
the artist's assistant in the study and practise of mechanical sciences. calculated for the improvement of genius. illustrated with copper-plates

the complete drawing-book, containing many curious specimens, under the following heads : i. select parts of the human body. 2. academy and groups of figures. 3. beasts and birds of various kinds. 4. landscapes, shipping, flowers, &c. with several outlines. rendered easier to the comprehension of beginners than any book of this kind hitherto made public. the whole neatly engraved on one hundred octavo copperplates, from le clerc, rembrandt, barlow, spilsbury, le brun, berghem, chatelin, callot, and others the best masters. to which are annexed, proper instructions to youth, for thelr, improvement and entertainment in this art.

the artist’s assistant: comprising the arts of drawing, perspective, etching, engraving, mezzotinto scraping, painting, coloring maps.

the principles of painting, under the heads of harmony, contrast, passion, anatomy, history, colouring, portraiture, attitude, invention, sculpture, design, accident, landskip, style, disposition, architecture, lights, truth, draperies, composition, proportion, claro-obscuro, unity, &c., expression, in which is contained,, an account of, the athenian, roman, venetian and flemish schools. to which is added, the balance of painters. being the names of the most noted pajnters, and their degrees of perfection in the four principal parts of their art: of singular use to those who would form an idea of the value of paintings and pictures.

a new introduction to the art of drawing collected from most free & easy designs of the best masters. with short instructions for the use of schools.

all draughtsmen\'92s. assistant or, drawing. made easy, wherein the principles of that art are rendered familiar, in ten instructive lessons, comprised. under the following heads : 1. features and limbs. 6. landscapes, 2. profiles and ovals. 7. perspective. 3. whole figures,, 8. enlarging and contracting. 4. drapery. 9. imitation of life. 5. light and shade. 10. history. explain\'92d by a great variety of examples from the most approved designs, on copper-plates, neatly engraved : with a suitable introduction on the utility of this noble art , and observations on design, as well in regard to theory as practice.

an introductive essay on drawing with the nature and beauty of light and shadows. and cuts suitable for the young practitioner, in the manner of the greatest masters.

arts companion, or a new assistant for the ingenious. in three parts. part i. containing, the art of drawing in perspective made easy and fully explain\'92d, the manner of drawing with crayons, and the best receipts for making them of all colours : the way of painting on glass, instructions for etching on copper- plate, and to cast amber in any shape: with a new and curious method of making the various kinds of varnishes for japanning upon glass, wood, or metal, and to make gilt japan-ware as beautiful and light as that bought from the east-indies. part ii. containing the art of drawing and painting in water-colours , with sufficient directions for delineating a view or prospect to the utmost exactness, and for colouring the same or any other print in the most beautiful manner, also instructions for making transparent colours of every sort, and the manner of taking off medals instantly, by various methods not before made publick, interspersed with many curious receipts for the use of painters, statuaries, founders, &c. part iii. containing the art of paint- ing in miniature , whereby the various methods of drawing are made easy to any tolerable capacity : to which are added directions for shadowing, stipling, &c. with many curious receipts for preparing colours peculiar to this kind of painting , likewise the preparation of an excellent polish and shell: the whole taken from some of the best italians and other masters.

bowles's principles of drawing: forming a complete drawing book ; illustrated with a curious collection of examples, beginning with an easy and simple method, calculated to convey instruction to young minds ; by which they may acquire the art without the assistance of a master. every branch of drawing is contained in this book ... elegantly engraved on sixty folio pages of copper plates, all from the original drawings of the most approves masters. to which ist prefixed, an introduction to drawing: containing rules and directions for the choice of instruments and materials, and how to apply and manage them. with easy and proper lessons for the young student

bowles\'92s complete drawing-book, . containing an extensive collection of examples, on a great variety of subjects, for the improvement of touth, in the pleas ant and useful art of drawing, elegantly engraved, on one hundred copper-plates, in the following method: i. lessons adapted to lead the pupil, gradually from the first practise on parts of the human body, to the drawing of the whole academy figures, in fifty plates, by sebastian le clerc. ii. examples of landscapes sketched in outlines, for the first attempts of the pupil, and finished with shadings for his after-practice : in several original plates, by chatelaine, viveres, vansomer, &c. iii. designs in sea-pieces, many examples in horses, cattle, fowls, flowers, &c. after the best masters, on each subject. to which are annexed, introductory rules, for tiie use of learners, with an account of the instruments and materials, used in drawing.

bowles\'92s, art of painting in watercolours, exemplieied in landscapes, flowers, &c. together with instructions for painting on glass and in crayons, explained in a full and familiar manner. with particular directions for preparing the colours, agreeable to the practice of the most eminent masters.

elements of painting with crayons. 

for the curious young gentlemen and ladies, that study and practise the noble and commendable art of drawing colouring and japanning, a new and compleat drawing-book, consisting of variety of classes, viz. whole figures in divers positions, and all the several parts of the human body from head to foot, light, airy, loose landskips, perspective views of sea-ports, forts, ruins, &c. being the close study, for a series of years, of the late mr. l e n s, miniature-painter, and drawing-master to christ's-hospital. in sixty-two copper-plates, engraved by himself. designed chiefly for young beginners, and now published from the author\'92s originals, very necessary and useful for all drawing-school:, boarding-schools, &c. &e. to whiich is prefixed an introduction to drawing, containing a description of the instruments and their respective uses, and the materials proper for drawing, rules for managing the pencil, and the best me thod for attaining perfection in the art, with instructions by which a young practitioner shall be enabled to form a judgment as well of his own performances as those of others, with easy, proper, and necessary lessons for him at his first entrance. also, the names of the colours ufed, wich instructions to temper and mix them, and fit them for painting. likewife, colours for washing landskips, or prints of any kind, with plain and easy rules for the ladies japanning.

the academy or arts, of universal drawing master, exhibiting the principles of art, as practised by the greatest masters, in subjects adapted to youth of both sexes, containing designs, in the manner of chalk and of indian ink, of heads, figures, historical compositions, landscapes cattle, horsess, birsds, flowers, perspective, architecture, &c. &c. with instructions at large, and likewise at the bottom of each plate. the whole forming a complete system of the arts of drawing, painting, engraving, &c. in their various branches, calculated to entertain the mind, and improve taste and genius.

the art of drawing and painting in water-colours. wherein the principles of drawing are laid down after a natural and easy manner, and youth directed in every thing that relates to this useful art, according to the practice of the best masters. to which are annexed, familiar directions, whereby a stranger in the art of drawing may be readily taught to delineate any view or prospect with the utmost exact- ness, of colouring any print or drawing in the most elegant manner, and of taking off medals, &c., instantly, after a variety of different ways never before made public, intermixed with curious receipts for the use of painters, statuaries, founders, e&c. with instructions for preparing, mixing, and managing all sorte of water-colours used in painting, so as to represent nature in the greatest perfection.

the art of painting in all its branches, methodically demonstrated by remarks on the paintings of the best masters: and their perfections and oversights laid open. 

the art of painting in miniature teaching the speedy and perfect acquisition of that art without a master. by rules so easy, and in a method so natural as to render this charming accomplishment universally astainable. containing i. the difference between painting in miniature and other kinds of painting. ii. the management of colours in draperies, linnen lace, furrs, &c. iii. the method of mixing colours for carnations, for painting or architecture or any building of stone or wood, for landskips, terrasses, water, ruins, recks, &c. iv. the art if painting all sorts of flowers, with the proper colours required to represent nature to the highest perfection. v. the various methods of painting.

the artist vade mecum, being the whole art of drawing taught in a new work elegantly engraved on one hundred folio copper plates , containing great variety of examples in every branch of that noble art :parts of the face, heads, hands, feet, academy, antiques, and groupes of figures, beasts, birds, insects, flowers, fruit, shells, ornaments, buildings, landscapes, &c. &c. &c. collected from the works of the greatest masters. to which is prefixed, an essay on drawing, with introductory rules for the use of learners, in which the first principles of that useful and noble art are explained in such manner that it may be attained in a short time without a master.

the artist's assistant, or, school of science : forming a practical introduction to the polite arts, in painting, drawing, designing, perspective, engraving, colouring, &c. : with ample directions for japanning, enamelling, gilding, silvering, lacquering, &c. : and a valuable selection of miscellaneous secrets : illustrated with plates.

the artists assistant in drawing, perspective, etching, engraving, mezzotints-scraping, painting on glass, in crayons, in water-colours, and on silks and satins. containing the easiest and most comprehensive rules for the attainment of those truly useful and polite arts, methodically digested. and adapted to the capacities of young beginners. illustrated with suitable examples engraved on copper. 

the compleat drawing-master: containing many curious specimens, as the several parts ofthe human body, whole figures, landskips, cattle, buildings, &c. neatly engraved on copper-plates, after the designs of the greatest masters , wherein the principles of drawing are laid down after a natural and easy manner: to which is prefix\'91d some general instructions to form the judgment of young beginners, by which that useful art may be attained in a short time without a master.

the drawing school for little masters and misses: containing the most easy. and concise rules for learning to draw, without the assistance of a teacher. emibellished with a great variety of figures curiously designed. to which are added, the whole art of kite making, and the author\'92s new discoveries in the preparation of water-colours. 

the practise of painting and perspective made easy, in which is contained, the art of painting in oil, with the method of colouring, under the heads of first painting, or dead-   painting back-grounds, colouring, on copying, second painting, drapery-painting, third or last painting, j landscape painting, and a new, short, and familiar account of the art of perspective, illustrated with copper-plates, engraved by mr. vivares. by thomas bardwell, painter.

the principles of design. for the curious young gentlemen and ladies, who study and practices the noble and commendable art of drawing, coloring and japanning: or a new and complete drawing-book, consisting variety of whole figures in divers positions, and all the several parts pf the human body from head to foot, &c. in fifty copper-plates, neatly engraved. designed chiefly for young beginners, very necessary and useful for all drawing schools, boarding-schools, &c. to which is prefixed an introduction to drawing, containing description of the instruments and their respective use, the materials proper for drawing, rules for managing the pencil, and the best method for attaining perfection in the art, with instructions by which a young practitioner shall be enabled to form a judgment as well of his own performances as those of others , with easy, proper and necessary lessons for him at his first entrance. also the names of the colours used, with instructions to temper and mix them, and fit them for painting. likewise, colours for washing landskips, or prints of any kind. 

the principles of drawing: or, an easy and familiar method for the improvement of youth- in the practice of that useful art. being a compleat drawing book containing a curious collection of examples in all the variety of cases, as the several parts of the human body, whole figures, landskips, cattle, &c. curiously engraved on copper-plates, after the designs of albert durer, abrah. bloemart, carlo morac, le clerc, hollar, and other great masters. to which is prefix'd, an introduction to drawing containing an account of the instruments and materials used in drawing, and the method of managing them, with easy and proper lessons for a young beginner, tending to form his judgment and direct his practice.

the rudiments of drawing : collected from the designs of the most approved masters : on 26 copper plates.

the school of raphael, or, the student's guide to expression in historical painting. illustrated by examples engraved by duchange, and others, under the inspection of sir nicholas dorigny, from his own drawings, after the most celebrated heads in the cartons at the queen\'92s palace. to which are now added, the outlines of each head, and also several plates of the antique statues, skeletons, and anatomical figures, most celebrated engraved by an eminent artist. with instructions for young students in the art of designing. and the passions, as characterised by raphael in the cartons, described and explained by benjamin ralph.

the works of the late professor camper on the connexion between the science of anatomy and the arts of drawing, painting, statuary, &c, &c. in two books. containing a treatise on the natural difference of features in persons of different countries and periods of life, and on beauty, as exhibited in ancient sculpture, with a new method of sketching, heads, national features, and portraits of individuels, with accuracy, &c.&c. illustrated with seventeen plates, explanatory of the professor\'92s leading principles.

the practice of painting made easy: in which is contained, the art of painting in oil, with the method of colouring, under the heads of first painting, or dead-colouring; second painting; third or last painting; painting back-grounds; on copying; drapery, and landscape painting. 

a compendium of colors, and other materials used in the arts dependent on design, with remarks on their nature and uses: including the method of drawing in chalk, crayons, &c. Of painting in water colors, crayons, &c. Of engraving in strokes, chalks, mezzotinto, aquatinta, &c. Of modeling, and of sculpture, &c. 

Bowes’s proportions of the human body, measured from the most beautiful antique statues; by monsieur audran, engraver to the late king of france; done from the originals engraved at paris. On twenty-seven large folio copper-plates. 15. The Statue of Venus Apbrodites, belonging to The Statue of Laocoon; this Figure was cut out of the Family of the MEDICIS. nc tirie d Ritte, andonte Cericon The same Statue. three famoussculptors, ACEsANDER, POL YDORUs, This Statipe Apoilo Pythins thooting his Arrows. and ATHENODORUs. Plin. lib. xxxvi. chas. v. in the Garden of the Vatican of Rome. Side View of the fame Statue. A fide View of the same Statue.Another View of the fame Statue. Another View of the same Statue. Another View of the same Statue. Another View of the same Statue. The Statue of Hercules, called the Farnesian; by An Antique Fragment. Glicon, a Grecian Statuary. Thre Fnine of Rirmite in the Lnspripan Carder Te tire Firnt Mens Eeman 2t Rome.Another View of the fame Statue. The Jame Statue.Pyramus in the Ludevifian Garden. The Greater of Laocoon’s Children.Another View of the fame Statue. Another of Laocoons Children.The Term, an Exybtian viece of Work. The Parts of the Face of the Statue of Venus,The Starue of Antinous. meafured in their natural Bignels. Another View of the fame Statue.The Parts of the Face of the Statue of Apolle, The Grecian Peace. meafured in their natural Bigness.The Grecian Shepberdess.

bowles’s youth’s assistant in drawing; containing manu curious specimens or an easy and familiar plan, adapted to lead the pupil gradually from the first practice on parts of the human body, to the drawing of the whole academy figures. In fifty plates, enlarged and improved, by Sebastian leclerc. To which are prefixed, proper instructions to youth, for their improvement and entertainment in this art.

general rules for painting in oil and watercolors; washing prints, maps, and mezzitintoes. With the whole art of japaning.

the art of painting in oil, rendered familiar to every capacity. Extracted from the works of the most eminent masters of the italian, flemish, and English schools. To which is prefixed, the method of mixing colors to the various teints used both for portraits, landscapes, &c. 

practical treatise on painting in oil-colours. 

the art of drawing, and painting in water-colours whereby a stranger to those arts may immediately rendered capable of delineating any view or prospect with the utmost exactness ; of coloring any print or drawing in the most beautiful manner; and of taking off medals instantly, by various ways, never before made publick: intermix’d with several curious receipts for the use of painters, statuaries, founders, &c. With instructions for making transparent colors of every sort; partly from some curious personages in holland, france, and italy; but chiefly from a manuscript of the great mr boyle; particularly a receipt of that gentleman’s, for making a blue color equal to ultramarine.

the art of painting, with the lives and characters of above 300 of the most eminent painters: containing a complete treatise of painting, designing, and the use of prints. with reflexions on the works of the most celebrated masters, and of the several schools of europe, as well ancient as modern. Being the most perfect work of the kind extant. translated from the french of monsieur de piles. to which is added, an essay towards an english school. 

the whole art of painting in water-colours; exemplified in landscapes, flowers, &c. Together with instructions for painting on glass and in crayons: explained in a full and familiar manner. With particular directions for preparing the colors, agreeable to the practice of the most eminent masters. 

de arte graphica ; or, the art of painting translated from the original latin of c. a. dufresnoy. with his life, by the rev dr Thomas birch, with notes miscellaneous and explanatory




