 .)
 . .
DRAUGHTSMENS ASSISTANT:
 ,
DR  WING MADE    .
WV HER EIN   
PRINCIPLES OFTHAT ART ARE RENDERED FAMILlAR:
IN TEH INSTRUCTIVE LESSONS.
COMPRISED UNDER THE FOLLOING HEADS.
. FEATURES AND LIMBES.
 LANDSCAPES.
 PROFILES AND OVALS.
 PERSPECTIVE.
. WHOLE FIGURES.
. ENLARCING AND CONTRACTINC.
 DRAPERY.
 IMITATION OF LIFE.
. LICHT AND SHADE:
 HISTORY.
Explained by  great Variety of ExAMPLEs from the moft approved Defigns on
Copper-plates, neatly engraved:
IV.   
 fuitable Introduction on the Urrerry of this Noble Anr.
  DD
ORSERVATIONS On DESICN, as well in regard to Theory as Practice.
  



BY THE AUTHOR OF THE ARTISTS ASSISTANT.
 tt
 tly ol  hllet lale  
     .
Printed for . SAYrn and . BENNETT, Map and Print-Sellers, (No.  Flect-street.


  
DRAUGHTSMANS ASSISTANT
 .
DR  WING MADE   SV.


          ..
      is the Reprefentation of any Object either real of imaginarys
being the Imitation of Nature or rt, in which by Ourlines and Shadows,
 execured in their Symmetry, and Proportion, the Copy appears as if it
were the real Object.
This ufeful and entertaining Art improves the Mind, refrethes and fupports the
Memory; it enables the Artift to form the cleareft conception, without which the
moft laboured Descriptions would be found deficient; and it refcues from Oblivion the
Actions and Perfons of our Fore-fathers, and preferves their Features and Deeds to fu-
ture Generations; and retains every uncommon Appearance of Nature.
Nature feems to inculcate  Fondness for Drawing even in Youth, by the Delight
they take in Pictures, Prints, &rc. which is  kind of univerfal Language, that (peaks
to the Eye, and conveys Ideas underftood by every Nation and People on the Globe.
The Artift may at Pleafure take Sketches of any Appearances in the Works of Na-
ture or Art, either in his own, or any foreign Country, and bring them home for his
future Ife or Inspection.——With this Accomplishment the Nobility and Gentry can
judge of Defigns before executed, and (pare themfelves the Mortification of Delay, and
the additional Expence of future Alterations. In  word, it may be said to be the filent,
but the moft expreffive Language of Nature.
There is no Art or Profeffion to which Drawing is not ufeful, but more particularly,
the Painter, Carver, Statuary, Engraver, Chafer, Mathematician, Archirect, Navi-
gator, Gardener, Weaver, Embroiderer, Whitefmith, and indeed every Workman
whofe Advantage in Trade may depend on Variety and Beauty; as by the Affiftance
of it he can lay down his Defigns, and improve them to the Fancy and Satisfaction of
his Employers.

 is  Pity fo ufeful  Branch of Education should ever be neglected, as feveral by
excelling in this Art have attained Perfection in their respective Profeffions and Employ-
ments, and have diftinguished themfelves by Works of Ingenuity, which have met
with the Protection and Encouragement of the judicious Part of Mankind. We need
not point out the Injury done to Vouth by the Neglect of this neceffary Study, and
how greatly many in Years of Maturity lament the Deficiency of it as  loss to them-
felves and Families. No wonder it should be deemed one of the chief Accomplifh-
ments in human Life, and thought worthy even of Royal Patronage, as well as the ho-
hourable Regard paid to it by the different Socieries, in all of which  fpirited Emula-
tion is excited among the Proficients, by Premiums given to fuch as produce the moft
correct and perfect Defigns or Imitations.
It has ever been the Misfortune of thofe who have profeffed to lay down Rules for
the Attainment of any Art or Science, to leave them enveloped with Difficulties, which,
if not utterly infuperable, at leaft difcourage the Learner from proceeding in  Study
which he can have little Hopes will ever reward his Purfuit.
From hence we may reafonably infer, that the faid Profeffors were totally unac-
quainted, if not with the Theory, at leaft with the Practical Part of what they under-
took to teach others: and that the Instructions they have given were founded rather
upon  bare Suppofition of their Efficacy, than upon the furer Bafis of long and repeated
Experience, which alone could have infured their Success, and from which, with all
due Deference to the Judicious, (whofe Sanction we shall at all Times be ambitious to
deferve), we may venture to anfwer for the Practicability of our own.
To obviate every Objection, and to remove all thofe Difficulties which had fo long
blocked up the Path of Science; and retarded, if not wholly impeded the Pupil, in his
Progress to the Temple of Fame, was the chief View in compiling the fubfequent little
Treatife.
Over and above the Improvements made in illuftrating the feveral Arts hitherto fo
imperfectly and unintelligibly explained, we have introduced Directions for Scraping
in Merzofinto, which, in this Edition, are ftill farther enlarged, and which, as they
have never been before attempted in any Books of this Kind, we flatter ourfeives will
be the more acceptable; especially when it shall appear, from the Rules laid down for
the Performance of this Art, that it is fo eafy to be attained, that  tolerable Profi-
ciency in Drawing will enable any one to undertake it with all imaginable Prospect of
Success.
The Reader will alfo find, in this Impreffion, the Addition of  very ufeful Problem,
in the Article of Perspective, illuftrated by  new Plate.
As this Book is chieffy intended for the Ufe of young Practitioners, we have pur-
pofely avoided all absirufe Expreffions and obfolete Terms, contenting ourfelves with
such  familiar Stile as we judged moft likely to inform thofe Minds we would with to
improves Vet, as the Ideas of an Artift are not wholly to be conveyed without some
neceffary Terms peculiar to each Branch, we have taken Care to explain fuch as could
not be omitted without  manifest Injury to the Work, by familiar Words of  fynoni-
mous Tendency, wherever they occur; to that we apprehend we have not left the leaft
Stumbling-Block for the Reader to encounter.
GENER AL


 AL INSTRUGTIONS.
+  ERY young Beginner should endeavour to improve his Memory with the
Beauties of the moft excellent Paintings and Prints, taking Notice of the Harmony
of their different Parts, as well as of the Reafons for the Disposition of the Lights and
Shades: which will, by Degrees, improve the Ideas to  Degree of Excellency, and
make the Practice eafy and familiar; as the hand will be more, ready to execute thofe
Objects the Mind has fo clearly conceived. The Ufe of this Accompliffiment is vifible in
many, who, though not able to execute, yet, by accuttoming themielves to this Study,
become excellent judges, and are with great Propriety termed Connoiffeers in the polite
Arts of Painting, Engraving, &. &. It will alfo be of effential Service to the Pupil
to attend to the Reafons affigned for the Merits or Defects of the Performance, as fuch
an Enquiry will greatly forward him in his Study.
Pupils fhould take particular Notice of the Original intended to be drawn from, ob-
serving whether the Figures or Objects are upright, or incline to the right or left, tak=
ing Care allo that every Part in the Copy has the fame Direction, which may eafily be
ditcovered by frequently revifing the Sketch, and comparing it attentively with the
Original. Paying  due Obfervance to this by young Beginneis will mend their Judg-
ment, and in Time enable them to proceed with  growing Pleafure.
MA TER IAL  FOR DR  WING.
Charcoal, cut in long Slips.
Camel’ Hair-Pencils.
Black Lead Pencils.
Fitches.
Crow-quill Pens.
Crayons of black, white, and red Chalk.
 Porte-Crayon.
 Ruler and  Pair of Compaifes.
Indian Ink.
An Indian Rubber.
INSTRUCTIONS, WITH EKAMPLE .
II VERY Learner is particularly defired to perfect himself in the Practice of the
firtt Leffon, in its feveral Branches, before he attempts the Second, and fo of the
Second, before he proceeds with the Third, not endeavouring to become Mafter of the
whole at once, which will only perplex his Ideas, and weary him in the Purfuit of
what he will never by this Means be likely to attain; whereas by proceeding gradually,
the Rules will be found much more eafy and practicable, and confequently the Study
infinitely more pleafing and encouraging.
Drawing


 the Introductory Lines, with the Features and Limbs
Separately.
ENDEAVOUR to imitate perpendicular or upright Strokes, and then horizontal or
parallel Lines, but without ufing the Ruler; and if Care be taken, few Examples of
this Sort will give you Perfection. When you have attained this, proceed to the curved
and twining Lines, obferving carefully their different Inclinations. And when you can
with Eafe perform thefe, pruceed to draw the Out lines of  Human Face, as the Eyes,
Nofe, Mouth and Ears; and from them proceed to the Parts of the Body, as the Arms,
Hands, Legs, &rc. See Plate  . The above muft be but faintly skerched, fo as to be eafily taken down with 
Rubber, in order to make the neceffary Alterations before finishing.
Prosiles and Ovals.
WHEN you are become Mafter of the former, you may then attempt the Profile
or Side face, being careful to obferve the Proportion of the feveral Parts to each
other; after this the Full or Oval Face, obferving till the Bearings of every Peature
with respect to the reft, and keeping the Proportions as exact as poflible. After pro-
ceeding with great Care in the above, you may begin the Ourline of the Body as in
Plate II.
Whole Figures, with the Proportions and Dimensions of the
Thuman Body.
If on thorough Examination you find you can eafily imitate the different Fea-
tures, and Parts of the Body, you may begin the whole Figure by iketching the whole
very lighrly with your Pencil or Charcoal, examining the Proportion of the different
Parts, taking it down with  Rubber, and altering where it shall appear neceffary.
When you have brought it as near as peffible to your Original, proceed to finiffi with the
Crow-quill Pen and Indian Ink, beginning with the Head, then proceeding to the
Shoulders, Body, Arms, Hands, Hips, Legs and Feet, taking Care to correct any Er-
fors in the Pencil Skerch, the Remains of which will be eafily erazed with  Rubber.
. . Refrain from the Ufe of Compaffes till after  very minute Inspection with
the Eye, and then, if the Fault cannot be difcovered,  proper Application of them will
greatly affift the Pupil to remedy the Defect. Having by clofe Attention and Practice
improved his Ideas to far as to be able to compleat  Figure in Out-lines, we shall pro-
ceed to instruct him in the Drapery or Cloathings but before we quit this Subject it.
will be neceffary in this Place to give him
THE beft Method of afcertaining the Proportions and Dimenfions of the several Parts
of the Human Body, by raifing  Perpendicular on the Place you intend for the Middle
of the Figure, and divide it into Heads, and from fuch form  Scale, to regulate the
proper Distances: but as it has been common to divide the Figure into ten Parts, we
have (though we do not to well approve of this Method) given an Example of both of
thefe Methods, together with Rules for the Iluftration of each respectively.
The


 Proportion of  Figure divided into Eight Heads.
See Plate III.
THE Length of the Head, is from the Crown of the Head to the Bottom of the
Ehin.
 Line ruled through the Second Divifion will directly crofs she Paps of the Breafts.
The Third Divifion will fall near the Naval.
The Fourth across the Privities, which is exactly the Middle of the Figure.
The Fifth croffes the Middle of the Thigh.
The Sixth is juft below the Bend of the Knee.
The Seventh falls  little below the Calf of the Leg.
The Eight extends to the Bottom of the Heel.
Obferve that when the Arms are extended at full Length in  direct Line, the full
Extent from the Middle Fingers of each Hand is exactly the Length of the Figure;
from the Middle of the Collar Bone to the End of the Middle Finger meafures four
Heads, viz. The Firft to the Bend of the Shoulder, the Second to the Elbow, the
Third to the Wrift, and the Fourth to the Fingers Ends.
From Shoulder to Shoulder in  Man of common Size, meafures exactly two Headss
but there is no precife Standard for the Breadth of the Limbs, which vary according to
the Bulk of the Perfon, and the Movement of the Mufcles.
The Proportion of  Figure divided into Ten Parts. See Plate  Firft of thefe Divifions extends from the Crown of the Head to the under Lip.
The Second  little below the Collar Bone, and  Line drawn through this Part of
the Figure, will Pafs over the Middle of the Shoulders.
The Third Divifion will make  Line juft below the Paps of the Breaft.
The Fourth will reach juft below the Navel.
The Fifth, which is the Middle of the Figure, directly acrofs the Privities.
The Sixth will pass over the Middle of the Thighs.
The Seventh croffes the Bend of the Knee.
The Eight directly through the Calves of the Legs.
The Ninth reaches half Way from the Calf, to the Bottom of the Heel, which deter-
mines the Tenth and laft Divifion of the Figure.
The young Beginner will find the foregoing Rules of infinite Advantage, to which
we would advife him to give due Application till they become ftrongly impreffed on his
Mind; but Care muft be taken that too striet an Obfervance of the preceding Dimen-
fions may not deftroy that Variety of Compofitions to abfolutely neceffary; nor will the
Preservation of the same Proportion be always allowed in the Subject, which Mr. Ho-
Farth, in his Chapter of Proportion, very judicioutly remarks in his Obfervations upon
the celebrated Statue of Apollo Belvidere, where he fays,  cannot throw  ftronger
Light on what has been faid hitherto of Proportion, than by animadverting on  re-
markable Beauty in the Apollo Defvidere, which hath given it the Preference even to the
Antinous;  mean  Super-addition of Greatness to at leaft as much Beauty and Grace
as is found in the latter.
In


in the same Apartment at Rome are to be feen thefe two Mafter-pieces of Art, where
in viewing the Antinans the Spectator is filled with Admirations when the Apollo ftrikes
him with Surprife; and, as Trawellers express themfelves, with an Appearance of
fomething more than human, which they are always at  Lofs to describe; but the Ef-
feet of this is, they fay, the mere extraordinary, as the Difproportion upon Examination
is evident to every common Eye.
 the Foundation of Defign.
 is  perfect Knowledge of all the Parts of the Human Body; but no
more is neceffary to Painters than that which relates to the Bones, and the principle
Mufcles that cover them.
There is an abfolure Neceffity to be thoroughly acquainted with the Forms and
Joints of the Bones; becaufe the Dimenfions are often altered by Motion; and likewife
to underftand the Office and Situation of the Mufcles, fince the moft fIriking Truth in
Defign depends upon them.
As it is indispentably neceltary that the Pupil should have some Knowledge in Ana-
romy; it being the fundamental Part of Defign, and enables Artifts to difcover the Beau-
ries of the Antique; it is) therefore earneftly recommended the Student to pay fome At-
rention to ii, as all that is neceffary for Draughtfmen is very eafily retained.
Of Drapery.
WHEN you have drawn the Outlines of the Figure you want to cloath, faintly
with Charcoal, Kketch the Out-lines of your Drapery lightly; with the feveral Foldsy
remembering that they muft not cross each other. Due Regard muft likewife he had to
the Qualiry of the Drapery; as Stuffs and Woollen Cloth are more harth than Silk,
which is always flowing and eafy. Remember that the Drapery muft not stick too
clofe to the Body, but let it feem to ffowr eafy about it, and yet appear fo that the
Motion of the Figure be free and natural. Be careful that the Drapery supposed to be
blown by  Breeze of Wind all flow one Way, and draw the Parts nexr the Body before
thofe which fly off. The Garments muft always bend with, the Figure, and if you, make
the Drapery almoft clofe to the Body the fmaller muft be the Folds; and if quite clofe
there muft be no Folds, but only  faint Shadow, to reprefent the Bend of that Part of
the Body which it covers. Ie is neceffary the Student should take every Opportunity of
Improvement in this ufeful Branch, by remarking the Folds in the Drapery of Gentle-
men and Ladies, according to their feveral Pofitions: By this unerring Rule of Nature,
the Learner will greatly heighten his own Ideas, and give  superior excellence to his
Work.
Thus far may serve to give the young Draughtfman  general Idea of Drapery; but
that he may not be at  Loss in perfecting himfelf in this neceffary Branch of the Art,
we have here fubjoined the following more particular instructions, viz.
 Be careful to avoid overcharging your Figure with  Superfluity of Drapery.
 Let as much of the Form of the Body as poffible be shewn underneath it.
 When the Draperies are large throw them into as few Folds as you can, and ler
thefe be large and graceful.
 On.


 On the contrary, fet thofe which are clofe to the Body and short, be loofened by
small Folds judiciouly placed, which will be the means of avoiding that Stiffness,
which for want of this Caurion appears, when the Drapery is made to fit too ftrait, and
makes the Figure feem as if wrapped round with  Bandage, instead of being gracefully
cloathed.
 When much Drapery is required, let the greater Part (if poffible) be thrown into
Shadow.
 Obferve that the Folds which fall in the Light muft have fuch foft and tender
Shadows, as may make them fir hollow from the Body, and not feem to girt too clofely
to it.
 Let the Folds be properly contrafted, and avoid ftrait Lines as much as poffible.
  judicious Repetition of Folds in  circular Form greatly contribute to charac-
terife  fore-thortened Limb.
 In fixed Arritudes let the Drapery appear likewife motionlets (unlets exposed to
the Air). But the Drapery of Figures moving with great Agility, should teem to play
as if agitated by the Wind, but in Proportion only to the Velocity of the Figures in
Motion.
We cannot conclude this Subject withour giving this very wfeful Caution, viz. Ler
the Pupil be carefl how he fiudies Statues, and remember that the beft of them
are only Memorials of thofe great Artifts, whofe Lives were fpent in endeavouring
to express their own Idea of Perfection, which varied according to the different Tafte
ef each, and the Nature of the Materials upon which they wrought: and let it be
likewife remembered, that there is  Stiffnets (which should be fiudiouly avoided
in  Copy (even though  correct one) made after the fineft Statue, which will never
convey any Idea but that of  Statue; whereas there is fuch  Freedom obfervable in
the Imitations of Nature, as evidently diftinguiffes them from thofe taken either from
Marble or Plaifter.
Of Light and Shade.
THE proper Distribution of Light and Shade in  Picture is abfolntely neceffary to
be known; as it not only determines the proper Distance of one Object from another,
without which the Whole would be an undiftinguished Mafs of Confufion, but it gives
likewife to each respective Object its Substance, Roundness and Effect.
Therefore, having out-lined the Folds, and the other Parts of Drapery, you may
next attempt the Shadowing of your Figure, obferving the following Method:
Shadow the Drawing with the Pencil or Pen; in which great Care is required.
Firft, obferve from which Side the Light comes in, which if natural ought to be from
the Right or Left; for when the Light comes in the Middle, it is called an artificial
Light, as proceeding from fome artificial Luminary, as  Candle, Lamp, &. &.
Lay your Shades rather faint at firft, fo that you may heighten them at Pleafure where
neceffary; for you may at any Time darken your Shadows, when you cannot lightenthem.
Remember that your Shades muft be all on the fame Side of the Figure, that is to
fay, if the Right Side of the Face be in Shade, fo muft the same Side of the Body, Arm,
Leg, &cc. Your Shades muft all be faint as they approach the Light, the Strength gra-
dually decreating towards the Extremities, to prevent  harth Appearance, as that is
 never-failing Sign of  bad Workman.
When.


 one Part of the Body projects over or before another, the Part projecting
muft receive  ftronger Light: Thofe Parts that bend inward muft be made fo much
the darker, and shadowed deepeft next the Light.
Two equal Lights muft never be made in the fame Picture: The ftrongest Light
should fall upon the Middle of the Piece (where the principal Figures ought to fland),
diminithing gradually towards the Extremities.
 Stump made of Paper or Glove-leather rolled hard, and cut almoft to  Point like
 Pencil, is ufeful (if you shade with the Pencil, Red Chalk; or Crayons) to blend the
Shades, and foften them into each other; as alfo, where they appear too ftrong, to
weaken them with the aforefaid Roll. By examining Nature you will improve. your
Ideas in Light and Shade, as well as in Out-lines, and be enabled to form  right Judg-
ment of the Truth of your Drawing.
. . The Indian Ink may be prepared for  few different Shades by rubbing it
more or less in Water on  Marble Stone cut in Hollows, for that Purpofe, referving
one of the Hollows for the Water.
Of Drawing Landscapes, &.
THIIS will give the Student an inexhauftible Fund of Amnfement, from the Variery
of Subjects which Nature conflantly fupplies for his Observance and Imitation. And
in order to improve in this Study, the heft Method is to adhere to the Rules before
laid down with regard to the Human Body, by beginning with the moft fimple Objects,
as the Out-lines of Cottages, Trees, &cc. for which Reafon we shall give  few Exam-
ples in each, with their proper Shades; but would advife, the Pupil not to be too
hafty in the Shadowing before he is perfect in the Out-line; and, as it is impoffible he
should excel in Landicape without fome Knowledge of Perspective, we shall give fome
Directions, fuitably illuftrated with Problems, as  neceffary Affistant to the Prac-
titioner, which will prevent his being imposed on by faulty and incorrect Originals,
where the Ignorance of Perspective makes the whole Landicape appear unnatural and
diftarted.
Of Perspective.
THE firft thing neceffary to learn before we proceed to the Problems, is an Ex-
planation of the feveral rechnical Terms ufed in the Practice of this Artz and these are
as follow:
The Bafe or Fundamental Line is the Bottom of the Drawing, or that Part of the
Ground on which the Perfon is supposed to fland, looking towards the Point of
Sight.
 Perpendicular is an upright Line with respect to any Part of the Bafe.
Parattel Lines are equidittant from each other, as the Horizon to the Bafe.
The Horizon is the moft distant Part where the Clouds teem to touch the Earth, and
Limits the Sight.
The Point of Sight is that Part of the Horizen where all the Vifual Rays center.
 Rays are Beams of Light conveying the Likenets of any Thing to the Sight,
and the Knowledge thereof to the Mind.
Points


 of Disfance are fet off on the Horizontal Line, at equal Diftances on each Side
of the Point of Sight.
Diagonal Lines are thofe drawn from the Points of Diftance to the End of the Baic
Line.
The Abridgment of the Square is the Line where the Diagonals crots the Vifual Rays,
and muft always be parallel to the Bafe; this is only of Ufe when the Sight is limited
by  Perpendicular, as the End of  Church or Room.
The foregoing Terms are illuftrated in Plate IV. Fig. .
The Point of direct View is when the Object is feen in Front, as  Houfe, &. or  Geo-
metrical Elevation raifed from  Ground-plot, comprehending an equal Space on both
Sides the Point of Sight.
The Point of Oblique View is when the Object is feen fideways; for Inftance,  of  Canal with fome remarkable Buildings, when the Perfon drawing the faid
View is placed on the Bafe Line oppofite to the Buildings, fo that the Ray of Light
may be more oblique, and the Buildings lets fore-shortened, and appear to greater
Advantage.
Accidental Points are thofe where Objects End in the Horizontal Line, not in the
Points of Sight or Diftance, ferving for Streets, Houfes, Chairs, &cc. taking diffe-
rent Directions.
Jchnography is  Plan of Ground-plot to be faifed in Perspective.
Scenography is bringing any Thing raifed in Perspective from an Ichnographic Plan
to its proper Proportion, that all Objects may be diminished in  Picture the fame as
in Nature.
As the Art of Perspective is constructed on Geomerrical Principles, it may be ne-
ceffary, previous to the Rules themfelves, to demonstrate the following introductory
Operations:
 From  Point in  given Line  to raife  Perpendicular. See Fig. II.
Plate IV.
Draw the given Line  then fet one Foot of the Compaffes in  and extending
them to rather more than half the Length of the Line  ftrike the Arch   and
with the same Extent of the Compaffes fet one Point in  and describe the Arch   then, without altering the Compaffes, fet one Foot in  and fveep the Arch   rule through the Points   to interfect the Arch   at ro; and draw the
Line from t to  which is the Perpendicular required.
 To raife  Perpendicular upon , it being the Center of the given Line . .
See Fig. III. Plate IV.
Divide the Bafe Line   into two equal Parts, then extend the Compaffes to any
Distance greater than  Bor  , and with one Foot in  Tweep the Arch de, then
with the fame Extent of Compaffes fet one Foot in , and sweep the Arch  and
from the Interfection of the two Arches at  draw  Line to the Center of the Bafe
Tine at , and you have the Perpendicular required.

 To


 To draw  Line parallel to, or equidiftant from, another given Line . .
See Fig. IV. Plate IV.
Extend the Compaffes to the Diftance of the parallel required, then with one Foot in
any Point of the Line given, as in  sweep the Circle HI.  Again, without altering the
Compaffes, fet one Foot in another Point, as in . and defcribe the Circle . . then
rule the Line . . touching the ourward Parts of the two Circles, and you will their
have the Parallel to the Line given.
 To bifect or divide  given Line, . . intotwo equal Parts. See Fig. . Plate  taken with your Compaffes any Diffance greater than half the given Line,
proceed with ohne Foot of them in . to describe the Arch . . and without altering the
Diftance, fetting one Foot in , sweep the Arch . . and thefe Arches will interfect
each other in the Points . . which joined by  Perpendicular will crofs . . in the
middle Point .
 Hlaving three given Points not in  right Line, how to turn  Circle through
them. See Fig. VI. Plare Iv.
Three Points being fixed as at . . and . proceed to join them by the right Linex
. . and . . then by Fig. . bffect the Line . . with the Line . HI. which being
done, divide the Line . . with the Line . . and from the Middle . where thefe
Lines center, extend your Compaffes to . and Tweep the Arch . . . .
  fure Way of drawing an Oval. See Fig. VII. Plate IV.
Divide the given Line . . into four equal Parts; one Feot of the Compaffes being
fet in . defcribe  Circle . . Withour altering the Extent of the Compaffes frem .
Tweep the Circle . . then extend the Compaffes, one Foot in , and Tweep the Arch
. . With the fame Excent fer one Foot in . and turn the Arch . . the Inter-
fections muft be united by  Perpendicular from . to . then proceed, with one Foot
of the Compaffes in . to defcribe the Arch . . and with the fame Extent of Com-
paffes fer one Foot in . and turn the Arch . .
 Another certain Method. See Fig. VIIl. Plate IV.
Rule  given Line . . then place one Foot of the Compaffes in . and describe
the Circle . . then with the same Extent of Compaffes on the Line . . in the fup-
pofed Point . describe the Circle . . and through the Points . . where the
two Circles interfect, rule the perpendicular . . then, having one Foot of the Com-
paffes fet in . extend the other to as to tweep the Arch . . to the lower Exxtremi-
ties of the Circles; then, without altering the Compafies, fet one Feot in , and turn
the Arch . . to join the upper Extremities.
By the preceding Examples it is evident that an Oval of any Form or Size may be
construeted at Pleature, only obferving always to fet the Compaffes at an equal Dif.
rance from the given Line . . on the Perpendicular . .
Pradical


 Examples in Perspective.
To draw  Square Pavement in Perspective. See Fig. Ix. Plate IV.
SUPPOSING you have  Piece of Pavement confifting of  Pieces of Marble,
each  Foot Square, your firft Bufiness is to draw an Ichnographical Plan, which is
thiis performed:
An exact Square being made to the Size of your intended Plan, proceed to divide
Both Horizon and Bafe into eight equal Parts, and from each Divition in the Bafe to
His oppofite Point in the Horizon rule perpendicular Lines, and divide the Sides into
the fame Number, ruling acrofs from Point to Point parallel Lines; to that of Courfe
your Pavement will be divided into  Square Feet; as the Eight Feet in Length,
being mulriplied by the Eight in Breadth, produce the Number of Pieces contained in
the Whole: then rule from Corner to Corner Diagonal Lines, and you will have your
Ground-plot as in the fame Figure.
Now, to throw this ine Perspective, draw another Square as before directed, and
divide the Bafe Line only into eight equal Parts; fix your Point of Sight at . in the
Center of the Horizon . . then to every Divifion in the Bafe . . rule Lines
from the fame Point; and proceed to rule Diagonals from . to , and from . to
, to answer thofe in the Ground-plot, and you will then have your Square reduced
to the Triangle . . . and from the Point . where the Line . . is interfected
by the Diagonal . . to the oppofite Interfection . where the Line . . is inter-
feeted by the Diagonal . HI.; then rule  parallel Line, which is the Abridgment of
The Square.
From the reft of the Lines which go from the Bafe to the Point of Sight, through
the Points which are interfected by the Diagonals, rule parallel Lines, and you willthen
have your Square Pavement laid in true Perspective, as in Fig. . Plate IV.
To find the Height and Proportion of Objects appearing above the Horizon on 
suppofed Plane. See Fig. Xl. Plate IV.
Having your horizontal Line ruled . . proceed with fixing your Point of Sight
as at , and marking the Place of your neareft Pillar by  Dot at the Summit or Top
as at , and another at the Bafe as at . Then rule  Line from . to . ard ano-
ther from . to . and thefe two Lines give the Height of any Number of Villars:
for inftance, would you have your Pillar at , fix your Dor for the Bafe, then meet the
Diagonal . . at  by ruling  parallel Line, and to the Diagonal . . rule the Per-
pendicular . , which Perpendicular thews the Height of the Pillar required at . Or,
would you have  Pillar placed at , obterve the foregoing Directions; ruling the
Parallels Il. . and . , and the Perpendiculars . . and .  will shew the required
Heights and Diftances.
In finding the Diameter at any particular Diftances, you are to be guided by that
nearcit the Bafe; as, for Example, fuppofe your neareft Pillar . . to be ten Feet in
Height and one in Diamerer, interfect from Bottom to Top in two equal Parts, and
upon the Bafe of the Pillar fot off one of them from the Point of Sight . to the Din-
meter . then Rule  Line to the Point of Sight from , and you will have on the re-
spective Bafis the Thicknets of each Pillar.
The


 preceding Rule exemplified in Objects beneath the Horizon. See Fig. KII.
Plate IV.
Having ruled the Horizontal Line . , fix the Point of Sight as at ; then, ac-
cording to your judgment, make  Dot for the Feet of your Figure as at , and another
for the Head as at Es then rule  line from . to , and from . to , and thefe two
Diagonals will shew the true Height of any Number of Figures that can be wanted.
Make Dots for the Place of the Feet of any Figure where you would have them
stand, as at , , II, , and : now to know the Height of each respectively,
draw parallel Lines from the Dots ; , II,  and , to the Diagonal  ; then
raife Perpendiculars from the Points where the Parallels interfect this Diagonal at
 . MR, NS,  , and PU, and the Perpendicular   thews the Height of the
Figure at , as does MR of that at , NS of that at ,   of that at  and P of
that at .
Note, You will be obliged always to fix the Height of one Figure as at DE, in or-
der to find the Size of the reft; and the Point of Sight may be placed at any Diftance
you pleafe from the firft fuppofed Figure on the Horizontal Line.
From  Line given to form  Square. See Fig. KIII. Plate IV.
Rule your Bafe Line of any Length you pleafe, as at  ; then raife Perpendicu-
lars (as in Fig. II.) from  to , and from  to ; next take with your Compaffes
the Length from  to , and fetting one Foot in , turn the Arch EF; then with the
same Extent of Compaffes fet one Foot in , and defcribe the Arch  ; laftly, rule 
Line from  to , touching the outward Parts of the two Arches where they interfect
the Perpendiculars, and you have the Square required.
From  given Line to form  Parallelogram. See Fig. KIV. Plate Iv.
Rule  given Line of the Length required, as at  ; then raife  Perpendicular at
, and another at , as in Fig. II.) and on them fet off the proper Heights, as  
and BD; join  Dwith  Line, and your Parallelogram is complete.
FIC. Xv. Plate IV.
In this Figure we have attempted to thew how to draw, with Certainty, that curved
Line, which Mr. Hogarth, in his ingenious Analyfis has ftiled the Line of Beauty.
There has, however, been an Objection raifed by some, that he has omitted the Rule
whereby this truly afefid Line may be found: For which Reafon, and in order to
enforce the Study of it, we have given this Figure, not as an Infult upon that celebrated
Author (whofe Meaning is very clear), but as  Line well deferving of Attention,
being of itfelf fingle and eafily drawn; and as we are defirous of following the
Method of that great Artift, in the Explanation of our Ideas by the moft familiar
Objects, we here inform the Student, that it may be plainly feen in that well-known
Amulement of the School-Boy,  fix-pointed Star; in which the contrafted Halves of
any two opposite Points give the Line which is with great Propriety stiled the Line of
Branty.
To


( execute  Direct View. See Fig. . Plate .
If you would draw  Direct View of  Houfe and Wall, or, in other Words,  Geome-
trical Elevation to be raifed from  Plan or Ground-plot, by  Scale, made according to
the Dimenfions of the Building, firft rule the Bafe Line   above the Plan   at any
Height you pleafe. Then erect Perpendiculars at  and  for the Extremities of the
Houfe, alfo from the Windows marked in the Plan ef,    ,  , no, which will
give the Breadth of all the Windows. Rule thefe Perpendiculars faintly with Black
Lead. Having done this, fuppose the Bottom of the Parlour or Ground-Floor Win-
dows to be  Feet above the Bafe Line  , take off with your Compaffes  Feet from
the Scale, and transter that Meafure from  to  at each End of the Houfe. Then fup-
pofing the Parlour Windows to be  Feet high, fer off that Meafure from the Scale,
and transfer ir to the Extremities from  to . Then, if the Diftance from the Top of
the Parlour Windows to the Bottom of thofe on the Firft Floor be  Feet, take ir as be-
fore from the Scale, and fet it off at each End from  to . Then fuppose the Chamber
Windows to be  Feet high, transfer that Diftance from the Scale from  to  at each
End. Next, supposing from the Top of the Firft Floor or Chamber Windows to the
Bottom of the Cornice to be  Feet, take  Feet from the Scale as before, and fet off
that Diftance at each End from  to . Then if the Cornice be  Foot high, meafure
it off from the Scale, and transfer it to each End from  to . Laftly, fuppofe the Roof
to be  Feet from the Top of the Cornice, fet off  Feet at each End from  to ,
then rule faintly with your Pencil the Parallels    ,      ,  , and
you have the Height and Breadsh of all the Windows, &cc. which having ourlined,
rub out the Parallels and Perpendiculars with Bread; and fetting off  Feet, the fup-
pofed Height of the Wall, rule the Line from  to  at each End, and the Work is
ready for shading.
To draw an Oblique View. See Fig. II. Plate .
Firft Rule the Horizontal Line  , and if the moft remarkable Objects be on the
Left-Hland, as at , having taken your Station on the Bafe Line as at , from that
Place raife  Perpendicular  , which at the Point of Sight  will inrerfect the Hori-
 and to find the Roof and Bafe of the principal Building , rule the DiagonalsL 
and ME.
. . Obferve whether the Prospect before you make  Curve, which if it should,
be careful to make the fame in your Copy, whether it be direct or oblique.
To draw  View wherein are Accidental Points. See Fig. IIl. Plate .
Suppofe  large Building in which are feen two Fronts taking different Directions,
as in this Views fix your Station at  about the Center of the Bafe Line, after which
rule the Horizontal Line  , then fix upon that your Points of Sight  and Es and
rule firft the Diagonals   and  , and you may draw Diagonals from the Point of
Sight  to , , and , &cc. that they may take their proper Directions towards their
respective Points of Sight.
Accidental Points feldom intervene where there is but  small Diftance, as in Canals,
Groves, Noblemehs’ Seats, &cc. which are to be drawn by the stricleff Rules of Per-
spective


  But when the Prospect is extenfive, it muft include every Thing analagous
thereto; but as this requires fuch an infinite Number of Accidental Points, you had
better not attempt them till your ideas are farther improved, and your judgment more
Htrengthened.
Of Enlarging and Contracting. Fig. IV. and . Plate .
Wirff your Compaffes divide your Original into any Number of Squares, and
with your Pencil Rule from Side to Side, and from Top to Bottom; then divide your
Paper into the Jame Number of Squares bigger or lets than the Original you intend
to enlarge or contract: and you may, to prevent Wiltakes, number the Squares both
in the Original and Copy, as they are dene in the Plate. This done, place your
Original before you, and draw Square by Square, that is to fay, make the fame Parts
as are contained in one Square of your Original. fall into the Jame Square of your
intended, Copy; and by doing this with Care, you will make the one exactly corre-
spond with the other in due Symmetry and Proportion. Then outline your. Subject
with Indian Ink, and rub out the Marks of the Pencil with Bread, and fo preceed to
Thading.
Of. Copying of Draughts.
WHEN you would copy  print or, drawing exactly of the Jame Size, rub the Back
Of it with the Duft of Red Chalk or Black Lead; lay this upon your Paper, and pin it.
down at the four Corners; then with  blunt Point trace the Outlines and Breadths of
the Shadows; which done; having carefully examined it to fee that nothing be omitted,
take it off, and finith it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another way to make an exact Copy; and at the Tame Time to preserve the Ori-
ginal, is, to lay  Piece of tranfparent Paper upon it, and draw the Outlines thereon
with  Black Lead Pencil; then between that and the Paper you intend to draw upon,
place  Piece of thin Poft-Paper, reddened or blackened at the Back; after which, pro-
ceed to trace and finish it according to the foregoing Rule.
If you would reverfe your Original, you need only turn the tranparent Paper, with
the Drawing you have made upon it, downwards upon the Peft-Paper, and trace it as
above directed.
Of the Imitation of Life.
CHIISE the Perfon you are to draw from, to be of an handfome Shape and good
Proportion, as this will confirm your Ideas, and illuftrate the Rules before-mentioned.
Place the Perfon in the moft natural, and eafy Pofition, always avoiding, in your
early Practice, the copying, of ungraceful or, difforted Attitudes, which ferve only. to
give


 the young Practitioner  wrong Bias, and render him incapable of forming  just
and proper Conception of the natural Bcauries and Graces of the Human Form.
Begin as before directed with  flight Skerch with your Charcoal of the main
leading Strokes or Ourlines, which having done correctly, proceed to finith with your
Pencil.
Take particular Notice of the Mufcles as they occur; as this will give  Refemblance
of the Perfon in the Outline, if correctly obferved, before you shadow it.
in drawing  Likeness, great Care is neceffary to express the Paffions in the livelieit
Manner, and this is done by minding the Difpofition of every Feature, with peculiar
Nicety. This being by far the moft difficult Part the Pupil has to learn, we would
advife him not to be too hafty to attain it before he has made  thorough Proficiency
in the eafier and more practicable Branches of Drawing; nor would we, on the other
Hand, difcourage the Efforts of Genius, which in the Purfuit of any Art or Science, are
noft certainly truly laudable, and have been frequently attended with the deserved
Success: all that we mean to inculcate by this Caution, is not to afpire all at once, or
by too hafty Strides, to Perfection, but rather to afcend progreffively the neceffary Steps
which lead towards it.
Of Hisory.
THE Student has in this Branch the whole Art of Drawing, as it were, blended
together; and when he has fo far gained his Point, as to draw completely the Human.
Body, this will be the moft delightful Employment that can be imagined. For the
Choice of Subjects he need never be at  Loss, as his own or his Neighbours Families
will furnish him with Abundance. Books will likewife greatly affift him, particularly
the Sacred Hiftory, which is replece with an inexhauftible fund of Events, above all
others worthy to be recorded, and therefore moff deferving his ferious Attention. To
this we may add the Hiftory of our own Country, wherein the illuffrious Actions of
ancient Heroes, as well as thofe of our Contemporaries, and particularly, our gallant.
Officers Military and Naval in the laft War, afford ample Matter for the Exercife of
the ingenious Artifl. As to Bealts, Birds, Flowers, Fruits, Plants, &cc. we think it
wholly unneceffary to give any Directions concerning them, as the Subjects we have al-
ready difcuffed are by far the moftufeful, and he who can draw  human Figure correctly
is fufficiently qualified for every other Branch of this noble Art; but as the experienced
Draughtiman may fometimes choofe to vary the Object of his Study, which, when perfeet
in Anatomical Subjects, he may do with Safety, we have given  few Examples of
Beafts, Birds, Shipping, &. for his farther Entertainment and Amufement.
Observations


 on Defign, as well in Regard to Theory as Practice.
THE Theory of Defign is only to be acquired by fludying the beft Authors who
have laid down the fcientifical Rules for the Attainment of this Art. By  found
Knowledge in the Theory of Defign, thofe who are unable to draw the moft fimple Ob-
jects may be enabled to give their Opinion upon the Performances of the beft Mafters;
in this Cafe, Theory being detached from Practice, is equally confidered, and diftinguish-
ed by the Epithet of Tafte. There is another Method of acquiring Taftes which is by
frequently examining good Pictures, in the Prefence of thofe who are efteemed Con-
noiffeurs in the Art, who generally pats their Judgment without Referve.
Theory, in this Senfe of the Word, has been hitherto the greateft Support of Paint-
ings for had Tafte been confined to Practice only, we should not be able to find fo
many invaluable Pieces in the Cabinets of Princes and other Encouragers of Art, and
who could not perhaps have been permitted by their Avocations to have acquired any
Tafte for this polite Art, to that Painting of Courfe would have found no Patronage.
The practical Part of Defign is produced only by  frequent Application of the
Hand, accompanied with the Understanding, in the imitation of various Forms.
Thofe Objects, whether Perfons or Places, which we have but  tranfient View of,
are in the Memory like Sketches of Charcoal upon Paper, which the Whilking of 
Feather will entirely deface. How then shall the unaccuftomed Hand perform its Func-
tion when the Object is not inculcated in the Mind, and can in  short Time retain only
 confuted Idea of its Refemblance? This is therefore an infallible Proof that the only
Way to attain Perfection is to blend Practice with Theory.
From what has been already faid, it is plain that the Conveyance of the Similitude
of Objects is only to be obtained by an unwearied Application. The Hand by Practice
acquires  Facility which gives Freedom, and we muft correct that Freedom by Judg-
ment. Pleafe to obferve, that we do not here mean by Judgment but Exertion of
the Underftanding that is neceffary to compofe an hiftorical Picture, but relates only
to Proportion, it being nothing uncommon for one who is  good practical Draughtf
man to be entirely incapable of compofing, which we think should be with the usmoft
Propriety afcribed to the Genius.
     .