BOWLES’


COMPLETE DRAWING-BOOK, .


CONTAINING AN


EXTENSIVE COLLECTION OF EXAMPLES,


ON  GREAT VARIETY OF SUBJECTS,


FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF TOUTH,


IN THE PLEAS ANT AND USEFUL


ART OF DRAWING;


ELEGANTLY ENGRAVED, ON ONE HUNDRED COPPER-PLATES,


IN THE FOLLOWING METHOD:


. Lessons adapted to lead the Pupil, gradually from the
First practise on Parts of the Human Body, to the
Drawing of the Whole Academy Figures, in Fifty
Plates, by SEBASTIAN LE CLERC.


II. Examples of Landscapes sketched in Outlines, for
the first Attempts of the Pupil, and finished with


Shadings for his After-practice : In several original


Plates, by CHATELAINE, VIVERES, VANSO


MER, &.


III. Designs in Sea-pieces; many Examples in Horses,
Cattle, Fowls, Flowers, &. after the best Masters, on
each Subject.





TO WHICH ARE ANNEXED,


INTRODUCTORY RULES, FOR TIIE USE OF LEARNERS;


WITH AN


ACCOUNT OF THE INSTRUMENTS AND MATERIALS,


Used in Drawing.


THE NINTH EDITION,


CORRECTED AND GREATLY IMPROVED, WITH ADDITIONS.


London:


Printed for the Proprietors, BOWLES and CARVER,
The Map and Print Warehouse,


No.  St. Paul’ Church yard.











DIRECTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN


DRAWING.


THIS useful, noble, and extensive Art, besides its be


ing an immediate Introduction to Painting, Sculpture,
Engraving, with all the train of graceful studies coinciding
therewith, is even necestary to form the minds of Youth for
whatever station designed, since nothing informs or corrects
our ideas so soon as  true knowledge of Symmetry and Pro
portion. Although this Art, in its extent, be as spacious as
Observation can discover, or Imagination conceive, yet in
the following sheets may be found an Abstract, containing
Examples amply sufficient to direct  Genius, in the least apt
or inquisitive, not forgetting diligence, but laying aside fear;
because every fresh attempt on the same subject will evidence
an amendment to encourage the learner. It would be rash on
 sudden to expect perfection in this Art ; yet, after  few
painful ESSAYS,  pleasure succeeds in the prospect, and
grows in the practice, beyond that of any other Acquisition,
and sure no one would spare the Means where the End is so
desirable. Not one Book has hitherto appeared in this coun
try well suited to facilitate the attainment of this Art; yet
we are always invited to attend to ample and -learned in
structions to beginners, where the preliminary discourses
often puzzle and confuse the ideas more than the examples
they recommend are ever able to eradicate. But since exam
ple has made verbal Instructions expected, we here subjoin
such as seem to us necestary for  Work of this kind, viz.


Any of the following Examples being placed before you,
 Black Lead Pencil and Paper are all the requisites
needful. Then slightly sketch the general proportions, from
the object so placed, which carefully survey, and alter by











rubbing it gently out with stale bread or India rubber, slight
ly and cautiously retouching with more correctness, still
keeping your copy so faint that you may with ease rub out
and amend it. When you can find no farther disagreement
from the original in your sketch, fresh point your pencil,
and keeping  waste paper under your hand, begin to finish
your out-line, taking particular care to observe and imitate
such parts as appear dark, distinctly from those which are
faint or smaller, the strong touches being what give spirit tet
the put-line, and when properly given, always denote 
master’ hand. Let your greatest application be employed ia
making  perfect out-line, for in this principally consists the
Art of Drawing.; this fully attained, the study and practice will
become delightful. The out-line compleated, light and shadow
become your next concern, which is  labour so pleasing,
that no commendation can be given, adequate to tste pleasure
 real Professor finds in the execution of this Art, or rather
Science succeeding Art. Beginners are apt to leave the study
of out-lines too soon, and so commence painters; like those
who raise  structure ere the foundation be compleated. Light
and Shadow are produced by Etching or Hatching, Washing,
Chiarjo Oscuro, Painting, Modelling, Sculpture, &. As the
, first three are chiefly used by learners, we shall give  few hints
for the executing of each.


And first of Hatching: carefully observe the Burin, or
manner in which the strokes of the original are laid, and
keep with exactness the form, not so much regarding their
number ; first slightly making them all of  thickness, and
after, by various retouchings, strengthen them to the tone of
colour in your original!, whether you use black or red chalk,
or black lead; which may be used singly or thus compound
ed, working the fainter black lead, and give








strength with black chalk: or finishing your drapery, hair
and eye-brows in this manner, and the flesh or naked with
red chalk. This method is best for copying engraved prints,
which we principally recommend to beginners.


Next of Washing or Shading with Indian Ink. Go exactly
over your out-line with  pen dipped in common Ink, with
Clean stale bread or India rubber, rub out all remains of
your black lead ; then mix your Indian Ink, by rubbing it
in an earthen saucer with water, till it is pretty black ; then
take another clean saucer and dip your pencil in the Indian
Ink, and with water mix it to the lightest shade; as it dries-
deepen it, where necessary, till you come up to the strength'
of your original. This method is most proper to use in
drawing from mezzotintos or paintings.


Lastly of Crayons, beginning with black and white : take
blue or purple-coloured paper, and having exactly formed
your out-line, begin on the second degree of your shades,
and with black chalk darken downwards; then take white
French chalk, to be had at all colour strops, and heighten
the lighter parts to  perfect white. In this manner all
paintings may be copied in their proper colours, by having
different Crayons of each colour, from dark to light in due
gradations; and practising by the preceding rule, rolling 
piece of paper to  point, and dozzeling or rubbing each co
lour on the paper when finished, to prevent their coming off,
Which yet will be tender, and should be kept behind  glass.


Materials used in Drawing.


Charcoal, cut in long Slips.


Black Lead Pencils.


Crayons of black, white, and red Chalk.
 Port Crayon.


Indian Ink.


Camel’ Hair Pencils;


Fitches.


Crow-Quill Pens.


 Ruler and  Pair of Compasles.
India Rubber.


