DIRECTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN
IV
 ufeful, noble, and extenfive Axr, befides its be-
ing an immediate introduction to Painting, Sculpture;

Engraving, with all the train of graceful ftudies coinciding.
therewith, is even neceffary to form the minds of Vouth for
whatever ftation defigned, fince nothing informs of corrects
our ideas fo foon as  true knowledge of Symmetry and Pro-
portion. Although this Art in its extent be as pacious as
Obfervation can difcover, or Imagination conceive, yet in
the fellowing sheets may be found an abstract, containing
Examples amply fufficient to direct  Genius in the leaft apt
or inquifitive, not forgetting diligence, but layingafide fear;
becaute every freth attempt on the same subject will evidence
an amendment to encourage the learner. It would be rath on
 fudden to expect perfection in this Art; yet after  few
painful Essays,  pleafure fucceeds in the prospect, and
grows in the practice beyond that of any other Acquifition;
and fure no one would (pare the Means where the End is fo
defirable. Not one Book has hitherto appeared in this coun-
try well faited to facilitate the attainment of this Art; yet
we are always invited to attend to ample and learned in-
structions to beginners, where the preliminary difcourfes
often puzzle and confufe the ideas more than the examples.
they recommend are ever able to cradicate. But fince exam-
ple has made verbal infiructions expected, we here fubjoin
fuch as feem to us neceffary for  Work of this kind, viz.
Any of the following Examples being placed before you,
 BLACK LEAD PENCIL and PAPER are all the requifites
nneedful. Then flightly sketch the general proportions from
the object fo placed, which carefully furvey, and alter by



 it gently out with sale bread or India rubber, Hlight.
ly and cautioutly retouching with more correctness, Hill
Keeping your copy fo faint that you may with eafe rub out
 arriend ir.
Wiren you can find no farther difagreement
i the original in your fkerch; freth point your pencil,

and kecging  watte paper under your hand, begin to finiffs
your out-line, taking
particular care to obferve and iritate


fuch parts as appear dark, diftinery from thofe which are


Faint or fmaller, ine ftrong touches being what give fpirit to
the out-line, and when properly given, always denote 
mafter' hand Let your greateft application be employed in
making  perfect out-line, for in this principally confifts the
Art of Drawing; this fully attained, all Arts are eafy, and

every Rudy will become delightful., The out-line compleat-
ed, fight and shalow become your next cencern, which is 
Tabour fo pleafing; that no commendation can; be given ade-


quare to the pleafure  real profeffor finds in thre execution of
this Rirt; or rather Science facceeding rt. Beginners are
apt to leave the ftudy of out-lines too foon, and fo commence
painters; like thofe who raife  structure ere the foundation
be compleased. Light and Shadow are produced by Erching
or Hatching, Washing, Chiaro Oscure; Painting, Modelling,
Scutpoure, Sc.  As the firft three are chrefly ufed by
learners,  shall give  few hints for the executing each.
And firft of Hatching: carefully-observe the Burin, of
manner in which the ftrokes of the original are laid, and
keep with exactnets the form, not fo much regarding their

number; firft Hightly making them all of  thicknets, and
after by various retouchings ftrengthen them to the tone of
colour in youroriginal, whether yeu ufe black or red chalk,
or black lead; which may be afed fingly or thus compound=
ed, working the fainter parts with black; lead, and gives


 with black chalk: os finithing your drapery, hair
and exc-brows in this manner, and the ffeth or naked with



red chalk. This method is beft for copying engraved prints,
in
which  principally recommend to beginners.
Next of Wathingor Shading with Indian Ink. Goexactly
over your out-line with  gen dipped in common Ink, with
clean stale bread or India rubber, rub out all remains of
your black lead; then mix your Indian Ink, by rubbing it
in an earthen faucer with water, till it is pretty black; then
take another clean faucer and dip your pencil in the Indian
Ink, and with water mix it to the lighteft fhade; as it dries
deepen it where necelfary, till you come up to the ftrength of
your original. This method is moft proper to ufe in draw-
ing from mezzotintos or paintings.
Eaftly- of Crayons, beginning with black and white: take
blue or purple-coloured paper, and having exactly formed
your out-line, begin on the second degree of your fhades,
and with black chalk darken downwards; then take white
French chalk, to be found at all colour-(hops, and heighten
the lighter parts to  perfect white. In this manner all

paintings may be copied in their proper colours, by having

disterent Crayons of each colour, from dark to light in due
gradations; and practifing by the preceding rule, rolling 
piece of paper to  point, and dozzelingor rubbing each co-
four on the paper when finifhed, to prevent their coming off,
which yet will betender, and should be kept behind  glats.
Materials used in Drawing.
Charcoal, cut in long Slips.
Camels ffair Pencils,
Black Lead Pencils.
Fitches.
ill Pens.
Crow-On
Crayons of black, white, andred Chalk.
 Port Crayon.
 Ruler and  Pair of Compaffes.
 Ink.
India Rubber;



 publiffed.

 for and sold by the Proprietor CARINGTOW BowLES,
at bis Map and Print Warchoufe, No.  in St. Pauls
Cburch Tard, London.
. Bowles' Principles of Drawing; forming  Complece Drawing Book:
illuftrared with  curious collection of eximples, beginning with an eafy and
simple method, calculared to convey instruction to young minds; by which they
may acquire the art without the affiftance of  mafter. Every branch of drawing
is contained in this bookk; such as the different parts of the human body, acrdemy,
dreffed figures, landfcapes, birds, carile, shripping, &cc. eleganrly engraved on fixty
folio pages of copper plates, all from the original drawings of the muft approved
mafters. To which is prefixed, an introduction to drawing; containing rules and
directions for the choice of intlruments and marerials, and how to apply and
manage them. With ealy and proper leffors for the young Hudent. Traullared
from the French of monfieur Gerard de Laireffe, with abtiracts from . . du.
Frefnoy. The feventh edition, corrected and greatly improved; with additions:
Price  Bowles' Passions of the Seal, reprefented in feveral heads, engraved in
the manner of drawings in chalk, from the defigns of the lare celebrared monfieur
Le Brun. In this fuperior performance, the lineaments of the face, that great
inirrour of the foul! are not only minutely defcribed by lerter-prefs, but are
admirably delincated on  folio copper-plates, in  tlriking and moft mafterly.
manner. Price  Bowles' Proportions of the Human Body, meafured from the moft
Deautiful antique itatues, by monfieur Audran, engraver to the lateking of France;


done from the originals engraved at Paris, on  foliocopper-plates. Pricev: Bowless Drawing Book for Ladies, or Complets. Flerift; being an
extenfive and curious collection of the moft beauriful ffowers, all drawn after
nature by . Heckle; with  fhort introduction to drawing, and directions for
mixing and ufing of colours. Alfofeveral proper and eafy examples;. the whole
adapted for the improvement of ladies in needle work. Engraved on  folio
copper-plates. Price  Coloured  Bowles' New and Complete Book of Cypbers, detigned and engraved
on  copper-plate:, by John Lockington, including  chrious print of the
amperor Charlemagne' crown; to which is added,  print of the coronets and.
helmets ufed by the nobiliry, &rc. The cyphers in this book are oreamentally
dispoted in the modern tatte, more regular than any ever publifhed, ufeful to
artifis in various profeffions; as feal and plate engravers, carvers, coach-paintersy.
defigners for medals, truphies, embroiderers, &cc. quarto. Price  Be careful to order Bowles' Book of Cypbers; by Lockington:
Wheremay be had  great Variety of ether Drawing Books.



