

 Editor of the following Treatife,
well affured it contains fufficient In-

Rructions for the whole Art of Painting in
Water-Colours, on Glass, ESc. prefumes to re-
commend it as far preferable to any Matter,
as it Cofts not to much as is ufually charged
for one Leffon; and as it includes the lateft,
and confequently the moft ufeful Difcoveries,
with the greateft Variecy of new, cheap, and
approved Receipts for mixing the Colours,
and laying them on to the beft Advantages
Confiderations which make all Apologies for
publithing it needlefs and fuperfluous. To
enter into the fingular Beauries the Noble Art
of Painting exhibits, would be too redious
here; fuffice it to fay, the real Entertainment
it always affords the Spectaior as well as
Practitioner, and its fo nearly refembling Na-
ture in her gayeft Attire and brighteft Co-
lours, muft furely be perfuafive Arguments to
enforce the Practice of  Book is intended as  neceffary Com-
panion to Bowles' Artiff' Asistant, Price  .  Lift of new, pleafing, and inffructive Drawing Books,
actapted for the further Improvement of young Gentle-
men and Ladies in this polue and accomplifhed Art, is
aided at the End of this Book.
which is thought truly worth the Nonce and
Regard of the Painter in particular, and
  Public in general, to whofe candid Ac
ceptance and Perufal the Author offers themg
not doubting but by  fleady Adherence to;
and Obfervation of the various Directions, the
Student will, in  thort Time, have his Labour
amply rewarded. But after all,
) EAII DAIHE
Like Nature? Can Imagination boaft,
Amid its gay Creation, Hiues like hers?
Or can he mix them with that matchlets Skilf,
And lay them on fo delicately fine,
And lofe them in each other, as appears
Inevry Bud that blows?

THOMSON' SPRING.
 


 

 PAINTING IW WATER-COLOURS
 for preparing the Single Colours
 for preparing the Mixed Colours


 for uling the Colours

 Methed of Colguring Naked Figures
  
 ie  seen 
iB.
Beafts



       
Frunt
   is   
 
 excellent Receipts
or those who paint





 PAINTING ON GLASS.
 Paintingon Glass 
Ciolour
 Manner of Working the Colours
 necessary Directions
To make  convenient Box to hold Colours, ESc.
 PAINTING IN CRAYONS  for using the Crayons

 for making Creyons

 of Drawing-Books, Sc. E 
 Publissed,
 OWL Ess Prattice of Perspective; or an ealy Niethed
Ad of reprefenting Natural Objects according to the Rules of
Art, applied and exemplified in all the Variety of Cafes; as
Landicapes, Gardens, Buildings of divers Kinds, their Appen-
dages, Parts, and Furniture; with Rules for the Proportion and
Pofition of Figures; both in Draught and Relievo: allo the
Manner of conducting the Shadows produced either by natural
or artificial Luminaries, and proctical Methods of Drawing
after Nature, when the Process of Rules are not underffood: 
Work highly neceffary for Painters, Engravers, rchitelts,
Embroiderers, Statuaries, Jewellers, Tapeary-Workers, and
athers cencerned in Defigning: the Whole illuftrated with  written in French by  sefuit of Paris. Trant=
lated by . Chambers, Auther of Cyclopadia, or  Univer—
fal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, the Sixth Edition. co)
so you would proceed immediately to the Practice of Perspective,
so without engaging in the Intricacies of the Theory, the
so fefuits Perspective will antwer your Purpose. Wolfius in
 Mathes.
Tom. II. .  in  Price  in Quarto.

To this Sixth Edition is prefixed the Theory of Perspective,
in which the Reafons and Grounds of the feveral Methods made
ufe of in the Practice, are thown and demonftrated, by Tames
Hedgson, Fellow of the Royal Society, and Mafter of the Na-
 School in Chriff' Hofpital.
II.
Bowles' Practical Geemetry; or,  new and eafy Me-
thod of treating that Art. Whereby the Prastice of it is ren-
dered plain and familiar, and the Student is directed in the moft
eafy Manner through the feveral Parts and Progreffions of it.
 Work highly neceffary fer Painters, Engravers, Architects,
Embroiderers, -Stazuaries, Jewellers, Tapeffry-Workers, and
others concerned in Defigning. The Whole illuffrated with
 Copper-Plates.
Wherein, befides the feveral Geome-
trical Figures, are contained many Examples of Landicapes,
 of rchitecture, Perspective, Draughts of Figures,
Ruins, &cc. Tranfiated from the French of Monfieur Seb. le
Clerc. The Sixth Edition,  Price gs. bound.
BOWLESS













 



 


Ct



   
 nt
 
 
 

 

dinting


    Dnd  Ed not Lnd  Ed  N  fffIIIifltfftn

DAIN  IIVty in Water-Colours, is an Artwhich
 Feen encourises by the Iatabiancs of Pa
laces eminent for their Titles, but more emis
ment for their Virtues; and no Wonder, fince no
Reprefentations can fhow forth Nature with more
Splendour and Magnificence, than  Painting exe-
cuted in this Mianner.
The Materials neceffary, are Gum-Colours, (of
which we shall treat more particularly hereafter
Lamel -Hiair  Fitches,   allet and   General or Simple Colours are, Whise,
BIACK, Brown, Red, aellow, biue, and (rreen.
The various Species of each are as follow:
Whites.
Spanish White.
Cerufe.
Wlake WRite.
Conftant White.
Soodium.
White Lead.

Blacks.



  Cherry Stones,
Verdigrife.
Ivory-Black; Fink.
Keating' Black.
Lamp Black.
Blues..
Saunders Blue,
&

Browns.
Ferre Blue.
Spanish Brown.
Blue Verditure.
Spanish Licorice.
Indigo.

 Blue.
Reds:
Light ditto.
Native Cinnabar.
Ultramarine.
Burnt Ochres
Blue Bice.


Indian Red.
Red Lead.
Fellows.
Minium.
English Ochre.
Lake.
Gall-Stone.
Vermilion.
Tambodge.
 Farmine.
Mafficot.
Red Ink.
Ochre de Luce,
Orpiment.
Greens.
Reman Ochre.
Green Bice.
Duich Pink.
Green Verditure.
Saffron Water.
Grals-Green.
DIRE CTIONs for preparing the following Singls
Ciolours.
WHIT ES.
The beft White for painting in Water-Colours,
is Flake Whife. Some recommend  White made
of Pearl and Cyffer-Shells, brought to an impalpable
Powder, called  Pearl White, which will mix well
with any Colour. If you afe Whice Lead, clarify
  .
at: with White Wine Vinegar; after the Whise is
fettled,
pour off the Vinegar, and wath it with
Water, thus:: Put the Powder into  Glats of
ater, fir it and prefently pour the Water off while
it is white, into another clean Glafs, when it is

settled pour off the Water, and you will have an exe
cellent White; to which add as much Gum, as is
neceffary to give it  Gloss.
: It has been often noticed that White Lead will
turn black, if mixed with Water that comes from
Iron or Clay; to that in the Space of  Month or
TWo, you may perceive it; and it will alfo change
any Colour, with which it is mixed.
It is recommended by some to rake the Powder of
Egg- Shells, of the brighteft and whiteft Sort,
well ground with Gum-Water, to the State of
 impalpaple Powder, to which add one twenrieth
Part of White Sugar-candy; others efteem it moff
when clarified in Spirits of Wine, and then ufe it
with Gum-Water.
It has been found by repeated Experience, that
 Egg-shell Powder is extremely ferviceable as  in Water-Colours: and thatithis, and the
Oyfter-shell Powder rectified; and well bruifed, will
make an excellent Mixture with other Colours, to
keep them from changing.
 fine White for Water-Colours may he made
by diffolving Filings of Silver, or Silver Leat, in
Aqua-Fortis, evaporating the Aqua;Fortis, till it
appears like Chryffal in the Bottom of the Glass:
Decant the other Part of the Aqua-Fortis, and walls
the Silver four or five Times in pure Water, till it is
entirely cleaned from the Aqua-Fortis, drying it
for Ufe. It muft be afed with the Waters of Cum
and Sugar-candy.
 good Whire for Water-Colours proper for Mi-
slature is made thus: Take  Pound of the Shred-
dings


 

 of Glove-Leather, and ffeep them in Water,
Boil them with twelve Quarts of Water, till it waltes
so two; ftrain it through  Linen. Cloth, into
 well-glazed earthen Pan: This is called CGlue
or Size, and proper to ufe with Colours in Candle-
Light Pieces; to know if this be ffrong enough,
feel if it is ftiff and firm under your Hand.
The Glue being melted, reduce fome White
halk to  Powder; and while it is hor, add fuch
 of Chalk, as will bring it to the Con-
Liftency of  Pafte; leiring it fleep for  Quarter
of an Hour,, fir it with  Bruth made of Heg'
Briftles.
In order to make this Whire brighter, add more
Eylac. Be careful to obferve that every Layer be dry,
before you put on another. If you work upon Wood,
you muft put on  Dozen; but fix or feven is fuffi-
crent, if your Paper is thick. Afterwards dip  foft
 in fome Water, draining it with your Fin=
gers, ruh the Work with it, in order to make it the
Smoother. When your Bruth is full of White, you
muft wath it again, and alfo change the Water,
exhen it is too white. Or you may ufe  wet Linen
Rag. intlead of  Bruth,
    .
In some Objects there may be seen  fhining, like
That of Gold; through Colours of Red, Blue, or
GGreen, such as some Sort of Flies, or Beetles, and
the Cansharides. This Grold Tranfparency may be
very welk imifared, by laying some Leaf-Gold on
the shaded Side of the Drawing, giving  little to the
light Side. To lay on the Gold Leaf, press it
Tmrooth and clofe with Cotton, after you have
walked it with trong Gum-Water. But Care muff
be taken that in laying on the Gum, you do not

exceed the Limits through which you would have
the Gold appear. In this Cafe, the Gold is only to
thing

 through the tranfparent Colour, which is to
be laid over. it.
As Leaf-Gold will not receive Water-Colours re-
fularly, it is necelfary to be provided with Water
of Ox-Gall; and with this Liquor to froke over the
Gold Leafs by which it will receive any Colour
you are defirous of laying over it, and will alfe
Tetain it.
In June and July, there may be found upon Rofe=
Trees,  Kind of Beetle, of  Gold and Green Co=
Jour, which may prove extremely serviceable in this
Kind of Painting; but in ufing your Gold, it will be
beft to polith it, in this Manner.
In Tome Manufcripts there may be feen Gold
Letters, which feem to rife above the Surface of
the Paper.
The Compofition which raifes them

is made of Vermilion, and the White of an Egzs
beat to the Confiffience of an Oil, and fixed  Paper with Gum Arabic: On this figurative
Letter, wath fome flrong Gum-Water, with  Hair Pencil; lay on the Gold Leaf clote
with fome Cotton: and when dry, rub it again with
Cotton, and burnifh it with  Dog' Tooth; and
it will appear as if it was really caft in Gold.
There is alfo another Way of working in Gold,
which is performed by Shell-Gold (but then it muft
be pure, and not that brought from Germany,
which turns green in  few Days). Cover the
Shady Parts with Vermilion, before you ufe this
Gold; and when you have rectified it with Spirits of
Wine, lay it on; when dry, burnifh it as before
directed.
In laying on this Gold, it is beft to leave the
Lights without it, as it will appear to  much greater
Advantage, than if all the Object was covered: But
providing the whole Performance should chance to
be covered, the beft Way of fetting it off, is to trace
DVeF



 the fhady Parts with Gall-Stone, or the  of French Berries (of which we shall treat
hereafter), heightened with Mlnium.
Having treated thus much upon Gold, we shall
now Speak of Yellows in general. Gambodge is, be-
youd doubt, one of the melloweff Colours Nature
has produced: It is of to mild  Temperature, that
when it is touched with any Fluid, it inftantly
diffolves; to that confequently if wants neither
gumming nor grinding: It is productive of  Va-
riety of the moft agreeable and pleafant Yellow
Fints, that Fancy or Art could ever imagine; it
vill generally fhade itfelf; though you will fome:
simes find in the Description of Flowers it requires
Felp.
Gall-Rone is  very rich deep Fellow, tending

towards  Brown. it is exceeding ufeful in many
Cafess needs but little gumiming or grinding; works

 but will not thade itfelf.
RIT. Boyle fays, if you cut the Roots of Ber-
)
Beriies, and put them into  ffrong Lixivium made

of Fearl-Afhes and Water, from them will preceed

& FD&
SVary agreeable Fellow:  his Experiment has often
been made and as often attended with Succels.
Ffe alfo gives an Account of another fine tranf-
Barent Yellow, by boiling the Root of  Mulberry:
 well cleanfed, in the foregoing Lixivium.

 Fellow-Ochre makes  very good Pale Yellow;

and being
ground with (um-Water, will prove ex.
treiely ufeful.
Bnother very ufefyl Yellow, is made by in-
fufing the Plant Celandine in clear Water, gently

preing it, adding to the Liquor fome Alum-Water,
letting it boil.
The Virtues of the Yellow extracted from French
To
 is to well known, that we need not difcourfe
Upon it, but only give the Directions for preparingit.
  Quart of the preceding Lixivium, boil twwe
Ounces of French Berries gill the Liquor is of  fine
Fellow; strain it from the Yellow Berries, and
when cold it is fit for iIfe. To the Berries put  of the Jame Lixivium, and boil it till the
Liquor is as Rrong as Gall-fones, with which
you may fhade any Yellows. This you may boil
till it comes to  Brown, and will, with the Addition
of  little Ox-Gall, ferve to fhade the Gold Leaf.
You may likewife make  Yellow, by infufing
Saffron in pure Water. When this is, steeped in
reclified Spirits of Wine, there is nothing higher;
but it is very apt to fy, unless it is high-gummed.
 good Fellow for the Illumination of Prints may
be extracted from the Roots of Cringer, which makes
 good Green, when mixed with tranfparent Verdi-
grife.
Thole Vellows, called Englifh and Dutch Pinks,
are made with French Berries ground to  fine Poty-
ter, and then boiled.
OR ANGE COLOUR.
This Colour is made of  Mixture of Vermilion
and Gambodge, the latter moft predominant; in
which you are prefented with  pleafant and service-
able Colour in painting Lillies, and allother Orange—
Colour Flowers.
 ED .
Minium, or Red Lead, is  flrong heavy Co-
lour, Mr. Boyle has given us the following Di-
rections for preparing it Put four Ounces in
 Glais, to  Quart of Rain-Water, and when
it has been thoroughly firred, pour off the Wa-
fer; and by  frequent Repetition of this, there
will





 remain at the Bottom of the Glats  beautiful
Red when dry; which is to be ufed with Gums
Water. When the Colour has been thus prepared;
you muft not expect above twenty Grains to remain
Sut of four Ounces.
Carmine affords the brightelf and moft perfect
Crimson, and is the moft beautiful of all Reds; for
with this Colour and Lake you may make the Shades
 ttrong as you pleafe. This Colour should never
be purchafed but by Day-light; for if it is not good,
it will but fpoil your Work.
Lake is  fine tran(parent Colour, not much in-
ferior to Carmine but in painting with Carmine on
That Part of the Print, on which the Light is fup-
pofed to ftrike, lay on fo light  Tint, as  fcarce
vifible; working it fronger as it orows darker, and
souch it in the darker Parts with Lake.
Lake may be bought at moft Colour-fhops ready
repared in Shells for Warer-Colours: But if you
are defirous of making it yourfelf, it is necefiary to
adhere to the following Directions.
Having prepared  Lixivium made with the Afhes
of Vine-Twigs, to three Pints of it, add  Pound of
the beft ground Brafil Wood, boil it till half the
Lixivium is evaporated, ftrain it off; boil it again
with the Addition of four Ounces of freth Brafil
ood, two Ounces of Cochineal, Half an Dunce
of Terra Marita, and  Pint of fair Water, let it
evaporate as before: Add half an Ounce of calcined
lum (reduced to an impalpable Powder)  Quarter
of  Drachm of Arfenick: diffolve them in it, by
stirring it with  Stick, when fettled ftrain it off.
To give this  Body, reduce two Cutle-fith Bones
to  Powder, and putting it in, let it dry leifurely.
uantity of fair Water; in which
Lerind it in  
you may let it steep. Strain it through  Cloth, and
Making


 it into  few Cakes, fet it by for Ufe, after
drying it on  Piece of Marble.
If you would have this Lake redder, add fome of
the Juice of  Lemon; and to make it deeper, add
Oil of Tartar.
nother Lake. Boil the Shreds of Cuperfine Scar-
let Cloth in  Lie made of the Afhes of burnt
Tartar, when fufficiently boiled, add fome Cochi-
eal, powdered Maftich, and Roche—Alum, boil this
again  while it is quite hot, ftrain it through  Bag

feveral Limes. The firft Time, the Bag muft be
Rrained from Top to Bottom, and the remaining
grofs Master being taken out, let the Bag be well
wathed; after this, ftrain the Liquor through the
Bag again, and you will find  Paffe remaining on
the Sides, which divide into small Cakes, and fet by
for ufe.
Another Lake. Steep four Ounces of the beft
Brafil Wood in  Pint and  Half of the fineft
diffilled Vinegar, for three Weeks at leaft, tho' the
longer it remains the better it is; feeth the Whole
in Balneum Marix, till it boils up three or four
Times; let it fettle for  Day or two, put it to an
Ounce of powdered Alum, and into  clean Pan with
the Liquor, let it remain for twenty-four Heurs;
heat the Compofition, and fir it till it as cold whern
it has ftood about twelve Hours, ffrain it, and add
two Cuttle-fish Bones, prepared as before.
 Liquid Colour of  very good Crimfon may
be made as follows. In twelve Ounces of pale ftale
Beer, boil one Ounce of ground Brafil Wood till the
Colour is as firong as you defire; frain it through 
Linen Cloth, and bortle it up for Ofe. If you want
to bring this Colour to  Body, take some dried Ox-
blood reduced to  Powder, and mix it with the
Colour.



 have the following Directions from Mir. Boyls,
for extracting  fine Crimfon from the Berry:bearing
Spinach, which, being preffed, affords  very agree-
able Juice; to which add  fourth Part of Alum,
boil it, and when cold it is fit for Ufe.
Or you may extract  very beautiful Red, from
the Red Beetreot, baked with  little frong Vine-
gar and Alum, when cold it is fit for tIfe.
Another Way to make  Crimfon Put twenty (or
more) Grains of bruifed Cochineal into  Gallipot,
with as many Drops of the Lne of Tartar, as will
make it give forth its Colour; add to this Mixture
about Half  Spoonful of Water, or more, and you
evill have  very agreeable Purple; reducing fome
Alum to  very fine Powder, put it to the Purple
Eiquor, and you will have as beautiful  Crimfon:
Strain it through  fine Cloth, ufe it as foon  for though this is  Colour, which if foon
sifed looks extremely well, yet by long flanding is
subject to decay.
PU. PL  .
Take eight Ounces of Logwood,  Pint of Rain.
Warer, and an Ounce of Alam, infufe it well over
allow Fire in  well-glazed Pan, or Pipkin, for about
Quarter of an Ounce of
swenty-four Hours; add  
sum Arabic; let it fland for  Week, ftrain it
through  Piece of fine Cloth. Keep it clofe, or it
vill mould.
Or you may make  redder Purple by adding to
one Ounce of the above, four Ounces of Brafil
Wood, and  Pint of Htale Beer, boiling it till the
Liquor is as ffrong as you defire. It may be made
Larker by adding more Logwood.
The


 richeft Purple is made by blending Carmine
and Pruffian Blue, or Indigo, to what Shade you
pleafe.
    .
Titramarine is the beft and brighteff Blue prepare
fix Ounces of the Lapis Lazuli till is
it by heating
is red; cool it in ftrong Vinegar; grind it with 
Stone and Muller to an impalpable Powder; then
make  Composition of Bees-Wax, Refin, Linfeed
Dil, and Furpentine, of each three Ounces; in-
corporate the Whole together over  flow Fire, till
it is near boiling; pour them into  Pan well glazed.
This is called the Pafte of Ultramarine. The Lapis
Lazuli being prepared, add to it an equal Quantity
of the Paftil, or Pafte; mix them together thorough-
ly, and let them remain twelve Hours; to eka
tract the Ultramarine from the Pafte, pour clear
Water upon it, preffing the Pafte with your Hlands,
the Ultramarine will come out; for its Reception
place  Glats Tumbler under your Hland; let it
fettle in this Water till the Ultramarine finks to the
Bottom.
If the Colour feems foul, cleanfe it thus. Dif-
folve fome Tartar in Water; add as much of it to
the Ultramarine as will cover it; let it sland twelve
Hours; wath it in warm Water, and you will have
your Colour well clarified and perfectly clean. Ler
your Ultramarine be of  high Colour, and well
ground, Next to Ultramarine in Beauty is Pruffiam
Blue, when ufed in Oil, though it will not fland fo

long, its not having the Body of Ultramarine. The
Pruffian Blue does not grind Kindly with Water, on
account of its oily Subltance.
Blue






-
 Bice is  Colour of  very good Body, and
fows very agreeably in the Pencil; wath it aca
cording to the Rules laid down for Ultramarine.
Blue Verditure is  very bright pleafant Blue, of
 good Body, and works very well when ground with
Gum-Water. It is  little inclineable to and makes
 very good Green, when ground with Gambodge,
or French Berries. This Blue is moftly ufed for  of  Garment.
Saunders Blue is extremely serviceabie in the Shad=
ing of Ultramarine, where no very dark Shades ap-
pear; when they do, you may add  little Indigo
 it.
Litmofe is  very agreeable Elue; to prepare it,
Quart of Small Beer Wort, in which boil
Lake  
two Ounces of Litmofe, sill the Colour is as frong
 you require; pour the Liquor into  glazed
Pipkin, and it will foon congeal.
Indige is the Carkeff Blue, is  foft free Colour,
and runs very warm in the Pencil; it requires to be
well wished and ground, and may be made darker or
lighter by the Addition of more or leis Gum-Water.
Care is required in the ufing this Colour; for, as we
before hinted, its running to free may be  Mleans of
deceiving the Student, and prove too dark for the
Completion of his Defires.
Mr. Royle has given us the following Directions
for making  very fine Coloer of the blue Leaves of
Rue, by prefting, bruifing, and infsfing both Leaves
and Juice in pure Water, for  Fortnight, washing
them every Day; incorporating them and the Wa-



ucil Gry gra-
ter, till they becone  Pulp, letenez
dually.
Thefe will produce an excellent Elue for Shading.
 runs free in the Pencil; put into it the Pow-
der of Gum Arabic, which will be  Mlcans of maks
  
ing it keep; add of the Gum as much as you would
have it more or lefs ftiff in working.
 fine tranfparent Blue, (from the preceding
Author) equal to  Tint of Ultramarine.— The
Flower from which this Blue is extracted is the
Eyanus, or blae Cornborde, which is poffefied
of two Blues, the outer Leaves being light, and
inner dark, the latter is hild in preference; pick
both from the Buttons and Cafes in which shey
grow, the same Day they were gathered.
 of the middle
Having prepared  ✓
Leaves, prets out as much jurce as poffible, with
The Addirion of  little lum, pou will be . feffed
of  fine, durable, tranfparent Blue, hitle inferior to
Titramarine.
The pracuring of the Flowers, and the Preffure of
the Juice, should be dene with all poffitte Expedi-
sion, lett the Flowers should lofe their Perfectiun.
It has been thought by fome, it the Leaves
of thefe Flowers were cured as thofe of Baffron,
there would proceed from them  much greater

Quansity of Colour, from which might be preffed

mure Tincture, than when freth from the Field.
in curing of which it would appear, that each
Time the Cake was turned, the Flowers would
be darker, till they became  dark Blue. Great
Lare is required during this Operation, that the Fire
be kept very conftant and gentle, that the Flowers
smay not be fcorched, which will be an inc nrettable
Way of bringing the Flowers to Perfectim.
herefore to put this Operation in Execution, 
Kiln muff be precured, as for curing Setfran; the
Top of which is to be covered wite Hair Cloth,
pon this lay-feveral Sheets of Paper, afterwards 
Parcel of the inner Leaves of the Flower, two or
Three Inches thick, preffing them clole, and (prink-
B  them with Gum-Water; after which,  small
Charcoal Fire muft be made in the Kiln, fo as to
communicate Heat to the Top. Cover the Cake
with  few Sheets of Paper, and  Board with
 small Weight upon it; after  few Minutes
the Cake is to be turned; when it is placed, take
off the upper Papers, (prinkle the Cake again
with Gum-Water, lay on the Board  Weight,
as before, for  few Minutes; and to repeat the
+
Turning and Sprinkling feveral Times, till the
Cake is united, and of the Thicknefs of  Cake of
Saffron.
     .
 proper Blacks for Water Colours are a fol=
low; Lvory Black, which is prepared in the fol=
lowing Manner: Let the lvory Black be tho-
roughly ground, and there will naturally proceed
from it  Liquor of an oily Subftance; mix as much
of it as will make it work freely in the Pencil. It
has  fine Glofs, and is extremely ferviceable in
painting of fhining Objects.
There is another very agreeable and ufeful Black
called Keating' Black, and may be had at moft Co-
four- Shops ready prepared.
Indian Ink is  very good Black, and of great
Service, as it may be laid on to any Shade, and will
always fhade itfelf, on which Account it is often
ifed for Drawings.
GR   NS.
to
Sap-Green is  Colour extremely ferviceable,
and the beft Green for Water-Colours our Age
affords; being of  gummy Subftance, and dilating
eafily


 
eatily in Water; it produces an endlefs Variety of
of
Lints, and has the Advantag
ge of thading itfelf., In
the purchafing this Colour, remember to obferve,
That it looks very black and bright.
 Sea or Artificial Green is made, by mixing
Indigo and Sap-Green, which may be made darker
or lighter by adding more or less Indigo: It is 
very serviceable Colour, eafily worked, and pro-
ductive of many Tints. This Colour, as well as
Sap-Green, fhades itfelf. The indigo muft be well
ground, before you mix it.
Another is made with Indigo and Gambodge
well ground together, extremely ufeful in painting
of Trees, Grats, Vegetables, &ic. with the Addition
of Sap-Green it is very ferviceable in Flowers
and shading of Garments.
 tranfparent Green is made by mixing Verdi-
grife and Yellow to Various Tints, by leaving
either predominant.
BR    .
Biffre is  good and serviceable Colour; the beft
Sort is very bright and clofe; as it is  Colour diffi-
cult to work of itfelf, mix  little Spanish Liconce
with it, that will mellow and take off its Harthness.
It muft be well ground, and the higher it is gummed,
the better for Ufe.
Spanith Licorice is allowed by the beft Mafters to
be productive of  great Variety of Brown Tints, of
 very agreeable Colour; it will not shade itfelf, but
works as free as any um Colours, by dilating it
in fair Water.
 brown Mixture is made by incorporating Sap-
Green and Carmine, which is of an extraordinary foft
Nature. It is  Colour extremely ferviceable, as you
will

  .
will find hereafter in  Description of painting
Flowers in Water-Colours.
Another, by biending Vermilion and Biffre tho-
roughly; the Biftre muft be extremely well ground
before you incorporate it with the Vermilion, and if
will produce  Brown worthy of your Effeem.
DIRECTiONs for preparing the following Mixed
Colours.
Asp Colour. Cerufe, Reating' Black; and Whitey
Paded with Cherry-Erone Black.
Lake, and Flake-Whire, shaded with Car-
B Biffre, and Vermilion, haded with
Black.
Changeable Sitk. Red Lead and Mafficot Water,
shaved with Sap-Green, and Verdigrife.
Another. Lake, and Fellow, shaded with Lake, and
Prusfian Blue.
Cloud Colour. Light Maffcet, or Lake and White,
shaded with Elue Verditure.
Confiant White, and Indian Ink, with  Vermilion.
White, with  little Lake and Blue Verdis
Knother
ture, makes  very agreeable Cloud Co-
lour, for that Part next the Horizon.
Lake and White, with  little Vermilion
Crimson.
shaded with Lake and Carmine.
Flame Colour Vermilion and Orpiment heightened
with Wnite.
Another. Gambodge thaded with Minium, and
Red Lead.
Fles Cobur. Cerut, Red Leed, and Lake; for
 Twarthy Complexion, add Tellow Ochre.
Contlent White, and  little Carmine,
Anoltier
shided with Spanish Licerice, washed with
Carminne.
French


 
 Green. Light Pink and Duich Bice, shaded
with Green Pink.
Glass Gray.
Cerufe; with  little Blue of any
Kind.
Hair Colour. Mafficot, Ochre, UUmber, Cerufe, and
Cherry-Stone Black.
Lead Colour. Indigo and White.
Light Blse.
Blue Bice, heightened with Flake
White.
Another. Blue Verditure, and White of any Sort
well ground.
Light Green. Pink, Smalt, and White.
Another. Blue Verditure, and Gambodge.
Another
Gambodge and Verdigrife.
The chief
Ofe of this Green, is to lay the Ground-
Colours for Trees, Fields, &.
Lion Tawny. Red Lead and Mafficot, fhaded with
Umber.
Murrey. Lake and White Lead.
Orange. Red Lead and  little Mafficot, shaded
with Gall-ftone and Lake.
Orange Tawny. Lake light Pink,  little Mafficot,
Chaded with Gall-ffone and Lake.
Pearl Colour. Carmine,  litle White, fhaded with
Lake.
Popinjay Green. Green and Mafficot; or Pink and 
little Indigo, shaded with Indigo.
Purple.
Indigo, Spanish Brown and White; or
Blue Bice, Red and White Lead; or
Blue Bice and Lake.
Ru sel.
Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Scarlet.
Red Lead and Lake, with or without Vers
milion.
Sed Green. Bice, Pink and White, shaded with
Pink.
Sky
  Colour. Light Mafficot and White for the
loweft and lighteft Parts; second, Red

Ink and White; third, Blue Bice and
White; fourth, Blue Bice alone. Thefe
are all to be foftened into one another at
the Edges, fo as not to appear harfh.
Shy Colour for Drapery. Blue Bice and Cerufe, or
Oltramarine and White, fhaded with In-
digo.
Straw Colour. Mafficot and  very little Lake,
Shaded with Dutch Pink.
Violet Colour. Indigo, White and Lake; or fine
Dutch Bice and Lake, thaded with Indigo;
or Litmofe, Small, and Bice, the latter
moft predominant.
Waier.
Blue and White, shaded with Blue, and
heightened with Whice.
Another
Blue Verdigrife, shaded with Indige, and
heightened with Whire.
DIRECTIONS for using the Colours.
wills; and
Your Pencils muft be fatt in their 
sharp pointed (after you have drawn them thro' your
Mouth) not apt to part in the Middle.
Before you begin, have all your Colours ready,
and  Pallet for the Conveniency of mixing them,
 Paper to lay your Hand, as well as try your
Colours upon, alfo  large Bruth called  Fitch to
wipe off the Duft from them.
Being prepared according to the foregoing Mc-
thod, proceed in your Painting, which if  Land-
Icape, lay on firft dead Colours all over your Piece,
leaving no Part uncovered: And in this Part of the
 there needs no great Pains, but  mat-
terly Freedom is rather required; and the Work,
though


  feemingly rough upon  clofe Inspection,
vill have  good Effect; when placed at  Diftance,
Ler not the Roughness of the Work difcourage you,
for it is eafily fofsened by Degrees, with the other
Shadows, obferving only to fweeten, mellow, and
heighten them as the Light falls.
In some Places lay on ftrong and mafterly Fouches,
and in thofe Places bring up your Work to an equal
Roundnets and Strength; tempering and sweetening
your Coloars with  sharper Pencil than the firft, shat
no Lumps or harth Edges be left, but that all your
Shadows may lie differted, foft, and Limooth, gliding
gently into one another.
You are not to finith any one Part firft, but
work up every Part gradually alike, till you fee no-
thing wanting to complete your Piece.
Tlaving laid your dead Colours, begin next with
 lighteff Parts, as the Sky, Sun-beams,
 the yellowith Beams, with Mafficet,
Blese
Whice; next the Blueness of the Sky with
Verditure alone: For Purple Clouds mis only
your Colours deeper as
Lake and White, making
they go upwards from the Horizon, except in tem-
peftuous Skies. The Tops of diftant Rhountains
muft be worked to faint, that they may feem to lofe
Themfelves in the Air.
Bring your Colours forward, as your Diftance de-
creafes; painting your firft Ground next the Hori-
 downwards, of bluith Sea-Green, and as you
advance forwards, of  darker Green, till you come
so the Fore-Ground itfelf, which as it is the darkeff
Part of all, with dark Green, worked in tuck  as to give the appearance of Shrubbery,
E painting of Trees, having firft laid  Verdis
grife Green for  dead Colour, proceed with work-
 it, to as to give  leaty Appearance; feeming is
hang





 free and natural, especially towards the Edges;
where you may touch  few Leaves clofe to the
&
Tree, which will give your Performance  mafterly
Kiffect. Bring some of your Leaves forward with
Mafficot and Whice: For the Trunk, work the
Brown with Sap-reen; if you should introduce
Oak Trees, lay on fome Touches, to exprets Leaves
of Ivy twined about it.
All diffant Objects are to be made imperfect as
they appear to the Kye.
+
Thefe Rules are adapted to General ppearances;
but the Student may deviate from them, as Nature
shall dictate.
The Methed of Colouring NARED FICURES.
We shall begin with the Daked Figures of Wemen
and Children; and though the Life is to be principally
followed, we think it neceffary to give fome Directions
to prepare the Colours feen in Nature. Take Flake
WWhite, and  little Lake, blend them together, and
with that lay the Ground Colour, then thade with Red
Ochre, Cherry-ffone Black, and  litile Lake mixed
together, touching the Ligs, Checks, Cc. with 
Tint of Carmine, and heighten the Flefh with
White, and  little Carmine. Remember that yeu
are never to heighten it with pure White, which
will rather give it the Appearance of Fith than
Fleth.
Old Women, Vermilion, White, and Brown
Ochre for the Ground Colour, fhaded with Red
Dchre, and Cherry-Hone Black; to put  little

Bloom in their Faces, ufe Lake and Vermilion,
heightened as before
Foung Women and Children deceased, Brown, White,
and  little Vermilion shaded with Cherry-fone
Black;


 to old Women you muft add more brewn
Ochre, shaded as before.
Toung Men, add more brown Ochre, shaded
with Keating' black and brown Ochre, touching
the Lips and Checks with Carmine and Lake.
Dead Men, Brown,  litile White and Vermi-
lion, shaded with Black.
The Methed of Colouring Hiaik.
Toung Women and Children, brown Octre alone,
heighten with Mafficot, or brown Ochre and Whice,
heightened with the fame. Or light Ochre dark.
ened with brown Ochre, and heightened with Maf-
ficot.
Old Women’ Hair, brown Ocre and black mixed,
In
heightened with brown Ochre and White.
CGray Hair, ufe more Black than Yhite; heighten
with pure White, or Cerufe. Thefe Colours may
be applied to the Hair of Men, making them darker
or lighter as Occafion requires.
The Methed of Colouring BE ASTS.
Chesnnt Brown Horfes, Red Ochre and Black
shixed together; shaded with Black, heightened with
Red Ochre and Whire.
App Gray Horses, Black and White mixed; thaded
with Black, heightened with White.
White Herfes, Black and White mixed; shaded
with Black, White, and Biftre; heightened with
pure. Water.
Block Harfes, Black lighily laid on, shaded
with Keating' Black.
Speited


 Horfes are to be variegated according to
Nature, and the Difcretion of the Artiff.
Sheep, White, fhaded, with Spanish Licorice.
Hogs, brown Ochre; shaded with Keating' Black
and Biftre, heightened with Mafficor; the Briffles
Hrong brown Ochre; the Eyes dark Mafficor, fhaded
with Vermilion, the Mouth Indigo; darkened with
Indian Ink: Touch likewife black Sparks among
the Hairs. The Infide of the Mouth Vermilion;
shaded with Lake:
Lions, colour much the (ame Manner as Hoge;
adding Lake in the Ground Colour.
Bears, brown Ochre; Red Ochre, and Black
snixed; shaded with Biffre and Ivory-black.
Leepards, brown and light Ochre; darkened with
Ivory-black; the Spots Red Ochre, and Black
Lhaded with Black.
Wolves, Spanist Licorice and Black, shaded with
Black.
Gray Wolves, Black, White, and Brown, shaded
with Black; the Eyes Chefnut Colour.
Ases, Black and White mixed. Or add  little
Brown Ochre, thaded with Black.
Elephants, Black and Whice, and Spanish Lico-
fice mixed; shaded with Black and Biftre; the
inner Part of the Nofe Vermilion and White, shaded
with Black.
Rats and Aice, to be coloured the fame as the
former.
Apes, Monkies, Exc. Duich Pink and Black, heigh—
gened with Mafficot and White. The Face, Black
and Biftre mixed, as alfo the Feet and below their
Bellies, shaded with Black and Pink, mixed with 
little brown Ochre.
Stags, brown Ochre, shaded with Biffre towards
The Back, the Neck and Belly White, the Mouth
and


 
and Ears inclining to Red, the Hoofs Black, and
Legs shaded with Black.
Hares, brown Ochre, the Belly white, and the
Back shaded with Biftre.
Whice,
Rabbits, Black and White, the Belly
shaded with Black.
The Methed of Colouring Bik Ds.
Eagles, Black and Brown shaded with Indigo; the
Feathers heightened with Brown Ochre and White;
the Beak and Claws Saffron; Graded with Biffre; the
Eyes with Vermilion heightened with Mafficot, or
Saffron shaded with Vermilion.
Falcons, Brown Ochre, Black and White mixed,
shaded with Black; the Feathers defcribe by Strokes
of Black, the Breaft (prinkle with Black, the Eyes
and Talons the fame as the Eagle', the Beak
Gray.
Turkeys, both Male and Female, the Back Black
and White mixed gradually, thaded off to  White
under the Belly, prinkled and shaded with Black;
the Legs indigo thaded with the fame, the Beak
and Eyes Blue, heightened with White; the
Red Skin hanging over the Bill, Vermilion shaded
with Lake.
Swans, White fhaded with Black; the Legs and
Bills Black, the Eyes Fellow,  Ball in the midft.
Geese, Cerufe shaded with Black, the Legs Black,
the Bill Red.
Pheafants, Whice and Black mixed, the Eyes
like rhofe of the Falcon, the Legs, Durch Pink shaded
with Black.
Owls, Ochre mixed with White in different
Shades, the Legs Yellow Ochre,
    

Opr
NT
 Der  an ythest



 Julty
EE)

     
Ct



  
 Ba


The Methed of Colouring FRvir.
pples, thin Mafficot mixed with Verdigrife,
Shaded with Brown Ochre, give them  Bloons
with Lake, heightened with Mafficor and White.
Pears, Mafficot, deepened and mellowed with
Brown Ochre; the Bloom the same as the Apple.
Cherries, Vermilion and Lake, Ihaded with Car-
mine, heightened with Vermilion and White.
Spanith Cherries, the Midicle Vermilion, Lake,
and White mixed, foftened off towards the Ex-
gremities; the Bloom Lake, heightened with White.
Mulberries, Carmine and Black, in fuch Man-
her as between the Stalk and Berries there may ap-
pear red, according to Nature.
Strawberries, White, draw it over with Vermis
lion and Lake, fhaded with fine Lake; heightened
with Red Lead and Mafficot mixed, and after with
White; stipple them with White and thin Lake
only.
Blse Grapes, dark Purple, shaded with Blue. the
Bloom Bice.
White Grapes,  Mixture of Verdigrife and Maf-
ficor, shaded with thin Verdigrife, heightened
with Niafficot and White.
Peaches, thin Mafficot, fhaded with Brown Ochre;
the Bloom Lake, heightened with White.
Bbile Plums are coloured according to the former
Directions.
Else Plums, Purple, fhaded with Bice; foftened
into  Green towards the Stalk.
Green Walnuts, Verdigrife and Sap-Green mixed,
shaded with Sap-Green; thofe without Hulks,
Brown Ochre, fhaded with Bifire.
 Method of Colouring VEGETAELES.
Raddises, Whice, shaded with Lake, near the
Top foftened into  blooming Purple; in fome
Places Green; the Leaves Verdigrife, shaded with
Sap-Green.
White Cabbages, Crambodge, and  very little Ver-
digrife, shaded wick Sap-Green; touched in fome
Places with  little brown Ochre, heightened with
White.
Red. Cabbages, Lake and  little Pruffian Elue
mixed, thaded with Lake and Indigo, the Veins
Lake and White.
Cscumbers, Fellow for the Ground Colour, wathed
over with Verdigrife, shaded with Sap-Green.
Fellow Pompions, Vellow thaded with brown Ochre,
the Veins  ffronger brown Ochre.
Green Pompions, Sap-Green, Verdigrife, and In-
digo mixed, shaded with Indigo and Sap-Green.
Turnips, White shaded with Verdigrife touched
with Brown, the Leaves Verdigrife touched with
Sap- Green, heightened with Mafficot.
The Method of Colouring FLOwEks.
Auriculas.
ATURE, together with the Art of the Bitanilt,

has rendered Auriculas preductive of fuch 
Variety of Colours, as to enter upon  particular
Description, would carry us beyond the Limits of
this Treatife. We thail therefore defcribe two only,
and oive the following Dirctions.  tender Wash
of ambodge, Thaaed with Sap-Green and Car-
mine blended regerser. Round the Centre leave
 broad





 broad white Space, which shade with Indiass

Ink and Sap-Green mixed, Ripple the Cambodge

with  Purple exrracted from Logwood; the Cup
in the Infide frong yellow fhaded with Duich
Pink or all-ffone; Hipple it with White, dark.
ening the White gradually with Indian Ink as the
Pn
Shade Incicans.

the Stalks and Leaves Green, made of Cerufe,
Indigo, and Sap-Green, darkening it as the Shade
FEgslrES.
Knother Mcthed.
 light Wash of Purple extracted from Log=
yood, shaded with  ffronger extract of the fame, in

the darkest Parts Carmine and Indigo mixed; the

white Circle shaded with Sap-Green, the inner Part
Purple, the Seed Gambodge.
The Leaves and Stalks Sap-Green, shaded with
that and Indigo mixed.
Single Anemones.
Anemones are enriched with the moft varic-
gated Colours, which are laid on fo delicately fine,
and blended with fuch matchless Skill, that in paint-
ing them we would recommend the Student to pay

great Attention to Nature; but not being willing
to leave him quite deffitute of Directions to colour
Thefe beautiful Flowers, we shall infert the fol-
lowing
 thin Wash of Gambodge, shaded with Biffre,
ar Carmine, and Sap-Green blended together; the
Stripes Carmine, fhaded with the fame, In-
digo in the darkeft Parts, or ftipple with it; the
Leaves


 Sap-Green, fhaded with Indige and French
Berries; the Stalk brown.
Belsilvia Anemones.
Stripe with  Mixture of Liquid Purple and Car-
mine, shaded with Liquid Purple; wath and fhade
the Heart or Apple with Sap-Green, stipple is with
White; the Seeds Gambodge.
The Leaves and Stalks Sap-Green, mixed with 
little Indigo.
lthea Frutexes.
The Pod Gambodge and Sap-Green mixed, shade
the dark Side with  Mixture of Sap-Green and In-
dian Ink; hatch round the Ourfide with Liquid
Purple and Carmine, shade the White Leaves with
Indian Ink only; Ripple the Flower with Indian
Ink.
The Leaves begin and finith with Sap-Green, and
make the Stalk to imitate Wood.
Almond Blossoms.
AA tender Walk of Carmine, shaded with Carmine
and Pruffian Blue mixed, to the required Colour;
the Buttons Mafficor, fhaded with Gambodge; the
Stem, Biffre, shaded with Keasing' Black; the Foot=
Stalks and Cups, pale Green.
While thefe Flowers are in Bloom, only  fevy
Leaves appear, which begin to shoot out from the
Branches, and are of  pleafant Greeh.
Deable



  Almond Blossoms.
These Flowers are darker than the former; add
more Prusfian Blue to the Earmine, and carefully
blend White in the light Parts.
The Stalks, Leaves, Sc. as fingle Almond Blof-
FOTRIS.
Aconites.
Gambodge, shaded with Gall-fone or Datsh
Pink; the Leaves ftrong Green, made of Indigo
and Garrbodge, the Stalks  Mixture of Verditure,
Cambodge, and white Lake, shaded towards the

Flower with Bifire,
Cyclamens.
White shaded with  Mixture of Indian Ink and
Sap-Green; the Pod the fame Manner, from the Pod
there is  fine Shade of Crimfon, done with Car-
mine carefully worked in the Shades of the Leaves.
The Stalk and Back of the Leaves, begin and
finith with Carmine and Sap-Green mixed.
Colchicums.
 tender Wath of Carmine, and  little of the
Purple of Logwood mixed, Ripple it with Carmine
 The Stalks and Leaves as the Cyclamens.
 Crown Imperials.
 thin Wath of Gambodge, upon that another
of Minium, shaded with Carmine; the Leaves
Sap-Green, shaded with Indigo and French Berries.
Orange Crown Imperials.
 thin Wath of Red Lead; the light Shades Cas-
mine, the dark Vermilion and Biftre mixed: The
 the same as the Flower.
The Leaves and Stalks as the preceding.
 Method.
 pale Tint of Gambodge, the light Parts shaded
with Gall-ffone, the darker Carmine and Sap-
Green mixed.
The Stalks and Leaves as Scarlet Lychnifes.
Convelvoluses.
Pruffian Blue and Verditure mixed well ground
and gummed the Rays excepted, shaded with Pruf-
fias Blue alone; the Buds the fame; the Rays
White, shaded with Indian Ink and Sap-Green
mixed next the Cup, the infide Rays hatch with 
Mixture of Whire and Gambodge.
The Leaves and Stalks as French Marigolds.
C Wiethed.
Watk with Carmine; deepen with the famey tilf
you have brought it to its proper Roundness; shade
the Rays with Sap-Green, Indian Ink, and  littie
Indigo, blended together.
The Leaves and Stalks as the preceding
Larnations.
THefe Flowers, as well as many others, afford 
Variety that makes them paft Defcription; in one
we see the Ruby, with its bleeding Radiance; in
another the Sapphire with its Sky-tinctured Blue;
and in all, fuch an exquifite Richness of Dies, as
no other Sort of Paintings can boaft.—With what
 mafterly Skill. is every varying Tint difposed,
whilft they feem to be thrown on with an safy Dafh
of Security and Freedom, and adjufted by the niceff
and moft judicious Touches of Art and Accuracy  in the Jame Manner as the ftriped Rofe, put
in Red Stripes, slipple it in different Parts with
Carrninne.
The Leaves and Stalks Verdigrife, shaded with the
Same.
Double China Affers.
Thefe Flowers are very much variegated in their
Colours; fome are white, others Crimion, and fome
are tinged with  bluith Purple; the Centre of the
Flowers are Yellow; the Leaves are of  frong
Green. the Stalks Biffre, shaded with the fame,
the darkeff Parts touched with Indian Ink.
Double


 Crowfeets.
 tender Wask of ambodge, shaded with the

same, the darkeft  arts touched with Gall-fione.
The Leaves and Stalks  very pale Green, singed
with Red towards the Bottom.
Crocuses.
Of thefe Flowers there are twe Colours, the one
Purple the other Saffron; wath the Purple one with
Prusfian Blue and Carmine mixed, shaded with the
Jame, but the readiest Way is to colour with the
Purple of Logwood, wathed over lightly; proceed
to darken, renewing the Shade with  darker Tine
of the fame; mix  little Prusfian Blue (if need be,
with your darker Shades.
Yellow Crocufes work upon the fame Prin-
ciples as Jonquilles. The Stalks and Leaves  same as Jonquilles.
Darsies.
Of these Flowers, there are three Colours, Red,
White, and others ftippled with Red and White,
The Leaves are of  pleafant Green, the Stalks of 
light Green, tinged with Red towards the Bottom.
Fien and Chicken Darfies.
The Hen, or principal Flower, round which the
small ones, called Chickens, grow, is beautifully
mortled
C 
 with Red and White, thofe which inclofe
it are almoft all Vithice; for the firft, Flake-White,
Hippled with Carmine; and in the same Manner
for the smaller ones, only ufing less Red.
The Leaves and Stalks as the preceding,
Fritillaries.
Purple, compofed of Indigo, Carmine, and  lit-
sle Vermilion, adding to much of each, as will give
it the Appearance of  dull reddith Pu:ple; Hlipple
it with  darker Shade of the fame, or Dutch Pints:
 Stalks Pruffian Blue and Sap reen mixed,
adding Indigo for the darkeft Shades: The Leaves
to be done with the same.
Chequered Pritillaries.
Carmine, shaded with Purple, and the Purple ex-
tracted from Logwood; chequered with Indian Ink.
The Leaves Verdigrife and ambodge, for the
Shade add thereto  little Indigo.
Gladiolas.
Carmine, shaded with the fame and Prussian Blue
blended together. The Bottom of the Flewer White,
shaded with Sap-Green, darkened with Indian Ink;
but great Care is required in this Part of the Per-
formance, that the Colours may appear foft, and
lofe themfelves in each other.
The Leaves and Stalks Carmine and Sap-Green,
the Bottom Sap-Green, and  finall Quantiry of
Pruffian Blue, shaded with the same Colour, darkened
eyith Eudige and French Berries mixed.
Geraniums.




  same as Yellow Crown Imperials,
Ffellebores.
White, the Bafe of each Petal ftain with Crim-
fon; the Button yellow, the Jame as other Rofes.
The Leaves Indigo and French Berries, the Stalk
paler Green; Hippled with Crimfon.
Single Hollybocks.
 thin Wath of Gambodge,  deeper of the same,
the darkeft Shades Gall-fone; finithed with Gall—
Hone and Sap-Green.
The Pod; Leaves and Stalks, begin and finith with
Sap-GreeR.
Double Hollybocks.
 flight Wask of Carmine, preferving the white
Paper for heightening, hatch with Carmine, the
darker Shades Sap-Green, the Bloom pale Li-
quid Purple, but in the Buds make no Ufe of
Purple.
The Stalk and Leaves, begin and finith with Sap-
EFTeER.
Heart’ Ease.
The Bloffom confifts of five Leaves or Petals, the
gwe upper of which are beautiful Purple, for which
Carmine and Liquid Purple mixed, fhaded with the
Sale  


  the other three light Fellow, or Straw-Co-
lour edged with Purple; the Bafe tinge with deep
Purple, imperceptibly blending itfelf with the Straw
Colour, from which Place five or fix Lines delicately
extend themfelves over each Petal.
The Stalks and Leaves, begin and finish with Sap-
CGreeH.
Double Hlypaticas.
Prusfian Blue, shaded with that and Indigo mixed;
the darkelt Parts Indigo alone.
The Leaves Indigo and Gambodge, or French
Berries; the Stalk pale Green, tinged with Red to-
wards the Root.
Honey-Suckles.
The Infide of the Petals White, shaded with
Sap-Green, or Mafficot shaded with Sap-Green,
or Gambodge and Biftre; which Infides are
to be thewn by curling the Leaves back at the
Ends, or fplicting them; the Gurfides  thin Wash
of Carmine and Lake mixed, thaded with Ear-
mine, Indigo for the darkeff Shades. It is to
be obferved, that fome of the Flowers growing on
The same Stalks, are inclinable to Purple, others to
Carmine; the Style and Buttons seen at the Ends of
the Flowers, are of  faint Green.
The Stalks Sap-Green and Carmine. The Leaves
Sap-Green, fhaded with Indigo and French Berries.
Blue Bell Hyacinths.
Wltramarine or Verditure; be careful to put in
your firft Harches very free and foft; shaded with
Prusfian


 Blue in the fame Manner, for the darkeff
Endigo.
The Leaves and Stalks as Orange Lilies.
Double Hyacinths.
White, shaded with Indigo, Indian Ink, and 
very little Sap-Green; for thofe with  Crimfon
Bluth, wath  faint Tinge of Carmine, leaving in
the White towards the Top, ftrengthening it to
wards the Botton.

The Leaves and Stalks Prusfian Blue and Sap-
Green, shaded with Sap-Green and Indigo,
Irises.
tinged with
The three upright Petals White,
Crambodge; at the Eafe of each, the Whire to be
Jone tye same as the Narciffus; the other three are
Purple with  Vein of Yellow, which begins in the
Middle, and to widens till it comes to the Bafe.
The Leaves and Stalks, the fame as Wall-
Flowers.
effamines.
 Chaded with Indian Ink, and Sap-Green
blended together, and worked extremely foft; for
the darkeff Shades add mere Indian ink; may
alto in  few Places add fome foft Tints of French
Berries at the Backs of fome of the Flowers, and
others entirely Fellow.
The Leaves and Stalks mix Sap-Green, Ver-
digrife, and  little indigo, adding more indigo for
The darkeff Shadess
Tonquibles.


 ever ambitious of shewing us what the is
Capable of performing, hath in thefe Flowers given us
an indiffutable Proof of her Air and Delicacy; and
sherefore in order to preferve them in Painting, let the


 Iint of Gambodge be very tender; walts the

Lup likewife, proceed with another Wash over
the firft; the Leaves shaded with Vermilion and
 mixed; let this be done fo foft, that the
Coleurs may feem to glide gently into each other;
Strade the Cup with Gall-fone, mixed with  little
Biftre, or Carmine and Sap-Green; but in all be
careful to preferve  Softners.
The Leaves and Stalks Pruffian Blue and Sap-
reen mixed, shaded with the fame.
Scarlet Lychnifes.
Walts very tenderly with Carmine and Vermilion
smixed, finish with Carmine, ufed with ftrong Alum

Water; put in the Lights with White tinged with
Cambodge.
The Leaves and Stalks as Single Hollyhocks
Lysbnideas.
Pale Red, with  purplish Tinge.

The Reaves the same Colour as the former; the
Stalk green near the Flower, but grows brownn to-
Wards the Bafe.
Lark.


aan

 Ppn
 


 tny
 
   
 


   Arortf

 
Eia
  Sburs:
Wearly the fame as China Asters.
 Lilies, the fame Manner as White
Hyacinths; Oranoe Lilies the Jame as Waftur-
Lidis.
Guernfey Lilies.
Streno Gambadge, wath that (except the lighteff
Parts) with Minrum; the darker Parts Wermin
lion; finithed with Carmine.
The Leaves Indivo, Pruffian Blue, and French
Berries mixed; the Stalk Green, tinged with Red
towards the hottom.
WEezeveOnS.
Pale Crimfon, the Ourfide darker.
 Leaves which appear while the Flowers are
 Blcom, are of  pleafant Green; the Stem Brown.
African Miarioolds.
The fame as Oranoe Lilies.
The Leaves and Stalks begin and finith with Sap-
(Freen.
French





  Marigelds.
Thefe Flowers demand great Attention to colour
them well: The Edges of the seaves Gambodge,
the Infide Leaves Red Lead, shaded with Carmine,
the deeper Shades Biffre.
Marvel of Peru.
 thin Wash of Carmine, proceed to  deeper
Shade of the fame; finifhed with Carmine and
Sap Green mixed.
 Leaves Gambodge and Green, finifhed with
Indigo and French Berries. The Stalks light Green,
tinged with Brown towards the Bafe.
Martagons or Turk' Caps.
 foft Wash of Gambodge, shaded with Gall.
ftone, that with Biftre, or Sap-Green and Carmine,
mixed.
There are others of  rich Scarlet, firff
afe  Lay of Red Lead thoroughly prepared,
Thaded with Carmine, adding
thereto for the
darkeft Parts,  fmall Quantity of Indigo; the Style
and Buttons Gambodge shaded with Red Lead, and
that with Carmine.
The Stalks and Leaves begin with Sap-Green
and Prussian Blue; finithed with the Addition of In-
dizo.
Nasturtians:


 Orange-Colour with which thefe Flowers are
adorned, is fo rich as makes it paff Conception; the
Colour which comes the heareft, is Orange-Co-
four; the Method of Compounding which, is givern
in the Directions for preparing Water-Colours.
On the two largeft Petals, draw feven or eight
Lines, the Jame Colour and Manner as Hearts
Eafe.
Double Nasturtions.
Thefeare to be coloured according to the foregoing
Directions; only with this Exception, the two large
Petals in that, are obliterated in this.
Polyanthoses.
Thefe Flowers, like many others of different
Sizes and Colours, are fo variegated, that Nature
teems to have taken  Pride in thewing how far the
can exercife herfelf. But we would not advife the
Student to look on them with an Eye of Contempt,
or think it Condefcenfion to copy the Works of
unerring Nature; fince in them, there are fo many
Various Beauties, as gives Auriculas very little, if
any Preference. This which we describe is mote
tled with Purple and White, the Edges and Cup
pure Gambodge, shaded with Gall-ftone; marble
the Leaves with Prusfian Blue and Carmine mixed;
wath the Flowers at the Back with Carmine and  Lake  shaded with Carmine and Sap-Green.
Anothes


 Micthed.
In the Centre of the Cup is  fmall Spot, which
with the Cup paint Straw-colour; the Spot muff
remain, the Cup shaded with Vermilion and Biffre
mixed; some Space round the Cuphasch with Straw=
colour; in the Shape of the Flower; the Ourfide

Kdges Whites proceed with Carmine, preferving
the Infide Whice Circle.
Pionies
Deep Carmine, darkening with the fame, as the
Shades grow darker, add indigo to the Carmine; the
 Sap-Green and Carmine; the Leaves Saps
Creen, thaded with Indigo and French Berries; the
under Parts not to dark.
Passion-Flowers.

 Petals white, shaded with Sap-Green, and
Indian Ink mixed; the Threads are ranged in fuch
Order as to form three Circles, each of  different
Colour. The firft or outer one is Blue Verditure,
Shaded with Pruffian Blue; the second White, to be
expreffed by carrying on the Stroke with Flake-White,
the Space between the Strokes Indigo and Indianink;
the third Circle reddith Purple, by blending Car-
mins and Pruffian Blue together. The infide of the
five Buttons (which Parts are chiefly feen) Yellow,
as the Centre of the Flower; the other Parts which
project from the Centre are light Green, thofe
three


  from the Top excepted,
which are bluifts
Purple.


The Leaves French Berries and Indigo, for the
Shades add  litle Indian Ink; the Tendrils and

Stalks Sap-tyreen and Carmine.
Pasque-Flowers.
Rich Purple, fomewhat inclining to  Blue, by
Carmine and Ultramarine.
mixing
The Stalk Whirith Green, tending to  Purple
sowards the Bafe; the Leaves and Stalks White,
Crambodge, and  little Indigo mixed together 
the Foot-Halks livid Red.
Pomgeranate Blosfoms.
Red Lead shaded with Carmine.
The Stalk and Leaves Green.
Sweet Stenied Peas.
The Bloffoms are compoted of Red and Purple
Leaves; the Red begun and finithed as the Mfunds
Rofe; for Purple ones  thin Wash of liquid
Purple; for the darker Shades  Mixture of Carmine
and Pruffian Elue, finished with Indigo.
The Leaves and Stalks,  little White and Saps
Green, shaded with Sap-Green alone.
. Ranunculuffes.

here are  great Variety of thefe Flowers; the
Student will have  delightful Paftime in Rudying
LFons



  Nature; and as his Eye will be agreeably en-
sertained with  Diverfity of Colours, fo will he find
himfelf improved by painting from therm. We should
recommend him therefore carefully to obferve and
perufe with Attention the Rules of Nature and the
following:
 fine Wath of Red Lead, striped with Carmine,
finifhed with Carmine and Sap-Green mixed; the
Seeds Indigo or Indian Ink, stippled with White
the Leaves and Stalks as Fritillaries.
Knother Methed.
White, the upper Parts friped with Red; the
white Leaves shaded with Sap-Green and Indian Ink,
the Sap predominant; Hripe the Outfide of the
Leaves with Carmine.
Rofes.
When
ss No Flower that blows is like the Rofe.
ve confider their noble and majeftic Appearance,  no wonder we fee them to often introduced in
Wreaths and Balkets of Flowers. The neareff Di-
rections we can give for imitating this King of
Flowers are the following:  light Tint of pure
Carmine, over which another equally light of
Pruffian Blue, which will give the Flowers 
Tint of that Bloom which appears in Nature; pro-
ceed with darker Shades of Carmine of the beft Sort,
in the darkeff Parts of the Flower add  little
Indigo, which will give  Roundness and Body to
your Work; if the Seeds are feen, lay on some
Gambodge, shaded with Gall-Stone; the upper
Sides of the Leaves Sap Green, shaded with Indigo
 French Berries mixed; the under Part Whites
Indigo, and Sap-Green mixed; fhaded with the
Same.
The Stalks Brown made of Sap-Green and Cars
smine, fhaded with Indigo.
Rose Buds.
We shall not here undertake to defcribe the diffes
rent Colours and various Tints, with which Nature
has furnifhed us;  pale Wath of Carmine, shaded
with  ftronger Wath of the same; let the Harchings
be extremely tender, preferving that Tranfparency
and Sweetness the Flower has by Nature.
The Stalks and Leaves begin and finith with Sap-

reen, after which  flight Wath of Carmine,
Guelder Rofes.
Flake White, shaded with Indian Ink and Sap-
reen mixed, keeping  proper Gradation of Shades.
The Leaves as Crown Imperials; the Stalk
Biffre, shaded with Indian Ink, to as to exprets
Wood.
Mundi Rofes.
 Right Walk of Carmine, heightened with
White; shaded with Indian Ink and Sap-Green
 adding more Indian Ink for the darker
Shades; ftriped as Hollyhocks. The Leaves and
Stalks Sap-Green, adding  little Indigo for the
darker Shades.
S are only two Sorts, the common Sun-
Flower, and the same improved; for the firft,  flight
Walks of Carmine, deepen that with another,
Shaded with Vermilion, Carmine and Biftre, mixed;
finith the deepeft Shades with the fame, being care-
ful to relieve the Flower, making it look round;
the Seeds shade the same as the Flower, the darkeft
much deeper; the Seeds on the light Side heighten,
Kippling them with Flake—White, washed over with
Gambodge very lightly; the Lights in the fame
Manner.
The Leaves and Stalks Sap-Green and Cambodge
mixed, finished with Sap-Green alone.
Snow-Drops.
Flake-White, the Inner Petals edged Green.
The Leaves and Stalks Pruffian Blue and Vellow
Berries mixed, the firft moft predominant; fhaded
with Indigo and ambodge mixed.
Single Stocks.
 thin Wath of Carmine, proceed with  ftronger
Layer of the fame; finith with Sap-Green and Car-
mine mixed; shade round the Seeds Sap-Green.
The Leaves and Stalks Gambodge, White, and
Sap-Green; fhaded with  Tint of Indigo, finiffed
with  darker of the same.

Doubli


 Stocks.
There are of thefe Flowers different Colourss
Tome are  purplifh Crimfon only, others mottled
with Crimfon and White, and fome are all White 
For the Crimfon  little Pruffian Blue and Carmine
mixed; for the Mottled ones ufe the fame Colour,


Ripple them with Flake-Whire; the White Sort
Shade with Indian Ink and Sap-(reen mixed.
The Leaves and Stalks pleatant Green, inclining
to  White.
Sweet Williams.
Some of thefe Flowers are endowed with an agree-
able Variety, fome are slippled by Nature, and others
poffels one Colour only; we shall endesvour to thow
how to colour two, and leave matchlefs Nature to
to direct the Pupil in his farther Studies. In work—
ing the firff, wath with Carmine till it is  rich
Crimfon; finithed with Carmine and Sap-Green.
The other,  pale Tint of Carmine, shaded with
the fame very dark, Hipple round the Fibre with
Flake-White; the Fibres in the Middle Indian
Ink.
The Leaves and Stalks begin and finith with Sap-
Grreen; touched with pale Carmine.
St. John' Worts.
Gambodge, shaded with Biftre or Carmine and
Bap-Green mixed.
The Leaves as Guernsey Lilies.
   nefe Flowers are juftly admired for their Craiety
and Multiplicity of Colours; what  Profufion of
Dies arrays their painted Cups! their Tinges are
glowing; their Contrafts frong; and the Arrange-
siient of them both elegant and artful Nature has in
The Tulip diverted the Eye with an agreeable and en=
chanting Variety. Begin by ftriping with White
well blended with Carmine; add some very tender
Stripes with Gambodge, heigzhend with Carmine, for
the darkeft Shades  lutle Sap-Green mixed with its
Shade the Yellow Stripes with fame Mixture, the

Jarkeft Shades Vermilion and Biffre imiked.
Another Wiethed.
Begin by ftriping with Gambodge, proceed with
Purple Stripes; in doing of which be careful to pre-
ferve the White ones, which will give an agreea-
ble Effeet; the darker Shades Liquid Purple, to
which (if requifise) add  little Pruffian Blue.
The Leaves and Stalks Sap-Green, shaded with
the fame.
Parrot Tulips.
Thefe Flowers derive their Name from the un-
Comion Appearances at the Back of each Pecal,
which very much refembles the Beak of  Parrot: the
Edges of thefe Tulips are jagged, and much unlike
the other Tulips in Shape, though not in Colour.
Double


 Vicleis.
The Groundas the former, the inner Petalstinged
with Purple; the Stalks, which are green, singe the
Hame as the Petals towards the Bottom.
The Leaves ftrong Green.
Wall-Flowers.
For the common Sort, Gambodge shaded with Gall-
Rone. But that Sortmoft efteemed by the Florift,
is called the Bloody Wall; the outer Petils Gam-
bodge, tinged with  litle of the Purple of Log-
wood; the inner Petals Red Lead finithed wish Car-
mine: the Cup Purplish Brown.
The Leaves and Stalk bluith Green, to be worked
as thofe of the Flowers of the same Colour.
Double Whise Narciffus.
Flake-White, the firft Shade Sap-Green, and  Indian ink, adding more Indian ink in the
 Shades;  the Bottom of each Petal
Green; the narrow Edge that furrounds  Turf of
fmall Petals in the Centre Carmine.

The Stalks and Leaves the fame as Irifes.
The Scabbard at the Bottom pale Brown.
 Wherever White occurs, it is always better to
leave the Paper to represent that Colours
Sores
DD  excellent RECEYEys for those who paint in
WATER-COLOURS.

as OIL two Ounces of the beft and cleareft Glue.
 with one Pint of pure Water
and half an
Ounce of the fineff Roche-Alum, till diffcived. This
is  very ferviceable Liquor, with which you may
temper thofe Colours intended for  as it will
prevent them from cracking.
To make  Selution of Gum.
Diffolve an Ounce of the beft Whice Gum Arabic,
and half an Ounce of double-refined Sugar, in  of Spring—Water, ftrain it through  Piece of
Muffin; then bottle it off for Ufe, keeping it free
from Duft.
Another Method.
Take the whiteff Sort of Gum Arabic, bruife and
tie it in  Piece of Woollen Cloth, feep it in Spring
Water till diffolved. If too fiff, which is Known by
the fhining of the Colours, add more Water, if too
weak more Gum. With this Water you may tem=
per moft of your Colours, ufing fuch  Quantity of
 that the Colours when dry, being touched, will
not come off.
To make Sixe for Candle Light Pieces. See Fage   keep the Flies from your Work.
Having prepared your Gum-Water according to
either of the preceding Directions, add  little Con
loquinteda, which, if your Performance should be
expoted, will keep it from being damaged by the
Flies.
To prepare Alum-Water.
Take four Ounces of Roche-Alum, and  Pint
of pure Spring Water, boil it till the Alum is tho-
roughly diffolved; filter it through  Brown Paper,
and it is fit for Ufc. Before you lay on the Colours
take some of this Water hot, and with  Spongs wet
the Back of the Paper, which if it is not good muft
be werted three or four times. This will not only
prevent the finking of the Colours, but will alfo
keep them from fading, and give an additional Beauty
and Luffre. Remember that the Paper muff be dried
each Time before you wet it again.
To make Lime Water
Put some unlaked Lime in  well glazed Pan,
cover it with pure Water, one Inchabove the Lime,
let it remain fo for one Day; then ftrain off the
Water and keep it for ufe by the Means of this
Water you may change Sap-Green into Blue.
To make  Lixivium of Pearl Afpes.
Steep half an Ounce of Pearl Affies in Rain of
Spring Water for one Day, frain off the Water as
  as poffible; this Infulion will prove extremely
ferviceable in many Colours, particularly Brafil-
Wood, to which it will give an additional Beauty
and Luffre.
To recover decayed Colours.
Take double-diftilled Refemary-Water, or pure
Effence of Rofemary, and with  few Drops temper
your Colours, which however dead and faded will
recover their primitive Brilliancy; this Effence will
prevent the Bubbles which are troublesome in grind-
ing White and Umber.
To prepare Liquid Geld for Vellum-Painting, Fans, EsC.
Hlaving procured fome of the finelt Leaf Gold,
grind it with frong Gum-Water, adding more
Gum-Warer as you fee requifite; when thoroughly
ground, temper it with  small 
uantity of Mercury
Dublimate, kinding it in the Shell with  little dif-
folved Gum; (pread it equally over the Shell, and
ife it with fair Wateronly.
 Liquid Silver, for the same Use.
The Manner of making this is the same as that of
Liquid Gold, only remembering to temper it with
the Glaire of Eggs, and not Water.
To make the Glaire of Eggs.
Beat the Whites with  Spoon, till they rife in 
Foam; let them fand twelve Hours, and they will
beclarified into good Claire.
  recover Liquid Silver that has contracted Rust.
If your Silver becomes rufty, cover that Part of
the Performance with the Juice of Garlick, which
vill recover it effectually.
To make  single Ground to lay Silver or Gold upon.
prs
Lake the new Shreds of Parchment (they being
preferable to Glove Leather) boil them in  Quart
of Spring Water till confumed to  Pint; Itrain
the Size from the Shreds, and put it into  well-
glazed Pan; ufe it before it is cold; be careful when
you lay on your Silver or Gold, that your Size is not
 moift nor too dry, for in either cafe you will
be in Danger of impairing your Performance.
To take the Impression of the Wings of  Butterfly in all
their Colours.
Kill it without fpoiling; cut off the Body clofe
to the Wings, which contrive to pread in  flying
Pofition; then take  Piece of white Paper, wall

Fart of it with thick Cum-Water, when dry lay it
on  fmooth Board with the Wings on the Cum-
Water; lay another Paper over that, prefs both very
hard, let them remain under Preffure for an Hours
afterwards take off the Wings of the Butterffy, and
you will find  perfect Imprestion of them with all
their various Colours remaining on the Paper. Draw
between the Wings of the Impreftion the Body of
The Butterffy, and colour it after Life.
 . 
  Cting



 Kny
 .
C Fiting
 &

ogt




 

Tf
  
  


 Dut  
Mi
To take the Impreffion of  Leaf of any Tree.
Tently rub the Leaf on the Backfide with  Piece
of Evory or fuch like Subftance, fo as to bruife the
Weins  little; wet the fame Side cently with Lin-
feed-Oil. and press it hard upon  Piece of white
Faver, and you will have the perfect Fioure of the

 ith every vein Juuly exDrinco; tnen corour
it, and it will appear  correct and beautiful lmi-
EdurOl O   it tod tt &   witl   .  ad   at or
EDA IN TING on Glats is an Art which has
 efteemed by the Generality of Mankind an
fmatement attended with many Difficulties; yet
mothing can afford  more folendid and marnificent
Reprefentation of Nature, than  Painting well exe-
eated in this Manner; there being no Outlines of
Shadino reouired, thofe in the Frint anfwering that
EIId.
Mezzotinto Prints are generally ufed for this Pur-
mofe, the Shades and Lines not being to harfh and
abrunt. as thofe of Enoraving as they are blended
into each other and have the Abpearance of  in Indian Ink.

Asaving procured iuch WIC  rints as vol
intend to paint, cut off the Margins, and set  Piece
of the beft Crown Glass, the Size of the Prins (free

from Knots and Scratches); clean it well with
Whiting, lay on one Side fome Venice Turnentine

with


 

with  Hog' Hair Bruth as thin and fmooth as pot-
sible; lay the Print flat in Water, and let it remain
on the Surface till is. finks; take it carefully our
with its Face downwards, and dab it between fome
Papers till no Water appears, yet to as the Print re-
mains damp.
Afterwards lay the damp Printon its Backupon 
Hat Table; hold the Glats over is without touching
the Turpentine, till it is exactly even with the
Print, then letting the Glats fall gently on it, care-
fully prets it down with your Fingers in different
Parts, to that the Turpentine may stick to the
Print; then taking it up, hold the Glats towards you,
presting the Print from the Centre towards the
Edges till no Bliffers remain.
Next wet the Back of your Print with  Sponge,
till the Paper will rub off with your Fingers, rub
it gently, and the white Paper wiil come off, leaving
 very plain Impreffion on the Glafs; when dry, wer
it all over with  Camel' Hair Pencil dipt in Tur-
pentine Oil, and it will be perfectly tranfparent, and
fit for Painting.
CoLOURS for PAINTING On GlASS.
O   Colours fit for painting on Glass are

ground in Oil, and tied up in small Bladdersj
which are to be had at the Colour Shops.
Whites.
Blacks.
Flake-White.
Lamp-Black.
Spodium.
Ivory-Black.
Browns.


  
 


 
wi










 Blues

Smalt.
 Brown.
Elimber.
Greens.
Verdigrife.
Reds.
Breen Verditure.
Rofe Pink.
 Werte.
Wermilion.
Red Lead.
Fellowss
Indian Red.

English Pink.
Lrake Cinnabars
Durch Pink.
Mafficol.
Blisess
ny 
Orpiment.
 Bice.

English Ochre.
&. ruffian Blue.
Spruce Ochre.
Fidigs.
 Reafon of not mentioning the Earmine (for
 and the Ultramarine (for Blae) in the above
 is on Account of its being beft to purchafe and

te  them in Pouder, as they are liable to be loffs
  small touch of thefe will give the Painting an
enlivening Caft; what you require for prefent Wie,
mix with  few Drops of Nus-Oil upon your
Pallet, with your Pallet Knife.
The Pallet and Pallet-Knives may be had at the
Colour-Shops.
Prick  fmall Hole at the Bottom of each Bladder
you want to get the Colourout of, and press out no
smore upon your Pallet than you intend for imme
diate Ufe, as the Colours are apt to dry and Ikin
EVEI.
Then laying  Sheet of White Paper on the Ta-
Ble, take the Glats in your Left Hand, the Furs
pentine Side next you; hold is floping, (let the Bot-
 sand upon the White Paper) and the Outlims
and Tints of the Prints will appear on the Clats 
shen decorate it as follows;
The Manner of working the Colours.
 the Lights and Shades are difperfed on the
Ja
& Picture, be careful in difpoting of the Colours
accordingly; lay on the light Colours on the lignseft
Parts of the Print, and the darker over the (haded;
the brighter Colours being laid on properly, it is
Rot of any material Confequence if the darker ones
should by Accident run over them; for the upper
Colour cannot be feen through that which was laid
on firfl; for inftance.
Freense
Firft lay on some Verdigrife, mix that and Dutsh
Pink for the next; this may be made darker os
lighter by adding more or less Duish Pink.
Blues.

The Lights, Ultramarine or Blue Bice; the firth
Shade Saunders Elue, the darkeft Indigo,
Reds.
The firft Minium, or Red Lead (thoroughly
ground), shaded with Lake, in the higheft Parts
touch with Carmine, which will enliven your Paint-
ing
, and fet it off to great Advantage.
BI lighteff Yellow Mafficot, fhaded with Dutch
Pink.
Any of thefe Colours may be darkened by adding
to them  darker Shade of the same Colour on your

Fallet; or lightehned by mixing them with White.
If the Colours are too thick, make them thinner
by mixing with them  few Drops of Turpentine
Oil, for they muft never be ufed thick, as you
will be in Danger of fpoiling the Piece.
Hlave  Pencil for each Colour; never put  Bruth
which you have ufed for one Colour into any other,
before you have wathed your Brush well in Tur-
pentine Oil, particularly Green, as that Colour
will appear predominant when dry.
Observe when you have done ufing your Brufhes,
they are to be thoroughly wathed in the Oil of Fur-
Pentine.
The Glass being painted, let it remain three or
four Days free from Duft, and it is fit for framing
 All Sorts of Mezzotinto Prints proper for paint-
ing on Glass, may be had at No.  in St. Pauls
Liburch Vard.
T 
  make  convenient Bd  to bold
CoLOURS, EC.
OE
Let the Size be two Feet fix Inches long,
Foot four Inches wide, and ve Inches deep, with
Partitions.


me

. Turpentine
. To receive
.
the Leavings of
Oil for wathing
Colours.
Pencils.

   ee eeanne  in


. For
. For Bottles  . For Colours
in Bladders,
dry Colours.
of Oil and the
and the Pallet.
Knife.
opt




.
For Pencils and Sticks.
,  Box lined with Tin, fixed in the great Bok,
to contain Turpentine Oil for wathing the Pencils
after they have been ufed before they are laid by.
Between  and  upon the Tin, at  is the
Place for preffing the Colour out of the Bruth after
being dipped in the Oil of Turpentine to clean it :

The Colours which fall into the Box , will, with
their Oils, make  very good Size for GGold.
The Partition  is lined with Tin, as it is to erje
clofe the Bortles of Nut and burnt Oil (which you
should never be without), alfo the Oils of Fur-
pentine and Linfeed; which was it not lined, the
frequent taking the Bottles out, would greafe and
Rain the Wood; whereas the Tin will preferve it
free from any Stain.
The


 xIi partition  in the Middfe of the Bos is also
made of Tin, to take out whenever it is required,
 that is to contain the Bladders of Oil-Colours.
Over thefe lay the Paller, which clean as foon as
Jone with; with Furpentine Oil, or else lay it in
Water fufficient to cover the Colours, which will
keep the Colours till the next Occafion, preventing
 very great Wafte. Rub the Pallet with  clean
Cloth and Linfeed or Nus Oil, till it is quiterdry,
it will be clean, and fit for the Reception of the
Colourso
The Box  is divided into feveral Parts for Keep-
ing the dry Coiours diffinct, and from fpoiling each
other; in the fame Place keep the Ultramarine and
Carmine.
 Box  is for the Reception of the Pencils
after they are cleaned, where they wilt be ready
whenever they are wanted. Obferve that fome of
the Pencils are to he uted in laying on the Colours,
while others are of white Hair for the foftening and
Blending them in each other as foon as laid on, that
if the Student should leave off harth and abruptly,
The Place may not be diftinguithable.

The Profeffor in this polite Art, should not have
fess than two or three dozen Camel’ Hair Pencils
Of Various Sizes, with Sticks to each, about ten or
swelve Inches long, made of Cedar.
If there is Occafion to grind the Colours, pro-
vide  Stone, which may be made of  Pebble or
fine Marble thoroughly polifhed, to be had at any
Stone-Maton'.
Quantity of Colour to grind,
If there be  large 
The Oil muft be in Proportion, and never overpower
Quanticy: The Colour being-
it, with  fuperffuous 
fufficiendy ground (which it is not while there are
any Lumps remaining) dip  Piece of Eladder in
warm Water to mollify and make it more pliable;
this



 done, immediately tie up the Colour in its apitt

    
it will be fit for Ufe when required.
But though you take all the Care poffible, wheir

 Colours are expoted to the Air, and ufed in
uantities, there will be  thick hard. Skim
small 
over them in  very thore Time, which though it
may be taken off with  Pallec Knife, will occafion
 great Decreafe of Colour. After the Skin is
taken off, the Remainder will in all probability
prove too thick for Ufe, without  Drop or two of
Nut-Oil, which muft be well tempered with the
Pallet-Knife.
Once more let us caution the Arriff to keep his
Bruthes to their feparate Colours; for the mixing
of them is attended with many ill Confequences,
and will greatly endanger the whole of his Per-
fermance.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS.
rn
IE be Paffils or Crayons are thofe imported
 from Swirzerland, which are to be had at the
Colour-Shops. The Sorts are as follow.
Whice, Black, Vellow Orange, Purple, Red,
Blue, Green, and Brown, each of which may be
ufed in fhading, the two firft excepted.
Directions for using the same.
Rough Venice Paper is ufed on this Occafion,
which is of  whited-brown Colour, the stiffer the
better; but there is  Sort much preferable called
Cape-Paper, at it diftribures the Colours to the beft
Advan-












  Fst  

Sa 





 By Crayons, Figines may be reprefenas
 the Eye, be.
in their proper Colours as appearing


caute the Colours can be matched with the Cray-
Ofs, which being dry will not fade. Whereas Cos
lours, when wee, feem deeper than when dry, which

  young beginner.
 affo fome thick fmooth light Elue, of

othert apers getting  Straining-Frame from  Frames
 aerain  Fiece of Scotch or Iriff Cloth over
it, which may be done by drawing and faftening it




with fmail  acxs round the Edges till quite fmooth;
damp your Paper with  Sponge dipt in Water,

Pafte it, laying ii on the Cloth, being particular
thiat it is even with the Straining-Frame; place  of White Payer upon the Table, put the
 Frame with the Blde Paper downwards
upon it, keeping it fleady with one Hand, rub the
Cloth clofe to the Paper with the other; then turn-
ing the Frame, with  Piece of White Paper in
your Hand rub clofe the Edges: When it is dry fet
it on an Eafel (which may be had at the Colour.
Shops) and proceed as follows.
With Charcoal Ketch your Rough-Draught, and
with Black, White, or Red Chalk, correct your

 reaving thus outlined your Object com-
pletely, the Crayons may be rubbed in; but Care is
required concerning the proper Colours; then
faften or blend them together with your Finger er
Fitch.
When you prepare the Crayons for Ufe, re=
member to cut the Points from the Bottom up-
wards, and take Care they are not made too sharp,
the Red Ochre, Charcoal, and White Chalk ex-
cEpted.
As it is difficult to get Crayons that are really
 we think it  Way fuperffuous to give the
Student the Wiethod of preparing them.
WHTT  Ss






th
AO.VMGYSTP
> 

is of on 


 
is
   
  


 
 intt
Fii
   
  
&  Mt for makins Gravons.
     .
To other is required than the beft and fofteff
French or Italian White Chalk cut into Pieces about
Two Inches long, and  Oi
arter of an Inch in
Thickness with your Penknife round off the Cor-
hers, and point them as directed above.
Of thefe it will be expedient that the Artiff should
have  great Number (as they are of continual Wie)
and muft be kent feparate from the reft, or they will
Orberwile be much driccioured.
&      .
As Fellows are next to be treated of we shall dis
vide them into feven different Shades.
Firff. Take Flour of Brimfione and Grounds
of Starch, with the Pallet Knife incoroorate them
pon  volished Marble, it will make an aoreeable
Straw-Colour bring it to the Confiffency of  Pafte,
with Milk or pale Ale Wort; with the Pallet-
Knife (pread it on  Piece of fmooth Cloth, till it
is in Thickness about one third of an Inch, let it
remain fo till half dry; with  fharw Enife reduce
it into Pieces about two Inches long, and one third
of an Inch wide roll it berween your Hands, or
swo Pieces of Board, till round as the Stem of 
Tobacco Pioe, and not much thicker, point it as
directed for the Chalk. Or if moft conveient, ufe
Ground Chalk inflead of the Grounds of Starch, as
aidr Will Work near fne iame Lnetr.
Second. Yellow Ochre well oround upon 
wTone with  Murter in fair water, dry and beat it
rantity of ground Chalk, or
By Iiking iut  
Grounds



 of Starch, as will render it little
Larker

than the above; mixing with it as much Wilk as
will make it  Pafte, forming it into Crayons as the
preceding.  little Sugar-Candy may be diffolved
in the Milk.
Third. Grind Fellow Ochre and Water; when
dry beat it well, mix it with  very little ground
Chalk to be darker than the former, add to it pale
le Wort or Size; make it into Crayons as before.

For the Method of preparing the Size, we refer the
Reader to thofe ufeful Reccipts, published at the
End of the Directions for painting in Water-Co-
Jours.
Fourth. Grind English Pink with Water as the
former; when dry beat it in the fame Manner; mix
it with  little of the Grounds of the beft White
Chalk, that it may be darker than the former Co-
lour; incorporate with it as much pale Ale Wort
as will bring it to  Pafte; prepare and reduce it into
Crayons as before directed.
Fifth. Mix English Pink with pale le Wort.
After being ground with pure Spring Water, re-
duce it to Crayons, according to the aforementioned

Directions
Sixth. Dutch Pink prepared as the former.
Seventh. Orpiment, mixed with  little ground
Chalk or Grounds of Starch well incorporated, and
brought to the Confiffency of  Paffe with pale Ale
Wort, in which muft be diffolved some Gum Dra-
gon, then roll it. in Crayons according to the firft
Disection.
. . Orpiment is peifonous.
OR ANC 







 ANC   OL  UR .
Firft. Grind Orpiment, and make it into Crayons
from the foregoing Directions.
Second. Grind Red Lead with pure Water very
fine, when dry beat it with ground Orpiment; mix
 fmall Quantity of Red Lead (that is, to much as
will make it  Shade darker than the preceding);
diffolve Gum Dragon in Milk or Ale Wort, and
with it temper your Colour; roll it into Crayons as
Before.
Third. Grind English Pink with pure Water,
nix it with as much Vermilion as will make it
 to your Defign; boil Ale Wort till it be-
comes glutinous, with which bring your Colour
to  Pafte, then cut it in Lengths; roll it as before.
Fourch. Prepare English Pink and Red Lead as
before; mix as much of them together as will make
it  Shade darker than the former. ix thefe
with Ale Wort prepared as above, and fo into
Crayons.
Fifth. Mix as much Durch Pink finely ground
with Red Lead as will bring it to the Shade re-
quired, and proceed as before.
Be careful in the compounding thefe Colours, to
smake as many Shades as poffible.
   .
Firff. Grind Red Lead very fine with pure
Water; when dry beat it as fine as poffible, heighten
it with white Chalk finely ground; diffolve some
Crum Dragon in Ale Wort, make your Compofition
into Pafte; cut and roll it into Crayons. Of this
Compo-










  you may make different Shades, by
adding more or lets White.
Second. The beft Red Lead ground; proceed as
before disected.
Third. Prepare Red Ochre in the same Mianhner
Whice Chalk.
 Fine White Chalk, or White Lead well
pulverizeds with it mix some Vermilion ground to
the State of an impalpable Powder. Divide thenm
£
into three or four Shades, make each of them into
 with Ale Wort boiled; cut, and roll them as
before.
Fifth. Grind Vermilion very fine with  Stone
and Muller, mix it with pale Ale Wert as before
directed; roll it into Crayons.
Sixth. Lake of the beft Sort, well ground with

Water, when dry, beat it to an impalpable Paw-
der. Divide it in three or four feparate Parcelss
add more or lets Whire to each, as will give them
different Shades; work each Parcel into Pafte with
Ale Wort, afterwards into Crayons.
Seventh. Reduce pure Lake to as fine  Powdey
 postible with clear Water; after it is dry reduce
it to as fine  Powder as before, mix it with Milk,
or Ale Wort, and bring it into Crayons according
to the firft Directions.

Righth. Indian Lake; prepare it as the former.

 his alone will be  very strong Colour; but make
three different Shades at lealt, by the Addition of
more or lefs White.
Ninth. Cut Rofe Pink into the Shape of Crayons,
They will be fit for Ufe without any farther Prepara-
sions. Carmine will come very expenfive; as 
Shilling'-worth will make but  very small Crayons
.         .
Firft. Blue Bice, well ground with pure Water,
when dry, reduce it to  Powder again, adding to
ie Whice Chalk finely powdered; divide it into Par-
rels, put to each more or lefs Chalk, to as to pro-
duce Various Shades
Bring thefe to the Confiffency
of  Pafte with Ale Wort mixed with  little Size,
made according to the former Directions; proceed
with making them into Crayons.
Second. Blue Bice alone finely ground, and
prepared as the preceding.
 Grind Verditure with Water; let it dry,
after which beat it into  Powder, to fine as that no
Lumps can be feen; divide it into four or five Par-
cels, to all of which, except one, add fuch different
Proportions of Whice Chalk, as will make themm
Shades for each other. Make thefe into Pafte with
pale Ale Wort, wherein Cum Dragon has been dif-
folved; and that Elue with which no White has
been mixed, make into Pafte with pals Ale Wort and
 little Size, into Crayons as before.
Fourth. Prussian Blue; be very careful that it
is thoroughly ground; make it into Pafte with pale
le Wort boiled, and thickened with Size; to into
Crayons, in purfuance of the firft Directions.  lighter Shades, Prusfian Blue; after you have
ground it well by itfelf and dried it, divide it into
two of three Parcels, to each of which add white
Chalk, in Proportion as you would have the Shades
lighter or darker; make thefe into Pafte with Ale
Wort boiled, into Crayons, as the former.
Fifth. Rock Indigo well ground in pure Water,
dry it, reduce it to  very fine Powder, divide it into
several Parcels, to which add white Chalk in diffe-
TCIE
  Proportions; mix thefe with pale Ale Wart
boiled, have at leaft four Shades of them; for the
darkeff ufe Indigo made into Paffe as the reft, and
into Crayons according to the firft Directions,
      .
 Rofe Pink; grind it as fine as poffible,
when dry powder it, mix it well with  little Jauns
ders Blue, till it appears of the Colour you defirs;
then bring it to  Pafte; proceed as before.
Second. Lake finely ground and wathed, add to
it as much Blue Bice as will make it of an agree-
able reddish Purple; make this of two or three dif-
ferent Degrees, each lighter than the other, and
into the lighter Parts put white Chalk or Grounds
of the beft white Starch; smake them into Pafte
with Ale Wort boiled, and mixed with Size, and
shen into Crayons as before.
Third. Grind Lake with pure Water; add as
much Pruffian Blue to it, as will make it of the Pur-
ple you defire; mix thefe well together in feveral
Parcels, making some more inclining to Blue, others
 Red, to the fainteft add as much white Chalk as
you fee neceffary; make the feparate Parcels into
Pafte with Ale Wort boiled till it becomes glutis
sious, then into Crayons in the Jame Manner as
before.
     .
Firff. The Black which is generally ufed for
Crayonns, is Charcoal cur into Pieces about two
warter of an Inch wide; the
Inches long, and  
fofteft and beft are thofe made of Willows. Have

of thefe at leaff one Dozen, becaufe the Contrails
Black and Whise are moft wanted.
Of





 Second. Grind Ivory Black as fine as. poffible
with pure Water, adding to it in the grinding  fmall
Quantity of Indigo, which will very much enlivers
 Black, and relieve it from that Deadnels which
attends it when ufed by itfelf; make it into Pafte
with boiled Ale Wort, into Crayons, as before.
   WW  .
Firft, Fullers Earth of the beft and pureft Sort,
grind it well with Water, add to it fome ground
Bhalk in different Quancities, that you may have
three or four different Shades; mix each of thefe up
with pale Ale Wort, boil it till it become glutinous,
and roll it into Crayons.
Second. Spanish Brown, ground well with Wa-
ter, add in the grinding some Fullers Earth, which
will very much enlighten it, the Spamsh Brown be-
ing of itfelf  very dark Colour; when dry beat it
into  Powder again, divide it into four different
Parcels, to three of which put Grounds of Starch
in different Degrees, to that you may preferve feve-
fal Shades of Colour. Mix each of thefe feparately
into Pafte with  little Size of Iinglats, or pale Ale
Wort boiled, or thick Water-Gruel wherein Gum-
Dragon has been diffolved; make it into Crayons,
according to former Directions.
Third. Indian Ink and Spanith Brown, well
ground together mix them with Ale Wort till they
are as fiff as Pafte. Of this Colour you may make
different Shades, by adding more or lefs White.
GR    .
Firff. Diffilled Verdigrife well ground with firong
Vinegar, wath it well with Warer, as follows: Put
the Verdigrife into Water, let it remain there about
 MMinuts


 Whinute, pour the Water off into  kup, let it

rettle; then pour that from it, wath it again in the
Jame Mianner, when dry make it into Crayons of
 Shades with ground white Chalk.
Second. Boil the beft Verdigrife, with tharg
Vinegar, while boiling add to it  little powdered
Tartar, which being of fo sharp  Nature will foon
diffolve the Verdigrife, then you will have  Liquor
of  very fine Colour, fomewhat inclinable to Blue;
fet the Liquor in imall Callipots, exposed to the
Air, which will foon be congesled and become hard;
mix it with as much Ale Wort as will bring it to 

 affe and Crayons as before directed.
 Verdigrife prepared after the laft Man-
her, reduce and divide it into feveral Parcels, add
 rusfian Blue in different Proportions, as you would
have them lighter or darker, to the lighteft Parts add
 little white Chalk, or  little Straw Colour, to

variegate the Shades as much as poffible. Mix all
shefe with pale Ale Wort boiled, as before directed.
Fourth. Grind Blue Bice very fine, in the
grinding add to it fome of the beft Dutch Pink.

Divide it into feveral Parts, make different Shades
with white Chalk; bring them to  Pafte with Ale
Wort boiled, then into Crayons.
Fifsh. Grind Rock Indigo very fine with pure
Water; dry it, reduce it to Powder, divide it into
four Parcels at leaft; add to fome, Dutch Pink, to
others Dutch Pink and Brimffone, for the lighteft,
Flourof Brimffone only. After you have made as many
 as you defire, bring them into  Pafte with
pale Ale Wort mixed with Size, made according to
that Receipt prescribed at the End of the Directions
for Painting in Water Colours; cut them into
Lengths, roll them into Crayons as at firft directed.
Sixth. Grind Rock Indigo with Water, divide
it inso Parcels more or lefs as you think proper, add
Duich









sis 
 
 
 it

 Pink in fuch different (
antities as will pre=
 feveral Shades after thefe are well incorpos
 make them into  ane with boiled Ale Worts
roll them into Crayons according to the former Di-
Feltiohs.
 rirtiff will find thefe Crayons far preferable
so thofe generally bought at Shops, which beingfre.

 tempered to high with Gum-Water, renders
shem to ffiff and obdurate, that they will too ofsen
father feratch, than give any Appearance of Colour

ipen your  aper; on the cuntrary, thofe which.
ve have recommended, may be ufed with all the
Eafe and Freedom imaginable, and will express the
Diverfity of Colours as pleafant and agreeable  Can
be defired.
When the Student is defirous of making  Draw-
ing in Crayons, either from Nature, or from  Cors
Fect Imitation of Nature, he sheuld be careful, bes
fore he begins, that he has every Colour that is in
his Original, as he cannot here, as in  Painting
either in Water or Oil Colours, prepare  Colour ar
 Miriutes Warning; which Confideration it was
that induced us to direct to many Shades to be mads
from each Colour.

the Artiff, in order to keep his Colours feparate,
ffor if they mix, it will, on account of their foft-
els, be very prejudicial to them) should be prepared
with  Bok which contains as many Partitions as
vill keep each Shade by itfelf.
 LIS






  ft elt   is







 
 

se   thr 
 
 

 
Seseeniontan   

  
 


    .  
 

 
 F it

.
Fe
 Riitid
VKK
  A 



 
 
 
S 




HRIEISS

 Lits
 is 


   hi 




  .          turg  


 
  thd  nd 
 DRA WING-BOOES
Defirned and Engraved in  very fuperior
Style, by the moft eminent Mafters, for the
Ife and Improvement of Toune Gentle
men and Ladies in the delightful Art of
Drawins.
Printed for and fold by the Proprictor CARINGTOrS
BOwLES, at his Mab and Print Warghoufe, No.  Pauls Church Fard, London.
. DOWL ES' Fleriff. containing  Convers
Mt
Plates of beautiful Flowers rerularly difpofed
in their Succeffion of blowing; to which is added.
an accurate Defcription of their Colours, with Ins
structions for drawing and painting them according
to Nature, being  new Work intended for the Ufe
and Amufement of Gentlemen and Ladies deliohtins
Ais Clidi Hirt.Stidve.  U LSIUAICEs   Bowles' Drawins Book for Ladies, or Comblets
Fleriff being an extenfive and curious Collection of
the moft beautiful Flowers. all drawn after Nature
by . Heckle; with  short Introduction to Drawing,
and Directions for mixing and ufing of Colours.
Alfo feveral proper and eafy Examples: The Whole
adapted for the Improvement of Ladies in Needle

Work. Enoraved on  Folio Copver-Plates.
Price  Coloured   AytvtvS &



Bt
-
Mndalnt
Inod
Fmny
to
en






 
  
 



  


  
   Bowress  assions of tne. w Feprerenfeg ist
 axeads, engraved in the Mlanner of Drawings
in Chalk, from the Defigns of the late celebrated

Mionhieur Le Brun.

In this fuperior Performance the Lineaments of
the Face, that great Mirror of the Soul! are not
enly minutely defcribed by Letter Prefs, but are ad.
mirably delineated on  Folio Copper-Plates, in  and moft mafterly Manner. Price  Bowles' Principles of Drawing; or, an eaty
and familiar Method for the Improvement of Youth
in the Pracfice of that ufeful Art, formins  complete
Drawing Book, illuftrated with  curious Collection
of Examples in all the Variety of Cafes, as, the fe-
yeral Pares of the Human Body, whole Figures,
Landicapes, Shipping, Cattle, CSc. after the De=
Ligns of Albert Durer, Abrab Bloemart, Carle Morac,
+
 Cterc, Siollar; and other great Mafters.
which is prefixed, an Introduction to Drawing;
containing Rules and Directions for the Choice of In.
ftruments and Materials ufed in Drawing, and how
to appry and manage tnem; with eafy and proper
Leffions for  young Beginner, tranflated from the
French of Monlieur Gerard de Lairefe, and improved
with Abitracts from . . Du Frefnoy. Contained
in Co large Folio Pages. Price  Bowles' Complete Drawing-Book; containing
an extenfive Collection of Examples in all Variety of
Subjects for the Improvement of Youth, in the plear
fant and ufeful Art of Drawing, elegantly engraved
on  Copper Plates, in the following Method:
. Leffons adapted to lead the Pupil gradually from
the firft Practice on Parts of the Human Body, to
The Drawing of the whole Academy Fisures in  WE
 

 ai  Ti   

 

if te 

  ho

or  re 


FII




  

  




 ep ogifans an  pit


 IALS; VYNEbufriggz. Estert. L ASRAurYIUSYS LSaria=

 IKetcneG jis Yatrifus j an iin Jctefingsos




ARE  Upil, and Hnmhed witi Snadings for  Ritts
 in levera original  lawe, by CBatelarnne,


. EVeres,  Gnjomer, Gc. . Lungss In wed   Aaatibies  HOrIts, Edtile, FOwrs,  sOwers, after the vert wiswers ois eachh oubjeci.
 which are annexed, Introductory Rules for the
 O LCarntss; with an Hccount of ine Anttris-
 and Wiaterias Yus s Diawisige 
 FICC BS.
VI. Bowles' Touths Affifiant in Drawines son.
faining many curious Succimens on an ealy and fas
miliar Plan, adanted to lead the Puvil oraduslly
 ahe Hric  ractice, on Larts of tue Aauman oyys
 the whore Acadermy a the Drawing
so Copper Flates, enlarsed and im
Bngraved on
proved by Sab. Ls Clere; to which are prefixed, pros
per Instructions to Youth for their Improvement and
Marte. Price  ihn iflis Hate LES
without  Mafter,
VII. Bowles' Art of Drawing,
from the French of the Sicur . . Enoraved on
 Copper-plates.  polite Prefent for Vouth;
squallv ufeful and amufing. Small Octavo. Price  Bowles' Arriffs Affiffant in Drawing, Per-
speccive, atching, Engraving, lezzOunto Scrapins,
Paintinoon Glafs, in Cravons, and in Water-Colours.
and on Dilks and Satins, containing the eafieft and
BrOficomurehenfive Rules for the ttainment of thofe
Erily ufeful and polite rts, methodically digefied
and adanted to the Capacities of Youne Beginners,
Chgraves
illuftrated with furtable Examnles,
en  Conner-Plates. By the Author of Bowles' Artof
Paintine in Water Colours, the Sixth Edition, cor-
fected and oreatly imoroved with Additions. Small
GidVO.  fiCE IS.


 


 Tt

 Sir


  
 

  ret so se  ao  

in Cnt

  
 Borules' new and accurats Map of Engiana and iw aless


comprehending all the Cities, Boroughs, Market and Sea-portl

 Villages, Lakes, Rivers, Forefts, Ruins and principal
Seats of the Nobility, with the Roads defcribed by Danmel Pa-
Person, the Diffance of each Place of Note from the Metropolis,
and  great Variety of other medern Improvements. To
which is added, the South Part of Scotland, and Eak of Ire-
land, with the maritime Previnces of France from Dunkirk to
Breff, and inland Country to Paris. Mcafures  Feet  Inches
Wide, and  Feet  Inches Deep. Price r in Sheets; xl:  on Cloth and Cafe, or on Cloth and Rollers.
II. Bowles' new and accurate Map of Scotland, compre-
hending all the Cities, Boroughs, Market and Sea-port Townss
Villages, Lakes, Rivers, Forefts, Ruins, and principal Seats
of the Nobility, from the original Survey of James Dorrets
corrected by late Surveys of particular Counties, the Coaft and
Roads, with the Diftances in meafured Milec, and  great
Variety of other ufeful Modern Improvements, from the beft
Authorities. Meafures  Feet  Inches wide, and  Feet deep.
Price zos.  in Sheets;  on Cloth and Rollers.
SII. Bowler'’ neav and accurate Map of Ireland, divided
into its leveral Provinces, Counties, and Baronies, comprehend-
ing all the Kities, Boroughs, Market and Sea-port Towns,
Villages, Lakes, Rivers, Foretts, Ruins, Inland Navigations
and principal Seats of the Nobility laid down from Sir Williams
Petty' original Description, corrected by late Surveys of par-
sicular Counties, the Coaff, and Roads; with the Diftances is
neafured Miles, and  great Variety of other ufeful Modern
Improvements, from the bett Authorities. The Jame Size and
Price as the above Map of Scotland.
 The above are New Four-sheet Maps, and the only ones
of those Kingdoms that can be depended on. No Pains nor Ex-
pence has been spared to render them, as they truly are, ssperier.
in Point of Elegance, Number of Towns and Villages, neaw
Roads, and exast meafured Diftances, to all other Maps of
England, Scotland and Ireland, ever engraved.


