
ELEMENTS
OF
WITH
CRAYONS.
BY JOHN RUSSELL.
IN TENUI LABOR —
VIRGIL.
LONDON;
PRINTEDFOR . WILKIE, In ST. PAUI' CHURCH-YARD,

AN
. WALTER, AT CHARING-CROSS.
MDCCLXXII.






















TO HIS GRACE
The DUKE OF CHANDOS.
MY LORD,

HE excellence at which the Polite
Arts have arrived, in every Nation
where they are known, has been
owing, in  great measure, to the
encouragement and protection shewn to them by
illustrious Personages. On this account, my
Lord,  presume to solicit your Grace’ Patron-
age



age for-the following little Treatise on the Art
of Painting with Crayons; sensible that your
Grace’ known Benevolence cannot be displeased
that  endeavour to render myself serviceable to
others.
ThE honour you did me, in the early part of
my life, when you condescended io wishi  would
direct my studies to the Arts of Painting, has
ever been held in remembrance Zand it will af-
ford me great satisfaction, to know that your
Grace accepts this Address as an humble Tribute
of my Gratitude, and, to believe that  am, with
the highest respect,
























































THE elegant Arts, of which Painting is one of the
most considerable, have ever been held in the
highest estimation by the Great and Illustrious of
all Ages, not solely for private amusement, but for their
beneficial influence in Society, in promoting benevolence,
and inspiring delicacy of feeling.
Titis will not appear paradoxical, if we observe, that
they are evidently contrived to afford innocent pleasures,
disregarding the inferior senses ; in this light they may be
considered as  rational science, and when cultivated to an
eminent degree of refinement, they do honour to mankind.
EveRy attempt to encourage and improve the elegant Arts
deserves great commendation, since there is too much rea-
son for believing that the interests of humanity are not so
strongly guarded, or so firmly secured, as easily to relin-
quish those succours, or forego those afsistances which they
administer to them.




Since Painting is an Art in which truth of Qut-line is no
less necessary that justness of Colouring,  apprehend  few
hints relative to the former will not seven at this period) be
deemed superfluous or unnecessary ; for, should these Ele-
ments fall into the hands of the accomplished Artist, to
whose judgment  submit them with the highest diffidence,
 flatter myself  shall meet with favour and indulgence,
since  intend this Work principally for the use of those
who are just entering into the world of Imitation--To such,
 hope to make an offering worthy their acceptance, should
inclination lead them to the Study of Painting with Cravons,
by exhibiting the Materials used in this Art, with the me-
thods of making and preparing them for the execution of
Design.
With respect to Crayon Painting, the present age has
produced an uncommon instance of excellence in one of
our own Countrymen.  mean the late Mr. Francis Cores,
whose Method  propose to explain in the following pages
with all possible perspicuity : for, it seems to be universally
allowed by all good Judges, that, as  Crayon Painter this
celebrated Artist excelled most of his Cotemporaries :

Reader will, doubtless, excuse this tribute of gratitude to
° In what high estimation are the Pictures of Rosalba heldp how happy do
Connoisseurs think themselves when they possess any of her Worksl If the
Crayon Pictures left by Mr. Cotes are not held in equal estimation, posterity will
not do justice to his merit.




the memory of an excellent Master, who, for some years,
directed my Studies, aud used his endeavours to communi-
cate that knowledge to me, which had most eminently
distinguished and raised him to the notice and esteem, not
only of the first Artists in the Britisb Nation, but to the
favour of our illustrious Monarch, who, in the commence-
ment of an auspicious reign, and even in that early period
of life, when pleasure generally is the sole pursuit, shewed
an elegant taste for the fine Arts, and has since been gra-
cioussy pleased to protect and encourage the cultivation of
them, by the establifhment of  Royal Academy, which,
from its first institution, has been conducted with such pro-
priety and unremitting attention, as to do honour to its
Profefsors, and add  dignity to the character of English-
men.
The hopes of rendering some service to the Art of Paint-
ing with Crayons, of suggesting some hints which may pos¬
sibly give rise to further inquiries respecting this pleasing
study, and of explaining its principles for the benefit of
such, as in this age of dissipation, may prefer the silent
amusement of  beautiful Art to the delusive enchantments
in the gay circles of unrestrained pleasure, have induced
me to this undertaking, and should it instruct, or even en-
courage  single Student,  shall not think my labour ill
bestowed ; but happy shall  be if my observations should,
in the least degree, awaken the attention of the curious to
those new sources of beauty and elegance, which may yet




lie concealed, for, if they are found to be just, those who
are Masters of the subject may be tempted to improve and ex-
tend them : be this as it may, my aim by this publication,
is to be useful to those who want experience, and therefore,
 have not  doubt but  shall stand excused from any im-
putation of vanity with those who do not require such assist-
ance : to the former lwish success, and  would soften the
censures of the latter by reminding them in the words of
Tbere is labour in the most trifling tbings.





ELEMENTS
OF
PAINTING wITR CRAYONS-
SECTION .
CONCERNING TASTE.
THERE is no disputing about Tafte, because its prin-
ciples are not absolute, and therefore they cannot

be defined. The opinions of men concerning
as their faces, their dispositions, or the different climates in
which they live. Nature, it is true, is in every particular
consistent with herself: we are framed with minds capable
of having the highest relisn for the elegant Arts, and conse-
quently, Nature has framed us with an uniformity of Taste
to furnish proper objects for that high relish, without which
the




the Arts could never have arrived at any degree of perfection ;
and this is sufficient to convince us that they are not yet
brought to perfection; some objects, indeed, of the fine
Arts, make such lively impressions of beauty, grandeur,
and harmony of proportion, as to command  kind of ge-
neral Taste, but instances of this sort are very uncommon.
Taste depends more on experience than on nature.
This is  point which merits peculiar attention, because it
opens to us  fure method of improving our taste in the
elegant Arts, and is  powerful incitement toward the cul-
tivation and improvement of them,  study which cannot
fail to embellish Manners and sweeten Society.
Azz, therefore, that can be said concerning Taste, is,
that there are certain principles that constitute the sensitive
part of our nature, and which, being common to all, pre-
serve  kind of uniformity with respect to the emotions and
feelings of different individuals, the same object making
(upon every one) the same impression, or at least, the same
in kind if not in degree. This is the only way of account-
ing for  uniformity of Taste in the polite Arts, and this, in
other words, may justly be termed the common sense of
mankind, which is the only true standard of Taste, all
other being equivocal or uncertain, and consequently, will
never be sufficiently general to become standards of Taste ;
but, the principles that constitute the sensitive part of our
nature,




nature, will, undoubtedly, lead us to methods of ascertain-
ing the common sense of mankind, or standard of Taste,
with great exactness and accuracy.
These will determine, almost generally, what is either
elegant or beautiful, and hence, when our ideas are regu-
lated and directed by these principles, we may be said to
have formed  good taste, and be enabled to discern what
is natural and proper, and what is not so.
TrUE it is that inattention, the force of example, pre-
judice, or passion, may introduce  bad Taste, and banish
 good one. In Painting, heavy Composition, incorrect
Drawing, and bad Colouring, may prevail, notwithstanding
the influence of those principles that constitute the sensitive
part of our nature: instances of so defective  Taste will,
however, be very rare, and when they happen, they will
seldom prejudice any but the possessors, because they can
carry but little authority with them to impose on others.
After all, the remedy against forming  bad Taste, is to
study the Works of Men of good Taste; this will enlarge
the mind, and by observation, establish the Student in 
good Taste of his own.






ELEMENTS OF
SECTION II
OF DRAWIN .
DRAWING may be justly termed the foundation of
Painting. This should be the first object of the
Student’ attention. The more perfectly this is attained,
the greater is the certainty of acquiring excellence. Genius
is the gift of Nature ; but Genius without cultivation can
never arrive at the summit of perfection.
The materials necessary for Drawing are  Port-Crayon,
à Leather Stump, some stained Paper, Charcoal, black,
white, and Red Chalk, with  Drawing-Board of about
two foot square.
Soue Artists reject the use of Drawings or Prints for the
Student’ imitation ; ee it is, say they,  servile method of
ci proceeding, because it cramps the ideas, and hence, Ge-
« nius suffers too great  confinement. Notwithstanding
this, the usual practice is to copy after Prints and Drawings
at first, and  imagine experience has determined the advan-
tages accruing from this method. To set the Drawings (in
particular) of the most eminent Artists before  young be-
ginner, at his first commencement, must be highly benefi-
cial,



cial, as it most undoubtedly will prevent rudeness and in-
accuracy, against which the most exact cannot be too much
guarded. How much more then ought the young Student
to observe this caution; Some Geniuses require restric-
tion, and when this happens to be the case, the placing
of accurate Works before them must hold them in  kind
of subjection, from which alone Correctness is to be ex-
pected. Exact Copies are absolutely to be required at first :
This will imperceptibly produce  Habit of Correctness, till,
by degrees, the Student will make himself Master of those
grand essentials to perfection, Truth, Boldness, and Free-
dom. Truth will be acquired by this accustomed Correct-
nefs, Boldness and Freedom will follow after as the certain
consequence, and on these the excellence of the Performance
must depend--Copying the Drawings of good Masters has,
also; another considerable advantage, viz. teaching  good
method of execution, by which many laborious and fruit-
dess efforts will be prevented.
CRAYoN PaInteRS fhould pay  particular attention to
the drawing on stained paper, with black, or red and
white Chalks, as this kind of Drawing has  bold effect, is
allied to the manner of using the Crayons, and imparts 
knowledge of what is usually termed the middie Teint.
Indeed, in almost every respect, this method is attended
with considerable advantages: But the young Student should
always have it in remembrance, that his chief aim ought




to be the making of  correct Drawing, and of attaining 
Truth of Outline, since this is more essentially necessary

than  Smartness of Touch, or  pleasing execution-
When he has made some considerable progress with the
Chalks, he may then attempt the round, or Plaister Figures ;
but here, as in every other case, care fhould be observed in
making choice of  good subject, for nothing is so preju-
dicial or dangerous as to copy from imperfect subjects; on
which account he should be directed in his choice by the
opinion of the most experienced Artists, who all recom-
mend the Study of the Antique, and other approved Plaister
Figures, previous to the drawing after living models; which
will furnish the Student with great knowledge and correct-
ness, as has been before observed, and, without which there.
is great danger of acquiring extravagant and pernicious ha¬
bits, which are easily attained without great care, but they
are not so easily difmissed when acquired.
To draw from  living Figure without having first studied
the Antique, is no less absurd than to attempt to understand
the Classicks without  previous knowledge of the Rules of
Grammar. The human Figure, and especially the Face, is
the most difficult Study, but  thorough knowledge of this
particular will give facility of execution in every thing else.
WHEN the Student has made himself master of  good
degree of exactness, by copying after Prints, or Drawings,
let




let him be provided with some good Head, cast after the
Antique: One, in which the features are strongly marked and
boldly determined; such as the Hercules, Jupiter, or Wiobe ;
as he will find the strength of either of these more easy of
imitation than the refinement and delicacy of the Antinous,
or Venus of Medicis ; though the latter, after  time, will
be his favourite and most valuable Study.
Apter the choice of  Subject, the next consideration will
be to place it in  proper Light and Shadow-lf the win-
dow is too near the ground, the effect cannot be pleasing,
because the Shadow will be distracted into too many parts :
In this case, the lower part of the window should be dark-
ened with sometbing that will quite obstruct the light, about
the height of six feet, which will throw the shades into very
agreeable mafses on the subject for imitation ; which being
thus placed, having the Drawing-Board partly resting in
thod) let the Student carefully observe the particular turn
and action of the head ; hou much the forehead is inclined
over the right or left shoulder, and how much over the back,
or breast; then, with the Charcoal, let him lightly draw
the general shapes of the head; after which, the center-line
of the face, from the middle of the forchead to the middle
of the chin, and then the cross lines, which determine the
situation of the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and Roots of the Hair;
all this being the foundation on which the Student may give







the particular shapes to each feature; and he must remem-
ber, that  good proportioned Face is divided into three equal
parts ; the first contains the Forehead, the second the Nose,
the Hair to the Crown of the Head is just the height of the
Forehead.
The Nose being the centre, most Artists begin their par-
ticular Shapes with that Feature, and from thence proceed
to the Eyes and Mouth; but, let the Student fketch the
Out-line very light, that any mistake may the more easily
be altered. His greatest attention must be paid to the pro-
ducing his Drawing correct, and the lines of the Features
parallel to one another, and each at  proper distance. If the
Student fails here, all his labour in the finishing will be to
no purpose ; but, when the lines are properly drawn, the
broad Shadowe may be laid in with soft Chalk, disregarding
the lesser parts till afterwards ; sweetening with the Leather
Stump: Then the demy Shades, and the heightening with
white are added, with which the whole is to be compleated,
preserving an intermediate space of the stained Paper, which,
as  middle teint, inust be left between the white and black,
otherwise the use of drawing on teinted paper is effectually
destroyed, and the production will have  heavy, unpleasing
effect, and be entirely destitute of that greatness and breadth
which distinguishes the Productions of  Master from the
efforts of inferior abilities.





When the Student has made himself Master of the know-
ledge of the face, he may proceed to the whole figure, stu-
dying with much assiduity the Casts after the Antique;
those almost perfect standards of Grace, Majesty, and
Beauty.
RuLEs, it is said, are the Fetters of Genius, but  great
man very judicioussy observed, lately, that ee they are
fetters only to men of no Genius, which is undoubtedly
true ; for, when they are properly used by men of abilities,
they rather assist Genius than impede it. On this accounti
 have given the measures of  fine proportioned-human Fi-
gure, with which it is necessary the Student should make
himself acquainted, previous to his Studies after the life ;
and, for this reason,  place this particular before. what .
propose to say on that. important part of Study.
ten of which, from the lowest Hairs on the Forehead to the
bottom of the Chin, is the beft proportioned height.--The
Face is divided into three equal Parts : ist, the Forehead ;
ad, the Nose; and  the Mouth and Chin--From the
Chin to the Collar-bones is twice the length of the Nose.—
From the Collar-bones to the lowest part of the breast, the
length of the whole Face--From the bottom of the Breast
to the Navel, one Face and half  Nose,-From the Navel
to the Secrets, one Face--From the Secrets to the Knee-pan,





two Faces--From the Knee-pan to the Ancle, two Faces.—
From the Ancle to the Sole of the Foot,  Nose and an half.
—When the Arms are extended horizontally, their length,
from the extremity of the longest Finger on one hand to the
other, should measure the same as the height of the Figure
from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot.—
From the Shoulder to the Elbow, the length of two Faces.-
From the Root of the Little Finger to the Elbow, two Faces.
—From the Box of the Shoulder-blade to the Pit of the
Collar, one Face---The Foot is the sixth part of  Man’
height, and the Hand should measure as much in length as
the Face-The Thumb is the third part of  Face in length.
—The Shoulder that the Face is most turned over is raised
higher than the other- The Shoulder bearing  heavy bur-
then will be raised considerably higher than the other
The Hip on which the Body chiefly rests will be raised
higher than the other.
ThE Knowledge of Anatomy, as far as relates to the
Structure of the Bones, and Dispositions of the Muscles, with
their various motions, will enable the Student to draw the
human Figure in great perfection. This may be acquired
by studying some good treatise on the subject, and by draw-
ing the Bones and Muscles in different views. The attend-
ing some Dissections, if he has an opportunity, willimprove the
Student much sooner than any other method possibly can.
Le Brun’ Lectures on the Passions of the Soul, read before





the Academy in France, will impart great knowledge in the
expression of the Muscles of the Face, which should be
strictly attended to; and also the knowledge of Light and
Shadow, as this, in particular, will instruct him how to
preserve harmony in his pictures, and  proper expression of
the different projections. These things being acquired, Ge-
nius will improve by Study, and Perfection and Fame re-
ward the labours of close application.
WhEN the Student draws from living models, great care
is required to place the figure in  proper action, after which,
particular attention should be paid to the general sway of the
figure, being careful to preserve what is termed the centre
of gravity; which is, that line always perpendicular from the
pit between the Collar-bones to the Heel of the Foot on
which the Figure restst.-The first sketch must be touched
very lightly, in  square manner, describing the large forms
by which the action of the figure is expressed. The second
time of drawing over the Qut-lines, notice should be taken
of those lesser parts, which, in the former slight sketch, were
neglected. In each sketch the Student must begin at the
Head, which must be carefully placed in it’ proper inclina-
tion, or else (however in other respects justly draurn) the fi-
gure will have an ungraceful appearance.
It must be remarked that all graceful Figures stand on one foot only.




WheN the Out-line is correct and in good proportion,
the principal difficulty is overcome. The next step is to
proceed to the Shadows, which must be made broad and
firm, and not distracted into too many parts, which would
perplex the Student ; as all the inferior distinctions in the se-
veral degrees of shadow, ought to be  second consideration,
and are, therefore, to be avoided when the whole care should
be to preserve the masfes of light and shade, broad and mas-
terly. Care should be observed where the principal mass of
light falls (as in every well-set figure there will be  princi-
pal mass of light) to preserve it broad, and not too much
divided, considering the whole together before the parts in
particular.
Ir  shadow is produced by any Muscle, &. near the
grand body of light, it will, at the first view, be apt to mis-
lead the Student, and incline him to think it much darker
than it really is ; but, if compared with the principal shadow,
the true degree may be ascertained. Sometimes on the rising
of  Musele, or the projection of  Bone, the light may
catch near the mafs of shadow, which, if not drawn ten-
der, will have an unpleasing, harsh effect, which can only
be regulated by comparing it with the strongeft lights; this
method of comparing one degree of light and shadow with
another will be the only certain rule of preserving the tone
and consistency of the whole together, as the comparing of





lengths and breadths with each other is the only rule to pro-
duce the just forms of Figures.
WhiLE the Figure is resting, the Student will have an
opportunity of placing his Drawing at  distance, by which
means the eye will more easily discover how much he has
erred from this rule, which he may soften with  linen rag,
or rub out with bread at pleasure. -As it cannot be supposed
the figure can, for any length of time, have the same Mnscles
of his body in continual action, the opportunity should be
embraced, while they are most properly exerted, to draw
each Limb, and describe each particular Muscle, the great
variety of which will give liberty to the Student to exercise
his Genius in producing his Drawing in an elegant tafte.






SECTION III
OF THE APPLICATION OF THE CRAYONS, WITI
SOME PREVIOUS DISPOSITIONS.

WHETHER the Painter works with Oil-colours, Wa-
 ter-colours, or Crayons, the grand object of his
pursuit, is still the same :  just imitation of nature. But
cach species has its peculiar rules and methods.—Painting
with Crayons requires, in many respects,  treatment diffe-
rent from Painting in Oil-colours ; because all Colours used
dry are, in their nature, of  much warmer complection than
when wet with Oils, &. For this reason, in order to pro-
duce  rich Picture,  much greater portion of what Painters
term Cooling Teints must be applied in Crayon Painting,
than would be judicious to use in Oils. Without any danger
of  mistake, it is to be supposed, the not being acquainted
with this Observation is one great cause why so many Oil-
Painters have no better success when they attempt Crayon
Painting. On the contrary, Crayon Painters being so much-
used to those Teints, which are of  cold nature when used
wet, are apt to introduce them too much when they paint
with Oils, which is seldom productive of  good effect.
 SHALL now endeavour to give the Student some Direc-
tions towards the attainment of excellence in this Art.








The Student must provide himself with some strong
blue paper, the thicker the better, if the grain is not too
course and knotty, though it is almost impossible to get any
intirely free from knots. The knots should be levelled with
 penknife or razor, otherwise they will prove exceedingly
troublesome. After this is done, the paper must be pasted
very smooth on  linen cloth, previously strained on  deal
frame, the size according to the Artist’ pleasure : On this
the Picture is to be executed; but it is most eligible not to
paste the paper on till the whole subject is first dead-coloured.
The method of doing this is very easy, by laying the paper
with the dead-colour on its face, upon  fmooth board or
table, when, by means of  brush, the backside of the
paper must be covered with paste; the frame, with the
strained cloth, must then be laid on the pasted side of the
paper, after which turn the painted side uppermost, and lay
 piece of clean paper upon it, to prevent smearing it;
this being done, it may be stroked gently over with the
hand, by which means all the air between the cloth and the
paper will be forced out.
WhEN the paste is perfectly dry, the Student may pro-
ceed with the Painting. The advantages arising from past-
ing the paper on the frame according to this method, after
the Picture is begun, are very great, as the Crayons will
adhere much better than any other way, which will enable
the Student to finisn the Picture with  firmer body of co-






lour, and greater lustre. The late Mr. Cotes found out
this method by accident, and esteemed it  valuable acquisi-
tion : And,  remember, on  particular occasion, he re-
moved  sine Crayon Picture of Rosalba’, and placed it on
another strained dloth, without the least injury, by soaking
the canvas with  wet fponge, till the paste between the
cloth and paper was sufficiently wet so admit of separation.
WhEN Painters want to make  very correct copy of 
Picture, they generally make use of Tiffany or black Gauze,
strained tight on  frame, which they lay flat on the subject
to be imitated, and with  piece of sketching chalk, trace all
the Qut-lines on the Tiffany. They then lay the Canvas to
be painted on, flat upon the floor, placing the Tiffany with
the chalked lines upon it, and with an Handkerchief brush
the whole over; this presents the exact Qut-lines of the
Picture on the Canvas. The Crayon Painter may also
make use of this method, when the Subject of his imitation
is in Oils, but in copying  Crayon Picture, he must have
recourse to the following method, on account of the
Glass.
Tie Picture being placed upon the Easel, let the Out-
lines be drawn on the Glass with  small Camel’ Hair
Pencil dipped in Lake, ground thin with Oils, which muft
be done with great exactness: After this is accomplished,
take  Sheet of Paper of the same size and place it on the
Glass,




Glass, stroking over all the lines with the hand, by which
means the colour will adhere to the paper, which must he
pierced with pin-holes pretty close to each other. The
paper intended to be used for the painting must next be laid
upon  table, and the pierced paper placed upon it ; then
with some fine-pounded Charcoal, tied up in  piece of
lawn, rub over the pierced lines, which will give an exact
Qut-line ; but great care must be taken not. to brush this off
till the whole is drayn over with sketching Chalk, which
is  composition made of Whiting and Tobacco-pipe Clay,
rolled like the Crayoi, and pointed at each end.
WhEN the Student paints immediately from the life,
it
will be most prudent to make  correct Drawing of the Qut-
lines on another paper, the size of the Picture hé is going to
paint, which he may trace by the preceding method, be-
cause erroneous strokes of the sketching Chalk (which are
not to be avoided without great expertness) will prevent the
Crayons from adhering to the paper, owing to  oertain
greasy quality in the composition.
Tiie Student will find the sitting posture, with the box
of Crayons in his lap, the moft convenient method for him
to paint. The part of the Picture he is immediately paint-
ing should be rather belo whis face, for, if it is placed toohigh,
the arm will be fatigued. Let the windows of the room
where he paints be darkened, at least to the height of six
feet




light may fall with every advantage on the face, avoiding
too much shadow, which seldom has  good effect in Por-
trait Painting, efpecially if the face he paints from has any
degree of delicacy.
Berore he begins to paint, let him be attentive to his
fubject, and appropriate the action or attitude proper to the
age of the subject: lfa Child, let it be childish; if  young
Lady, express more vivacity than in the majestic beauty of
 middle-aged Woman, who, also, should not be expressed
with the same gravity as  person far advanced in years.
Let the embellishments of the Picture, and introduction of
Birds, Animals, &. be regulated by the rules of propriety
and consistency.
Tre features of the face being correctly drawn with
chalks, let the Student take  Crayon of pure Carmine, and
carefully draw the Nostril and Edge of the Nose, next the
shadow, then, with the faintest Carmine Teint, lay in the
highest light upon the Nose and Forehead, which must be
executed broad. He is then to proceed gradually with the
second Teint, and the succeeding ones, till he arrives at
the Shadows, which must be covered brilliant, enriched
with much Lake, Carmine, and deep Green. This me-
thod will, at first, offensively strike the eye, from its crude
appearance,




appearance, but, in the finishing, it will be  good founda-
easily sullied when too bright, than when the first colour-
ing is dull, to raise the Picture into  brilliant state. The
several pearly Teints discernable in sine complections must
be imitated with blue Verditer and white, which answers to
the Ultramarine Teints ufed in Oils. But if the parts of the
face where these Teints appear are in shadow, the Crayons
composed of black and white must be substituted in their
place.
Though all the face when first coloured should be laid in
as brilliant as possible, yet each part should be kept in its
proper tone, by which means the rotundity of the face will
be preserved.
Ler the Student be careful when he begins the Eyes to
draw them with  Crayon inclined to the Carmine Teint,
brilliant, and at first, not loaded with colour, but executed
lightly ; No notice is to be taken of the Pupil yet. The
Student must let the light of the Eye incline very much to
the blue cast, cautioussy avoiding  staring, white appearance,
(which, when once introduced, is seldom overcome) pre-
serving  broad shadow thrown on its upper part, by the
Eye-lash.  black and heavy Teint is also to be avoided
in the Eye-brows ; it is therefore, best to execute them like





 broad, glowing shadow at first, on which, in the finish-
ing, the hairs of the brow are to be painted, by which me-
thod of proceeding, the former Teints will shew themselves
through, and produce the most pleasing effect.
The Student should begin the Lips with pure Carmine
and Lake, and in the shadow use some Carmine and Black ;
the strong Vermillion Teints should be laid on afterwards.
He must beware of executing them with stiff, harsh lines,
gently intermixing each with the neighbouring colours,
making the shadow beneath broad, and enriched with bril-
liant Crayons. He must form the corner of the mouth with
Carmine, Brown Oker, and Greens, varioussy intermixed.
lf the Hair is dark, he should preserve much of the Lake
and deep Carmine Teints therein; this may be easily over-
powered by the warmer Hair Teints, which, as observed in
painting the Eye-brows, will produce  richer effect when
the Picture is finished ; on the contrary, if this method is
unknown or neglected,  poverty of colouring will be dis-
cernable.
Apter the Student has covered over, or as Artists term
it, has dead-coloured the Head, he is to sweeten the whole
together, by rubbing it over with his finger, beginning at
the strongest light upon the Forehead, passing his finger
very lightly, and uniting it with the next Teint, which he
must continue till the whole is sweetened together, often





wiping his finger on  towel to prevent the colours being
sullied. He must be cautious not to smooth or sweeten his
Picture too often, because it will give rise to  thin and
fcanty effect, and have more the appearance of  Draw-
ing than  solid Painting, as nothing but  body of rich co
lours can constitute  rich effect. To avoid this, (as
Student finds it necessary to sweeten with the Finger) he
must continually replenisn the Picture with 
WhEN the Head is brought to some degre
ss,
let the Back-ground be laid in, which mus
different manner, covering it as thin as possible, and rubbin
it into the paper with  Leather-stump. Near 
 the
paper should be almost free from colour, for
great service to the Head, and by its thinness, give botl
and solid appearance. In the Back-ground also,
rayon
but
that has Whiting in its composition should be
chiefly such as are the most brilliant and the least adulte-
rated. The ground being painted thin next the Hair, will
give the Student an opportunity of painting the edges of the
Hair over in  light and free manner when he gives the fi-
nishing touches.
The Student having proceeded thus far, the Face, Hair,
and Back-ground being entirely covered, he must carefully
view the whole at some distance, remarking in what respect
it is out of keeping, that is, what parts are too light, and
what






what too dark, being particularly attentive to the white or
chalky appearances, which must be subdued with Lake
and Carmine. The above method being properly put into
execution will produce the appearance of  Painting princi-
pally composed of three colours, viz. Carmine, Black, and
White, which is the best preparation  Painter can make for
The next step, is to compleat the Back-ground and the
Hair, as the dust, in painting these, will fall on the Face,
and would much injure it if that was compleated first. From
thence proceed to the Forehead, finishing downward till the
whole Picture is compleated.
In painting over the Forehead the last time, begin the
highest light with the most faint Vermillion Teint, in the
same place where the faint Carmine was first laid, keeping
it broad in the same manner. In the next shade succeeding
the lightest, the Student must work in some light blue Teints,
composed of Verditer and White, intermixing with them some
of the deeper Vermillion Teints, sweetening them together
with great cautione insensibly melting them into one an-
other, increasing the proportion of each colour as his judge-
ment shall direct. Some brilliant Yellows may also be ued,
but sparingly, and towards the roots of the Hair, strong Ver-
° This direction is for the finest complections, but the Student must vary his
colouring according to his subject.





diter Teints, intermixed with Greens, will be of singular ser-
vice. Cooling Crayons, composed of black and white,
should succeed these, and melt into the Hair. Beneath the
Eyes, the sweet, pearly Teints are to be preserved, com-
posed of Verditer and White, and under the Nose, and on
the Temples, the same may be used ; beneath the Lips,
Teints of this kind also are proper, mixing them with the
light Greens and some Vermillion.
In finishing the Cheeks, let the pure Lake clear them
the Lake may be intermixed the bright Vermillion; and last
of all, (if the subject should require it)  few touches of the
orange-coloured Crayon, but with extreme caution; after
this, sweeten that part with the finger as little as possible,
for fear of producing  heavy, disagreeable effect on the
Cheeks : As the beauty of  Crayon Picture consists in one
colour shewing itself through, or rather between another;
this the Student cannot too often remark, it being the only
method of imitating beautiful complections.
The Eye is the most difficult feature to execute in
Crayons, as every part must be expressed with the utmost
nicety, to appear finished ; at the same that the Painter
must preserve its breadth and solidity while he is particu-
larizing the parts. To accomplish this, it will be  good
general rule for the Student to use his Crayon in sweetening






as much, and his finger as little as possible. When he
wants  point to touch  small part with, he may break off
 little of his Grayon against the box, which will produce 
corner fit to work with in the minutest parts. If the Eye-
lashes are dark, he must use some of the Carmine and brown
Oker, and the Crayon of Carmine and Black ; and with
these he may also touch the lris of the Eye (if brown or
hazel), making  broad shadow, caused by the Eye-lasn.
Red Teints of Vermillion, Carmine, and Lake, will execute
the corners of the Eye properly, but if the Eye-lids are too
red, they will have  disagreeable, fore appearance. The
Pupil of the Eye must be made of pure Lamp-black ; be-
catch very strong, but it miust not be made too sudden, but
be gently diffused round the Pupil till it is lost in shade.
When the Eye-balls are sufficiently prepared, the fhining
speck must be made with  pure white Crayon, which
should be first broken to  point, and then laid on firm ;
but as it is possible they may be defective in neatness, they
should be corrected with  pin, taking off the redundant
parts, by which means they may be formed as neat as can
be required.
The difficulty, with respect to the Nose, is to preserve
the lines properly determined, and at the same time so art-
fully blended into the Cheek, as to express it’ projection,
and yet no real line to be perceptible upon  close exami¬





nation ; in some circumstances it should be quite blended
with the cheek, which appears behind it, and determined
entirely with  slight touch of red chalk. The shadow
caused by the Nose is generally the darkest in the whole
Face, partaking of no reflection from it’ surrounding parts.
Carmine and brown Oker, Carmine and Black, and such
brilliant Crayons will compose it best.
Tie Student having before prepared the Lips with the
strongest Lake and Carmine, &. must, with these colours,
make them compleatly correct, and, when finishing, intro-
duce the strong Vermillions, but with great caution, as they
are extremely predominant. This, if properly touched,
will give the lips an appearance equal, if not superior, to
those executed in Oils, notwithstanding the seeming supe-
riority the latter has, by means of Glazing’, of which the
former is intirely destitute.
When the Student paints the Neck, he should avoid ex-
pressing the Muscles too strong in the stem, nor should the
Bones appear too evident on the chest, as both have an un-
pleasing effect, denoting  violent agitation of the body, 
circumstance seldom necessary to express in Portrait Painting.
 The method with which Painters in Oils express transparency in the Lips is,
by painting them first with light Vermillion Teints, and, when dry, touching
them over with pure Lake.






The most necessary part to be expressed, and which should
ever be observed, (even in the most delicate subjects) is 
strong marking just above the place where the Collar Bones
unite, and if the Head is much thrown over the Shoulders,
some notice should be taken of the large Muscle that rifes
from behind the Ear, and is inserted into the Pit between
the Collar Bones. All inferior Muscles should be, in ge-
neral, quite avoided. The Student will find this caution
necessary, as most subjects, especially thin persons, have the
Muscles of the Neck much more evident than would be ju-
dicious to imitate. As few Necks are too long, it may be
necessary to give some addition to the stem,  fault on the
other side being quite unpardonable, nothing being more
ungraceful than  short Neck. In colouring the Neck, let
the Student preserve the stem of  pearly hue, and the light
not so strong as on the chest. If any part of the Breast ap-
pears, its transparency must also be expressed by pearly
Teints, but the upper part of the chest should be coloured
with beautiful Vermillions delicately blended with the
other,




SECTION IV.
OF DRAPERY.
DAINTING the Drapery is commonly thought to be 
very inferior branch of the Art ; this is, most certainly,
 mistake.  very great Painter being afked what part of
the Picture he thought most difficult to execute; answered, the
Drapery. Whether we allow this to be absolutely true, or
not, we may venture to affirm, that, it is  very difficult part
to execute with Taste; merely to give the effect of Silk, Sat-
tin, or Cloth, &. is not the point; this, the servile Copyist,
by the mere dint of labour, may effect, and may even de-
ceive the-vulgar eye, so that the imitation may be taken for
reality ; but to make the folds give grace and dignity to the
the figure, to cloath it uninfluenced by prejudice, fafhion,
or caprice, so as to bear the test of ages, requires the fullest
exertion of true genius, and the study of  man’ lise : but it
is not my design to say much on this copious subject, there-
fore  shall dismiss it with  sew observations concerning the
colouring and execution.
DaRk blue, purple, black, pink, and all kind of red
Draperies also, should be first tinged with Carmine, which
will render the colours much more brilliant than any other






method; over this should be laid on the paper, the middle
Teint, ( medium between the light and dark Teints, of
which the Drapery is to be painted) except the dark massfes
of shadow, which should be laid on at first as deep as possi¬
ble ; these, sweetened with the Finger, being destitute of
the smaller folds, will exhibit  masterly breadth, which the
lesser folds, when added, ought by no means to destroy. With
the light and dark Teints, the smaller parts are next to be
made with freedom, executing, as much with the Grayon
and as little with the Finger as possible, in each fold touching
the last stroke with the Crayon, which stroke the Finger
must never touch. In the case of reffections, the simple
touch of the Crayon will be too harsh, therefore, fingering
will be necessary afterwards, as reflected lights are always
more gentle than those which are direct. With respect to
reflections in general, they must always partake of the same
colour as the object reflecting, but in the case of single
figures, it may be useful to make some particular observa-
tions.
In  blue Drapery, let the reflections be of  greenisn
cast ; in green Draperies, make them of  yellow teint; in
yellow, of an orange; in orange, reflect  reddish cast; in
all reds, something of their own nature, but inclined to the
yellow: Black should have  reddisni ressection ; the re-
flection of  reddish Teint will also present purples to the
best advantage.





Of whatever colour the Drapery is, the reflection on the
Face must partake thereof, otherwise the Picture, like
Paintings on Glass, will have but  gaudy effect.
LINeN, Lace, Fur, &. should be touched spiritedly
with the Crayon, fingering very little, except the latter;
and the last touches, even of this, like all other parts,
should be executed by the Crayon, without sweetening with
the Finger.
 HAve contented myself with treating on the first princi-
ples only, because many judicious Writers on the subject of
Painting (whose Works, notwithstanding, merit the highest
attention) have not been so explicit on this head as seems to
be necessary. The methods  have recommended, have
been practised by the most celebrated Crayon Painters, whose
Works have been held in public estimation ; but the know¬
ledge of, and ability to execute each separate part with
brilliancy and truth, will be found very insufficient to con-
stitute  compleat Painter, without his judgement enables
him to unite them with each other, by correctness of draw-
ing, propriety of light and shadow, and harmony of co-
louring. In order to accomplisn this, the Student should
carefully avoid finishing one part in particular, till he has
properly considered the connection it is to have with the
rest. The neglect of this is the principal reason why the
Performances of indifferent Painters are so destitute of what





termed Breadth, so conspicuoussy beautiful in the Works of
great Masters. It must be granted, that this observation re-
lates more particularly to large compositions, where  diver-
sity of figures requires such  judicious disposition, that each
may assist in the combination of  kind of universal harmo-
ny ; yet, even in Portrait Painting, the Student should be
particularly attentive to observe this idea of Breadth, if he
is desirous of acquiring that importance and dignity which
constitutes excellence in Painting.



PAINTING WITH CRAYONS  .
OP THE MATERIALS.
—HE perfection of the Grayons consists, in  great mea-
sure, in their softnefs, for it is impossible to execute
 brilliant Picture with them if they are otherwise, on which
account great care should be observed in the preparing them,
to prevent their being hard.-- In all compositions, Flake-
white, and White-lead should be wholly rejected, because
the slightest touch with either of these will unavoidably turn
black.
The usual objection to Crayon Paintings is, that they are
subject to change, but whenever this happens, it is intirely
owing to an injudicious use of the above-mentioned whites,
which will stand only in Oils. To obviate the bad effects
arising from the use of such Crayons, let the Student
make use of common Whiting prepared in the following
manner :
Taxs  large vessel of water, put the Whiting into it,
and mix them well together ; let this stand about half  mi-
nute, then pour off the top into another vessel, and throw
the gritty sediment away ; let what is prepared rest about 
minute,





minute, and then pour it off as before, which will purisy

the Whiting and render it free from all dirt and grittiness.
When this is done, let the Whiting settlé, and then pour
the water from it ; after which, lay it on the Chalk to dry,
and keep it for use, either for white Crayons, or the pur-
pose of preparing Teints with other colours, for with this,
all other Teints may be safely prepared. If the Student
chuses to make Crayons of the Whiting immediately after
it is washed, it is not necessary to dry it on the Chalk, for
it may be mixed instantly with any other colour, which will
save confiderable trouble.  Colours of  heavy, or gritty
nature, especially blue Verditer, must be purified by wash-
ing after this method.
The Student must be provided with  large, flexible.
Pallet-knife,  large Stone and Muller to levigate the Colours,
two or three large Pieces of Chalk to absorb the moisture
from the Colours after they are levigated,  Piece of flat
Glass to prevent the moisture from being absorbed too much,
till the Colours are rolled into form, and Vessels for Water,
Spirits, &. as neceffity and convenience shall direct.




REDS
CARMINE AND EAKE.
It is rather difficult to procure either good Carmine or
good Lake. Good Carmine is inclined to the Vermillion
Teint, and good Lake to the Carmine Teint. The Carmine.
Crayons are prepared in the following manner.
As their texture is inclinable to hardness, instead of grind-
ing and rolling them, take  sufficient quantity of Carmine,
lay it upon the Grinding-stone, mix it with  levigating
Knife with Spirits of Wine, till it becomes smooth and
even. The Chalk-stone being ready, lay the Colour upon
it to absorb the Spirit, but be careful that it is laid on in 
proper shape for Painting. If it is levigated too thin, the
waste of colour, by their adhering to the Pallet-knise; but
practise will render the proper degree of consistency far-
miliar.
The simple Colour being prepared, the next step is to
compose the different Teints by  mixture with Whiting;
the proportion to be observed consisting of twenty grada-
tions to one, which may be clearly understood by the fol-
lowing directions. Take some of the simple Colour, and





levigate it with Spirits of Wine, adding about one part of
washed Whiting to three parts of Carmine, of which, when
properly incorporated, make two parcels. The next grada-
tion should be composed of equal quantities of Carmine and
Whiting, of which four Crayons may be made. The third
composition should have one fourth Carmine, and three
fourths Whiting, of this make six Crayons, which will be 
good proportion with the rest. The last Teint should be
made of Whiting, very faintly tinged with Carmine, of
which make about eight Crayons, which will compleat the
abovementioned proportion. As these compound Teints
are levigated, they are to be laid immediately upon the
Chalk that the moisture may be absorbed to the proper de-
gree of dryness for forming into Crayons, which may be
known by its losing the greater part of its adhesive quality
when taken into the hand: lf the consistency is found to be
right, it may be then laid upon the Glass, which having
no pores will prevent the moisture from becoming too dry
before it is convenient to form it into Crayons, otherwise
the Crayons would be full of cracks and very brittle, which
will be  great inconvenience when they are used in
Painting.
LAKE
Is  Colour very apt to be hard, to prevent which the
Student must observe the following particulars :






PAINTING WITH CRAVONS.
Take about half the quantity of Lake intended for the
Crayons, and grind it very sine with Spirits of Wine; let it
dry, and then pulverize it, which is easily done if the Lake
is good; then take the other half, and grind it with Spirits,
after which mix it with the pulverized Lake, and lay it out
directy in Crayons on the Chalk. This Colour will not bear
rolling. The simple Colour being thus prepared, proceed
with the compound Crayons, as directed before, and in the
same degrees of gradation as the Carmine Teints.
VERMILLION.
The best is inclined to the Carmine Teint. Nothing is
required to prepare this Colour more than to mix it on the
Stone with soft Water or Spirits, after which it may be
rolled into Crayons. The different Teints are produced by
 mixture of the simple colour with Whiting, according to
the proportions already given.
BLUES
PRUSSIAN BLUE
Is  Colour very apt to bind, and is rendered soft with
more difficulty than Carmine and Lake. The same method
of preparation is to be followed with this as directed with
respect









respect to Lake, only it is necessary to grind  larger quan-
tity of the pure Colour, as it is chiesly used for painting Dra¬
peries. The different Teints may be made according to
necessity, or the fancy of the Painter.
BLUE VERDITER
Is  Colour naturally gritty, and therefore it is necessary
to washi it well. Its particles are so coarse as to require some
binding matter to unite them, otherwise the Crayons will
never adhere together. To accomplish this, take  quan-
tity sufficient to form two or three Crayons, to which add
 piece of slacked Plaister of Paris about the size of  pea ;
mix these well together, and form the Crayons upon the Chalk,
This Blue is extremely brilliant, and will be of great use in
heightening Draperies, &. The Teints must be formed with
Whiting as directed in the former instances, and are highly
serviceable for painting flesh, to produce those pearly Teints
so beautiful in Crayon Pictures. It is not necessary to mix
the compounds with spirits, as clear water will be sufficient.
GREENS.




GREEN .
BRILLIANT GREENS are produced with great difficulty. In
Switzerland, they have à method of making them, far supe¬
rior to ours '. We usually take yellow Oker, and after grind-
ing it with spirits, mix it with the powder of Prussian blue,
then temper it with à knife, and lay the Crayons on the
Chalk, without rolling them. Instead of this, some use
Oker and Prussian blue. The Crayons made of the two
last may be rolled. Various Teints may be produced by
these colours, according to fancy or necessity ; some to par-
take more of the blue, and others of the yellow.
YELLOWS
   '-YELLOW
Is the most useful and the most brilliant, levigated with
Spirits of Wine, and compose the different Teints as before
directed. Yellow Oker and Naples yellow ground with
spirits will make useful Crayons.
 Mr. Bonhote, in Hayses Court, Soho, is the original Importer of these Crayons
from Lausanne, in Swilzerland; the Student may find it very useful to supply de-
ficiencies of this nature with them, as the ingredients which compose these brilliant
Crayons are not to be met with in England.
ORANGE








ORANGE
Is produced with King’-yellow and Vermillion ground
together with spirits, and the Teints formed as in other
cases, but no great quantity of them is required.
BROWN .
CULLENS-EARTH
Is  fine dark brown. After six or eight of the simple-
Crayons are prepared, several rich compound Teints may be
produced from it, by  mixture with Carmine, in various
degrees. Black, Carmine, and this colout, mixed together,
make useful Teints for painting Hair ;. several gradations
may be produced from each of these by  mixture with
Whiting. Roman, or brown Oker is an excellent colour,
either simple or compounded with Carmine. Whiting
tinged, in several degrees, with either of these, will prove
very serviceable in painting.
UMBER
May be treated in just the same manner, only it is ne-
cessary to levigate it with Spirits of Wine.
PURPLES.




PURPLES.
PrUSSIAN BLUE ground with spirits, and mixed with pul-
verized Lake, will produce  good purple. Carmine thus
mixed with Prussian blue will produce  purple something
different from the former. Various Teints may be
made from either of these compounds by  mixture with
Whiting.
BLACK.
LAMPBLACK
Is the only black that can be used with safety, as all others
are subject to mildew; but as good Lamp-black is very
scarce, the Student will, perhaps, find it most expedient to
make it himself, the process of which is as follows :
ProvidE  tin cone, fix it over  lamp at such  height
that the flame may just reach the cone for the soot to ga-
ther within it. When  sufficient quantity is collected, take
it out, and burn all the grease from it in  crucible. It
must then be ground with spirits and laid on the chalk to
absorb the moisture. Various grey Teints may be formed
from this by  mixture with Whiting, as mentioned in for-
mer instances.
VERMILLION




tion of great use, and Teints made from this with Whiting
will be found to be very serviceable.
CaRMinE and black is another good compound, of which
five or six gradations should be made, some partaking more
of the black, and others having the Carmine most predomi¬
nant, besides several Teints by  mixture with. Whiting.
VerMiLLioN and black is also  very useful compound,
from which several different Teints should be made.
PRUSSiAN ELUE and black is another good compound,
and will be found of singular service in painting Draperies.
It is impofsible to lay down rules for the forming every
Teint necessary in composing  set of Crayons, there being
many accidental compositions, entirely dependant on fancy
and opinion-The Student should make it  rule to save the
leavings of his colours, for of these he may form various
Teints, which will oecasionally be useful.
SECTION





SECTION VI.
OF ROLLING TBE CRAYONS, AND DISPOSING
THEM POR PAINTING.
The different compositions of colours must be cut into

 proper magnitude, after they are prepared, in or-
der to be rolled into Pastils for the convenience of using
them. Each Crayon should be formed in the left hand with
the ball of the right, first formed cylindrically, and then ta-
pered at each end-lf the composition is too dry, dip the
Finger in water, if too wet the composition must be laid
upon the Chalk again to absorb more of the moisture. The
Crayons should be rolled as quick as possible; and when fi-
nished, must be laid upon the Chalk again, to absorb all re-
maining moisture. After the gradation of Teints from one co-
lour are formed, the stone should be well’scraped and cleansed
with water before it is used for another colour.
WheN the set of Crayons is compleated according to the
rules prescribed, they should be arranged in classes for the
convenience of painting with them---Some thin drawers,
divided into  number of partitions is the most covenient
method of disposing them properly. The Crayons should be
deposited according to the several gradations of light. The
bottom of the partitions must be covered with bran, as 
bed




bed for the colours, because it not only preserves them clean,
but prevents their breaking.
The box made use of when the Student paints, should be
about  foot square, with nine partitions. In the upper
corner, on the left hand, (supposing the box to be in the
lap when he paints) let him place the black and grey Crayons,
those being the most seldom used; in the second partition,
the blues; in the third, the greens and browns ; in the first
partition on the left hand of the second row, the Carmines,
Lakes, Vermillions, and all deep reds ; the yellows and
orange in the middle, and the pearly Teints next ; and as
these last are of  very delicate nature, they must be kept
very clean, that the gradations of colour may be easily dis-
tinguished : In the lowest row, let the first partition con-
tain  piece of fine linen rag to wipe the Crayons with while
they are using ; the second, all the pure Lake and Ver-
million Teints ; and the other partition may contain those
Teints, which, from their complex nature, cannot be classed
with any of the former.

 


