



PRACTICAL TREATISE
 
PAINT IN 
IN
OIL-COLOURS.





 Painters spend many years in the fearch after Knowledge,
of which they might have artained in  little time, had they hir
 firff on the right path.
DE PILES.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR . AND . WHITE, FlEET-STREET.
   .   .

By minds already fiored with in=
formation, whether it be acquired by
the instruction of others or by dint of
perfonal application, preceptive books
will be frequently rejected. What
has been diligently attained is too
often affiduoully hoarded; and pride
and envy co-operate with avarice to
render the progrets of Knowledge
difficult and expentive.
  however; has wrought &
change in the opinions of men; and
what  few may fupercilioutly de-
pife, the multitude now eagerly
embrace. Happy, indeed, are thefe
 for the generality of human
Kind! Arrogance and ignorance are
expelled the land; and, linked in
one couple, are journeying to oblivion,
and nearly out of fight.
THE prefent age feems to be; of all
others, more diftinguithed for the
Rrong impulfe which has been given
to the human mind, in whatever has
 near relation to philofophy. The
 of Icience is unbounded, and its
Votaries have accumulated beyond
the powers of common calculation.
Knowledge and take; fo happily com:
bined; have pread their influence in
almoff


vii
PREFACE.
almoft every direction; and have pre-
pared the minds of the rifing genera-
tion for the expantion of Genius, and
the reception of Truth.
Faers judicioutly arranged, and
publifhed from time to time as they
accumalaie, are productive of infinite
advantage for to few are in circum-
fances to acquire Knowledge, and
thofe few to quickly pats away, that,
without  fand of this fort, all intereft
would be loft to mankind. Every
branch of fcrence is much facilitated
and advanced by public communica-
tion, which diffinctly points out the
prefent, and opens  free channel to
future, difcoveries. Many. are well
qualified for extending the bounds. of
fcrence, whofe ardor is checked by
the failure of experiments, and who
are
  continually mortified to find they
have been long fince anticipated by
others. Records of this Kindact, there
fore, as Itimulants to general improve-
ment what is already known need
not be retraced, and what is difce-
vered in future may be occafionally
added: thus, the needy and the dif
fident will be taught with oeconomy
and cafe, and myftery will be unfold-
ed and converted into truth.

HITHERTO, the Lkilful practice of
Painting in Oil has been chietly in the
poffettion of  few. to few, as to make
the works of moderate artifis appear

to great advantage, if they claim only
 fuperionty in the department of: co-
louring. It is well Known, that Na-
ture is more admired by the common
obferver for the richnels and variety

Of


 tints, than for the mere outline
of her forms when, therefore, truth
of colouring is to eminently promi-
nent, how much ought its principles
to be fiudied, and its effects to be un
derflood!
WiTH  defign truly laudable, 
 Treatufe on the Praltice of Painting
& in Oil was published as far back as
the year  which went through

two, if not more, editions in  The
author, Mr. Thomas Bardwell, was 
man well qualified for this undertak-
ing; as he had been employed very
clofely in copying the choiceft works
of Rubens and Vandyke. The Earl
of Rochford, to whom he has dedi-
cated his work, was one of his princi-
Dal patrons.




. THE



PREFACE.
 THE motive," fays he,  of my
& publifhing, is folely the benefit of the
& Art. Such as are born with  happy
co genius, though deftitute of  guide,
& may from thefe instructions acquire
of  competent knowledge of Colour-
 
ing. Here the lovers of Painting
 who Hudy for their pleafure and
 may be conducted eafi-
=ly, Rep by Hep, to the secrets of that
& Art, which, of all the defigning
& ones, affords the greateft pleafure to
of the mind.—There is no difference
 in the method of working between
& Copying, and painting from Nature.
co Had  Known, at my firtt fetting
sc out, as much as  have fince learn-
  should have approached nearer
CC +
perfection; but others, who have
of the advantage of youth, may;  am
 attain the end  propofe.
Since
.


X the firft appearance of the
above publication, Great Britain has
received  confiderable advancement
in the infistution of  Royal Academy,
which has embodied fo much excel-
lence as to have increafed the general
Rock of information.
THE late learned and elegant Prefi-
dent, (peaking of the ufe of copying;
thus expreffes himfelf  If it be
& at all ufeful, it should feem to be in
 learning to colour; yet even colour-
ing will never be perfectly attained
 by fervilely copying the model pe-
efore you. An eye critically. ice
 can only be formed by: obferving
 well-coloured pictures with atten-
ction and by: clofe inspection,: and
"minute examination, you will: dif=
  delivered December   Cover;





XI at laft, the manner of han-
&
ling, the artifice of contrall, glazing.
 other expedients by which good
 colourifts have raifed the value of
& their tints, and by which Nature
& has been to happily iitated"— But
if & an eye critically nice can happily
 Nature, how much greater
affiltance is needed by the eye that is
untutored and unaccuftomed to pe-
culate!—Were the materials with
which Nature' hues are practically
imitated, to exact in their tints, and.
to fixed in their nature, as to admit
of inftant perfection, without change,
then indeed mere obfervation would
be fufficient: unhappily, however, the
reverfe is the cafe, and [carcely one
artiff in ten is chemically acquainted
with the bodies he is ufing
 An Artiff of eminence being cautioned againtt
the


Kill
PREFACE.
Praltical information is strongly need-
ed and if the great mafters, whofe
manner of colouring has been approv:
ed, had communicated it in writing
to pofterity, to frank and generous 
conduct would have produced more
good pictures than all the lectures that
have been delivered.
Wirh the fixed refolution of ex-
tending that information which time
and experience have firmly fanction-
ed, this work is undertaken; nor will
it contain any thing but reality. What

ever fuggeftions are offered to confi-
 will be appended in the
the profufe admixture of Sugar of Lead in his colours,
replied, if that he never made ufe of it; he thought
of Sacrum far preferable to it. —Secrum is  corrupt
and abbreviated name for Saccharam Saturm, or Sugar
of Lead.


form


XIV
PREFACE.
form of Notes, or will at leatt be kept
teparate and diftinct from the main
body of the work.
IN  Treatife of this nature, much
will be found that is already Known,
and much that may participate of no-
velty - but as knowledge is by necef-
fity accumulative, good fenfe will
furnith an apology for that which
would otherwife difgult. For the pro-
jector' part, he may fafely fay, that
however inferior his abilities may be
to the undertaking, no one will be
found poffeffed of more genuine  good will in its favour.
CONTENTS.












CONT EN  .



Page




INTRODUCTION
Materia Pictoria; or, Hiffory of Pigments,
Drugs, Varniffies, and other Materials
which are ufed in the Art of Oil Painting
 Rules for Painting in Oil Colours
 of the principal Colours ufed in the
Fleth
Lift of the principal Tints that are abfolutely
  for painting Fleth

 Painting

Second Painting
 Painting, or Finithing

 Back-grounds
On


Ivi
CONT    .
Page



On Copying
 Painting Draperies
 Painting
 and Laft Painting
 of Coloritto
 Varnish-making
 Remarks, worthy the Attention of

the Varnish-maker
 Observations
 White Pigments
  

INTRODUCTION.
WANY learned and ingenious men have
employed the acumen of their talents in
explaining the theory of light and colours,
which form  very important part of the foi-
ence of painting. To excel in colouring, the
artiff muft be thoroughly well grounded
in the principles of that branch of optics
which treats of the nature of light. He will
there find that wbite, by which light may
be otherwife termed, is not, philofophically
peaking,  fimple and primitive colour,
but is compounded of feveral colours, of
which the number and proportion are well

Known.


 INTRODUCTION.
Known. By means of  glats prifm, the
component tays of light may be separated
into feven diffint parcels exhibiting red,
orange, yellow; green, blue, indigo, violet;
and although thefe rays are immutable in
themfelves, yet they are continually fepa-
fating from each other in their pallage
through the various objects they may
meet. Thus, for inftance, grass reflects
the green rays of light, while port roine
reflects the red rays; and fubltances that
participate of other colours, have this pe-
culiar property accounted for on fimilar
reafoning. By this frequent feparation
of different rays is nature fo beautifully
diverfified ().
DA
() On this interefting subject the reader may
confult George Adams' Lectures, edit.   Lectures      in which he will
find


INTRODUGTION.
 ViNci () feems to have been
aware of the truth of light being only an
afemblage of colours, although the proof
was left to be exemplified by the im-
mortal Newton. So valuable  difcovery
mult be allowed to be highly serviceable
to the fudent in painting; for though
Titian, Corregio, &cc. became great Co-
lourifts without this knowledge, yet to be
find the whole Newtonian fyltem familiarly explained,
-together with the opinions of Mr. Huffey Delaval,
which, though now firongly combated, are highly
ingenious.—To  mind yet further anxious for
philofophic inveltigarion, an original work of real
excellence may be confulted, which, though it oppo-
fes the opinions of Newton and Delaval, is deferving
of the moft ferious inveftigation, viz. of Experimental
to Refearches concerning the Philofophy of Perms-
of nent Colours—by Edward Bancroft, .. edit.
&   Trattato della Pittura, .  with the philofophy of co-
lours, is to be directed immediately to
the view of thofe tints which might other-
wife be found out by cafualty. To him
who shall Know.—that two colours re-
feeting on each other form  third—the
painting  funfet will be eafy; for though
the light be tinged with yellow or red,
yet, if the lky be blue,  greenith tint
will be formed, more or less in propor-
tion to the depth of the yellow (]. This
difcrimination is in reality foreknown by
the
(.) This greenish tint, whhich may be termed in-
cipient twilight, is diftinguithable in  high degree,
if the ftudent will keep pariently viewing the gra-
dual declention of the fun. When the glow of the
evening begins to flacken,  peculiar chill will per-
yade his whole frame, which is not entirely to be
attributed to the abfence of warmth, but in part
to the cold fenfation produced on the optic nerve
by



INTRODUCTION.


the fcrentific ftudent, which might have
been totally miffed by any other, except
co the eye critically nice. But how few
poffets  correct eye to nature may be
Known by inspecting the works of dif-
ferent mafters, in which every ftyle will
vary; while nature, which they are endea-
vouring to imitate, is uniform in herfyf-
tem (). It may be faid on this subject,
without
by  green colour.—To render this nicety  little
more palpable, for in fact it is  matter of feeling
let the reader view  glowing fire through the me-
dium of green glass, and his eyes will inftantly feel.
cool. Perhaps this may be further exemplified by
contraft: let the reader view  well-painted fire, and
he will be led to feel himfelf warm. Some
of Claude' pictures have this slightly greenish bue of
tvilight fioating lightly in the air, under the appear-
ance of  thin vaporous mift: to have many of the
works of Vernet.
() In the Philofophical Tranfactions for the
YCar
B INTRCUUGTION
without  bluth of falfehood,—To few fuc-
ceed in imitating the local hues of nature,
that,
year  is an account of  man who had to ex-
traordinary  defect in his vifion as to be incapaci-
tated from diftinguithing colours. The hiftory of
this fingular perfon, who lived at Maryport in Cum-
berland, was communicated by Mr. Huddart to Dr.
Prieftley.—As the full account would be too long
for inferting here, we mult refer the reader to the ac=
countitfelf; the following however is the outline:—
His name was Harris, by trade  thoemaker. He
could difcern the form and magnitude of bodies, but
could not diffinctly fee their colours: he could fee
cherries on  free, but could not fay whether they
were white or black. In general, all light colours
he termed white, and all darx colours black. He
was fo anxious to know the nature of light and co-
lours, that he attended  courfe of lectures in natu-
fal philofophy.—Two of his brothers were in like
circumftances; but two other brothers and fifters,
 well as his parents, had nothing of this defect.
He did not imagine that colours were mere differ-
ERCES


INTRODUGTION.
 out of  whole academy, Reynolds
fcarcely had  rival ().
BUr, befides the superiorityacquired by
the Hudy of optics in what has been juft
enumerated, the fame principles will fully
explain many other things practifed by
Painters; for, were their works not judged
of on the bafis of philofophy,  confiderable
thare of their merit muft be attributed to
ences of light and fhade, but believed, from the re=
marks of others, that they were various and diffinet.
() Of late years the art of colouring has been
affiduoully cultivated in the Britith fchool, owing
in  great meafure to the emulation excited by that
great mafter, Sir Jofhns Reynolds. Could the ex-
periments in which he failed, and thofe in which
he fucceeded, be collected and divulged,  confider.
able advantage muft of confequence enfue; for good
is  refult compounded of the avoidance of error and
the practice of right.
  INTRODUGTION.
chance ratherthan learning. He who has
viewed the effects of nature with an eye
directed by found education will be able
to eftablifh general rules, where another
will gain only particular cafes.

WrITH regard to the application of
thefe fcientific rules to painting, the works
of the beft colourifts are to be carefully
examined: thefe are the records which 
young painter ought ever to be fiudying,
that he may be enabled to exprets the
beauty of objects with the utmoft truth
and exactnels.—
With respect to co-
 fays Sir Jothna (
 though
  may appear at firft  part of painting
of merely mechanical, yet it fill has its
of rules, and thofe grounded upon that
of prefiding principle which regulates both
 Difcourfe, read December   the

 the great and little in the ftudy of
 painter. By this, the firft effect of
of the picture is produced; and as this
if is performed; the spectator as he walks
& the gallery will stop, or pats along.
Aware, however, of the misfortune to
which  young artiff may be expoted
by placing too great confidence in very
old pictures, he judicioutly remarks—
 inform you, however ( that
 old pictures defervedly celebrated for
of their colouring, are often to changed
& by dirt and varnifh, that we ought
& not to wonder if they do not appear
 to their reputation in the eyes
 unexperienced painters, or young
st fudents. An artiff whofe judgment
of is matured by long observation, con-
 rather what the picture once was,
( Difcourfe, read December   INTRODUCTION
  what it is at prefent. He has ac-
be
quired  power by habit of feeing the
C 
rilliancy of tints through the cloud by
Co 
which it is obfcured. An exact imi-
 therefore, of thofe pictures is
& likely to fill the fudents mind with
 falfe opinions; and to fend him back
 colourift of his oon formation, with
 equally remote from nature and
 art, from the genuine practice of
 mafters, and the real appearances
tt of things.
 thefe rules, and ufing
of thefe precautions, when you have clearly
se and diftinctly learned in what good co-
& louring confifts, you cannot do better
of than have recourfe to nature herfelf,
of who is always at hand, and in compa-
 rifon of whofe true fplendor the beft-
 coloured


INTRODUCTION.  coloured pictures are faint and feeble.
ot However, as the practice of copying is
of not entirely to be excluded, fince the
 prattice of painting is learned
 some measure by it, let thote choice
 only be felected which have re-
of commended the work to notice. If
& its excellence confift in its general ef-
is feet, it would be proper to make Hight
of sketches of the machinery and gene-
 management of the picture. Thefe
of sketches should be kept by you for the
 
regulation of your ftyle.
MUcH is it to be lamented that the Aca=
demy of Painting does not poffels models
of colouring as well as models of delign,
that the ftudent may learn in what the ex-
cellence of the beft colourifts confifts, ere
he attempt to quit the fchool to imitate
Rature


 INTRODUCTION.
nature in the fields.— Bnt if it be ob-
jected, that the cofl of  collection fuf-
ficiently valuable and various for this
purpofe would be too great, let  living
model at lealt be procured, where the car-
nations rich and healthy may be faith-
fully imitated as to the variety of the lo-
cal hnes. Were tis model ufefully em-
ployed, it would be placed in various
lights; now in the beams of the fun, now
in  more fober light, and now in the
light of  lamp or candle; at one time in
the fhade, at another in  reffected light.
By fuch practical artifices the complexion
of the body under different circumstances
may be thoroughly learned and maftered;
and the tints and half-ants produced in
the colour of the ikin by bones, blood-
yeffels, or fat, may be duly attended to
and difcriminated.  ftudent thus in-
structed


INTRODUGTION. 

sructed would not be too forward in
giving that roly appearance to the fleth
which we fo often find in practice; but
would modeftly adhere to the dictates
of nature, as the fountain head of that
perfection to which he is conftantly
aspiring.
By thefe means the approaches to 
true knowledge of colouring are evidently
attainable. From the ibeory of light, ecc.
which the ference of optics will completely
furnifh, the next ftep naturally tends to
the appropriation of thofe principles as
practifed by the beft colourifts; after
which, the practical application of the ma-
ternals by which colouring is produced
will confequently occupy the attention.
Ir has been  generally received opi-
nion, that the ancient painters had no
more


 INTRODUCTION
more than four colours, out of which all
their other tints were formed. This po-
fition has been very ably combated by
the ingenious Mr. Thomas Cooper, who
has written an effay on this exprets fub-
jelt in the papers of the Manchefter Soci=
ety ( He conceives this notion to
have arifen from too hafty  perufal, or 
mifapprehention, of thofe paltages of an-
cient authors which are quoted in fup-
port of it. Cicero, Pliny, Exc. wrote of
perfons who were ancients in their days,
not concerning the cuftoms of their con-
temporaries, which latter are the per-
 termed ancients by us. Wherever
mention is made of the cuftoms of their
own times, many proofs are given of the
application of more colours than for-
() Memoirs of the Literary Society of Manchef-
 vol. iii. .  edit.   is
merly. Cicero in particular fays,— Hlow
 more brilliance is there in the
 and variety of the colours in the
 of the moderns, than thofe of
 ancients () ?
PERHAPs, the more fuperior painters
might employ, in the very early periods of
the art, fewer colours than at prefent, be-
caule purples and blues were not difcovered
till later, at leaft in any degree of per-
feetion (). After this,  variety of new
colours were gradually difcovered; and,
being
() & Quanto colorum pulchritudine et varic-
of tate foridiora funt in picturis novis pleraque
to quam in veteribusl" Cic. de Oratore,  Purple was prepared from  fubftance pro-
duced by infects on certain plants, both of which
are defcribed by Crefias; and after him by CElian in
his work De Nat. Animal.  iv. .  fub-
Rance is certainly the cochineal, from which our
lake is now ufually prepared.
Pliny


 INTRODUCTION.
being introduced into practice, increated
the ftock to  confiderable degree ( the pigments and fubltances ufed
by the ancients, Mr. Cooper has given 
fuccinet account, which he collected from
the works of Diofcorides, Vitruvius, Pliny,
Oribafius, Hidore and Solinus ().
Pliny mentions  blue which in its name and ori-
gin appears to be fimilar to our indigo.  Ab hoc
of maxima antoritas Indico: Exindia venit, arundi.
 (pums, adhereicente limo. cum teritur, ni-
 grum, at in diluendo mixturam purpure caruleique
 reddit. Plinj .  .  in
the following chapter,  India conferente ffuminum
CC 
uorum limum.—this timum is precifely the mud
or facula which fublides in the preparation of indigo
from the plant anil; and might, in India, be fpon-
taneoully formed by the maceration of vegetable
Tubllances growing on the banks of rivers.
( For  lift of the colours ufed in Pliny' time,
see Pliniilib. xxxv. .  et feg.
() See Manckefter Memoirs, .  vol. iii.  OF


INTRODUCTION.  OF rebate colouring fubltances, the
ancients had obite lead varioully pre-
pared;  whire from caleined es
 Sbells,
and preparations from crefaceous and ar-
gillaceous earths.—The moderns, in ad-
dition, have magifiery of bismuth, hitle
wled; and ought to have the calces of tin
and sinc.
 blacks, the ancients had prepa-
fations fimilar to lamp, rvory, blue and
Frankfort black; allo to Indian ink, and
common writing ink; and they uled what
we do not, viz. the precipitate of the black
dyers vats. Black chalk and black lead
were, as  think, unknown to them.
 ancients poffeffed  species of
vermition, or fine cinnabar;  coarler cin-
nabar red lead; various reddles, burned
and unburned, apparently fimilar to our
 INTRODUGTION.
red ochre; Venetian red; Spanish brown;
burned terra di Siennd, and scarlet ocbre:
they had alfo  fubltance alike in colour
and in name to our dragon  blood. Their
minium was not red lead, but native ver-
milion, or very fine cinnabar. Their red
lead went under the names of minium se-
cundarrum, and cernffa ufta. They had not
carmine or rofe-pink, nor the lakes from
Kermes, cochineal, or brazil; although
they certainly had the cochineal infect,
and the Kermes berry.
 yellore pigments of the ancients
were generically the same with our orpi-
ments, King' yellow, Naples yellow, mas-
ficot, and the yellow ochres of various de-
nominations, as well as earths ringed yel-
low. They did not poffels turbith mineral,
mineral yellow, or gamboge; nor do
they appear to have Known of gall-fone
  pigment.
 OF


INTRODUGTION  Of the biue paints, they had prepa-
rations from the lapis cyanus and lapis ar-
menus, perhaps allo from the lapis lasuli,
which they poffeffed, and which  am in-
clined to think  different flone from the
former. Indigo they had and bice or imall,
for they made blue glafs, but whether

from fome ore of cobalt or of wohtraim
mult be incertain—perhaps the former.
They had not Pruffian-blue, verditer, or
litmus, which we have. We do not ufe
the blue precipitate of the dyers vats, nor
mountain blue, which they certainly em-
ployed.
 Or green colours, they had verdigrife,
terra verte, and malacbite or mountain
green the latter is not in ufe among us.
Sap-green and Scheeles green appear to
have been unknown to them. Like us,
they produced as many tints as they
pleafed
  INTRODUGTION.
pleafed from blue and yellow vege-
tables.
 have no original purples in ufe:
that from gold by means of tin, though
very good when well prepared, is too dear,
and is unneceffary. Their purple was 
tinged earth.
& THEIR orange, or Jandarach (red
orfiment), we alfo poffels. Hence there
does not appear to have been any great
want of pigments, or any very material
difference between the colours they ufed
and fuch as we generally employ.—Per-
haps the full effect of colouring may be
obteined without the ufe of the exceeding
brilliant pigments, by depending more on
the proportion and opposition of tints.
COLOURINC was carried to  great de-
gree


INTRODUCTION.  of excellence formerly, as may be
clearly afcertained by the writings of va-
rious authors, who ftate that the Roman
artifis particularly trufted to it; but it is
highly probable that the moderns have
exceeded them in this particular branch of
painting. The number of the modern
colours, and their preparations have en-
abled them to excel their predeceffors in
the variety of their tints, independent of
the chrarofcuro, which would alone go 
great way towards the fame excellence.
All this, and  great deal more that might
be urged to the fame effect, will only go
to prove the lamentable ftate of to de-
firable an art, which has been tranfmitted
to pofterity with fcarcely one practical
rule whereby fuch performances were ef-
fected. Nay, to come neaterourown times,
the real method of working, and the pe-
culiar admixture of the colours, ufed by
Rembrandt,
.  INTRODUCTION.
Rembrandt, Rubens and Vandyke, are
very partially known to us, and are now
rather difianly imitated than practically
identified.
REMERANDT, who was  mafter of
colouring in the higheft degree, died in
 Loult, who ranked next to him,
died in England about eight years after.
Lely diel in  Reily,  difciple of
Louft, furvived them both, and was the
beft eclourt of his day. Then came
Richardion, who died in  and,
though taught by Reily, was much in-
ferior to lum in merit. Thus we fee in
how thort  ame the art of colouring de-
clined, which was in high perfection in
the time of Rembrandt.
WHENEVER  diicovery is made where-
by the world is likely to reap advantage,
it


INTRODUCTION.  becomes the duty of every one to pro-
mulge and extend it. For want of an
open and philofophic difpofition in mat-
ters of this fort, men of great abilities
have dwindled into tradefmen, and have
carried to their graves  ffore of infor-
mation which, during life, was  lucra-
tive monopoly.
By fimilar means, we are deprived of
the knowledge of many valuable arts
practifed by the ancients, who from mo-
tives of jealouty or avarice excluded others
from  participation of their skill. The
Jultinian code, for inftance, contains 
striet prohibition of the ufe of the Tyrian
purple dye, except within the walls of
the palace; and although experience con-
vinced the Eaftern Emperors of the folly
and impolicy of fuch interdicts, not all
their
C INTRODUGTION.
their future plans could preferve this va-
Iuable art ).
Cyaar little information can be had
concerning Rembandrs merhod may be
learned from  de Piles, bur it is not of
-


the practical fort
itian and Rein-
 brandt prepared their firtt lay, or
 grounds, nearly alixe, and with colours
& that kindly unined, and were as near to
& the lie as poftible, on which they laid
 their virgintents with light hrokes of the
() To prevent the toral lots, if postible, of this
highly valuable dye, the Emperors obliged the de-
Icendants of the Tyrian dyers, as well as other artiffs,
to practife the trades of their anceftors. But in
time, as the families of thefe artifts became extinct,
the art became extinet alfo; which thews the ne-
ceffity of fome act of the legiflature to purchafe all
receipts of any real value, and record them. Vide
Codex,  xi. tit. vii. Until the promulgation of this
law, it was an act of high treeson for any private
perfon to make ufe of this dye. Iid. iit. viii.
  and thus they imitated the force
 and frethnets of nature.—They were
of convinced that there were certain co-
 which deftroyed each other, if
& they were mixed to excels; and that
of they should be as liitle thaken as pof-
of fible by the motion of the pencil." If
MI. de Piles Knew the above, he might
have allo Rared the names of the colours,
and the medium in which they were ground,
ExC. ExC.
FRo  clofe inspection of the beft
painted pictures of thefe great colourifts,
it appears that the drugs and the colour-
ing materials were in general far better
prepared and more fcrupuloully felected
than at prefent. Many of the venders
of colours are not preparers of them; and,
being ignorant of their compofition, re-
ceive into their shops whatever has the
femblance


 INTRODUGTION
temblance of excellence. Numbers of the
materials are either not genuine, or are
vilely fophifticated; and when ground,
and fied up in bladders, are mixed with
taw and impure oils. It would be well
if the Royal Academy of Painting would
elect cenfors to enforce propriety in this
refpect, after the cuftom of the College of
Phyficians or at lealt appoint  few honeft
and well-informed colourmen; or, what is
perhaps better, have  laboratory of their
own, and apply the profits to the fup-
port of decayed merit, and the patronage
of rifing genius.
AFTER all, to recapitulate the more
valuable confiderations of the truly ani-
mated Rudent, let him never reft fatisfied
with an effect, without endeavouring to
difcover the canss. He will, if grounded
in philofophy, be able to account for moft
Of


INTRODUCTION.  the appearances of nature; and the
particular cafes, which are to many ex-
ceptions, his mind will readily retain, as
being peculiarly flriking in themfelves,
and aloof from general explanation. On
of the whole, —to recur to Reynolds (),
& there is but one prefiding principle
 regulates and gives ttability to
of every art. The works, whether of
co poets, painters, moralifts, or hiftorians,
of which are built upon general nature,
 for ever; while thofe which de-
  for their exifience on particular
 and habits,  partial view of
 or the fiuctuation of fathion,
of can only be coeval with that which
 
irft raifed them from obfcurity. Pre-
ce fent time and future may be confidered
 Tivals, and he who folicits the one
 expect to be difcountenanced by
 other.
() Difcourfe, read Dec.   con-
cluding part.


          
ne 


MATERIA PICTORIA():

OR,
      
 DRUGS, VARNISHES,
ANND
PTHER MATERIALS WHICH ARE USED IN THE ART OF
OIL PAINTING.
 

 
ASPHIALTUM. This is  folid bitn.
minous fubltance, of  deep thining black
or brown colour within, with fcarcely
any fmell till it be heated, when it emits
 ftrong pitchy one. It is plentiful in fe-
() It has been thought more convenient to ar-
range the feveral words in alphahetical order; by
which means any article may be inftantly found out,
as by  Dictionary.
Veral


BI
 parts of Es
ypt, and on the furface
of the Dead Sea. From France, Germany,
and Switzerland,  fimilar bitumen is pro-
cured, differing only in its smell, which is
more piichy. Sometimes prich itself, and
the reliduum after the diffillation of am-
ber, are both fubltituted for it, but are
diftinguithable from the natural bitumen.

BLACK. See the feveral arricles—Blue
Black; Frankfort Black. Ivory Black;
Lamp Black.
 OF COLOUR. After pis
ments have been carefully ground in oil,
and prepared for the ufe of the pencil, it
is cuftomary to fecure them from duft
 other adventitious alteration, by tying
them up in pieces of bladder. By fimply
puncturing the bladder, fo much colour
as is wanted may be fqueezed from the
 and the remainder be preferved
for  future occafion.
BLUE. See Indigo; Pruffian Blue;
Small; Ultramarine; Ultramarine Athes;
Verditer.
BLUE-BLAcK. Of this colour the pre-
paration is various, but the better fort
is faid to be made of the young stalks and
tendrils of the vine charred. See Frank-
fort Black.
BROwN. See Afphaltum; Brown Ochre;
Brown Pink; Cologne Earth; Burnt Terra
di Sienna; Umbre.
BROWN OCHRE. See Ochre.
BROWN PINk is the tinging part of 
vegetable, precipitated on the earth of
alum, and on calcareous fubftances, fuch
 
 cuttle fith bone, chalk, exc. There are
many methods of preparing it, among
which are the following: Take of French

Denles, one pound; of fuftic wood, in
Ciniys, half  pound; and of pearl-afhes,
OR pound. Boil them in  tin boiler, with
 galion and  half of water, for an hour;
and then ftram off the tincture through
Hannel, while the Haid is boiling hot.

Havins prepared in the mean time  fo-
lurion of  pound and  half of ahim
(which takes fourteen times its weight of
water to difolve), put it gradually to the
tinciure, as long as an ebullition shall ap-
pear walr the fediment, as in the pre-
paration of lake; and when it is brought,
by lkering through paper and  linen
cloth, to  proper confifience, dry it on
boards, in Tquare pieces.—Or, it may be
made without the ufe of falts, by boiling
two pounds of the berries in  gallon of
Water,


BE
 for two hours, and ftraining off
the tincture through flannel. In the
mean time prepare  pound and  half of
curtle-fith bone, by levigating the foft
inner part with water on marble; add
this to the tincture, and evaporate in bal-
neo Marix ( water-baib) till the matter
become of  ffiff confifience when the
mats is well ground, let it be cut in cakes,
and dried on  board.
BRUNSWICE GREEN. This is  very
valuable and newly difcovered colour,
and is prepared by two brothers, of the
nname of Gravenhorft, at Bruntwick.
Hitherto it has been kept  secret; but it
is conjectured to be  precipitate of cop-
per which has been diffolved in tartar
and water by coction, and which, by eva-
poration of the lixivium, is depofited in
the form of  cupreous tartar  limilar
colour is fold by Mefirs. Brandramand Co.

Ii





CE CO
 SifeLane, London, which poficffesmany,
if not all, the rare qualities of that prepared
at Brunfwick.
CERUSs. See Whice Lead.
CINNABAR. An ore of quickfilver,
found in all quickfilver mines. The beft
is of  high red colour, brilliant, and free
from gritty matters. It is  combination
of quickfilver and fulphur, and when arti-
ficially prepared is termed Vermilion,—
which see.
COLCOTHAR OF VITRIOL.  purple
Drown calx of iron, which remains after
the diftillation of the acid from martial
vitriol:—it is alfo called Crocus Biartis.

COLOGNE EARTH is of  deepbrown
colour. It is dug up in many parts of
Germany. and France; but Dr. Hill; in
 DR
 Hifforyof Foffils, obferves, that it is alfo
found near Birmingham in Warwickfhire,
and on Mendip Hills in Somerfeithire.
COLOUR. In painting, the medium
 the hues of nature are imitated.
For thefe, see the words—Red, Orange,
Fellow, Green, Blue, Purple, Brown,
Black; Whice.
CoMMON INDTAN RED. See Indian
Red.
COMMON ORPIMENT. See Orpiment.
CoPAL.  refin from New Spain, of
which varnish is made.
DISTILLED VERDIGRISE. See Verdi-
erife.
DRYING OIL.
Various are the mea
D of preparing drying-oils; but as
palenels and limpidnets are as highly ne-
ceffary as  drying quality, the operation
Is  nice one. The following receipt  To  quart of VERY CLD
nut or linfeed oil add one pound of the
cleaneft, unadulterated litharge of filver.
Let the Class veffel in which they are
put be perfectly eylindrical, that the
greaty parts of the oil, which will unite
with the litharge, may fublide without
impediment. Shake the mats many-times
in  day for  week, or longer; and care-
fully, without mixing the greaty fedi-
ment, pour off the drying-oil for ufe.
 . When drying-oils are made with
 they are only applicable to coarfe
 and the darker pis-
eutfide painting,

Ments.

DYTCH PIRx. This colour, like brown
 
 is prepared of French berries, with
this difference, that turmeric inftead of
fuftic is admixed, and that chalk is nfed
in lien of cuttle fith bone. It is alfo pre-
pared, after the fame manner, with ftarch
and white lead. Iis goodnels confifts
in its being of  fine golden yellow, and
very bright.
EARTH, WHITE. Many ingenious
men have employed their talents in dif-
covering  more wholefome, and equally
cheap, pignent as white lead; and, per-
haps, the finer and whiter forts of EARTH
might be ufefully fubllitured. The Terra
Golrbergenfis is of  white colour, which
is dug up in feveral parts of Germany,
more particularly at Goltberg, whence
its name, and Strigaw, and at Lignitz
 Silefia. At this time it is procured in
the neighbourhood of Haffelt, in the
bifhoprick




 
Dishoprick of Liege, in the circle of
Weltphalia, where it is ufually fealed
with the impreffion of an Eagle and the
words or Terra Collbergenfis. —Of to-
bacco-pipe clays there are alto feveral forts
that appear convertible into pigments,
especially one of this clats which is found
near Lymington in Hampthire, which is
not at prefent turned to much ufe. But
the earth termed Melinum in natural hif-
tory has been ever famous in the annals
of painting, being the principal white of
the painters of antiquity. It is ftill found
in the fame place from whence the paint.
ers of old had it, viz. the ifland of Milo,
called Melos by the Greeks, whence its
name, and is common in all the adjacent
Iflands. It is not quite to bright  white
as whitelead; but, as it never turns yel-
low as white lead does, it is far preferable
to that article in the courfe of time. Be-
sides,


EN FR
 as moft of the difcolouring fub-
stances of white earths may be attributed


to iron, if it were treated with marine
acid, the brightness might be improved.
See Hills Hil. of Foffils, . 
 PINE. This is fomctimes
termed light pink, from its being of 
lighter colour than Durch pink, to which
it is fimilar in preparation, except that 
greater quantity of chalk enters the com-
pofition, to render it confiderably lighter.
FLAKE WHITE. See White Lead.
FRANKFORT BLACK. This is made
of the lees of wine burnt, then wathed in
water, and ground in mills for that pur-
pofe, together with ivory or peach-fiones
burnt. It makes the principal ingredient
in the rolling-prets ink; and is generally
D from Frankfort, Mentz, or Strat
bourg, in lumps. The French allo pre-
Dare it, and theirs is far preferable.

GLAZING.  term ufed by artifts to
exprets the application of  thin fuperficial
coat of tranfparent colours. It is gene-
fally practifed in the shades; and the
colour is mixed with meggellup.
GREEN. See Brunfwick Green; Pruf-
Lian Green; Scheele’ Green; Terra Verte;
Verdigrife, common and diftilled.
GREEN, BRUNSWWICK. See Brunfwick
Greenn.
GREEN, PRUSSIAN. See Prulfian Green.
 SCHEELEs. Sec Scheeles
Green.
HAIR


HA IN
 PENCIL. See Pencil.
INDIAN RED. There are two forts,
viz. the common and the real. Common
Indian red is no other than the ochre or
colcothar left after the diftillation of the
acid from martial vitriol, well wathed
from the falts, and ground. Real Indian
red is  natural ochrous earth brought
from the ifland of Ormus, in the Perlian
Gulph, and called by fome writers Terra
Perfica: In general it may be obferved,
that the calces of iron may be made to
appear erther purple or red, according to
the manner in which the calcination is
performed. Various paints are kept in
the shops under different names, which
differ only from each other in fome tri-
vial circumftances, — fuch as. Scarlet

Dchre; Spanish Brown, Indian Red;
Venetian Red.
INDIGO


IN IV
 is  blue feculd obtained by
maceration from the plant AIL. The
very beft fort comes from Spanith Ame-
rica; but within thefe few years  valt
quantity has been brought from Bengal,
which equals, in many famples, the fineft
that has been produced on the globe. It
 not to well calculated for oil as for
water. it is, therefore, applied in great
quantities to the purpofes of dyeing.
IVoRY BLACK. If this colour were
really prepared from the raspings of ivory.
which in truth it ought to be, it is  very
beautiful jet black; but unhappily. it. is
prepared only from bones, which by no
means equal it in (plendour, although they
may be confiderably cheaper. It is  very
bad dryer, and requires  confiderable ad-
RIxture of Jugar of lead.
KINCS


XI . 
 TELLOw. This is an orpi-
ment, or preparation of arfenic and ful-

pher, of an caireme bright colour. It
will Hand well, if kept unmixed and by
itfelf; but, if it be mixed with lead and
fome other colours, it fies off or changes.
It may be obtained from common orpi-
ment by fublimation.
LAKE, to called from gum-lacca, from
which it was at firft prepared, is  very
beautiful ringe of red, purple, or yellow
colouring fubltances precipitated on the
earth of alum. The red and purple lakes
are prepared from cochineal, madder, and
Kermes berries; the yellow fort, from the
curcuma orturneric-root. Sonice are the
miniature-painters in water-colours in the
procuration of lake, that great prices are
given for it. The great complaints made
againtt the red lake are, that it is too pur-
ple


. 
 and too apt to fade and vanith. Could
an unadulterated scarlet lake, that would
fland the feft of time, be philofophically
prepared, fuch  colour would accumulate
Same and fortune on the ingenious artift
who invented it.
LAMPELACK. This colour is the foot
of oils, refins, and other infiammable fub-
ftances collected from lamps. At prefent,
to great is the confumption,  process of 
much greater extent is effected. For in=
ftance, in Norway and Sweden it is fre-
quently obtained from the dregs and
ftramings of refin, together with chips
of the wood and bark of the pine, burnt
in ovens of  peculiar construction. Simi-
lar modes are now probably practifed in
England, where vall quantities are made
for the painting of the bends and mafts of
ships; fince it has been difcovered, that
lamp





LE  
 mixed with tar or oil is 
perfect non-conductor, and has proved 
prefervative from lightning, by repelling
the electric matter from thole parts which
are coated with it.
LEAD, RED. See Red Lead.
LEAD, SUCAR OF. See Sugar of Lead.
LEAD, PRECIPITATE OF.. See White
Precipitate of Lead.
LEAD, WHITE. See White Lead.
LIGHT PINk. See English Pink.
MASTIC, or MASTICH.  tranfparent
refin from the lentife tree.

MAsTicoT or MASSICOT, is white
 calcined till it affume  yellowith co.


 :
lour.


MEGGELLUP.  term ufed by artifts
to exprets  compofition or mixture of
turpentine, maftic varnish, and linfeed oil,
with which they apply their plazings.
Others prepare it of one part of genuine
maftic varnith, and two parts of pale dry-
ing oil. When the two ingredients are
:quickly thaken together they will form 
clearjelly, which will be found extremely
serviceable in many parts of painting.

MINTUM. See Red Lead.


NATIVE CINNABAR. See Cinnabar.


NAPLES VELLOw. This: colour was
for  long time fuppofed to be  prepara-
tion of arfenic, but it is now well Known
t contain lead. Dr. Hill in his Hift; of
Foffils, .  is highly miftaken as to the
nature of this material. He fays that it is.
 bolar earth, impregnated with  ferrugi-
nous calx, very beautiful, of  bright and
elegant yellow between  gold and faffron
colour, and of  very loofe, porous, spongy
and thattery texture. It is found, as he
lays, in fome parts of Italy, fometimes on
the furface of the earth, at other times very
deep.— The truth is now, however, difco-
vered by Ml. Fougerous, who has demon-
ftrated that it is made by art. The perfon
who prepares it at Naples, fcrupuloully con-
ceals every circumftance that might lead to
 difcovery of its nature and preparation.
It contains, by chemical analyfis, an abfor-
bent earth,  vegetable acid united with
lead, an aluminous and ammoniacal. fall,
and  calx of antimony. ccordingly, on
mixing together intimately twelve ounces
Of


No OC
 white lead, one of alum, one of fal
ammoniac, and three of diaphoretic anti-
mony, in an unglazed earthen pan, co-
vered over, and expofing it to  moderate
heat for the space of eight hours, he ob-
tained  fubfiance of the fame colour and
the fame properties with Naples yellow, or
Giallolino, as it is there called. See Hilt.
Acad. Sciences,  WHITE. See White
Lead.
OCHRE. The name of  large genris
of earths, ufed principally by the painters.
The moft common kinds are the red and
yellow though there are brown, blue and
green. Of the yellow, Dr. Hill defcribes
eleven species; of the red, the same num-
ber; of the brown, two; of the blue and
green, one species each. Ochre is  fer-
ruginous


 earth, or ofe of iron: the specis
mens of fuch as are dark may be bright:
ened by calcination. They appear to be
produced by the decompolition of martial
pyrites, which confift of fulphur and iron.
By the action of air and water the fulphur
becomes acidified, and forms vitriol, and
the iron is depofited on calcareous earths
which feire the acid. Iron is frequently
extracted from this ore.
OfLs. The bils ufually auplied to the

purpofes of the painter are, linfeed, nut,
and poppy oils, and the oll (improperly
to termed) of turpentine. The paler and
more limpid thefe oilsare, the better, pro-
vided no heterogeneous matters are applied
to them to render them fo. Experience has
proved, that great age is required to ren=
der seed-oils valuable, as they then acquire
 drying quality, and lofe that turbid ap.
Dedrance




OK..OR
 which when new they invaria
bly poffels.
OKER. Sec Ochrc.
ORANCE. Sec Orange Lake; Red
Orpiment.

SRANGE LAKE. This may be pre-
pared by boiling four ounces of the beft
Spanith anotto, and one pound of pearl-
athes, for the space of half an hour, in one
gallon of water. Strain the tincture, and
mix it gradually with  folution of 
pound and  half of alum in fix quarts of
water, defifting when no ebullition enfues.
Treat the fediment as is ufual in preparing
common lake, and dry it in (quare bits,
of round lozenges.
ORPIMENT is  combination of the
calx of artenic with fulphur, and is of 
yellorw colour. By an expoture to  great
degree


 
 of heat, the above combination af-
fumes  red colour, which is then termed
red orpiment, or realgar. NI. Chaptal and
. Busquet compare this operation with
the convertion of mercurial xthiops into
cinnabar, or vermilion.

PALE. FE, among painters, is  little
ovaltable, or piece of wood, very thin and
(mooth; on and round which the requi-
fite colours are placed; that they may be
ready for the pencil. It has no handle,
but in lien thereof  hole at one end,
through which the thumb is thruft, to keep
if firm in the hand.
PATENT VELLOw. This colour, for
which the ingerious Mr. Turner has  pa-
tent, is prepared by trituratingred lead and
Common falt together in  mortar, and then
expofing them in  crucible (made of to-
bacco-pipe clay) to  certain heat. The
falt
  PR
 is decompoted; the marine acid unit=
ing with the cals of lead forms the patent
yellow. and the bafis of the fall, which
mult be carefully wathed out, is the mi-
neral alkall, of fo much confequence in
the foap, glats, and other manufactories,
PENCIL. An inftrumentuted by paint
ers for the application of their colours.
They are of Various Kinds, according
to their ufes the moft ufual are of
badgers and (quirrels hair, of fiwans
down, and boars brifiles. Thefe laft are
bound to sticks, and are more generally
termed brusbes the others are included
in the barrel of  quill.
PRUSSIAN BLUE.  combination of
iron with  fubliance of the nature of
an acid, diltinguished by the name of acid
of Pruffian blue. Various theories have
been propoted respecting this colour, by
Geoffioy,


PR
 Macquer, Sage, and others, all
depending on the received knowledge of
chemiftry of that period: but Scheele and
Berthollet have thrown much light on this
subject, and have converted the oldterm
of pblogifficated alkall imro Pruffian doid.
To make this article, on  small experi-
mental fcale, any animal matters, fuch as
blood, the raipings of horn, clippings of
Kins, Exc.  are converted into char-
coal, by heating them in  covered veffel,
together with an equal weight of alkali.
Lixiviate this coal in water; then ftrain it,
and evaporate to  degree of ftrong concen-
tration. This lixivium is then to be gra-
dually admixed to  folution of two ounces
of martial vitriol and four ounces of alum,
when  blueith depofit is formed, which is
rendered more intenfely blue by treat-
ment with marine acid. Manufacturers
proceed on  much larger fcale.
PRUSSIAN
E RE
 GREENN. This is  colour
feldom employed, and is made by fome
admisture during the operation of making
Pruffian bluc.
PYRPLE. See Colcothar of Vitriol;
Purple Lake; True Indian Red.
PURPLE LARE. See Lake.
REAEGAR. See Orpiment.
RED. See, Burnt Terra di Sienna; Cin
Nabar; Common Indian Red; Rofe Pink;
Red Lake; Red Lead; Scarlet Ochre;
Spanith Brown; Venetian Red. Ve
milion.
RED LEAD is  calx of lead of 
vivid orange-red colour, which colour it
acquires by  flow calcination in  rever-
 furnace. From Holland, for the
moft part, the red lead in commerce   is frequently termed Mi-
ium.
REDOCHRE. See Ochre.
RED ORPIMENT. See Orpiment.
ROSE PINK. This is  very beautiful
red colour, but is to perithable as to be
little effeemed. It is made of chalk, co-
loured with  decoction of Brazil wood,
heightened by an alkaline falt.
SACRUM.  vulgar and corrupted
mode of exprefting Saccharum Saturni, or
Sugar of Lead.
SANDARACH.  name Tometimes
given to  combination of artenic and
fulphur.
SANDARACH GUM. Improperly fo
called, becaufe it is  refin. It is pot-
feffed
E  of confiderable tranfparency, and
is therefore ufed in varnifh. It is ob-
tained from the juniper tree, in which it
occupies  place between the bark and
the wood.
SCARLET OCHRE. See Ochre.
SCHEELES GREEN, To one pound
of blue vitriol diffolved in  fufficient
quantity of water, add immediately one
pound of purified alkali, and five ounces
and  half of pulverized white arfenic,
diffolved previoully in eight pounds of
boiling water the precipitate, arifing
from the mixture of thefe two folutions,
is to be well wathed or elixated, and dried,
SMALT is the pulverized blue glats
of cobalt. By us it is generally termed
Powder-blue, and is ufed with ftarch, to
give  beauty to fine linens.
SPANTSH BROWN is an ochrous
fudd


SI
ruddy earth, which was formerly fupplied
from abroad, as its name imports, but is
now dug up in leveral parts of England.
SPIRIT OF TURPENTINE. This is an
effential oil, which has given rife to the
improper name of oil of turpentine, but
it is not of an oleaginous nature. By
diftillation in balnco Marix ( chemical
water-bath) the spirit rifes from the tur-
pentine, and leaves  refiduum of  yellow
colour, termed yellow refin, or rofin,
SPONGE-PENCIL. Among the an
clents, pencils of fponge were ufed, by
which the foaming of the fea, and other
reprefentations of  fimilar nature were
moft ingenioully effected. Fience, doubt-
lets, the ftory of the painter, who not be-
ing able to exprets the foam of  war=
horfe, fucceeded by dashing the (bonge at
I picture,
SUGAR


TE
 OF LEAD. Lead and its calces
may be diffolved by the acctous acid, and
will afford  cryftallizable falt, called sugar
of lead from its extreme fweetnels. This,
like all the preparations of lead, is 
deadly poston, It has the property of
rendering oils thicker, and cauling them
to dry more rapidly, Litharge, which is
 preparation of lead, is ufed with the
same intention in drying oil.
SWEETENER.  term ufed by some
artifts for  hair-pencil, or brufh, with
which the abrupt edges of colours are
fofiened and biended together, as in the
operation of glazing, ecc.
TERRA DI SIENNA. This   ferru-
inous earth, and capable of becomingred
by calcmation. It is  highly valuable
colour to the portrait-painter, for defcrib-
ing


+
TV
FE
 the warm reffected lights of the face,
Reck, Exc.
TERRA VERTE. This is  native
earth, of  green colour, which it pro-
bably receives from an admixture of cop=
per. When well levigated, for it is of 
gritty texture, it is very durable, though
Rot bright.
TURPENTINE. This is  refinous

infpiflated juice extracted from trees of
the fir Kind. Four forts are diftinguithed
by medical writers; but the moft common,
from which the fpirit of turpentine is
made, is obtained from the pinus fylvef-
tris of Linngls.
TURPETH MINERAL, Or TURBITH
MINERAL, is but little ufed in painting
though it feems richly deferving of notice.
Iis fine yellow colour is likely to poffets
durability, and is therefore preferable to
King'


EC
CL
King' or Naples pellow. It is prepared
by mixing crude mercury in  retort with
equai parts of vitriolic acid, and fubjecting
thefe to an intenfe heat, till the mercury
 reduced to  white mats. Let this be
afterwards elixated with water, and it
wrill affume  brimfione-yellow hue.
ULTRAMARINE. Is great price hm-
ders it from being much ufed, although it
is by far the beft and moft durable blue
colour known. Pruffian blue has of late
been much ufed in lien of uliramarine,
but it is  fad fubltitute, it being lets dur-
able, and leis brilliant in its primitive flate.
Iis preparation confifts in firft calcining
the lapis lazuli in  crucible, then grinding
it very fine on  porphyry. then mising
it up with  paffe made of wax, pich,
maftich, turpentine and oil; and lafily.

rathing ine patie well in clear water, to
Teparate


 the colouring part from the reft,
which precipitates to the bottom, in form
of  fubtile, beautiful, Olue powder. The
water is then poured off, and the powder
at bottom is dried in the fun; and is
the rue attramarine.—To know whether
it be pure and unmixed;—put  little of
it in  crucible, and on heating it red-hot,
if the powder has not changed its colour,
It is certainly genuine. on the contrary,
if any change be perceived, or any black
pots appear, it is erther (purious or adul-
terated.
ULTRAMARINE ASHES. This is the
name of  pigment which is the refiduum
of the lapis lazuli after the preparation of
ultramarine. Thefe athes cannot poffels
the beauty and value of the firft colour,
as the colouring particies are mixed with
thofe of another Kind, which are red.
Their


TM
 fophiffication may be detected af=
fer the manner in the precedingarticle.
UMBRE. This is  foffile fubstance,
of  brown colour, which takes its name
from Ombria, the ancient name of the
duchy of Spoleto in lraly, whence it was
firft obtained. Dr. Hill and Mr. Da Colta
confider it as an earth of the octire Kind,
several large maffes having been thrown
up in digging on Mlendip Hills in So=
merferthire, and in the county of Wexford
in Ireland. It is found in Eevot, Italy,
 and Ciermany, as alfo in Cyprus;
but it is brought into England principally
from different parts of the Turkith do-
minions. This fubltance, when burnt,
makes  good shade for gold. II need
only be put into the naked fire in large
lumps, which should not be taken our till
they be thoroughly red-hot.
VAENISH.


 
VA
  vifcid, oloffy liquor,

ifed by painters, gilders, and various
other workmen, to give  glofs and lufire
to their works, as allo to defend them
from various accidents, from weather,
 Exc.  more particular treatife on
varnish will be given by itfelf; it will be
needlels, therefore, to dilate further here.
VENETIAN RED. This differs in no-
thing from red ochre, or the colcothar of
vitriol well calcined. See Indian Red.
VERDIGRISE. Copper corroded, and
reduced to  very beautiful green colour,
or rult, by the vinous acid, is termed
verdigrife. Montpellier is the principal
place of its manufacture, it being the
Capital of Languedoc, where the vine  to  great extent. . Monet
gives the following method of preparing
yerdigrife.


 :— Vine-Htalks well dried in the
fun are fteeped during eight days in frong
wine, and again dried. After this they
are put into earthen pots; and wine is
poured upon them; the pots being clofely
covered. When the fermentation, which
in fummer takes place in eight days, and
in winter fomewhat later, has advanced, the
Htalks are to be taken out of the pots.
They are then to be drained for  while,
and alternaie layers of Htalks and plates of
Swedith copper are to be arranged in
earthen pots clofely covered. Afterthree
or four days the plates will be corroded;
when they are to be taken out, and left
in  cellar, and are occationally to be
wetted with water, or weak vinegar. This
operation of wetting and drying being
repeated three times, the rult may be
Icraped off for fale. Other methods are
practifed elfewhere, by ordinary vinegar:
 
 it has been obferved that, if the
acid be not vinous, the verdigrife will not
have that uncluofity to defirable, and even
neceffary, in painting. Great quantities
are now made at Grenoble, fince the
vulgar prejudice in favour of the cellars
of Montpellier has been done away.
VERDITER is  blue colour, prepared
 chalk, and copper precipitated from
aqua-fortis. It is ufed by painters in wa-
rer, and is principally confumed by the
Paper-ftainers.
VERMILTON. Under the article Cin
nabar it was flated that vermition was
 other than  factitious imitation of
that colour, the component parts confifting
of quickfilver and fulphur. . Beaume
 the following procets as  good one.
Make  perfect xthiops mineralis by tri-

turating


VHI
 two parts of fulphur with one of
quickfilver. Take of this xthiops any
quantity, and expofe it to the fire in 
Inatrals;  more intimate combination
will take place, and the mixture will fub-
time to the upper part of the veffel, in
form of  very deep reddifh-brown mais.
To make it more perfect, one or two

more fublimations are necefiary. In the
shops, this is termed factitious cinnabar
but by srinding it very fine, with  mix-
ture of clear urine, and  little faffron as
Tome fuppofe, the intenfenets of the co-
lour  fomewhat loft, and it alfumes the
name of vermition.
WHITE. Flake-white and white lead
are the two principal colours ufed in oils.
Though thefe are called the beft prepa-
lations of lead, yet fome others exift un-
der the names of ceruss and Notting-
ham


WVII
 white, which will be explained in
the following article.
WHITE EARTH. See Earth, White.
WHITE LEAD. The preparation of
this pigment has become  diftinct trade,
and is practited in many parts of this
Kingdom. The author of the Chemical
Dictionary, . Macquer, gives the fol-
lowing description of the procels: Leaden
plates rolled fpirally, fo that the space of
an inch shall be left between each circum
volution, muft be placed vertically in
earthen pots of  proper fize, containing
tome good vinegar. Thefe leaden rolls
ought to be fupported in the pots, that
they do not touch the vinegar, but that
the vapour of this acid may circulate free-
ly betwixt the circumvolutions. Thefe pots
are to be covered, and placed in  bed of
  or in  fand-bath, by which 
gentle heat may be applied. The acid of
vinegar, being thus reduced into vapours,
catily attaches itfelf to the furface of thefe
plates, penetrates them, and is impreg-
lated with this metal, which it reduces to
 beautiful white powder, called cernss.
When this powder is ground, and fitted
for painting, it is termed white lead.—
Flake-white and Nottingham-white are
alfo preparations of lead, and are nearly
the felf fame thing. Through the com-
munication of  philofophical gentleman
of veracity the writer of this is enabled
to hate—that the principal difference be-
tween the procets of making obite lead
and Nottingsam-white confitts in the ufe
of alegar inttead of vinegar From 
very fevere trial he made of both the
white colours, the preference is decidedly
in favour of Nottingham-white— he
painted


WII
 the back-board of  picture frame,
one half with common obite lead, the
other half with Nottingbam-white. The
picture in its frame was hung up as ufual,
and was not difturbed for feveral months;
at the end of which time the picture was
removed, and the fide painted with Notting-
ham-wbite wasnearly as whiteas ever, while
the other half was changed to  deep yel-
low.—If  conjecture may be offered on
the superior efficacy of alegar over vinegar
in the preparation of  white colour from
lead, it is—that alegar contains more of 
vinows acid than common vinegar. for,
independent of the greater quantity of
faccharine matter which enters into  it poffeffes the virtue and
spirit of the bop,  peculiarity unknown
to the common vinegar. That  vinous
acid is fuperior to any other is well
Known, as the verdigrife made at Mont-
pellier
E and Grenoble from vine-ftalks
acidiked in wine, is better, and fells at  price, than that which is made of
ordinary vinegar. See the article Verdi-

Srife.

THITEPRECIPITATEOF LEAD. Al
though the principal intention of this
& History of Pigments, ESC. is to give 
more general knowledge to the fiudent in
OIL-painting
 yet the more curious artiff
will indulge us in giving the following
defcription of  water-colour, which is
highly valuable to the painter in minid-
ture, and may be found capable of great
improvement.
If  fmall quantity of frong nitrous
said be poured upon litbarge (which fee),
the acid unites itfelf to the metal with
confiderable effervefcence and heat. Some
Water
 being now poured on, and the glats
veffel containing the misture thaken, 
turbid folution of the litharge is made.
If  small quantity of acid of vitriol be
now added, it throws down  beautiful
ebite precipitate; and the acid of ire
being left at liberty to act upon the re-
mainder of the litharge, begins anew to
diffolve it with effervefcence. When it is
again faturated, which will be Known by
the difcontinuance of the bubbles, more
acid of vitriol is to be dropped in, and 
white precipitate is again thrown down.
If any of the litharge remains undiffolved,
the nitrous acid being fet at liberty  fe-
cond time, attacks it as at firft; and by
continuing to add acid of vitriol, the
whole of the litharge may be converted
into  moft beautiful and durable white
Infortunately this colour cannot be ufed
in ofl, though in water it feems fuperior
t  any. . . If the process be well
managed, an ounce of nitrous acid may
be made to convert feveral pounds of
litharge into  white of this Kind,
Ir has been firongly recommended to
Paper-ftarners, and others who ufe water-
colours in large quantities, to prepare their
lakes, and the colours now prepared of
chalk, on the bafis of the above precipi-
tate of lead.—For inftance. if the colour
required be  very fine one, suppofe from
cochineal, the colouring matter is to be
firtt extracted by fpirst of wins, without
heat. When the spirit is fufficiently un-
pregnated, it is to be poured by little and
little upon the cals. the fpirst foon evapo-
fates, and leaves the calx coloured with
the cochineal. More of the tincture is
then to be poured on, rubbing the mix=
ture conftantly. and thus, by proper ma

Ragement,


WV II
 many beautiful colours, not in-
ferior to the beft carmine, may be pres
pared.—When only  fnall quantity of
colour, for the more exquitite touches of
the miniature painter, is required, we
would recommend the process to be con-
ducted on the bafis of robite precipitate,
or calx of tin, purfuing the same method
of rubbing in the colouring tincture as
when white precipitate of lead is uted.
If, inftead of cochineal, Brazil-wood, tur-
meric, logwood, Exc. be fubftituted, dif-
ferent kinds of red, yellow, and purple
may be produced.—Aqueous decoctions,.
in lien of fpiriruous extracts, may be ufed
for coarfer work; but the process is more
tedious, from the length of time required
to evaporate the water. Art may, how-
ever, be employed here to affift the eva-
poration, provided the heat be low and
gradual; and then the quantity of colour
prepared


VHI
 at one time might well anfiwer
the operator' trouble.
TELLOw. See Durch Pink; English
Pink; King' Tellow; Mafticot; Naples


Telow; Orpiment;  dient Fellow; Terra
di Sienna; Turpeth Nlineral; Yellow
Ochre.
YELLOW OCHRE. Ses Ochre.
  RULES
FOR
PAINTING IN OIL COLOURS.


THE following rules are derived from
the observations and practical experience
of the late ingenious Mr. Bardwell, fo
well known and admired, at  period pre-
vious to the formation of the Royal ca-

demy. Time has evinced the truth of
his method, and has eftablifhed certain
principles on which the ffudent may fafely
rely. Such great difcoveries, however,
have been made, fince his time, in the
preparation


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
preparation of fome colours, as to call
forth the powers of modern ingenuity to
apply them. Much is left to be done;
and from the prefent Hourthing ftate of
the Royal Academy, it is to be hoped

that the day will come when modern ge-
nins shall ecliple the productions of former
  comparifon with Mr. Bardwell'
work, it will be found that many altera-
tions and corrections have been made;
but thefe chieffy confift in the ftriking
cut many redundancies, and errors that
had crept into it.—the PRINCIPLES are
everywhere fcrupuloully adhered to.
 Viz. Brunfwick Green, Patent Fellow, Scheeles
SIeeH, Exc.
Lf


 IN OIL COLOURS.
Lift of the principal ColoUks used in
the Fieth, from which all the Tints are
made.
. WLAKEWHIITEE OrFINE WHITE,
is the very bett white we have. This
colour should be ground with the fineft
poppy oil that can be made. At prefent
our white is bad, only on account of the
oil, which is not really poppy. White is 
friendly working colour, and comes for-
ward with yellows and reds, but rerires
with blues and greens. It is the nature
of all whites to fink into whatever ground
they are laid on; therefore they should
be laid on wbite grounds.
 IVoRY BLACK is the beft black we
have. it is  colour which fympathizes
 See the article White Lead in the Materin Pic-
foria.
and
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
and mixes Kindly with all the other. It
is  true thade for blue. Ivory-black and
 little Indian red make the beft general
Shadow-colour that can be. It is ground
with linfeed oil, and uted with drying oil
and fugar of lead Black is  cold, retiring
colour.
 ULTRAMARINE is the fineft blue in
the world. It is  tender, reuring colour,
and never glares; and is  beautiful gla-
 colour. It is ufed with poppy oil.
 PRUSSIAN-BLUE is  very fineblue,
and  Kindly working colour. It is ground
with linfeed oil, though nut oil is more
proper. It should never be ufed in the
feth, but in the green tint and in the eyes.
. LICHT OCHRE is  friendly mixing
colour, and of great ufe in the ffeth. It
 IN OIL COLOURS.
 ufually ground with linfeed oil, but nut
oil is better. All yellows are ftrength-
ened with reds, and weakened with blues
and greens.

. LICHT RED (light ochre burnt)
and white, mixed, produce the moft per-
feet fleth colour that can be made. It
is  beautiful, clean, Kindly working co-
lour, but too frong for the white, and
therefore will grow darker. II should be
ground and ufed with nut oil.

  ERMILION made of the true na-
tive cinnabar only should ever be ufed.
It will not glaze; but is  fine colour
when glazed upon. It is ground with
linfeed oil, and should be ufed with drying
 CARMINE is the molt beautifulcrim-
Ion that can be. it is  middle colour be-
tween


So PRACTICAL RULES FOR
tween lake and vermilion; is  fine works
ing colour; and glazes delightfully. It
thould be ground with nut oil, and ufed
with drying oil.
 LAKE Is  tender, fympathizing,
deepred; but of no ftrong body; there-
fore it should be ftrengthened with Indian
red. It is the belt glazing colour that can
be ufed. It is ground with linfeed oil,
and ured with drying oil.
 INDIAN RED is  Rrong, pleafant-
working colour; but will not glaze well;
and, when mixed with white, falls  little.
It is ground and ufed as the lake.
II. BROwN FINK is  fine glazing co-
lour; but of no ttrong body. In the ffeth
 should never join, or mix with the
lights becaute this colour and white an-
tipathize


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS .
tipathize, and mix of  warm dirty hue;
for which reafon their joinings should be
blended with  cold, middle tint. In glar-
ing of fhadows, it should be laid before
the other colours that are to enrich it. It is
one of the finithing colours, and therefore
should never be ufed alone in the firft
Painting. It is firengthened with burnt
timbre, and weakened with terra verte;
ground with linfeed oil, and ufed with
drying oil.
 BURNT UMERE is  fine warm
 and  good-working, frong co¬
lour. It is of great ufe in the hair, and
mixes finely with the warm shade.
 PEACTHCAL RULESFOR
Lift of the principal TrwTs that are ab-
solutely necesfary for painting Fleth, all
wbich are made from the principal Co-
lours juft enumerated.
No. . LICHT RED TINT is made of
light red and white. It is the moft Kind
and beft conditioned of all colours, for
the general ground of the ffeth. With this
colour and the thade tint (No.  we
should make out all the fieth, like claro
obicuro, or mezzotinto. We should alfo.
remember, that this colour will grow dark-
er; becaufe it is in its nature too firong
for the white therefore we should im-
prove it; that is, mix some vermition and
white with it, in proportion to the fair-
ness of the complexion. And though it
is thus mixed, yet it will be called light.
red tint in all the courfe of the work;
becaufe
 INOIL COLOURS. ,
becaufe it should not have the vermition
tint confounded with it, as if there was no
difference.
No.  VERMILION TINT is only ver-
milion and white, mixed to  middle tent.
It is the moft brilliant lightred that can
be: it agrees beft with the white, light-red,
and yellow tints.
No.  CARMINE TINT is carmine and
white only, mixed to  middle tint. It is,
of all colours, the moft beautifulred that
can be for the checks and lips. it is one
of the finithing colours, and should never
be uted in the firft painting, but laid upon
the finithing colours, without mixing.
No.  ROsE TINT is made of the red
Shade (No. ro.) and white mixed to 
middle degree, or lighter. It is one of the
  PRACTICAL RULESFOR
clear  and moft delicate tints that can be
uted in the ffeth, for clearing up the heavy
dirty colours; and therefore, in changing,
will fympathize and mix Kindly.
No. . TELLOw TINT is ofien made of
Naples yellow and white; but it is made
alfo of light ochre and white, which is 
goodworkingcolour. Remember the ochre
is t Hrong for the white; therefore we
should make  little allowance in uling it.
It follows the light-red tints, and should
always be laid before the blues. If welay
too much of it, we may recover the ground
it was laid on with the light red-tints.

No.  BLUE TINr is made of ultra-
marine and white, mixed to  lightith
arure. It is  pleafant working colour:
with it we should blend the gradations.
It follows the yellows; and with them: it
makes


PAINTINGINOHL COLOURS.  the greens; and with the redit pro-
duces the purples. No colour is toproper
forblending down, or foftening the lights
into keeping.
No.  LEAD TINT is made of ivory
black and fine white, mixed to  middle
degree. It is  fine retiring colour; and
therefore is of great ufe in the gradations,
and in the eyes.
No. . GREEN TINT is made of Pruf
lian blue, light ochre, and white. This
colour will dirty the lights, and should be
laid paringly in the middle tints. It is
moft ufed in the red fhadows, where
they are too flrong. It is of  dirty anti-
pathizing nature.
 No.  SHADETINT is made of lake,
Indianred, black,, and white, mixed to 
 PRACTHCALRULES FOR
beautiful murrey colour, of  middle tint.
This is the beft colour for the general
ground of hadows; for which reafon it is
here called the shade tint: it mixes with
the lighis delightfully, and produces 
pleafant clean colour,  little inclined to the
reddith pearl.  all the four colours of its
compofition are of  friendly fympathizing
nnature, fo confequently this will be the
same; and therefore may be eafily changed,
by the addition of any other colours.
No. I RED-SHADE is nothing but
lake and  very little Indian red. It is 
charming working colour, and  good
glazer it Hrengthens the thadows on the
Ihade rint; and receives, when it is wet,
the green and blue tints agreeably. It is 
good ground for all dark fhadows.
No. II.


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS.  Ir. WAkM-SHADE is made. of
lake and brown pink, mixed to  middle
degree. It is  fine colour for Htrength-
ening the fhadows on the fhade tint,
when they are wet or dry. We muft take
care that it does not touch the lights, be-
caufe they will mix of  dirty fnuff-colour.
 therefore should be foftened with 
tender cold tint..
No.  DARK-SHADE is made of ivo-
ry black and  little Indian red only. This
colour mixes very Kindly with the red-
shade, and fympathizes agreeably with the
middle tints in the dead colouring. It is 
charming glazing colour for the eyc-brows
and darkeft fhadows. It is, of all, the
moft excellent fhadow-colour, and one of
the fineft working colours we have.

FIRST.
  RULESIFOK
  

 PAINTING.

The Colours and Tints that are necesfary
for the First Painting of the Flesh are.
FIE Whice.
Light Ochre.,... and its two Tints.
Light Red..... and its two Tints.
Vermilion..... and its Tint.
 Tintmade of Lake, Vermilion, and Whits.
-
Rofe Tint.

Blue Tint.
Lead Tint.

Green Tint.

Half-fhade Tint—made of Indian Red,
and White.
Shade Tint.
Red Shade.

Warm Shade.

THE finithing palette for  fine Coim-
plexion


PAINTINGINOH COLOURS So
plexion requires fix more; viz. Carmine
and its Tint, Lake,, Brown Pink,; lyory
Black, and Prulfian Bluc.



 firft painting, or dead-colouring;
Is divided into two parts the firft may be
called the first lay, or ground; the second,
the laying on the virgin tints.
THE firft lay of colours confifts of two
parts: the one is the work of the shadows
only, and the other that of the lights,

THE work of the fhadows is to make
out all the drawing, very correctly, with
the Thade-tint, in the fame manner as if
it was to be done with this colour only
and remember to drive or lay the colour
Sparingly. The lights should be all laid
in with the light-red tint, in different de.
grees, as we fee them in: nature thefe
two



 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
two colours united produce  clean, tender,
middle tint; for, mixing with the Thade-
int, they turn to  pearly hue; and by
Rrengthening them with the lightred, we
may work to  very good retemplance.
In uniting the lights and shades, we
should ufe  long foftener& about the
fize of  large fvan' quill; which will
help to bring the work into character,
and leave the colouring more delicate,
then go over the darkeft fhadows with the
red or warm shade, which will finith the
firli lay.
THE warm shadebeing laid on the shade-
int, improves it to  warmer hue; but if
laid inftead of the fhade-tint, it will dirty
and fpoil the colours it mixes with, and
if the red hade be laid firft, inftead of the
thade-tint, the shadows would then appear

Seethe article SwEETENER in the Mlateria Pictoria,
 IN OIL COLOURS.  red and bloody. Therefore, notwiths
slanding thefe two colours are the beft that
can be for the fhadows, yet they are too
Irong to be laid alone; which is  proof
of the great ufe and merit of the fhade-
tint. Here we may obferve, that the
shade and light-red tints are fo friendly
and delicate in their natures, that they
will not dirty, though we are continually
changing them. How proper then, and
agreeable to our purpofe, are they, for
making the moft principal part of the like-
nets, when in altering and changing they
always produce  clean colour of the in¬
yiting pearly hue!


THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST
PAINTINC.
IN order to finith the firft painting, im=
prove




 TRACTICAERULES FOR
prove the reds and yellows to the com=
plexion, and after them the blues; obferv-
ing, that the blues on the reds make the
purple, and on the yellows produce the
green. The same method is to be under-
food of the shadows; but be fure to leave
them clean, and not too dark therefore
allowance should be made in their grounds
with the lightred; becaute glazing them
will make them darker. When the cloth
is of  dark or bad colour, there muft be 
frong body of colour laid all over the
Thadows, fuch as will not fink into the
ground, but appear warm, and  litle
lighter than the life, to that if may be of
the same forwardnels to finith, as if it had
been  light ground. Therefore the bufi-
nets of dead-colouring is, that we leave it
always in the fame order for finithing
though the colour of the cloth be quite


the reverfe,

I IN.OIL COLOURS.
 is proved by experience, that the
grounds of shadows, in what, we call, the
dead-colouring, should be fuch as will
Tupport the character of the finishing co-
lours; which ground muft be clean, and
 little lighter than the finishing colours;
 litile lighter, becaute the sinishing. of
Shadows is glazing; and no other method
but glazing can leave fuch brilliancy and
beauty as they ought to have. For, glat-
 the fhadows in the first painting is not
To proper as laying  body of fhadow co-
lours, that are very near to the life, though
 little lighter. Thefe may be glazed and
:touched upon, when dry, with  great
deal of cafe. but if we begin the firtt
painting with glazing, we shall find it will
Rare, and be of no ufe; and the folid co-
lours, which are laid on it, will look heavy
and dull. Therefore all Thadows and co-
lours, that are to be glazed, should be
done


 PRACTICAL RULESFOR
done with colours of  clean folid body 
becaufe the glazing is more lafting, and
has the beft effect, on fuch colours. Re-
member to leave no roughnets;  mean
tuch as will appear rough, and interrupt
or hurt the character of the finithing co.
lours which, by examining the work
whilfi it is wet, with  foft tool, or, when
it is dry, with  knife, may be avoided,
as it will eafily take off the Knots and
roughelt parts.
THE lightred and white improved  to all other colours for the firft
lay or ground. which should be always
done with  full pencil of fliff colour,
made brighter than the life, becaufe it will
fink  little in drying. The greater the
body and quantity of colour, and the stiffer
it is laid, the less it will fink. Every colour
in drying will fink, and partake, in pro=
POTtiOR


PAINTINGINOIL:COLOURS. Oj
portion to its body, of the colour it is laid
on. therefore all the lights of the ffeth, if
not laid on . light ground, mult confe-
quently change  little from the life, if
there is no allowance made. The fhade-
tint for the fhadows should fall into the
rofe tint, as the complesion grows de
licare; all which should be lightly united,
with  fofc long-pointed tool, to the lights,
making out the whole like mezzotinto.
 BELIEVE the great malters veryfeldom
tweetened or foftened the colours. but
in uniting the firft lay, they were very
careful in preferving the brightness of
their colours, and therefore did not work
them below the complexion. For, to force
or keep up  brilliancy in the grounds
can only be done with the whites, reds,
and xellows; which method will make
up for the deficiency of the white grounds:
therefore



 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
therefore, the firft painting should be left
bright and bold, and the less the colours
are broken the better. We should fors
bear ufing any colours that will prejudice
them, and be contented to add what is

tvanted the next painting; where if we
fail,  clean rag will reffore the firft ground.
SECOND




 COLOURS.
st


SECOND PAINTING.

THE Second Painting begins with lay-
ing on the leaft quantity that can be, of
oppy oil; then wipe it almoft all off, with
 dry piece of  filk handkerchief.
THE second painting is alfo divided
into two parts one is called the firft lay
of the second painting; which is fcumb-
ling the lights and glazing the fhadows.
the other, finithing the complexion with
the virgin tints, and improving the like-
nels, as far as can be, without daubing.
ScUMELING is going over the lights,
where they are to be changed, with the
lightred tints, or some other of their own
colours, fuch as will always clear and im-
Drove the complexion, with fhort fliff

II
pencils;


 PRACIICAL RULES FOR
pencils; but fuch parts only as require it;
otherwife the beauty of the firft painting
will be spoiled, and we make double work.
THE light-red rint improved, is the
very beft colour that can be for fcumbling
 improving the complexion in gene-
ral. Where the shadows and drawing are
to be corrected, we should do it with the
Shade-tint, by driving the colour very fiff
and bare, that we may the eafier retouch
and change it with the finithing tints.
Some parts of the fhadows should be
glazed with some of the tranfparent tha-
dow-colours, fuch as will improve, and
come very near to the life; but be fure
not to lay on too much of it, for fear of
loting the hue of the firft painting, the
ground of which should always appear
through the glazing. Be very careful, in
uniting the lights and shades, that they do
 COLOURS.  mix dead and mealy. for the more
the lights mix with the fhades, the more
mealy thofe shades will appear. Thus
far the complexion is prepared and im-
proved, in order to receive the virgin
ants and finithing touches.


THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND
PAINTING,
Is to go over the complexion with the
virgin tints. thefe are the colours which
improve the colouring to the greateft per-
fection, both in the lights and (hadows.
This should be done in the same manner
as we laid them in the second part of the
firtt painting; that is, with the reds, yel-
lows, and blues; blending them with deli-
cate light touches of the tender middle
tints, without foftening. We should leave
the
  PRACTICAL RULES FOR
the tints and their grounds clean and dif=
tinct, and be content to leave off whilft
the work is fafe and unfullied, leaving what
is farther required for the next fitting
 in attempting the finithing touches
before the other is dry, we lofe the spirit
and drawing, and dirty wherever we
touch.


THE


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS. jor
THE THIRD PAINTINC, OR
PINISHING.
IT is to be suppoted the complesion now
wants very little more than  few light
touches; therefore there will be no oc-
cation for oiling.
BEGIN with correcting all the glazing;
firft, where the glazing ferves as  ground
or under part, we should determine what
should be done next, that we may be able
to make the alteration on the part with
one ftroke of the pencil. By this method,
we preferve both the glazing and the tints;
but if it happens that we cannot lay fuch
variety of tints and finithing colours as
we intended, it is much better to leave
off
II PRACTICAL RULES FOR
off while the work is fafe and in good
order becaute thofe few touches, which
would endanger the beauty of the co-
louring, may eafily be done, if we
have patience to ftay till the colours
are dry; and then, without oiling, add

thofe finithings, with free light flrokes or
the pencil.
 BELTEVE that Rembrandt touched
upon his beft pictures  great many times,
letting them dry between: it was this
method, moft certainly, which gave them
that furpriting force and fpirst, which is
to inimitable.  find it much eafier to
foften the over-frong tints when they
are dry, than when they are wet becaufe
we may add the very colours that are
wanting, without endangering the dry
work. If any of the colours of the
palette want to be  little changed to the
life,


PAINTING INOHL COLOURS. roy
life, when we are painting, it is much
better to do it with the Knife on the
palette, than with the pencil; becaufe
the knife will mix, and leave it in good
order for the pencil.
HI PRACTICAL RULES FOR

OF BACK-GROUNDS.
VAN DYCK made out the keeping in
his back-grounds more from the different
oppofition and harmony of the colours,
than from his knowledge of the claro
obfcuro. There is not in his pictures
that intelligence of light and shade, which
 to Hriking and beautiful in Rembrandts.
Van Dyck' general method was to be
very Hill and mellow and to break the
colours of the ground with thofe of the
drapery. This will certainly produce
harmony, the principles of which method
belong only to the art of colouring: but
it is the knowledge of light and shade
which gives that furpriting force and
ftrength, which, at firft fight, we find in
Rembrandts works. There is  picture of
 lady,


PAINTING IN OIL COLOURS. TOg
 lady, where he has made the ground
juft light enough to thew her complexion
and hair, which is  dark brown, in the
greatelt perfection. the ground is  wall,
which, near to the face, is lighter than
the shadows of the fleth, and the light
diminithes fo artfully in the gradations,
that though the part round the head is
much darker, yet it appears to be of the
same colour with that near the fieth.
This method of relieving the head from
the ground is better than Van Dyck'
method, where he has made the ground
almoft of the fame colour with the hair;
and though his way of breaking the
colours of the ground with thofe of the
draperies is admirable, yet there appears
t near  famenels, as in tome of his pic-
tures; where he has carried this principle
to near that it is almoft imperceptible.
In Rembrandt' pictures at Farmouth, the
lights


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
lights and shades are as vifible as thofe in
his prints, and are remarkably broad,
clear, and Hill; the fhadows are very
warm and thin, and look as if they were
painted all at once, with  plenty of co-
lour, which appears tranfparent: which
trauparency was done by glazing the
dead colouring.
THE principal colours that are necet
fary for painting of back-grounds in per-
traiture, as walls, buildings, or the like,
are white, black, Indian red, light and
brown ochre, Pruffian-blue, and burnt
umbre, from which the eight principal
tints are made, as follows:
 Pearl is made of black, white, and
 little Indian red.
 Lead, of black and white, mist to
 dark lead-colour.
 Fellow,


 INOIL COLOURS.  Fellow, of brown ochre and white.
 Olive, of light ochre, Pruffian-blue,
and white.
 Flesss, of Indian red and white,
mixt to  middle tint.
 Murrey, of Indian red, white, and
 litile black, mixt to  kind of purple.
  middle tint.
 Stone, of white, umbre, black, and
Indian red.
 Dark-sbade, of black and Indian
red only.
HERE the lead int ferves for the blues;
the feth unt mixes agreeably with the
lead; and the Murrey is  very good
blending colour, and of great tife where
the olive is too frong.. The umbre,
white, and dark-fhade; will produce  fine
variety of ftone colours: the dark: thade
and umbre, ufed plentifully with atrying
oil,


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
oil, make  charming warm thadow-colour.
All the colours should be laid with drying
oil only, becaute they mix and fet the
better with the foftener.
WHERE the marks of the trowel are fo
frong in the priming of the cloth, that
one body of colours will not be fuffi-
cient to conceal it, we should lay  colour
to prevent it; which should be dry, be-
fore we begin with thofe parts that we
expect to finith at one painting.
THE method of painting back-grounds
is divided into two parts.
THE firft part is the work of the
firft lay: the second is to follow on that,
with the finithing tints.
OF


PAINTING IN OH, COLOURS.  THE FIRST LAr.
WE should always begin from the
Shadowed fide of the head, and paint the
lights firft; from them go into the gra-
dations and Thadows, which should be
done with  large fiffith tool, very par-
ingly, with the dark-fhade and white, 
little changed with the colours that will
give it more of the required hue, but
very near in regard to tone and ftrength;
leaving them like mezzotinto.
THE dark and warm fhadows should
be laid before the colours that join them:
this we should do with the dark-fhade
and umbre, drove with drying oil, before
the colours that join them, becaufe, if
thofe colours were laid on firft, they
would interrupt and fpoil the tranipa-
Tency,


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
rency, which is their greateft beauty. The
more the firft lay is drove, the eafier and
better we may change it with the finithing
tints therefore we may lay them with
the greater body.
THE second part is to follow directly.
 the firft lay is wet, with thofe
tints that we think are moft proper to
harmonife and finith with.
BEGIN with the lights firft; and re-
member, as we heighten and finith them,
we do it with warmer colours; and let
thofe be accompanied with fine tender cold
tints: The lighteft part of the ground is
always neareft to the fhadowed fide of
the head : this is the part which governs
all the reft; and should be painted with
 variety of light, warm, clear colours,
which vanith, and lofe their firength im-
perceptibly


PAINTING IN OHL COLOURS. IIr
perceptibly in the gradations. Thefe
should be laid with  kind of cloudy
touch, rather than spotted; and we muft
take care that we do not cover too much
of the firtt lay, but confider it as the
principal colour.
FRoM the lights we go to the grada-
tions and fhadows; for when the lights
are well adapted to produce and fupport
the head, it is ealy to fall from them into
whatever kind of fhadows we shall find
moft proper for our work: then foften
and blend the whole with  long large
tool; which, with the firength and body
of the drying oil, will mell and (weeten
all together, in fuch  flattering manner,
as will feem furprifingly finithed. Re-
member the tints will fink, and lofe 
little of their firength and beauty in dry-
ing. All the grounds, as walls, Ec.
should


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
should be finished at one painting; but
if they want to be changed, we may glaze
them with  little of the dark-fhade and
drying oil, drove very bare; on which,
with  few light touches of the colour
that is wanting, we may improve their
hue. The dark fhadows may alfo be
Rrengthened and improved by glazing,
which should be done after the figures
are near finithed, for fear of making them
 Rrong.
REMERANDTs grounds are rather
brighter in the lights, and have more variety
of tints than any other painter': and to be
fure he had obferved, and juftly too,
that thofe tints diminish in proportion
with the lights. therefore his shadows
have but  faint appearance of tints. He
underffood the gradations in perfection,
by mixing and breaking the firft lay of
colours,


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS. Iiz
colours, to artfully, that they flatter us in
regard to their real flrength.
FRESNOY Lays, & Let the field or ground
co of the pieture be pleasant, free, transient,
&light, and well united with colours which
 are of  friendly nature to each otber, and
 of such  mixture as that there may be
 in it of every colour that com-
poses your work—as it were the contents
 of your palette.
DE PILES Lays, Variety of tints, very
& near of the same tone, empioyed in the
same figure, and often upon the same part,
 moderation, contribute much to bar-
Mony.
ALL the curtains should be dead-co-
loured when we paint the ground; and
should be done with clean colours, of 
ReAT


 PRACIICAL RULES FOR
near hue to the intended curtain; fuch as
will fupport the finithing colours. Do it
with  tender fort of keeping, and near
in regard to their tone in the lights, but
much fofter in the hadows. All which
should be mixed and broken with the
colours of the ground; and, as Fresnoy
Lays,  Bodies that are back in the ground,
& should be painted wish colours allied to
those of the ground nself." It will often
happen, for want of the life, or fome de-
fign, that we cannot make the folds in
the firtt painting; we should then leave
the maffes of light and fhadow, in regard
to the keeping of the picture, broad and
well united together, fuch as may feem
eaty to Linith on. The colours of the
landicape, in back-grounds, should be
broke and foftened allo with thofe of the
parts which jon them. This method
brings them into keeping, which will
make


FAINTING INOIL COLOURS. Ir.
make all the parts of the ground as it
were of one piece, fo that the different

parts do not fare, nor cut at their exire
mities.
THE Ly should be broke with the lead
and the fleth tints. the murrey tint is of
great ufe in the grounds of diftant ob-
jects; and the umbre and dark-fhade in
the near grounds. the greens should be
more beautiful than we intend them, be-
caufe they will fade and grow darker.
After all is painted, we should go over the
whole very lightly with the foftener, as
we did the grounds, which will make
it look agreeably finithed.
OR
 PRACIICAL RULES FOR
ON COPYING.
LHE artiffs in all ages have copied and
Rudied each other, in whatever they
found moft for their purpofe, and for the
advancement of their art; was it not for
this, the art itfelf would foon dwindle
and decay.
RUBENs fudied principally the works
of Titian, Paul Veronefe, and Tintoret
 is, he copied fuch of their pictures as
he thought moft worthy his imitation,
and kept them for his own ufc.
VAN Drck copied Titian, and all the

enetian fchool; or, in De Piless phrafe,
skimmed their cream." Temers is cele-
brated for transforming himfelf into as
many


 INOHL COLOURS. II,
many mafters as he copied which he
did fo exactly, that it is hard to diftinguith
the copies from the originals. Hanne-
mans copies of Van Dyck are taken for
the originals of that great mafter.  have
feen copies by Stone, fold at great prices
for undoubted originals, notwithflanding
they were divefted of that free penciling,
and charming variety of tints, which are
to apparent in Van Dyck. Buckfhorn
was one of the laft good copiers we have
had in England the reft that followed
him and his mafter Lely, foon dwindled
to half artilts. There is  copy of Bucks-
horn' painting after Van Dyck, which is
much better than any of Stone , viz. the
picture of the Earl of Strafford and his Se-
 in the Marquis of Rockingham 
 Probably at this time in the poffettion of Earl
Fitzwilliam.

collection,
 PRACTICAL RULESFOR
collection, which is well painted, and des
servedly efteemed.
EvERy one that has heard of Andrea
del Sarto' copy of Leo the tenth, painted
by Raphael and Julio Romano, will be
convinced of the great ufe and merit of

Copying

Ir is furprifing that fince the age of
theie great mafters, we have fcarcely had
 man able to make  fine copy from any
one of their pictures, and if fuch  genins
should hereafter arife, it is to be feared
the deftroyers of the art, if they are fuf
fered to go on, will scour of the remains
of their beauties, fo that very little will
be left for him to ftudy. and by the end
of this century, there will be none fit for
copying.
 IN OIL COLOURS. rig
Ir is in vain for  man to think of
making  fine imitation of any of the
great mafters, without being thoroughly
acquainted with the nature of colours and
of colouring; and without being clearly
convinced, at fight of the picture he is
going to copy, of the method and prin-
ciples on which it was painted. It is the
want of this Knowledge and conviction
which leads us into to many errors and
miltakes.
AA PAINTER, that has acquired any fort
 manner., will always tincture his
copying with the fame. Now--days we
are too apt to fall into  manner, before
we underfland the nature of colours,
which is the cafe, where fome predomi-
Nant colour or hue appears in all the com-
 What is generally termed syle.
-
plexions
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
plexions alike. For this reafon  painter,
whofe carnations are toored, will certainly
make his copies bluth: or if his colouring
and fhadows be heavy, they will of courfe
fall into the obfcuro. By the same rule,
whatever tints infect his colouring, the
same will unavoidably taint his copying;
for which there is no cure, becaufe he
himfelf is infected.
MiONS. DE PILES Lays,  II is very

are to change  bad manner in colouring for
 better. that Raphael, Michael Angelo,
 da Vinci, Julio Romans, and
 great masters, spent their whole lives
Without iruly understanding good colouring.
And though colouring is the principal
excellence in copying, yet it is necclfary
that every artilt should avoid  particular
manner with his pencil, otherwife it will

certainly be feen in his work.
FROM


PAINTING INOHL COLOURS.  what has been faid on this fub=
ject,  apprehend, it appears, that the art
of copying, which was practifed by the
great mafters, in order to catch each
other' excellencies and perfections, and
by which their noble works have been
to often repeated, and as it were renewed,
is to far from deferving contempt, that ir
ought to be encouraged, as  thing highly
yfeful, and worthy of effeem.


OF


 PRACTICAL, RULES FOR
OF PAINTIG DRAPERIES.
IN order to underfiand the nature, and
different degrees, of colours or tints ufed
in painting draperies,  firft determine
how many divifions are abfolutely ne-
celfary to make the firft lay of colours,
and, after that, the refiects and finishing
tints.
 rigut method of painting drape=
fies or fatins in general, is to make out
the whole, or the firft lay, with three cos
Jours only. viz. the lights, middle tint,
and thade tint,
FoR the lights, that  the colour of
all the high lights—The middle tent
should be very near to the general hue
Of


PAINTING IN OIL COLOURS.  the fatin, Exc. and of an exact middle
degree between the high lights and the
thade-tint. The Thade-rint should be
dark enough for the general hue of all
the thadows, for which reafon it is called
the thade-tint.
WE should obferve, that the lights
should rather incline to  warmith hue,
and the middle tint should be made of
friendly working colours, fuch as will
always mix of  clean, tender, coldifh
hue. The shade-tint should be made of
the same colours as the middle tint, only
with lets light; therefore this tint will
alfo mix of  tender clean colour. It is
with thefe three colours we should make
out the whole, like mezzotinto and we
should underttand, that all the beauty
and character of the folds, the shape, atti-
fude, and principal lights and thades, are
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
all to be confidered and made with thefe
three colours only; which should be done
to our fatisfaction before we add any of
the reffects or finishing tints.
THE reffects of drapery and fatins are
generally productions of their own, and
are always lighter than the fhadows on
which they are found; and being pro-
duced by light, will confequently have 
light, warm colour, mixed with the local
colour that receives them. Here it will
be neceffary to obferve the general me=
thod and secret in managing the colours
of the firlt lay, and thofe of the reffects
and finithing tints.
IN the firft lay, the high. lights should
be laid with plenty of fliff colour, and
then fhaped and foftened into character
with the middle tint, very correctly.
Where


PAINTINNG IN OIL COLOURS.  the gradations of the lights are
flow, as in the large parts, it will be pro-
per to lay the middle tint firft at their
extremities, with  tool that will drive the
colour, and leave it paringly; becaufe the
lights will mix and he the better upon it:
ext, make out all the parts of the fhadows
with the fhade-tint drove bare. after this
comes the middle tint, which fills up, and
ferves as the fecond lights and gradations,
and should be managed together very
nicely, to character, without touching any
of the high lights which finith the firft
la reffects and finithing tints are in
general the antipathies of the firft lay:
they will, without great care, porfon and
dirty the colours on which they are laid;
and therefore should be laid with  deli
cate light touch, without foftening. If it
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
is over-done, we muft remember to res
cover it with the colour of the part on
which it was laid: this may be done
directly, or when it is dry. We should
alfo obferve, whether the reflects proceed
 the same colour or any other, that

cie method of uting them is the fame.
BEFORE  proceed to the particular
coours, It will be proper to make fome
obfervations on their grounds:
I often happens, that the colour of
the cloth is very improper for the ground
of the drapery. and when it is  we
should change it with thofe colours which
tre think are moft proper to improve and
tupport the finithing colours. This me-
thod of dead -colouring muft confequently
preferve them in their greateft luftres
In dead-colouring, we should lay the
lights


PAINTING IN OHL COLOURS. r and fhades in  manner, to as only
to thew  faint idea of them, with regard
to the shape and roundings of the figure.
If we have  design to work from, then
it will be proper to make all the large and
principal parts in their places, which
should alvrays be done with  colour that
is clean, and lighter than the intended
drapery, though in general of the fame
hue: and let the fhadows be no darker
than  middle tint: thefe should be mixed
and broke in  tender manner, and then
foftened with  large tool, to that nothing
rough or uneven be left to interrupt or
hurt the charalter of the finithing colours,

WHITE SATIN.
ALL. whites should be painted on
white grounds, laid with  good body of
colour,


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
colour, by reafon this colour finks more
into the ground than any other.
THERE are four degrees of colours in
the firft lay to white fatin. the firft is
the fine white for the lights, the second
 the firtt tint, which is made of fine
white and  very little ivory black, mixed
to an exact middle degree between the
white and middle tint. This colour
follows the white; and it is with this
we should fhape the lights into character,
before we lay on any other: and take care
that this firtt tint appear diffindly be-
tween the white and the middle tint,
otherwife the beauty and character of the
Latin will be spoiled.
THE middle tint should be made of
white, black, and  little Indian red: thefe
three colours are very friendly, and mix
 IN OIL COLOURS.   beautiful clear colour of  pearly hue,
which has the true brightness and warmth
of the general hue of the fatin. Re-
member to allow for the red hue chang:
ing  little to lead. If there is occafion to
make any part in the middle tint lighter,
we should do it with the firtt unt only.
This colour should alfo be laid (paringly
before the white, in all the little lights
that happen in the middle tints and tha-
dows; on which we should lay the
white with one light touch; and be fure
not to cover all the part that was made
with the firlt tint if we do, it will fpoil
the character, and look like  spot, for
want of the foftening edge or border,
which mult be between the white and the
middle fint. The thade-tat should be
made of the same colour as the middle
int; but with less white, to that it be
dark enough for the thadows in general;
with



 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
with which we should make out all the
parts of the hadows nicely to character:
this is the work of the firft lay.
NENT come the reffects and finithing
tints.
BROwN ochre, mixed with the colour
of the lights, is the moft ufeful colour in
general for all reffects in draperies that are
produced from their own colours. All
accidental reffexes are made with the co-
lour of the parts from which they are pro-
duced, and the local colours that receive
them. There are but two reflecting tints
franted for draperies in general;  . to
any one particular colour: one should be
lighter than the middle tint, the other
darker. Thefe colours may be  little
changed on the palette with the firft and
middletints, as occafion requires, or lightly
broken


PAINTING IN OHL COLOURS.  on the part that receives them: but
this laft method is not to fafe as the other.
The rint fufficient for blending the dark
Shadows to the mellow tender hue, is made
with the fhade-tint and  little brown
ochre; which should be laid on very par-
ingly, with foft light touches, for fear of
making them dull and heavy. If it should
be over-done, we may recover it with the
colour it was laid upon.
WE often fee  little bhie ufed in the
firft unt of white fatin. Van Haecken,
who was the beft drapery-painter we ever
had in England, did fo; and fometimes;
inftead of the blue, he ufed bhie-black, till
he found it to be  pernicious colour, and
was therefore obliged to ufe blue; be-
caufe his middle tint, which was made only
of black and whice, was fo very cold, that
no other colour but blye would make 
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
colder tint: yet he managed thefe cold
colours, in all the lights and middle tints;
to agreeably, and fo light and eafy was his
touch, that we cannot help admiring, and
may learn fomething from him. Though,
he was not to lucky in his fhadows, which
were generally of  heavy dirty hue. this
was owing to the colours he ufed, and the
method of uling them; which will always
have fuch an effect, when  warm or dirty
colour is mixed with  clean light one; for,
being mixed together, they will form 
dirty colour, that muft confequently appear
to in the work. Bur if his lead or thade-
fint had been mised with Indian red in-
stead of the cchre, and then followed with
 few light blending touches of the ochre-
tint, it would have left them clean and
mellow. It is the want of the red hue
which makes the white fatins appear fo
often like pewter.
BLUE


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS.
 SATIN.
BL VE fatn is made of Pruffian-blue and
fine white,
THE beft ground for blue is, white for
the lights, and black and white for the
Shadows.
THE firft lay of colours for blue is di=
 into three degrees or tints.
We should firft make the middle tint of
 beaunful azure, then mis the colour for
the lights about  middle degree between
that and where. Make the fhade-fint
dark enough for the fhadows in general.
All the broad lights should be laid with 
plenty of colour, and shaped to character
with the middle tint, before we lay on
any
  PRACTICAL RULES FOR

any other colours. Remember, the lets
the colours are mixed, the better they
will appear, and fland; for the lights of
blue should be managed with as much
care as thote of white fatin. Next is, to
follow with the reft of the middle tint,
and then make out all the fhadows. The
more we drive the fhade-tint, the better
it will receive the reffects and finithing
fints. The fhadows should be ftrength-
ened and blended with ivory-black and
tome of their own colour, which will
mix with them into  tender, mellow
hue.
THE reflects are made as thofe of white
fatin; that  with ochre and fome of the
lights; which should be perfectly done,

as we intend it, at one painting. The
fhadows, when dry, may be  little im-
proved, if there is occafion to alfer them,
with


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS. .
 the colours they were made with.
The Pruffian-blue proper to be ufed, is
that which looks of the moft beautiful
ature before it is ground; and the fooner
it is ufed after it is ground, the better it
will work and appear.
VELVET may be painted at once. The
method is, to make out the firft lay with
the middle tint and shade tint on which
we should lay the high lights with light
touches, and finith the fhadows as we did
thofe of the fatin, but the nearelt imita-
tion of velvet we can make, is done by

glazing; which is prepared on  ground
or dead -colouring of fuch colours as will,
when dry, bear out and fupport the glar-
ing colour in iis higheft perfection. The
nature of the glazing colour is to be of 
fine tranfparent quality, and ufed fimply
with oil only; to that whatever ground
i  PRACTICAL RULES FOR
it is laid on, the whole may appear di-
  ough  The beft ground for
blue is made with white and  white is for the high lights, which,
with the middle tint and fhade-tint,
makes out the firtt lay, like merzotinto.
Remember to make the middle tint lighter
in proportion to the glaring, becaufe that
will make it the darker. It is often ne-
ceffary to cover all but the high lights
with  thin glazing; not with plenty of
 in the colour, but laid with lets quan-
tity than if ii was to be done once only.
If any of it touch the lights, we should
wipe it off with  clean rag. The very

high lights should be improved, and made
of  fine white, and left to dry. The
 coiour  Prman-blue, ground
very fine with nui oil; and should be lard

with  large, nhith tool, that will drive

 colour, as Occation requires. It .

O IN OHL COLOURS  the latt glazing we should frengthen
and finith the fhadows.
THE greateft fault in the colouring of
draperies is, the painting the shadows with
Hrong glaring colours, which defiroy the
beauty of the lights. This is not only
the reverfe of art, but of nature, whofe
beauty always diminithes in proportion
with the lights; for this reafon we should
take care to blend and foften the fhadows
with fuch friendly colours as will agree
with their local character and obicurity.
Here we may obferve, that glazing the
middle tint, which is made of black and
white, will not produce  colour to blue,
as if it had been prepared with Pruffian-
blue and white; yet this colour will pre-
serve the beauty of the lights in the
higheft perfection, by reafon of its tender
obicure hue, when the blueness of the
other


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
 would only diminith them. This
method of glazing the blue is the general
rule for all glazing.
WHEN we are glazing blue, the lights
may be glazed with ultramarine, though
all the other parts are done with Prulfian

blue. This method faves  great quan-
tity of that valuable colour, and anfivers
our purpofe as well as if it had all been
done with ultramarine.
THOwGH this general method of paint-
ing latins, is to make the firtt lay of co-
lours with three degrees of tints; yet we
should underfland, in uling them, that
they produce two more: for the mixing
of two diffcrent colours together on the
cloch, will make another of  middle tint
between them. to it is with the lights
and middle tint and with the middle and
Shade=


PAINTING IN OHL COLOURS.  the firft anfwers to the firft
sint in white fatin; and the laft will con-
sequently be  fort of gradating, or half-
Shade.
If the lights and middle tint mix to 
beautiful, clean colour, of  middle hue
between both, there will be no occafion
for  colour to go between them, as in
the blue fatin; but if in mixing, they
produce  tint inclining to  dirty warm
hue, then there muft be another found
of  fympathizing nature, which should
he laid between them, in order to preferve
the beauty of the lights, as the firft tint
in the white fatin; for if it was not fo,
the red, in the middle tint, would certain-
ly dirty and fpoil the whire.
Ir is highly necelfary to underlland
thefe principles of the firft lay of colours,
in


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
in order to have  perfect knowledge of
the general rule of colouring, on which
the principles of colouring depend.


SCARLET AND CRIMSONN
ad
 LiCti yellow-red, made of light
cchre, lightred, and white, is the proper
ground for fearlet; the shadows are Indian
red, and, in the darked parts, mixed with
 very little black.
ThE second painting should be  little
fighter than we intend the finithing co-
lour; in proportion to the glazing, which
will make it darker.

THE high lights, are vermition and
white for fatin, velvet, and cloth; the
miditle is vermition and white, with 

Tef


 IN OIL COLOURS.  litle lake or indian red; the shade-
tint is made with Indian red and lake;
with the addition of  little black in the
darkeft fhadows. The difference between
fearlet and crimfon is, that the high lights
of crimfon are whiter, and the middle
tint is made darker. Their reflects are
made with lightred and vermilion. The
high lights should be laid and managed
in the fame manner as thofe of the blue;
for fear of dirtying them; and fometimes
they require to be touched over the fe-
cond time, before we glaze them. The
more the colours of the second painting
are drove; the eafier and better they may
be managed to character; but the high
lights should have  good body of colour;
and be left with  delicate light touch.
After it is well dry, we should linith with
glazing the whole with fine lake, and im=

prove the reflects and thadows. Remem-
her
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
ber that the fearlet requires but  very
thin glaring, and it is better to glaze the
crimfon twice over, than lay too much at
one painting

PINE-COLOUR.
THERE are two different methods of
painting  pink colour: one is by glaz-
ing; the other is done with  body of co=
lours at one painting. The same grounds
do for both; which should be  whitifh
colour, inclining to  yellow, for the lights;
and Indian red, lake, and white, for the
Thadows.
THE second painting for the glaring
method is done with the fame colours,
and  little vermilion for the reffects;
and



PANTING IN OHL COLOURS. Tas

and vermition and white for the high
lights when it is dry we should glaze it
with fine lake, and then break and foften
the fhadows into character and harmony
liredly.
THE other method  to make the high
lights with carmine and white; the middle
tint with lake, white, and  little carmine;
and the shadows with lake and Indianred,
with  little vermilion for the reffects.
But remember the fhadows will require
to be broken with fome tender oblcure
KIRnt.
    
TElLOw.
THE Ground for yellow should be 
yellowith white for the lights, and  mix-
ture of the ochres for the fhadows.
THERE


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
THERE are the fame number of tints
in the yellow as there are in the white
fatin; the method of ufing them is the
very fame. The lights are made with
King' yellow ground with clean good
drying oil. The firft tint is light ochre,
changed with  little of the pearl tint
made with the dark fhade and white;
which should be laid and managed as the
firft fint in white fatin. The middle tint
  mixture of the light and brown ochre;
foftened with the pearl tint. The shade-
tint is made with brown pink and brown
ochre. Thefe belong to the firft lay.
THE reffects are light ochre; and fome-
times, in the warmelt parts, mixed with 
little lightred: the fhadows are ftrength-
ened with brown pink and burnt umbre.
THESE colours, well managed, will
Pro-


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS   yellow very like Van Dycks;
but if we leave out the King' yellow,
which is in the high lights only, then it
will be one of Lely' favourite yellows.
GREEN.
THE proper ground for green is 
light-yellow green; which is made of
light ochre,  little white, and Pruffian-
blue, for the lights; and the ochre, brown
pink, and Pruffian-blue, for the shadows.
THE fineff green we have, for drapery,
 made of King' yellew Pruffian-blue,
and brown pink. The high lights are
King' yellow and  very little Pruffian-
blue; the middle tint has more Pruffian-
blue; and the fhade-tint is made with
some of the middle tint, brown pink, and

nore


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
more Pruffian-blue. but the darkeft fha-
dows are brown pink and  little Pruffian-
blue. The lights and middle tint should
be managed in the fame manner as thofe
of the blues. The fhade tint should be
kept entirely from the lights, becaufe the
brown pink that is in  will, in mixing,
dirty them, as the black does thofe of the
blues. Remember to allow for their dry-
ing  little darker; and that the King'
yellow should be ground with good dry-
ing oil. for the longer it is drying, the
more it will change and grow darker;
and the fooner it is ufed, the better it will
fland. It is proper to have two forts of
King' yellow- one to be very light,
which will do beft for the high lights of
relvet

CHANGEABLE.


PAINTINGNOIL, COLOURS.  colours are made
with four principal tints, viz. the high
lights, middle tint, shade tint, and reflect-
ing tint.
THE greatelf art lies in finding the
exact colour of the middle tint; becaute
it has more of the general hue of the filk
than any of the others. The shade-tint is
of the fame hue with the middle tint,
though it is dark enough for the fhadows.
The high lights, though often very dif-
ferent from the middle tint, should be of
 clean, friendly-working colour, that will,
in mixing with It, produce  tint of 
clean fympathizing hue.
THE method of painting filks is to
make out the folds with the fhade tint,
and
.  PRACTICAL RULES FOR
and then fill them up in the lights with
the middle tint. This is the firft lay,
which should be done to our fatisfaction
before we add any other colours; and
the Hiffer the middle tint is uted, the
better the high lights may be laid upon
 The reffecdingunt falls generally upon
the gradating half-fhades, and should be
laid with tender touches, (paringly, for
fear of fpoiling the firft lay.
This method of painting antwers to
all coloured filks, as well as changeable,
with this difference only, that the plain
colours require not fo much art in match-
ing the tints, as the changeable do. The
laft part of the work is the finithing, and
Rrengthening the fhadows with an obfcure
int,  little inclining to  mellowith hue;
tuch as will not carch the eye, and inter-
rupt the beauty of the lights.
BLACK.


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS. T beft ground for black is light-
red for the lights; and Indian red and 
little black for the shadows.
THE finithing colours are, for the lights,
black, white, and  little lake. The mid-
dle tint has lets white, and more lake and
black. The fhade-tint is made of an equal
quantity of lake and brown pink, with 
very little black.
THE method of painting black is very
different from that of other colours; for
as the principal thing in them, is to leave
their lights clean and brilliant, fo in black,
it is to keep the fhadows clear and tranf-
parent. Therefore we should begin with
the shade-tint, and glaze over all the sha-

dows
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
dows with it. Next, lay in the darkeft
Lhadows with black, and  little of the
Thade-tinr, very corredly. After that fill
up the whole breadth of lights with the
middle tint only. All which should be
done exactly to the character of the fatin,
Exc. and then finish with the high lights.
HERE we may obferve, the ground,
being red, will bear out and fupport the
reds, which are ufed in the finithing co-
lours. the lake in the lights takes off the
cold hue, and gives it  more beautiful
colour. If the fhade-tint was of any other
colour than  tranfparent warm hue, the
Ihadows would confequently be black and
becaufe no other colours can pre-
heavy;
ferve the warm brilliancy, which is want-

ing in the fhadows of the black, like lake
and brown pink. Black is of  cold heavy
nnature, and always too flrong for any
other


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS.  colour; therefore we should make
an allowance in uling it. There will be
 few reflects in fatin, which should be
added as thofe of other colours; but they
should be made of flrong colours, fuch as
burnt umbre, or brown ochre, mixed with
 little of the shade-tint.
ThovO the grounds which are here
mentioned for the draperies, are abfolutely
neceffary for the principal and neareft
figures in  picture, fuch as  fingle por-
trait, or the like. yet they are not in-
tended for figures, which are placed more
into the picture. Such as are behind the
principal or front figures, their grounds
should always be fainter, in proportion to
their local finifhing colours.
LINEN.
L PRACTICAL RULESFOR
LINEN.
THE coloursuted in linen are the same
as thofe in white fatin, except the firft tint;
which is made of white and ultramarine
athes, inflead of the black, and mixed to 
very light blueith tint.
IN the dead-colouring we should take
particular care, that the grounds be laid
very white and broad in the lights the
Shadows are made with black, white, and
 little indian red, like the middle tint of
white fatin. Thefe should be left very
light and clean, in order to fupport the
Linifhing colours.
THE second painting begins with glaz.
ing all the lights, with  ftiff pencil and
fine white only, drove bare, without uling
any


PAINTING INOHL COLOURS.  oil: the fhadows may be fcumbled
with poppy oil, and fome of the colour
they were made of. This is the firtt lay,
on which we are to follow with the finith-
ing colours directly. The middle tint of

white fatin is the beft colour for the gene
ral hue of the fhadows. With this and
white, in different degrees, we should
make out all the parts to character, with
free light touches, without foftening
Then with  large long-pointed pencil,
and fine white, lay the high lights very
nicely, with one fircke. fter this comes
the fine light blueith tint, which should be
mixed light, and laid in the tender gra-
dations very (paringly and lightly, with-
out filling them up.
REMEMEER the firft lay should be left
clear and diffined; the more it appears,
the better, It is the overmixing, and
Joining


I PRACTICAL RULES FOR
joining all the colours together, which
spoils the beauty of the character there
fore it is better to lst it dry before we
add the refiects and finithing tints.
THE method of letting the beautiful
clear colours dry, before we add the
arm, reffex, and harmonizing tints,
prevents them from mixing, and dirtying
each other.
THE principal blending colours ufed in
the reffects, are the yeliow tint, green
tint, and the rofe tint; which latt is
made of lake, Indian red, and white. 
find glaring the pearl and lead colours
with white, though it feems to anfwer
our purpofe when it is done, will certain-
ly fink, and be loft in the grounds on
which it is laid; therefore we should make
the dead-colouring as whice as we intend
the


PAINTING IN OHL COLOURS. Te
 
the finithing colours, by reafon they will
fink  little, in proportion to the colour
of the cloth, which the glazing with pure
white only will recover.
LANDSCAPES.


 TRACTICAL RULES FOR
LANDSCAPES.
THE principal Colours ufed in Land-
Icapes, are,
. Fine White.
 Common White.
 Fine Light Ochre.
 Brown Ochre.
. Brown Pink.
 Burnt Umbre,
 Ivory Black.
 Pruffian-Blue.
 Ulramarine.
 Terra-Verte.
 Lake.
 Indian Red.
 Vermilion.
 Kings Fellow:
 COLOURS.  principal Tints ufed in Land-
Icapes, are,
 Light Ochre and White.
 Light Ochre, Pruffian-Blue, and
White.
 Light Ochre and Pruffian-Bluc.

 The fame, darker.
 Terra-Verte and Pruffian-Blue.
 Brown Pink and Pruffian-Blue.
 Brown Pink and Brown Ochre.
. Brown Pink, Ochre, and Pruffian-
Blue.
 Indian Red and White.
 Ivory Black, Indian Red, and Lake.
THE colours necelfary for dead-co-
louring, are common white, light ochre,
brown ochre, burnt umbre, Indian red,
ivory black, and Pruffian-bluc.
THE


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
THE principal colours and tints for
painting the lky, are fine white, ultra-
marnne, Pruffian-blue, light ochre, ver-
milion, lake, and Indian red.
THE fints are  fine azure, lighter
azure, light ochre and white, vermition
and white, and  tint made of white,
 little vermition, and fome of the light
alure.
LANDSCAPES should be painted on 
foft of lanned-leather colour which is
made of brown ochre, white, and light-
red. This colour gives  warmth to the
Lhadow colours, and is very agreeable and
proper for glazing.
 or rubbing in the defign,

as the firft work of the picture.

THIS


PAINTING INOIL COLOURS.  should be done with burnt umbre,
drove with drying oil, and  little oil of
turpentine, in  faint, light, fcumbling,
free manner, as we hade with Indian ink
and water; leaving the colour of the cloth
for the lights, as we do that of the paper.
Remember, in doing it, we leave no part
of the Ihadows to dark as we intend the
firft lay, or dead-colouring, which is to
be lighter than the finithing colours. And
though the foliage of the trees is only rub-
bed in, with  faint fort of fcumbling, yet
the trunks and bodies should be in their
proper shapes, with their breadths of light
and hadow. All kinds of buildings should
be done in the fame manner, leaving the
colour of the cloth for their lights. The
figures on the fore-ground, if they are de-
termined, should alfo be sketched in the
same method, and then left to dry.
OP




 PRACTICAL RULESIOR
OF DEAD-COLOURING.
LET the firft lay or dead-colouring be

without any bright, glaring, or Hrong,
dark colours; fo that the effect is made
more to receive and preferve the finishing
colours, than to thew them in the firft
painting.
THE Lky should be done firtt; then all
the diftances; and to work downwards to
the middle group, and from that to the
fore-ground, and neareft parts. Remem-
ber that all the parts of each group, as
trees, buildings, or the like, be all painted
with the group they belong io.
THE greateff fecret in dead-colouring
 to find the two colours which ferve for
the ground of the shadows in general; the
thy excepted, and the method of ufing
:them
 OHL COLOURS.  with the lights. the firft of which
is the dark-fhade with  litile lake in it;
the other colour is only burnt umbre.
Thefe should be  little changed to the
natural hue of the objects, and then laid
and drove with drying oil, in the fame
 as we shade with Indian ink,
which is  fcumbling kind of glazing;
and as fuch they should be left; for,
otherwife, they would be dark and heavy,

and therefore would be entirely fpoiled

for the finishing glazing. Both thefe co-
lours mix and fympathize agreeably with
all the lights, but should be laid before
them.
WHEN the landlcape is defigned, begin
with the sky, which should be laid, with
god body of colours, and left with 
 refemblance of the principal clouds;

 this we should do more in the manner

   
of
NI




RACTICAL RULES FOR
 claro obicuro, than with finithing co-
Jours. the whiter it is left, the better it
will hear out and fupport them. The
diftances should be made out faint and ob-
fcurely: with the dark- fhade, and fome
of their lights in different degrees; and
laid fo, as beft to find and shew their prin-
Cipal parts. As we come more into the
middle group, we fall by degrees into the
burnt umbre in the (hades. All the grounds
of the trees should be laid or rubbed in,
enough only to leave an idea of their
Thapes and fhadows faintly. The ground
of their fhadows muft be clean, and lighter
than their finithing colours, fuch as will
Tupport their character, and feem eaty to
finiffi on.
IN painting the lights, it is better to
incline more to the middle tint, than to
the very high lights; and obferve to leave
them



PAINTING IN OIL COLOURS.  with  fufficient body of clean co-
lours, which will receive and preferve the
finifhing colours the better; all which
may be done with  few tints. After
this, go over the whole with the fweetener
very lightly, which will foften and mix
the colours agreeably for finifhing.

  PRACIICAL RULES FOR
SECOND PAINTING.
BEGIN with the sky, and lay in all the
azure and colours of the horizon.; then
foften them. After that lay in the general
unt of the clouds, and finith on it with
the high lights, and the other tints that
are wanting, with light, tender touches;
then foften the whole with the (weetener
very lighily. Remember the finishing of
the tky should be done all at one painting,
becaufe the tender character of the clouds
will not do fo well as when the whole is
wet. Obferve, that the Riffer the arure
and colours of the horizon are laid, the
better the clouds may be painted upon
them.


THE greatelt diftances are chieffy made

with


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS. T the colour of the lky; and as they
grow nearer and darker, we should glaze
and fcumble the parts very thin, with
fuch glazing fhadow-colours as come
neareft to the general hue of the group
the objects are in. This glazing should be
of  darkifh hue;; and the firtt painting or
dead-colour should be feen through it di-
Rinetly. On this lay, or ground, we
should add the finithing colours.
Now Tuppofing this glazed ground is
properly adapted to the object and place,
it will be eafy to find the other colours
which are wanted for the lights and fi-
nithings of the fame. But in laying them
we mult take great care that we do not fpoil
the glazing; therefore we should be very
exact in preparing thofe colours on the
palette, and then be fure to lay them with

ight free touches.
BEFORE
M PRACTICAL RULES FOR
BEFORE proceeding any farther, it will
be proper to fay fomething of the moft
ufeful glazing colours.
LAKE, Terra-Verte, Pruffian-Blue and
Brown Pink, are the four principal. The
more we manage them like Indian ink,
and the more diffint we leave them, the
better their tranfparent beauty will fland
and appear, provided we do it with good
drying oil. After thefe four glazing co-
lours, burnt umbre is  very good glaring,
warm brown, and of great ufe in the
broken grounds and neareft parts; but
the moft agreeable colour for the darkeft
Thadows, is the dark-fhade improved with
lake. It is  fine warm hade, when it is
drove with drying oil: no colour in the
world is to fweet and fympathiting; it
Mixes harmonioutly with all the lights,
as well as the thadows, and is  charming
colour


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS.  in the trunks and bodies of trees;
and in all Kinds of buildings.
WE should make out all the ground of
the objects with fuch glazing fhadow-
colours, as feem neareft to the natural hue
of the object, in that fituation. But as the
principal glazing colours themfelves are
often too firong and glaring, they should
therefore be  little changed, and foftened
with fuch colours as are of  near re-
temblance to themfelves and the objects.
Thus, if it is in the diftances; the terra-
verte and azure, which are their principal
glazing: colours, may be improved and
made lighter with fome of the fky tints;
and as the diftances come nearer, with
the purple. fis we get more into the
middle group; the terra-verte and Pruffian-
blue may be changed with some of the
green tints, fuch as are made without

white;
M PRACTICAL RULES FOR
white; for white is the deftruction of all
glazing colours. As we approach the firft
group, there is lets occafion for changing
them; but the fore-ground, and its ob-
jelts, require all the Arength and force of
glazing which the colours are capable of
producing.
AFTER this glazing ground, we should

follow with firengthening the fame in the
thadows and darkeft places, in fuch man-
ner as will feem eaty to finith; which is
the firft lay of the second painting.
The colours that come next for finish-
ing, are in the degree of middle tints.
Thefe should be carefully laid over the
greateff breadth of lights, in fuch manner
as not to fpoil and cover too much of the
glazing. Do it with  good body of the
colour, as fliff as the pencil can agreeably
manage


PAINTING INOLE COLOURS T to character. Remember, the
colours of the middle tint should be of 
clean, beautiful hue. According to thefe
methods,  think it will be eaty to finith
all the second painting as we work down,
from the fky, through the middle group.
As we come to the firft group, where all the
objects should appear perfectly finithed, we
should finith their under or moft diftant
parts, before we paint any of the other
which appear nearer. Oblefye this me-
thod down to the laft and neareft objects
of the picture; and where it fo happens
that painting one tree over another does
not pleafe, forbear the second, until the
firft is dry. Thin, near trees, of different
colours, will do better if we let the under
Parts dry before we add the finithing
colours.


THE


 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
THE THIRD AND LAST
PAINTING.
IF oiling is neceffary, lay the leaft quan-
tity that can be; which should be done
with  Rump-tool, or pencil, proportioned
to the place that is to be oiled, to that we
may oil no more than is wanted: then
wipe the whole place that is oiled, with
 piece of filk handkerchief. By this me-
thod we leave no more oil than is proper
for our purpofe.

WHEN we are going to finith any ob-
jects, we should remember to ule  great
variety of tints, very near of the same co-
lour; but moft of all, when we are finith-
ing trees. This gives  richness to the
colouring, and produces harmony. The
greens


PAINTINGINOIL COLOURS.  will fade, and grow darker there-
fore it is highly neceffary to improve and
force them, by exaggerating the lights,
and making an allowance in uling them
to much the lighter. For the fame reafon,
we should take great care that we do not
overcharge and fpoil the beauty of the
glazing; for if we do, it will be dull
and heavy, and will confequently grow
darker,
THE method for painting near trees is
to make the firft lay very near to nature,
though not quite fo dark, but more in the
degree of  middle tint, and follow it
with frengthening the fhadows, and im-
proving the middle tints; and laft of all,
lay the high lights and finithing colours.
But all this cannot be done as it should
be at one painting: therefore, the beft
way is to do no more than the firtt lay
with
 PRACTICAL RULES FOR
with the faint fhadows, and leave it to
dry.
THEN begin with improving the mid-
dle tints and fhadows, and let them dry.
THE third and laft work is adding all
the lights and finithing colours, in the
beft manner we are able. This method of
leaving the firtt and second part to dry fe-
parately, not only makes the whole much
ealier, and more agreeable, but leaves the
colours in the greateft perfection; becaufe
moft of the work may be done with fcum-
bling and glazing, and fome parts without
oiling. The lights alfo may be laid with
 better body of colour, which will not be
mixed and fpoiled with the wet ground.
What  have faid of trees, anfwers the
tame to all Kinds of thrubs and buthes.
THE


PAINTING IN OHL, COLOURS.  figures in  landlcape are the laft
work of the picture; thofe in the fore-
ground should be done firft, and thofe in
the diftances next : for, after the figures in
the firft and fartheft group are painted, it
will be much eafier to find the proportions
of thofe in the middle parts of the picture.
And we should obferve, that the fhadows
of the figures should be of the same hue
or colour with thofe of the group, or
place, they are in.
EPITOME


 ORIT ..


AA VERY valuable work, now fcarcely
procurable at any rate, was published by
the late ingenious . le Blon. It was
termed Coloritfo, or the Hiarmony of Co-
louring; which is the art of mixing co-
lours, in order to reprefent naturally in
all the gradations of painting light and
Shade, the flesh, or any other object that
is reprefented in the true and pure light.


AFTER


EPITOME OF COLORITTO.  duly confidering the philofo-
phy of colours, and putting his obferva-
tions to the teft of experiment, he draws.
thefe conclutions—that Painting can re-
prefent all vifible objects with three co-
lours, VI Fellow, Red, and Blue; for all
other colours can be compofed of these
three, which may be called primitive; for
example,
Fellow
and jmake an Orange Colour,
Red

Red
and (make  Purpleand Viclet Colour.
Blue

Blue
and
make  Green Colour.
Fellow
And  mixture of the above three original

colours makes  Black, as allo every other
colour whatfdever; as has been demon-
strated
 





 EPITOMEOT COLORITTO.
frated by the invention of printing figures

in their natural colours

Ir is here to be underftood to mean
material colours onty, not impalpable ones;
for the admisture of the latter will pro-
duce  perfect rebite, as Sir Ifaac Newton


has thewn. But both are the produce of

all the primitive colours compounded or
mixed together; the one by impalpable,

the other by material colours.


TRUE PAINTING reprefents;
II. Lights, by White.
 Shades, by Black.
 Reffections, by Fellore.
 Turnings off, by Blise.
. . In nature, the general reffex-co-
 The prints here alluded to are not very com-
mon, but may be occafionally found at brokers
ftalls. The modern mode of printing in colours is
very different.

lour


EPITOME OF COLORITTO.  is yellow; but all the accidental re-
flections, cauled by an oppofite body or
object, partake of the colour of the oppo-
fite body that cauted them.
The author proceeds next to lay down
rules for the preparation of the various
palettes neceffary in this mode of paint-
ing. They are reprefented by copper
plates, printed in the genuine colours and
admixtures, with the gradations of tints
that are ufed in the different stages of the
work. But thefe are more expentive
than ufeful, as the theory is too fimple
and beautiful to need any additional aid.

ONN





-
  



ON
VARNISH-MAKING

 





 
VARNISHIESare of two forts, viz. Sp:.
Fir Varnish, and Oil Varnifh.
 
  


    
OBSERVITIONST ON THE PREPARATION


OF SPIRIT VARNISHI
. SPIRIT. Varnish may be made in
 heat of  water-bath: (balneum Miarix
 obtervations are taken from the Memo-
 
  

randums of French rtiffs, who are the beft makers


of Farnith of any people in the worlds ofte fery:

taking
 VARNISTI-MAKING  care to clofe the veffel which con-
tains the materials, in proportion to the
heat required to melt them.
 PUr in no more at  time than three
fourths of fpirit of wine; let one fourth
pace be referved for the ebullition, and
for receiving the spirit of turpentine, with-
out which the varnifh would evaporate.
 LET all the more folid articles of
which the varnish is to confift, be put in,
if poffible, at the fame time.
 CoNTINUE to heat the veffel till
the whole ingredients are diffolved: this
may be known by the non-refiftance and
limpid flate of them.

 
Ar this period, incorporate the re-

ThaHv :  hir iliris retttmtra
mainder of the spirits, of wine. viz.  fourth
 ON VARNISIMAKING
Part, with the varnish now ready to re-
ceive it.
 PERMIT the whole to mix, by con-
Stantly firring them together, with the
water-bath at  full heat; when the
varnish will affume the appearance of 
uniform furd.
 LEsT any impurity has intruded,
ftrain the varnith, whilft hor, through 
fine cloth.

 LEr the varnith be at reft some days
before it is ufed.
 SPIRIT Varnith is totally oppofite
in its nature to oil varnith; for it is better
for being new, being apt to grow thick
and yellow by Keeping, whereas the other
 

Improves in beauty by AGE.
  VARNISHMARINC. AB.
i ON THE PREPARATIO
OF OIL VARNISH.
 COPAL and amber are the principal
ingredients in O varnith. both thefe
 have the valuable properties of
folidity and tranfparency.
 THE above fubliances, ought never
to be mixed together  copal, being
almoft colourlets, should be referved for
clear and light colours; and the amber
should be employed over gold, or colours
of  fombre hue.


THE beft mode of operating is to
add  the copal, or the amber, by itfelf,
 qrt  af iolie.
 Cirresy
& The famous Vernis Martin is an exception to
iin Th Tiliaet tas vtTrfiiz
his rulc.
 .
before






 ON VARNISHMAEING.
before the oil is put in; becaufe the heat
that is required to diffolve erther, will burn
and difcolour the oil.
 THEoil of which the varnith is com-
pofed should be perfectly free from greafi-
nets, and carefully bleached.
. WATCH attentively to the moment
 fution; for, if the heat be too great, the


whole will be difcoloured.
 Ar the inftant of perfect fulion, pour
 the oil (which muft be previcufly heat-
ed;, by little and little, firring it with 

wooden fpatula.
. WHEN the ffaid is uniformly mixed,
take the pot off the fire, and fir it till it
is merely warm. At this time, mix in
the prescribed quartity of fpirit of tur-
 VARNISHMAKING.  which should exceed the quantity
of the oil. Remember well, that if the
oil was more than earm, it would catch
fire on adding the spirit of turpentine.
. STRAIN the varnish through  fine

cloth, to remove all impurities.

 Should any of the copal, or the am-
- remain, in the ftramer undiffolved,

expofe the pieces to the action of the ar

for  long time, to diffipate the oil; and
varticularly cautious againtt ufing them
 br se
in varnish, till this operation is performed,
 

ng
or the adhering particles of oil will burn,
and difcolour the whole.

To. OTE varnith; if well preferved, is
very much improved by age; but it is at
grow thicker.
the same time fiable to pe

 therefore, oil varnith is about to be

 ON VARNISHMAKING.
ufed, the operator may render it more
finid, if neceffary, by incorporaring  little
of the spirit of turpentine whilft the var-
nith is made hot in  water-bath.
 In the hotteff days of fummer good
old varnish should be perfecily dry, and
free from tacking, in twenty-four hours.
in the winter, the room ought to be heated
by fines in the wall, as well to prevent
duft as to imitate the warmth of fummer.
 THE oils of poppies and of,nuts
are both ufed in the preparation of yar=
nithes; but very old linfeed oil, which has
been drawn without beat (termed cold
drawn), and perfectly bleached, is equally
as good, and confiderably cheaper.




 We
fitz
TMIEE Er TTlNGY TEITl  Sris Ball.


TMl . EUERnJREL. T OFTEHST  RGH
CENERAL REMARES,
   Mitlt: .  Sr. El
  iaci  
WORTHY THE ATTENTIONOF THE
  ntitt  






 silc sle ceccatties ansd sditit            Varnithes should be prepared
of fubftances that are folid, gloffy, and

fittauve ky and the liquids in which thefe
 are diffolved should be limpid
  ft
and colourlels.

 AbL biruminous and refinous fub
Rances which are adapted to the making
& Exprestive of  drying quality: the word is rather
new, but is of French extraction,
of


 CENERAL REMARES.
of varnifh will burn if they are too much
heated, and will become friable and in-
capable of being polifhed.
 THE materials should be very pure
 clean, and should be rather broken
into small pieces than pulverized (except
in very particular cafes), becaufe they are
lets liable to burn, by their not adhering
to readily to the fides of the containing
reffel.
 THE operation should be performed
in an open place, during the dayelight; for,
if the spirituous vapour from the heared
materials should take fire, from  lighted
candle for inftance, or other ignited body,
the confequences might be difafirous.—
 cover should, therefore, be in readinets
(clofely fitred), together with wetted cloths,

to extinguith the Hame:

. SOME


GENTRAL REMARES.  SOME forts of Varnith, as has been
obferved, may be prepared by the heat of
 water-bath only; but as many will re-
quire  ftronger heat, remember to Keep
the fire constant and equable.
 SHOULD it burn-to, prevent its blifter-
ing by foaking the part inftantly with pi-
rits of wine; or apply  comprets moiften-
ed with spirit of wine.

 WHEN the varnifh is made, take
great care to purify it as much as poffible,
by ftraining it through fine linen, or filk;
and keep it in narrow-mouthed, glared,
earthen bottles, clofely ftopped.

.. . VERY nice operators prepare
their warnith in glazed, earthen veffels,
and ufe them only once for the fame pur-
pofe; they have experienced, that the heat
communicated


 CANERAL REMARES
communicated to the veffel may occafion-
ally crack the glazing, which imbibing
some of the former Varnish, may com-
municate  brown colour to the new.



 late ingenious Dr. Lewis has
given  very valuable account of  mode
of making amber varniff. It is  fimple
varnifh, of great ufe for many purpofes,
and fuppofed to be the bafis of the one
ufed on coaches. The preparation is as
 melr the amber in 
crucible, then reduce it into  powder; and
boil the powder in linfeed oil, or  mix
ture of linfeed oil and (pirits of turpenn
tine. Drying: oil is commonly made ufe
of by the workmen; but it feems there
+
 Ei Fit Seehis &Commercium Philcforhico-Technicum,
 &   
 Londen  REMARES  to take the oil unprepared, that
the boiling requifite for giving the drying
quality may be employed at the fame
time in making it act upon the amber.
By the previous melting of the amber,
Its nature is changed; and part of its oily
and faline matter expelled, as happens in
the common diftillation of it.. When the
diftillation is not far protracted, the fhin-
ing black? refiduum anfwers as well as
the amber melted on purpofe.. fience
some of our chemifts, inflead of urging
the diftillation to the urmoft; by which
the amber would be reduced to  mere
coal, find it more advantageous to difcon-
tinue the process when the thinner oil
and part of the fall have arifen; that the
remaining mass, may be in great mea-

 It has been before obferved that amber varnish



 only afed over to geld, and dark coloirs.
Sure



 GENERAL REMARES.
fure foluble in oils, fo as to fupply the
common demand of the varnifh-makers.
Ir has generally been thought that
amber will not at all diffolve in oils, till
it has fuffered  decompofition by fire.
Hoffmann relates an experiment in his

Observatisnes Pbyfico-Chemice," which
difcovers its folubility in its natural State.
Powdered amber, with twice its quantity
of oil-olive, was put into  wide-mouthed
glats; and  digefter, or frong copper
veftel, being filled about one-third with
ater, the glats was placed in it, the cover
of the digefter fcrewed down right, and 
moderate fire continued an hour or more
when cold, the amber was found diffolved

into  gelatinous tranfparent mals.
 
IN Dr. Stocker   Specimen maughrale

de Succine,
rinted at Leyden  there

a REMARES.  many more important. experiments,
made by himfelf and his friend . Liegler
of Winterthur. They found that by con-
tinuing  fimmering heat for twelve hours,
and confining the Vapour as much as ftone-
ware veffels would bear without burking
(which may be avoided by  fmall notch
in the ftopple), powdered amber diffolved
Perfectly in expreffed oils, in turpentine,
and ballam of copaiba.

 THE Jolution in rape-feed oil, and in
oil of ialmonds, was of  fine yellowith
colour; in linfeed oil, gold coloured; in
oil of poppies, yellowifhred; in oil-olive,
of  beautiful red; in oil of nuts, deeper
coloured : in, oil of bays, of  purple red.
 is obferyable that this laft oil, which of
itfelf, in the greateft heat of the atmo-
 proves of  thick butyraceous con-
fiffence, continued finid, when the amber
in
. CENERAL REMARES.
was diffolyed in it. The folutions made
with rurpentine, and with balfam of co-
paiba, were of  deep red colour, and on
cooling, hardened into  brittle mass of
the fame colour. ll the folutions mingled
perfectly with fpirit of turpentine. Thofe
made with the oils of linfeed, bays, pop-
pies, and nuts, and with balfam of copaiba
and turpentine, formed hard, tenacious,
gloffy varnithes, which dried fufficienrly
quick, and appeared greatly preferable to
thofe made in the common manner from
melted amber.
AN amber varnish may be otherwife
made, by melting eight ounces of Chio
turpentine, and, when ffnid, pouring into
it by degrees  pound of finely powdered
amber, and ftirring it; and when it is pro-
perly mized, fetting it on  fire for half
an hour, taking it off, and firring it well,
and


GENERAL KEMARES.  adding to it two ounces of white co-
lophony (robite refin).—Cover it clofe,
and mell the mals into  perfect fluid;
then les it cool, and; when warm only,
add  pound of linfeed or poppy oil, made
drying, and hot. Stir and incorporate the
whole, and finally piit in  quart of
warm turpentine.—When the whole is
uniformly mixed, ftrain it off; and bottle
it for ufc.
 MOST excellent copal varnish is made
in France, under the name of Verms Mar-
in, in the following manner:—Take
 frong well-glazed earthen pot, in form
like  chocolare pot, capable of holding 
gallon at the leaft; put into it four ounces
of Chio or Cyprus turpentine, and when
this is diffolyed, add to it eight ounces
of finely powdered bright yellow am=
bers


 GENERAL REMARES.
Der 
mingle them well, and fet them on
the fire for  quarter of an hour; then
add  pound of copal broken in pieces,
but not powdered. fir the mass, and add
four ounces more of Chio or Cyprus
turpentine, and  gill of warm spirit of
turpentine; fet it on the fire for half an
hour; when taking it off, firt he contents,
and add two ounces of the fineft white
colophony. Let the pot be again fet on
the fire, and remain till the whole is
diffolved, when it will be as flaid as
water remove it again, and put in gra-
dually twenty-four ounces of nut, poppy,
or linfeed oil, made drying and hot; and
hir the mats with  deal ftick. Give it
one boil-up, and then cooling it  little;

 The mixing of amber with coval is not ufusl,
F Eityi
 is an exception to  general rule. The varnith,
however, is excellenti zin fic
add




CENERAL REMARES.
  quart of hot turpentine; replace it
on the fire, and boil it up once more,
when an additional pint of hot turpentine
 to be put in, and the varnifli completed
by boiling and firring it well for  minute
or more. Strain it, and keep it in narrow-
mouthed fione-bottles, and ir it is too
thick when ufed, mix  proper quantity
of the fpirit of turpentine by the heat of
 water-bath, which will give it ffuidity.
. . The older it grows, the better it
will be.
GooD maftich varnsb is prepared by
putting twelve ounces of genuine imaftich,
in tears, to one quart of fpirit of turpen=
tine, in  glazed earthen pot, and very
gently and cautioully heating them till
they are thoroughly incorporated. Strain
off, and bottle it for ufc. . . The
  GENERAL REMARKS.
maftich varnith of the shops is in gene-
ral too poor and thin.
FoR pictures and paintings in oil, the
following varnith is highly recommended:
-it is not at prefent common in the
Shops:
TAKE of the beft copal varnish  one
quart, and fet it on  moderate fire, in 
glazed pipkin, till it is hot; at the fame
time, put one pint and  half of turpen-
tine, and half  pint of frong good dry-
ing-oil into another pipkin, and having
made them hot, pour the varnith by little
and little into the turpentune and drying=
oil, replacing the pots each time to pre-
ferve the heat. Stir them well, and ins
corporate them together; and complete
 The Birmingham Varnith is the beft for this
purpofe.
the



GENERAL REMARES.  procets expeditiouly, left the fire
should change the colour of the varnith.
The admisture of oil prevents the varnith
from cracking; but as it at the fame time
delays the drying, it should be laid on
In  place free from duft, and remain un-
difturbed for two or three days. It will
hourith and beautify the colours, and will
never be found to chill.


 OBSERVATIONS.


ETHEN the young fiudent has put in
practice the rules laid down in the former
part of this volume, he may venture to
speculate in experiment. But here he

should be cauemely cautious how he ad-
mits his difcoveries to be introduced. If
he too haffily receive as valuable, what
time thal prove to be falfe, he will have
done more injury, and have pread greater
milchief, than his genius and talents will
counterbalance. Colourine. however,  of improvement, and is deferving
the ferious attention of the artift: he has
need only of caution, and strict veracity
in his recital.
AMONCST


OBSERVATIONS.
  variety of modes of work-
ing, and peculiar forms of receipts, of
the great mafters, the following have
been collected; not to much with  view
of exhibiting what is curious, as of ex-
tending the neceffary information for fu-
ture experiment. By being well acquaint-
ed with what has been already done,: 
great deal of time and expence is faved
that would infallibly produce vexation
and dilappointment.
 METHOD OF SETTING  PALETTE.
 The principal light of pess is com-
pofed of white and Naples yellow, or
light ochre, or brown ochre, according
-
to the complexion of the perfon to be re-
prefented: of thefe, form the firtt and
second tints.
 WHITE,






 as  Sirt
 lightred,. with;  plitzls

yellox.

 THE Lame,  Little darker.
 THE MELZOTINTO.


. WHITE, black, and yellow, temper
ed with  little,red.



 THE fame,  litile darker
 METHOD OF SETTING 
PALETTE.

. LICHTs. Fellow ochre and white..
 DITro. The fame,  little darker.
 DIrrO. Burnt ochre,  little yel-
low ochire, and fome white
 DITro. The fame;  litile darker,
For  fine complexion; add vermition
il
in the fints No.  andf.

LIGHTS, 




 is hecelfary
in the cheeks, but mixed with white.
 HALFTINT.—The Jame as No. ,
-
with black
Fellow and black,
 SECOND TINT

with red in the dead.
. THIRD TINT.—Terra di Sienna
burnt, with yellow and black:
 REFLECTIONS.—To No. zadd yel.
low ochre and brown ochre.

 DITrO.—To No.  add lake and

burnt ochre.
 BLACK.—Lake, burnt ochre, and


ferra-di. Sienna.

 is  good method to obferve to lay
thofe colours near each other which har
monize. for inftance, firft, white, then
Naples yellow, next: light yellow, dark
yellow burnt ochre, :vermition;; burnt
terra di Sienna, lake, blue, umbre burnt
and


 unburnt, black. Place allo the feve-
ralunts made of thefe colours in like har-
&
mony, beginning with the lighteff of
each, and arranging thofe of the next

degree of Rrength one befide the other.


IN the works of many of the beft
matters, when there is  dark or middle
tint, there is light always oppoted to it.
As for example. on foregrounds, or at
second and third diftances, where fome
object, fuch as water, buildings, eac. are
Kept in Shade,—figures, plants, Exc. with
an accidental light introduced on them,
come well off of thofe thaded parts;—dark
objects relieve allo well on the foreground,
or elfewhere, when thofe behind them
are light. In regard to trees, their
brighteff lights are generally in the middle;
and


OBSERVATIONS.
 the lights leften by degrees, in pro-
Portion to their diftance from the princi-
pal light. It muft be obferved, that the
edges of trees in particular are never to
be too firong or hard, even in the moft
Shaded parts.
YELe
THIE following principle has been ob-
ferved in the works of fome good paint-
ers. In painting rocks, roads, exc. they
have laid their ground in  shade of
blue-black, ending here and there at the
extremities in  reddith call, of the shade
side. Towards the light or half tint, they
have touched upon the fame colours, mix-
 more or lels of yellow or black with
them, in proportion to the degree of
Krength they intend to produce, leaving
between their half- tints and thade the
coolicts of blue-black, as alfo between
the



 half unts and lights. They paint the
lights of  rich warm call, fuch as yels
low: and terra di Sienna will produce; ob=
ferving to accommodate the whole to the
point of time, or degree of light, they
introduce throughout the picture, and
which never fails to produce harmony
when managed with judgment.





MBRE, burnt or unburnt, is an ex-

cellent colour for dead-colouring, as it has


agood body.
.  

 pounded to an impalpable.

+
Powdss is  very good dryer of the co=
  

lours, mixed either with oil or varnith.
 Ld Sirse

 Eris.

 

is
 Tilire: Tes ifeE: Brersl Ere
IN
 order to dry  picture: quickly;
place the back towards the fun, which
will effect the purpofe without detriment
to the colours.

   
 importance to paint the
I is of  and second paintings of good body

colours, referving the more brilliant touch-
es for the finithing, which is to; be. per-

formed by glazing. It is, reafonable, to

tuppofe that  proper foundation of flrong

holding colours is neceffary under the
more delicate, in order to make them
latt and bear out the better; whilft, on


 contrary, if folid colours are ufed

on the thin and brilliant, the effect muft
 dull and heavy. Befides, if the fineft
and brighteft colours are ufed in the firft
and second colouring, what colours can
 found to brighten with iz the finith-
 excellent method of re-tonching
at pleafure  mix equal parts of dry-
ing-oil and clear nut -oil, and with  sponge
or bruth moiften the parts to be re-
painted.

+

SOME artifts preser good poppy-oil to
nut oil for re-touching or re-painting over
parts of pictures, concerving it less liable
to change, and working more freely under
the pencil.



 Exc. are re=
IE Iky, face, drapery
 to be rerouched in water-colour

paintings,


 the back of the picture is to be.
noiftened with  wetted fponge, after
which it may be re-touched, fcumbled,

Exc. as often as needful.—This method
fucceeds very well when the picture. is
painted on fine cloth, or filk; but not fo.
well on paper.



TO. prevent the colours from ever
changing, and for preferving them in
their original beauty, force and vigour,
the cloths should be primed with black
made of burnt peach-ftones, mixed with
white that is to fay, the second going
over the cloth, or the laft hand, as it is
termed, should be done with this black
and white, and the picture will be freth
and without change to the laft.—This was
the general practice and advice of the

late. Mr. Georse Robertfon, ,landfcane
 
 MISCELLANEOUS
painter of firft-rate abilities, whofe me.
mory will be ever respected.
POUSSIN, as well as other great
nafters, have made ufe of the following
colours in draperies with very good effcct,
VI  jellow under-drapery, with  loofe
ipper-drapery of red, on his principal
figure; near that, one clad in  leadin or
flate-coloured upper-drapery, under which
at 
is  faded pink colour; on the near ugure;
 dark blue, and on thole near the fore
ground, fuch as half naked figures, some
with light-bine sinffs, others with faded
 colours; and on the figiies behind;

the fame Run, more broken and in-
diffinct, in proportion to their diftance.
All thefe colours harmonize well together.
 it is to be obferved, that they are of 
low tone, fuch as old Rufts produce, and
that the folds are foff as if copied from  fort of old woollen cloth; not from
rich and gay filks, full of glare and hard-
nets.— buss-coloured waificoat, with the
thirt fleeves appearing, and the legs either
bare; or covered with  dark-blue or brown
ftocking, is  dress frequently ufed by the
beft matters in their landicape figures.—
 faded yellow waificoat without fleeves,
or with faded red Reeves; dark-blue. or
yellow breeches, with the legs either bare
of covered with  slate or ligbt-cofoured
ftocking; all thefe colours harmonize, and
are worthy of imitation, as they have
been applied by the firtt Ialian artiffs,
among whom may be named Raffaclle &
Dominichino, Guido, the Carracci, Pouffin,
Exc.: They ufually made choice of the
beft:coloured Huffs, and knew how to
vary them at pleafure, and are therefore
 Jothns Reynelds' orthography.




models





MISCEELANEOUS
 very proper to be attended to.—
The Flemith mafters afford examples of
great excellence, but the ltalians have been
the moft fuccetsful in this practice.
-
IN order to reprefent the sun or moon
with an amazing force, lay on the fpot
or place where it is intended the greateft

night or glow shall be, fome varnith, or
body of fine white; upon this stick gold
or filver leaf (whichever is to be painted,
either fun or moon) and glaze over with
Fellow-lake, brown-pink, or Naples yel
low, in proportion to the effect of Jun-
Thine or moon light. This, well managed
 the glazings and re-touchings, will pro-

duce  wonderful effect.
 reprefent clouds in the day-time,
there ought to be  little mafticot mixed
with the white, with fometimes more
red, fometimes more yellow, at difcre-
tion. In cafe the tky be fformy, in
certain places it will be clear; in which
places blue and red muft be made
ufe of, in the fame manner as in the
clear Lky, lofing them gradually in the
pencilling and finithing



THE beft fort of terra di Sienna burnt
and mixed with white, and  very little
ultramarine, make an exquifite fieth co-
lour, and  fine-toned iky.
 red, with true ivery black,
makes  fine warm colour.
FOR painting trees— The trunk may
be laid in with ochre, in the whice and
clear parts put  little green, and in the
brown parts put  little black, adding
green for the fhade both to one and the
other. Tints may allo be made of blue
and yellow, with here and there fome
touches of white, or mafticot, juft as it

often appears in nature.



FOR herbage, and foliage—On the
fore-grounds, when the ground is painted
in; lay them in with fea-green; and sif
they are yellower, ufe mafticet: in the
thades


 ufe green, with brown for fuch as
are withered and dead.


. DE PILES obferves, that Claude
Lorrain added to the tendernels of his
trees by glaxing.


WIIITE is not ufed as  glazing co-
lour, having too much body; neverthe-
lefs, it may be applied with tolerable fuc-
cets, if ufed with thin varnish.—In the
Hower-pieces of Baptifte and others, 
glazing of white may be detected, which
produces  rich effect.

IN: favour of good linfeed-oil, it is
remarked by . De Piles, in his Life of
John Vanburgh, commonly. called John
of

P MISCELLANEOUS
of Bruges; that in fearching for  good
varniffi he found OlD linfeed-oil was the
beft medium for colours. To him the
art of painting is indebted for the perfec-
tion to which it has arrived by the means
of this invention: and the works of John
of Bruges, increating in beauty, are pur-
chafed by the great, and affigned to the
firft places in their cabinets.

PICTURES that have been covered
with maftich varnith and thut up in 
clofe room are frequently mildewed: to
take off this mildew, the following me-
thod is recommended: Wath the picture
with  clean fponge dipped in an equal
quantity of vinegar and water, luke warm,
which will readily remove the mildew;
afterwards, rub the furface gently till it;  and moiften it with purified nut-oil,
continuing to wipe it clean off till the pic-
ture is reftored.

THE late Mr. Wilfon, landlcape pain-
ter, had  method of preparing Afphal-
tum; which he ufed with great fuccess:
Put two ounces of ballam of copaiba into
 pipkin, over  flow fire; let it fimmer,
and add one ounce of afphaltum, bruifed,
and as much fpirit of turpentine as will
make it liquid : take great care that it do
not take fire. The above compolition is
an excellent glazing colour in the fhadows
of fieth, draperies, fore-grounds, Ec. and
particularly in fcumbling. It may perhaps
be advitable to mix it with  fmall quan-
tity of lake, blue, or terra di Sienna, any
-of which colours will fix it, and preferve

it from turning black.

AN
P MICCEELANEOUS.


Ser wht   Sht ofCr  
ANOTHER, method of preparing at
phaltum is,—to mell two ounces, of Ve.
nice turpenune over  flow fire in  glazed
Pipkin, and to add one ounce of bruifed
aphaltum. when the two are well incor-
porated, thin it properly with fpirit of
turpentine; but in doing this, take it off
the fire.

POWDERED Keyphan mummy is
ufed by fome artifts as  good glazing
colour, but it is long in drying. As good
 colour, and  better dryer, may be made
by burning Pruffian-blue in  covered

crucible it requires no drying-oil.
Norder to obtain  very lively and
pcautiful green, paint the object, whether

tree,



  drapery, erc. quite blue, and glaze
It over with brown pink, which will pros

duce the fineft effect.




 BRILLLANT green may be pro-
duced by painting the ground white, and
glazing over it with verdigrife mised up
with varnith.





THE Lmoke which iffues from the
purning of damp Hraw gives  fine tint
to drawing-paper, and likewife gives an
old look to  freth picture.






ON





 
  

ON




WHITE PIGMENTS.
TAKEN FROM . MEMOIR OF . DE
MORVEAU, READ IN THE ACADEPIY
OF DIjON.


WHITE Is the moft important of all
colours in painting. It affords to the
painter the materials of light, which he
diftributes in fuch  manner as to bring

his objects together, to give them relict,

and that magic which is the glory of his
art. Forthefe reafons, my attention will

be confined to this colour.


THE firft white which was difcovered,
and





ON WHITE PIGMENTS.  indeed the principal one yet Known,
is extracted from lead. The danger of
the process, and the dreadful diftemper
with which thofe employed in it are
often feized, have not yet led to the
difcovery of another white. Less anx:-
ous about the danger of the artiff than
the perfection of the art, they have va-
ried the preparation, to render the colour
lets liable to change. fience the diffe-
rent Kinds of white, viz. white of Crems
in Auffria, white lead in shells, and white
ceruffe. Bur every perfon converfant in
colours knows that the foundation of all
thefe is the cals of lead, more or lets
pure, or more or less loaded with gas.
That they all participate of this metallic
fubftance will indeed be evident from
the following experiment, which demon-
ftrates and determines the alterability of
Colours by phlogiflic vapours.
 POURED


 ONN.WHIITE PIGMENTS.
 POURED into  large glats bottle. 
 of liver of fulphur, on . bafis
quantity

of qlkali, fixed or volatile, it makes no
difference.  added fome drops of diftilled
vinegar, and  covered the mouth of the
bottle with  piece of pafteboard cut to its
Lize, on which  difpoted different famples
of crems, of white lead, and of ceruffe, in
oil and in water.  placed another ring of
pafieboard over the firft, and tied above all
 piece of bladder round the neck of the
hottle with  firong packthread. It is
evident, that in this operation  took ad=
vantage of the means which chemiftry
offers to produce  great quantiry. of phlo=
giftic vapour, to accomplith inflantane:
oully the effect of many years; and,: in
. few words, to apply to the colours the
very fame vapours to
Thich  picture is
neceffarily expofed, only more accumu-
lated and concentrated.  fay the same va=
in


pours



ON WHITEPIGMENTS  for it is fully eftabliffied; that the
smoke of candles, animal exhalations of
all Kinds, alkalefcent odours, the electric
effluvia, and even light, furnifh continu-
ally  quantity more orless of matter, not
only analogous, but identically the fame,
with the vapour of vitriolic acid mixed
with fulphur.
Ir it happen that the famples of colour
are fenlibly altered by the phlogiftic va-
pour, then we may conclude with cer-
tainty, that the materials of which the
colour is compoted bear  great affinity
to that vapour; and, fince it is not pof-
fible to preferve them entirely from it in
anyfituation, that they will be more or
lets affected with it, according to the time
and  valiety of circumstances.



AFTER Come minutesconfinuance in this
Vapour,


 ON. WHIITE PIGMENTS
Vapour,  examined the famples of co-
lours fubmitted to ius infinence, and found
them wholly altered. The ceruffe and
the white lead both in water and oil
were changed into black, and the white
of crems into  brownith black; and
hence thofe colours are bad, and ought to
be abandoned. They may indeed be de-
fended in fome meature by varnith, but
this only retards for  time the contact of
the phlogiffic vapour; for as the varnish
lofes iis humidity, it opens an infinite
number of paffages to this fubtile find.
AFTER having afcertained the inRlab:-
lity of the whites in common ufe,  made
Leveral attempts to dilcover fuch as would
prove more latting; and though many of
thefe attempts were without effect,  thail
give  fuccinet account of the whole,
which may fave  great deal of trouble to
thofe


ON WHITE PICMENTS.  who with to travel over the fame
field.
 THERE are three conditions effential to
 good colour in painting.
FIRST, That it dilute eafily, and take
 body both with oils and with mucilages,
or at leaft with the one or the other of
thefe fubltances;  circumftance which
depends on  certain degree of affinity.
Where this affinity is too flrong,  diffe-
lution enfues; the colour is extinguished
in the new compolition, and the mats be-
comes more or lets tranfparent or elfe

the fudden. re-action abforbs the fluid,
and leaves only  dry fubltance, which
can never again be foftened. But if the
 be too weak, the particles of colour

 fcarcely fuspended in the ffuid, and
 Eteis


 ON WHIITE PIGMENTS
they appear on the canvals like fand,
which nothing can fix or unite.
THE SECOND condition is, That the
materials of which colours are compoted
do not bear too near an affinity with the
phlogiffic vapour. The experiments to
which  fubmitted whites from lead are
the infallible means of afcertaining the
quality of colours in this respect, without
waiting for the low impreffion of
time.
 THIRD condition equally effential
is, That the colouring body be not volg-
tile; that it be not connected with  fub-
ftance of  weak texture, fufceptible of
 pontaneous degeneracy. This confi-
deration excludes the greater part of fub-
Stances which have received their tint front
vegetable
 WTITTE PIGMEN..  organization, at leaft, it makes
 impoffible to incorporate their finer
parts with  combination more folid.

AFTER thefe reflections, my refearches
were directed, firll, to the five pure earths.
next, to the metallic earths, either pure of
Precipitated by Pruffian alkalit. . Wen=
 has difcovered  fixth earth, which 
call EBURNE, and which, after other ex-
Beriments,  thought of applying to the
Purpofes of painting; but  foon perceiv-
ed that it would have the fame fault with
other kinds of earth, and, befides that, it
could not be obtained but at  very con-
fiderable expence.

THE five pure eaiths poffels fixity in
 very great degree, and at the same time
no
 the article PRUSSIAN-ELUE, in the Materin
Pictoria.
AE
 ON WHITE PIGMENTS
are little affected by the phlogiftic vapour 
but they refufe to unite with oils or mu-
cilages, and the white is totally extin-
guithed when they are ground with thofe
liquids.  made feveral attempts on earth
of alum, not only becaufe . Beaume
recommended the ufe of it in painting;
and becaufe it enters into the compofition
of Pruffian-blue; but alfo becaufe it is 
chief ingredient in ochres, and other
earths of that nature, which indicates that
it would unite in  certain degree with
diluting liquors. Notwithllanding, in
whatever manner  treated it, it would
not yield  white. But one will be less
furprifed at this want of fuccess, when it
is confidered, that in the ochres and
Pruffian-blue the earth from alum is. only
the vehicle of the colouring body, whereas
here it is the colour itfelf.
To be convinced of the truth of this
obfer-



ON WHITE PICMENTS.  it is only neceffary to mix
equal parts of this earth, or even of clay
not coloured, with ceruffe or any other
white; the mixture will be fufceptible of
being ground in oil or in gum, without
being extinguithed; it will eafily unite
with any coloured fubltance, and be pro-
ductive of no bad confequences to the
pure earths.
NATURE and art prefent to us  confi-
derable number of carthy compofitions
fufficiently white for the purpofes of
painting; fuch as the JAsPEk white, the
FELDSPAT white, the SCHIRL white, Exc.
But all thefe fubltances, in all the trials
 made, had the fault which  have al
ready mentioned; and oiginating from
the fame caufe. they wanted  fixed co-
louring body, which would not change
 ON WHITE PIGMENNTS
when pulverized, nor be extinguished
when dilnted.
THE ultramarine blue, which is ex=
tratted from the blue jafper, and known
by the name of lapis lazuli, feems at firft
view to warrant the poftibility of appro-
priating to painting all the opague half-
vitrified compofitions of the nature of
Jatper.
PREPOSSESSED with this idea,  con-

ceived the hope of producing  true white
lapis; but  foon perceived that the ex-
periment confirmed the principle which
 had laid down from my obtervations on
pure earths, fince it is not the fubitance
peculiar to the jafper which conftitutes
the uhramarine blue, but the metallic
subftance which accidentally colours this
particular Kind of jafper.
IN





 WHIIIE PIGMENTS.  the fame manner, art, in this imita=
tion of nature, should have for its object
to give  permanent bafe to  colour al
ready formed, to fix it without altering,
and to augment perhaps its (plendour and
Its intenfity, without attempting to pro-
duce  colour.
IN excepting from earthy and metallic
falts all thofe of which the acid is not
completely faturated, which would eafily
attract the moifture of the air, or which
would be eafily diffolved, you have but
 very small number to make experis
ments on.
THE natural and artificial SELENITE
gives with oil  pafte without colour, and
talting fomewhat like honey; its white is
better preferved with  gum, but even in
this cafe it refembles  femi-tranfparent
Dap.
 ON WHITE PIGMENTS.
THE natural or regenerated SPAT PE=
RANT 
 the moft likely fall to pro-

duce white. As it is of all others the
moft difficult to diffolve, it appears after
 to be  very fine white, but
is fcarcely touched with oil when it be-
comes grey and femi-tranfparent the

mucilage alters if alfo, although less dif
cernibly; and it does not even refume
its white colour after it becomes dry on
the canvais.
THE fame is the cafe with the CAl-
CIREOUs BORAx, formed by the folu-
tion of borax in lime water its white is
completely extinguithed with oil, lets fo
with gum, but it hardens fo inflantane-
oully with the latter, that it cannot be
diluted again.
  ifland cryfial, or refracting spar.
 WIIITE PIGMENTS.  TARTAR, obtained by
calting quicklime into  boiling folution
of cream of tartar, is affected with oil in
the fame manner as felenite; but with
mucilaginous water it gives  pretty good
white, only poffeffed of fome reflection,
and appearing like plafter, It applied very
well to the canvals, and relifted the phlo-
giftic vapour.
AcCORDING to . Weben, in his work
intitled FABRIKEN UND KUNSTE, pub-
lifhed in  the white called in Ger-
Many EREMESER WIESS Is nothing but
the vitriol of lead, prepared by diffolving
lead in nitrous acid, and precipirating it in
Vitriolic acid; and forming it afterwards
into folid tablets by means of guin water.
It is certain that this refembles in no
manner the white called in France the
white of crems at leaft  never found
that
 ON WHIITE PIGMENTS:
that it, could be diffeived in vinegar:; but
 tried the white prepared in. .. We-
bens manner, and the refult was the fame
as above; that  it turned it black.
THE vitricls of lead and bismuth atter
more fpeedily than the calces of thofe me.
tals. And thus, with the exception of
calcarsous tartar which may be of fome
ute in water-colours, the beft earthy falts
on which  have made experiments, may
all, or the moft of them, give  bafe to
some colours, but cannot conftitute by
themfelves  colour ufeful in painting.
ad
Or the firteen Known, metallic fub-
fances, there are nine which yreld white
calces, viz. filver, mercury, lead, tin, an-
timony, bifmuth, zinc, artenic, manga-
nefc.

OF


ON WHITE PIGMENTS.  thefe nine fubllances we may pats
over filver and mercury, becaute, though
they yield  very fine white, precipitated
by means of pure dry vegetable alkali,
yet it is foon altered when expofed to the
air; that from filver into black, and that
from mercury into yellow.
Ir is well known that lead gives  very
good white, and one which unites eafily
with oil or fize; but that it is extremely
liable to change, has been my principal
object to prove; and the experiments 
have made, place it beyond contradiction.
 SHALL only add, that if there be 
reparation able to correct this fault, it
should be the precipitation of the earth of
this metal, from an acctous folution, by
the Pruffian alkali; but the white which
refults from this preparation becomes fen-
fibly


 ON WIHITE PIGMENTS.
Libly brownish, when it is expofed  fers
minutes only to the phlogiffic vapour.
Ir would be therefore unreafonable to
perfevere in the ufe of this fubllance, or
to with to render it fixed; fince the
changes which it undergoes do not alter
Iis nature, and the indeftructible order of
Iis affinities.
THE calx of fin is ealily applied to any
purpofe, and experiences no change from
the concentrated phlogiffic vapour. Thefe
confiderations induced me to endeavour
to obtain this calx perfectly white; and
here follows the refull of my experi-
 Malacca tin calcined gives
 pretty white calx; but, whatever atten-
tion  paid to take off the red furface
which the violence of the fire occafioned,
 takes always  shade of grey: when it
 WHITE PICMENTS.  diluted. Tin calcined by nitre in fu-
tion, gives  tarnifhed and gross cals,

which continued wathings could not de
prive of  yellowith int.
HAviNC precipitated, by means of dry
yegetable alkali,  solution of English tin
in muriatic acid, after the manner of Nr.

Bayen for exuacting the arfenic,  had
 cals of the pureft whitenels, fo light as
to be buoyant on the liquor in the filter,
and to pats through it in fome quanti
ties; but it poffeffes at the fame time 
kind of adherence with the falts, which
makes the particles remaining on the fil-
ter to be incapable of being pulverized,
gummy, femi-tranfparent, and of  yel-
lowith hyc. It is neceitary to diluie it
in boiling water; and afterwards to cal-
cine the fediment flighily, when it has
had sufficient time to fettle.
 HAVE


 ON. WTIITE PIGMENTS.
 HAVE employed the beft Malacca tin
and rectified nitrous acid, and have tried
the calcination after the manner of Meyer.
It formed  very white (parkling calx,
which remained in the lilter in the con=
fiftency of jelly.—Meanwhile;  obferved
that it was always  little yellow; by 
mixture of  portion of earth which took;
during the operation, the colour of tur=

peth mineral.
. VERY fine white calx is made from
antimony calcined with nitre in fution,
but the earth of this femi-metal mult be
placed in the number of thofe which
combine too ealily with the phlogiftic
vapour. Diaphoretic anrimony, ground
in oil, took in ten minutes  colour like:
fulphur, in my phlogiftic apparatus.
   property of bismuth to give  fim

white


ON WIIITE PIGMENTS.  calx, called magiffery, or white
paint ufed by the ladies, is well; known.
It is eafily prepared, fince it is only ne-
ceffary to diffolve the bifmuth in nitrous
acid, and precipitate it by means of wa-
ter. It dilutes perfectly in oil and muci-
lage.—But this colour ought to be re-
jected as the moft alterable by the phlo-
giftic vapour. It became completely black
in ten minutes in my apparatus, and this
fact is proved from what happens to
perfons who ule this colour, when they
are expofed to the vapours of fulphur;

garlic, or any putrid fubllance
 furnifhes, by all the proceffes of
calcination and precipitation,  pretty
white calx, when it is pure and feparated

 
The fame will happen to perfons drinking falt
water, and bathing in the fea; as is well known at


Margate, &.
from


X ON WWHLLE PIGMENTS.
from iron; otherwife; the preparation of
vitriol of zine will become yellow when
expoted to the arr.  have precipitated
it from this folution, by means of lime-
water, and by caultic and effervelcent
alkali;  have calcined this femi-metal
alone, and with nitre and in all thefe
operations  have obtained an earthy fub-
ftance of different degrees of whitenels;
which, after it was dried and prepared;
mixed readily with oil and mucilage;
without loting its colour; and which ex-

perienced no fentible change when ea

poted to the phlogiffic vapour.
THESE valuable properties, the chief
object of my refearches, engaged me to
 my experiments, to determine
at once the moff economical procets,
and the moft advantageous and infallible
preparation.— Thefe attempts have con-
vinced





OH WHIlIk IIGMENTS.  me, that the calcination of this
Lemi-metal alone in  crucible, placed ho-
Fizontally on the corners of  reverberat
ing furnace, gives the pureft, the whitelt,
and the leaft reducible cals, and that to
make an excellent colour, it is fufficient
to teparate with water the parts unburned,
and grind it with  little of the earth of
alum or chalk, to give it  body. Linc
precipitated by Pruffian alkali, even in
diftilled vinegar, retains always  fhade
of yellow, does not unite to well in oil,
and takes  femi-tranfparent confiffence,
like cheefe.
 ARSENIC extinguithes much
lets in diluting than one would believe
from its faline nature: it preferves its colour
beft in guim-water; and it is remarkable,
that, infead of turning black in the phlo-
giflic



VerT
  WHLLE PIGMENTS.
giftic vapour, it takes  very diftinct fhade
of yellow. This property is fufficiently
fingular and conflant to furnish  new
method of analyfing arfenic, to as to
Know it. And this alteration of colour
makes it of no ufe in painting, although.
its deleterious qualities might alone pre=
vent the practice.
THE femi-metal Known by the name.
of manganese gives allo  white calx. .
had at firft great hopes from this colour;
as, contrary to all thofe extracted from
the other meials, it became white by
the phlogiffic vapour. There remained,
therefore, but one difficulty to overcome,
vit. to feparate from the manganefe the
portion of iron which it afually contains;
and which infallibly makes the earth 
little yellow. To accomplith this in the
cheapeft manner, . fubmitted the black
Ore


ON WHITE PIGMENTS.  of manganele to  long calcination,
to render its iron infoluble.  after-
wards applied vinegar to it, after the ex-
ample of . de la Peyroufe; and in
precipitating the folution by alkall, 
cafily obtained  pure white precipitate.
But  foon perceived that the facility
with which  colouring body lofes its
phlogifton is no lefs an inconvenience
than that of attracting it, and productive
of the fame alterations.
THE white of manganefe became very
foon yellow when expoted to the air;
and this is not to be afcribed to the iron
contained in it, fince neither the galls
or Pruffian alkali had difcovered any
of it in the folution. This fubliance,
therefore, can be of no ufe in producing
 white colour for painting.
 PLACED



 ON WHIITE PIGMENTS.
 PLACED (wben the experiments were
made) in my apparatus, pieces of cloth,
on which were laid the white of calcare-
ous tartar, different preparations of white
from tin and zinc, in oil and water;
and  allowed them to continue expoted
to the phlogiffic vapour during the fit
 of the Academ
If they were
not altered, their fuperiority over the
whites in ufe would be fufficiently efta-
blifhed. The fitting continued for near
an hour; and the bottle having been
opened, all the colours continued to have
the fame hade which they had before.
 can, therefore, recommend to painters
thofe three whites, and particularly that
of  the preparation of which is ex-
pofed to less variation, the fhade more
lively and uniform, and, moreover, it is
 Dijon.
Sit


ON WHITE PIGMENTS.  for all purpofes, and perhaps procured
at lefs expence.
 will affert farther, that it may be
procured in fufficient quantities to fupply
the place of ceruife in every branch of
the art, even in interior houle-paint-
  would recommend it less with 
view of adding new fplendor to this kind
of ornament, than for the fafety of thofe
who are employed in  and perhaps for
the fafety of thofe who inhabit houfes
ornamented in this manner.
BUr, without being too fanguine, al.
though the procels in the preparation be
timplified in proportion to the demand,
as is ufually the cafe, yet there is reafon
 Would it not anfwer the purpofes of an inge-
nious Colourman, to prepare and yend this pir-

ment?
  ON WHITE PIGMENTS.
to apprehend, that the low price of ce-
ruffe will always give it the preference
in houfe painting. With regard to thofe
who apply colours to nobler purpofes,
they will not helitate to employ the white
of   am aftured that four livres is
paid for  pound of white of crems,
and  believe the white in question, pre-
pared in the manner which  have point
ed out, might be fold for fix.
NI. COURTORS, connected with the
laboratory of the Academy, has already
declared that it is ufed in houfe-paining
lets in regard to its unalterability than its
folubility; and this may be the more
readily believed, as the fowers of  into many compofitions of the apo-
thecary. Al. Courtors has alfo arrived, at
the art of giving more body to this white,
which the painters feemed to defire, and
of


ON WHITE PIGMENTS.  making it bear  comparifon with
white lead erther in water or oil. The
only fault found with it is its drying too
llowly when ufed in oil; but fome ex-
periments which  have made, incline me
to believe that this fault may be eafily
remedied, or greatly corrected, by giving
it more body. At any rate, it may be
rendered ficcative at pleature, by adding
 little vitriol of zine (white copperas)
Hlightly calcined.
PAINTERS already Know the proper-
ties of this fall; but perhaps they do not
know that it mixes with the white of
 better than with any other colour,
for the reafon that they have chemically
the same bafe. It is prepared by depriv-
ing the white copperas of that fmall por-
tion of iron which would render it yel-
low; which is eafily done, by digeft-
ing


 ONN WIIITE PICMENTS.
ing  folution of it on the filings of
TInc.
 MIKTURE of this falt thus prepared
may be made on the palette, which will
caufe no alteration in the colour, but be
productive of great effect in  very fmall
quantity.
