THE COMPLETE
DRAWING-BOOK;
CONTAINING MANY CURIOUS
SPECIMENS,
Under the following Heads :
. SELECT PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY.
 ACADEMY AND GROUPS OF FIGURES.
 BEASTS AND BIRDS OF VARIOUS KINDS.
 LANDSCAPES, SHIPPING, FLOWERS, &.
With several Outlines.
Rendered easier to the Comprehension of BeGinneks than
any Book of this Kind hitherto made public.
The Whole neatly Engraved on
ONE HUNDRED OCTAVO COPPERPLATES;
FROM


LE CLERC; REMBRANDT, BARLOW, SPILSBURY,
LE BRUN; BERGHEM; CHATELIN, CALLOT



And others the BEST MaSTERs.
To which are annexed,
PROPER INSTRUCTIONS TO YOUTH,
For thelr,
Improvement and Entertainment in this Art.
The FIFTH EDITION.
WITH MANY ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS
LONDON;
Printed for ROBERT SAYER, Map, Chart, and Printseller.
No  Fleet-Street.  THE
STUDENT IN DRAWING.
HIS useful, noble, and extensive Art,
besides its being an immediate In-
troduction to Painting, Sculpiure, En-
graving; with all the Train of grace-
ful Studies coinciding therewith, is
even necessary to form the Minds of Touth, for what-
ever Station designed, since nothinxunforms or cor-
rects our ldeas so soon as  true Knowledge of Symme-
try and Proportion-Although this Art, in its Extent,
be as spacious as Observation can discover, or Imagina-
tion conceive, yet, in the following Sheets, may be
found an Abstract, containing Examples amply suffi-
cient to direct  Genivs, in the least apt or inquisitive,
not forgetting Diligence, but laying aside Fear; because
every fresn Attempt on the same Subject will evidence





in Amendment to encourage the Learner. It would
be rash on  sudden to expect Perfection in’this Aris
yet, after  few painful ESSAYS,  Fleafure succceds
in the Prospect, and grows in the Practice, beyond
that of any other Acquisition: and fure no one would
spare the Means where the Enp is so desireable. Not
one Book has hitherto appeared in this Country well
suited to facilitate the Attainment of this Arr; yet
we are always invited to attend to ample and learned
Instructions to Beginners, where the preliminary Dis-
courses often puzzle and confuse the Ideas more than
the Examples: they recommend are ever able to era-
dicate. But, since Example has made verbal In-
structions expected, we here subjoin such as seem to
us necessary for aWork of tbis Kind; viz. Any of the
following Examples being placed before you,  BLack
EEAd PENCIL; and’PAPeR; are all the Requisites neede
ful-Then slightly sketch- the general Proportions
from the Object so placed, wbich carefully survey,
and alter by rubbing it gently ont with stalé Bread,
Gr Indian Rubber, slighely and cautioussy retouching
withmore Correctness, still keeping your Copy so faint
that you may wph ease take out and amend it. When
you can sind no farther Disagreement from the Original
in your Sketch,-fresh point your Pencil, and, keeping
arwaste Paper under your Hand, begin to finifhi your
Qut-line, taking particular Care to observe and imi¬
tate such Parts as appear daré, distinctly from those
which are faint or swaller, the strong Touches be-
ing what gives Spirit to the Out-line, and, when
properly given, always denote  Master' Hand.





Let your greatest Application be employed in mak
ing  perfect Out-line, for in this principally consists
the Art of Drawing; this sully attained, all Arts
are easy, and every Study will become delightful.
Tlie Qut-line completed, Light and Shadow become
your next Concern, wliich is à Labeur so pleasing,
that no Commendation can be given adcquate to the
Pleasure  real Proftssor finds in the Execution of
this Art, or rather Science succeeding Ars- Begin-
ners are apt to leave the Study of Qut-lines too soon,
and so commence Painters; like those who raise 
Structure ere the Foundation be compleated. Light
and Shadow are produced by Etcbing or Hatching,
Wasbing, Claro Obscuro, Painting, Modelling, Sculp-
ture, &. &—As the first three are chiesly used
by Learners,  shall give  few Hints for the execu-
ting each. And first, of Hatching:-- Carefully ob-
serve the Engraving, or Manner inwhich the Strokes of
the Original are laid, and keep with Exactness the
Form, not so much regarding their Number; first
Alightly making them of  Thickness; and after,
by various Retouchings, strengthen them to the
Tone of Colour in your Original, whether you use
black or red Chalk, or black Lead ;--which may be
used singly, or thus compounded, working the
fainter Parts with black Lead, and give Strength
with black Chalk; or, finisning your Drapery, Hair,
and Eye-brows in this Manner, and the Flest, or
naked, with red Cholk-This Method is best for
copying engraved Prints, which  principally recom-
mend to Beginners.-Next, of Washing, or Shading




with INDIAN Ink :-Go exactly over your Out-line
with  Pen dipped in common Ink; with clean stale
Bread rub out all Remains of your black Lead; then
mix your Indian Ink, by rubbing it in an earthen
Saucer, with Water, till it is pretty black; then take
another clean Saucer, and dip your Pencil in the
Indian Ink, and, with Water, mix it to the lightest
Shade ; as it dries, deepen it where necessary, till
you come up to the Strength of your Original—-
This Method is most proper to use in Drawing from
Metzotintos or Paintings--Lastly, of CRAYONS,
beginning with black and wbite :Take blue or pur-
ple-coloured Paper, and, having exactly formed your
Out-line, begin on the second Degree of your Shades,
and, with black Chalk, darken dounwards; then take
white French Chalk, to be found at all Colour-Shops,
and heighten the lighter Parts to  perfect white—
In this Manner all Paintings may be copied in their
properColours by having different Crayons of each
Colour, from Dark to Light, in due Gradations, and
practising by the preceding Rule, rolling  Piece of
Paper to  Point, and stumping or rubbing each Co-
lour on the Proer when finished, to prevent their
coming off, which yet will be tender, and should be
kept behind  Glass.



