THE

COMPLEAT
DRAWING-MASTER:
CONTAINING
MANY CURIOUS SPECIMENS;
AS
THE SEVERAL PARTS

OFTHE HUMAN BODY,

WHOLE FIGURES,
LANDSKIPS, CATTLE, BUILDINGS, &.
Neatly Engraved on COPPER-PLATES, after the DESIGNS of
the greatest MASTERS ;
WHEREIN
The PRINCIPLES of DRAWING are laid down after 
natural and easy Manner:
TO WHICH IS PREFIX‘
Some GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS to form the JUDGMENT
of Young BEGINNERS; by which that useful ART may be attained in  short time without  master.
tained in  short Time without  MASTER.
LONDON:
Printed for HENRY PARKER, opposite Birchin-Lane, Cornhill
MDCC.LXIII.















 





 







 
THE

Compleat Drawing-Master.

THE PRINCIPLES, &. or DRAWING.

   . .
Or DRAWING IN GENERAL.

DRAWING is the Art of representing the Ap
 



pearances of Objects, by Imitation; or expressing,



by Lines and Shades, the Form or Appearance




of any Thing in Nature or Art, the Copying of
another Draught, or any Design conceived in the



Mind; and all this without the Assistance of ma

thematical Rules.
The Art of Drawing, being
an Accomplishment not more ele

gant, agreeable and ornamental, than useful ; is, therefore, by no

Means, to be neglected in the Education of Youth, wherein any







Genius or Inclination that Way is discovered. Besides its being, of
all other Arts, the most universally admired and esteemed, there are
few other Arts or Professions to which it is not assisting its great
Use is not confincd to Painters, Engravers, Gardeners, Embroiderers
ers, Weavers, and many others concerned in designing; but the
Mathematician, Engineer, Architect and Navigator daily practise it.
All Designs and Models are executed in it; its Use appears in every
Station of Life, and it is equally admired by Children and by Adults.
To be able, on the Spot, to take the Sketch of  fine Building, or
 beautiful Prospect, of any curious Production of Art, or uncom
mon Appearance in Nature, is not only  very desirable Accomplish
ment, but  very agreeable Amusement; Rocks, Mountains, Fields,
Woods, Rivers, Cataracts, Cities, Towns, Castles, Houses, Fortifi
cations, Ruins, or whatever else may present itfelf to View, on our
Journies or Travels in our own, or in foreign Countries, may be
thus brought Home, and preserved for our future Ufe, either in Bu
finess or Conversation. This Art transmits to our View, Things
that are long since past, or would otherwise perish; represents to
us the Deeds of People and Nations, for many Ages dead, and pre
serves the Features and Resemblances of Ancestors, or other valu
able Perfons, for many Generations. It is therefore no Wonder
that an Attainment so universally useful and admired, should be dis
tinguished as one of the highest Embellishments of human Life, and
be patronized and cultivated by all the denerous and ingenious Part
of Mankind.





  

CHAP. II.
GENERAL
RULES FOR DRAWING.
BEGIN with plain gcometrical Figures, as Lines, Angles, Tri

angles, Polygons, Arches, Circles, Ovals, Cones, Cylinders,
and the like, being the Fundations of all other Proportions. The
Circle is of Use in the several orbicular Forms, as the Sun, Moon,
Globes, &. che Oval in giving  just-Proportion to the Face. and
Mouth; and the Square confines  Picture you are to copy, &.
The Triangle is of Use in drawing  side or half Face; Angles and




Arches in Perspective; and the Polygon in Ground-Plats, Fortifica
tions, &. The Cone, in Spires, Steeples, Tops of Towers, &.
The Cylinder, in Columns, Pillars, &.
Having brought your Hand to be fit and ready in general Propor
tions, accumstom yourself to give every Object its due Shades, ac
cording to its Concavity or Convexity, and to elevate or depress the
same as the Object appears, either nearer or farther off the Light.
Before you begin to work, view your Original with close Attention;
divide it in your Mind into several Parts; observe the Length, the
Breadth, and the Similitude of cach Part; consider their Proportion
to each other, and to the whole; the Distances from one Part to the
other, and what Parts lie opposite to each other.
AFTER you have done your Copy, view it afresh, by comparing it
with the Original, for the discovering and amending of Faults, as it
will not only serve to perfect you in that particular Draught, but will
improve your Knowledge of Lines and Proportions in general, and
in Time enable you for the nearest Imitations. The Out-lines must
be drawn in  gliding Manner, large and smooth, which will give
them the Resemblance of Life and Motion. You muft preferve in
your Draught  strong Refemblance between the Parts and the
Whole; every Member ought to be made to agree; strong Limbs
have no Relation to  consumptive Body, or decayed old Age; and
the Eyes, Legs, Hands and Feet, should be exactly paired.
Having good Copies to draw after, learn to reduce them to other
Proportions, either larger or smaller, and this by frequent Practice.
In drawing Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, &. with their
Leaves, Herbs, Trees, &. of different Kinds: As also in the Imi
tation of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, &. it is requisite not only to be per
fect in laying down the exact Proportions, but, before you procced
to the shadowing and trimming your Work, to be well acquainted in
the general or outward Lines; and this is still more necessary in imi
tating the Body of  Man with all its Lineaments, as Head, Nose
Eyes, Ears, Cheeks, Arms and Shadows; as also in the Drapery and
Imitation of the Clothing, and the artificial setting off ihe outward
Coverings, Habit or Ornaments of the Body, in their natural and pro
per Folds.





CHAP. III.
PARTICULAR DIRECTIONS for DRAWING.
IN Drawing after  Picture or Print you must take Care to place
it in such  Light that the Gloss of the Colours may not interrupt
your View, but so that the Light and your Eye may fall equally and
Obliquely upon the Piece. To this End you are to consider from
what Point, and in whar Direction, the Light false upon the Objects,
according to which Direction, let all your Lights and Shades be piaced
throughout the Work. That Part of the Object must be lightest
which has the Light most directly opposite to it; if the Light fall
Sideways on pour Picture, you must make that Side wlich is opposite
to it lightest; and, on the contrary, that Side which is farthest from
ir darkest. Let the Piece be placed ar such  Distance, that, upon
opening your Eyes, you may view it all at once, and the larger the
Picture is, it should be so much the more placed off at the greater
Distance, but right before you, and  little reclined.
DRAW all your Out-lines at firit very faint with  Coal, which may
easily be rubbed out again with the Feathers of  Duck' Wing, or
 Crumb of Bread; and these Out-lines should be drawn true, and
agreeable to the Pattern, before you begin to shadow any Part of the
Object. The Out-lines next the Light should be drawn more faint;
and when you have drawn one Feature, it should be  Direction for
you, in some Measure, to draw another, by observing with your Eye
the Distance from that to the next Feature, making  full Mark at
the Place with your Coal; then draw it, and so to the next, 'till you
have drawn the whole Figure.
THEN observe the Middle of the Picture you would copy, and
touch upon the Paper with the Point of your Coal; afterwards ob
serve the more conspicuous and uppermost Figures, if there are
more than one, which you are to touch lightly in their proper Places.
Thus running over the whole Drught, you will fee, as it were, the
Skeleton of the Piece to draw.




HAVING made out these Sketches, view them diligently, to see
if they answer your Pattern or not; for the Gestures of the Life
ought to shew themselves eminently in the first and rudest Draught
of the Piece; correct and amend whatever you perceive amiss; add
ing and diminishing as it varies from the Pattern, by which means it
will be brought nearer and nearer to the Life.
OBSERVE the Distance of one Limb, Joint, or Musele, from ano
ther, and the fame in all other Accidents of the Figure; their
Length, Breadth, Turnings, &. Shadow next to the Light very
faintly; and where you see bold and free Touches, be not timo
rous in expressing the same. In drawing  Head after the Life, or
otherwise, take Care to place the Features exactly right upon the
Cross-Lines, whether it be  full Face or three-quarter Face. In
shortening, you must make the Cross-Lines to fly upwards, but
where the Aspect is downwards, they must be made downwards
in  circular Manner.
HAVING drawn the Out-lines true with  Coal, yon are to proceed
to trace the fame Lines again with  Pen, Indian-Ink, &. drawing
them with more Exactness; and by imitating all the Hatches with
their exact Distances one from another, their Crossings, Turnings
and Windings, with more Boldness and Freedom, perfect your De
sign.
In drawing after  naked Body, all the Muscles are not to be so
plainly expressed as in anatomical Figures; but that Side whose Parts
are most apparent, and of Signification in the Performance of any
Action, must be made to appear more or less, according to the Force
of that Action.
In drawing young Persons, the Muscles must not appear mani
festly so hard as in elder and full grown Persons; the lame Thing is
to be observed as to fat and fleshy Persons, and such as are very deli
cate and beautiful; and in Women scarce any Muscles at all are to
be expressed, or but very little, unless it be in some very forcible
Action; and then too they are to be represented very faintly; tlic
like is also to be observed as to Children. The Motion of the whole
Body must be confsdered in drawing of the Muscles; as in the rising




and falling of the Arms, the Muscles of the Breast appear either
more or less; the Hips do the like, according as they are bent out.
ward or inward; and it is the same chiefly in the Shouldlers, Sides
and Neck, according to the several Actions of the Body.
THE Breadth and Largeness of  Picture is also to be considered ;
it should be larger about the Legs and Garments, shewing itself
flender above, by discovering one Shoulder and hiding the other,

which is shortened by turning the Body. But sometimes the Fi
gure is to be represented biggest in the upper Parts, by representing
either or both the Shoulders, or both the Arms; shewing the one
Leg, and hiding the other; or both of them after one Manner at
Discretion. Neither ought this to be observed only in the whole
Body, but even in every Part, so that in the Legs, when  Muscle
is raised outwards on the one Side, that which is directly on the con
trary Side must be drawn in and hid, as it appears in the Life.
THE Proportion of the Figure ought to be multiplied by Degrees,
in Proportion of one to two, three, four, &. for herein the chief
Skill consists; the Diameter of the biggest Place between the Knee
and the Foot is double the least, and the largest Part of the Thigh
tripple.
 —







CHAP. IV.
OF THE PROPER MATERIALS FOR DRAWING.
THE Materials required in Drawing, are black Lead Pencils,

Crayons of black, white, or red Chalk, Crow-Quill Pens, 
Rule and Compasses, Camel' Hair-Pencils and Indian-Ink. Accus
tom yourself to hold your Pencil further from the Point than you do
in Writing, which will give you  better Command of it, and con
contribute to render your strokes more free and bold. The Use of
your Pencil is to draw the first Sketches, or Out-lines of your Piece;
as any Stroke or Tine that is amiss, may, by this Means, be more
easilly rubbed out than in any other Thing; and when you have made

your Sketch as correct as you can with the Pencil, you may then




draw carefully the best Out-line you have got, wich your Crow-Quili
Pen and Ink. The Ink made Use of for this Purpose, must not be
the common, but Indian-Ink; being much softer than the other, and
not running; and, by mixing it with Water, it may be made to any
Degree of Strength, and may be used in  Pen like common Ink.
After using the Ink, you may wipe out the Pencil-Lines, by rub
bing the Piece gently with che Crumb of stale Bread. Having thus
got your Out-line discharged, your next Work is to shade your Piece
Properly, as you shall be directed below, either by drawing fine
Strokes wich your Pen, where it requires to be shaded, or by wash
ing it wich the Hair-Pencil and the Indian-Ink. As tothe Rule and
Compasses, they are never, or rarely, to be used, except in measu
ring the Proportions of your Figures, after you have drawn them,
to prove whether they are right or not; or in Houses, Fortifications,
and other Pieces of Architecture.
Red Lead, and red or black Chalk are used in the fame Manner
as black Lead. White Chalk and Tobacco-pipe Clay are used in
heightening or giving strong Lights, and in drawing on coloured Pa
per. Pastils or Crayons; or any other Colours, mixed with Tobac
co-pipe Clay, which, while soft, and in the Consistency of  Paste,
is rolled up in Pieces, about the Thickness of  Quill, and two or
three Inches in Length, and then dried, are generally used on co¬
loured Paper; and the Colours are so rubbed aud wrought one into
another, in such  Manner, that no Strokes appear, but the whole
looks as if it was done with  Brush.

CHAP. .
Or LIGHT AND SHADE.
It is the artful Management of Light and Shade that gives the

Appearance of Subsitance, Roundness and Distance, to whatever
Bodies are represented by Drawing. Draw  Circle on  Piece of
Paper; fill it up with any even Colour, and it will appear to be 
Body with  round Circumference and flat Sides: But by colouring it
stronger in the Middle, and causing it gradually to weaken towards




the Circumference, it will receive  convex Appearance like that of
 Ball or Globe: Where ever the Vivacity of Colour is strongest, that
Part of ihe Object catches the Sight first and appears nearest to it;
whereas its Weakness and Goines off are more and more broken and
faint, and seem tu fly farther off from the Sight. In rounding the
Parts of any Object, the Extremities in turning must lose themselve,
insensibly and confusedly, without precipitating the Light all of:
sudden into the Shadows, or the Shadows into the Light; but the
Passage of the one into the other must be common and impercepti
ble; that is, by Degrees of Light into Shadow, and Shadow into
Light. Objects that are painted light, must have  sufficient Breadth
of Shadow to sustain them, and dark Bodies must have  sudden
Light behind, to detach them from the Ground, or from those Ob
jects, that are placed behind them; otherwise they will appear con
fusedly, as sticking upon each other; whercas the Oppolition of
Shade to  light Object, and of Light to  dark one, gives  Pro
jection, and separates them from other Bodies.
THERE should be  Ballance preserved between the Lights and Sha
dows;  broad Light ought not to be introduced into  Draught with
out  large Shadow. The nearer any Object is to the Eye, it is seen
so much the stronger and plainer; the Sight is weakened by Distances,
and the mode remote any Object is, it is feen in  more imperfect

Manner: Therefore those Objects which are placed foremost to the
View, ought to be more finished than those that are cast behind;
and they should have such  relative Dominion over each other, that
as one Object, by its Heightenings, causes others to retire more back
wards, fo the fame Object must be chased and made to appear farther
from the Sight, than others which are more strongly illuminated.
It is nor sufficient that remote Objects be only coloured in  more
faint and languid Manner; but, according to their Distance, the
Parts must appear more or less confused; the Eye not being able to
discover minutely what is far separated from it. Pure and unmix'
White, either draws an Object nearer, or carries it off ito  greater
Distance. If it be accompanied with Black, the Opposition of Light
and Dark renders the Object more sensible and brings it nearer to
the advanced Part; but pure White, being the lightest of Colours,
unless it be forced forwards, and supported by Black, will fly off to
the remotest View. As for pure Black, it is the heaviest, most ear




thy, and most sensible of all Colours, and brings the Objects nearer
to the Sight: It must be placed in Masses, be insensibly confused,
and have its proper Reposes.
THE Representations of Bodies give them always such Lights  :
are most proper and convenient to their supposed Situations. If the
Objects are in the Field, or open Air, and the Sun invisible, or ob
scured by Clouds, you must then introduce almost an universal Light,
though not warm and strong, and your Shades must be faint; but
when the Sun is conspicuous, and shines in it’ full Lustre, then the
Light must be very strong and bold, and the Shadows very dark.
If the Objects you represent be supposed in  Room,  little, but not
very much illuminated, and you survey it from without, and stand
on  Level with the Light that strikes upon it, the Shadows of that
Figure must be very soft, whereby the Figure itself will appear beau
teous to the Eye; and will, notwithstanding the Softnefs of the Sha
dow, seem as imbossed, and come boldly out.  small Light illu
minating  Body, occasions the Shadows on the dark Side to be
large, and their Extremities to be very bold. On the other Hand, 
Light makes the Shadows on the darker Side to be more distinct and
more soft in the Limitations.
REFLECTION is to be used in delineating, glittering, or shining Bo
dics, as Glass, Pearls, Silver, &. Let the Cause of the Reflection, be it
more or less, be seen in the Thing itfelf. Place all your Lights one
Way through the whole Work, and if the Light fall sideways on the
Picture, the other Side, which is the farthest from the Light, must
be made the darkest. That Part of the Body must be made lightest,
which has the Light most opposite to it; if the Light be placed
above the Head, then the Top of the Head must be made lightest;
the Shoulder must receive the next greater Degree of Light; and
thus must you continue to shade, losing the Light by Degrees. By
how much one Part of the Body projects more than another, it must,
by so much, be made the lighter; and, on the contrary, thode Parts
that bend inward must be made fo much the darker.
Two equal
Lights must never be made in one and the same Picture; the greater
is to strike forcibly into the Middle, and wich greater Lustre on those
Parts of the Design where the principal Figures and Strength of
the Action seem to lie, diminishing
it gradually as it approaches near
est the Extremities of the Piece.




CHAP. VI.
OF DRAWING FACES.
IN Drawing  Head, it is usually divided into four equal Parts.
 From the Crown of the Head to the Top of the Forchead.
 From the Top of the Forchead to the Eye-Brows.  From the
Eye-Brows to the Bottom of the Nose.  From thence to the Bot
tom of the Chin. But this Proportion is not constant; those Fea
tures, in different Men, being often very different as to Length and
Shape. In  well proportioned Face, however, they are nearly right.
To direct you, therefore, in forming  perfect Face; your first Bu
siness is to draw  complete Oval, in thie Middle of which, from
the Top to the Bottom, draw  perpendicular Line; through the
Center or Middle of this Line draw another Line directly across,
from one Side to the other of your Oval. On these two Lines all
Features of the Face are to be drawn as follows. Divide your per
pendicular Line into four equal Parts; the first must be allotted to
the Hair of the Head; the second is from the Top of the Fore¬

head to the Top of the Nose, between thhe Eye-brows; the third
is from thence to the Bottom of the Nose, and the fourth in
cludes the Lips and Chin: The Line across the perpendicular one,
or the Breadth of the Face, is always supposed to be the Length of
five Eyes; you must therefore divide it into five equal Parts, and
place the Eyes upon it fo as to leave exactly the Length of one Eye
betwixt them. This is to be understood only of  full, front Face;
for if it turns to either Side, then the Distances are to be lessened
on that Side which turns from you, less or more, in Proportion to
its Turning. The Top of the Ear is to rise parallel to the Eye
brows, at the End of the Diameter or cross Line, and the Bottom of
it must be equal to the Bottom of the Nose; the Nostrils ought
not to come out farther than the Corner of the Eye in any Face;
and the Middle of the Mouth must always be placed upon thie per
pendicular Line. The Mouth, when shut, is as large as an Eye.
THE following is an ingenious Device, which, perhaps, may some

what assist the young Practitioner, in forming the Face according to




its different Turnings, and in placing the Featurcs properly thereon.
Procure  Piece of smooth Wood, turned for the Purpose, in the
Shape of an Egg, which is nearly the Shape of the human Head;
draw  Line lengthways quite round it, and divide this Line into two
equal Parts, by another Line drawn directly across it, at right Angles.
The Features being drawn on these two Lines, according to the

Rules delivered above, will produce  Fore-right Face. Turn the
Oval  small Matter from the left Hand to the right, and the
perpendicular, upon which the particular Features are to be drawn,
will appear bent like  Bow; always observing in what Manner the
Nose projects beyond the Round of the Oval. The same must be
observed, if you turn the Oval from the right Hand to the left; and
if you incline the Oval downwards, and to the right; or upwards,
reclining to the Left, the Lines of the Cross, and the Features
drawn on them, will in each Case, leave different Appearances;
and  great Variety of Faces may be shewn by this Oval, according
as you incline, recline, or turn it more or less. But those Figures
which come Sideways are to be drawn by Means of  Perpendicular
upon which the Forehead, Nose, Mouth, and Chin are to be drawn,
as before directed. It is to be observed, that if the Face be fat, the
Checks will seem to swell; if lean, the Jaw-Bones will stick out, and
the Cheeks fall in; but if it be neither too fat nor too lean, it will
be nearly round. Touch the Features lightly, wheere the Eyes, Nose,
Mouth, and Chin should ftand: Then begin to draw thein more ex
actly, and so procced 'till you have finished the Face; after which
draw the Hair, Beard, and Shadows about it. You are to consider all
those chief Touches which give Life to  Face, and that discover the
Disposition of the Mind: Thus the Mouth extended, and the Cor
ners turning  little up, shews  smiling Countenance, &. You must
take Care that the Shadows be not made too dark, where they should
be light, because afterwards they cannot be rendered more light;
and remember that they are to be more faint and light, in  fair, than
 swarthy Complexion.





CHAP VII.
OF THE MEASURES AND PROPORTIONS OF THE
SEVERAL PARTS OF the Body.
THE Ancients commonly allowed eight Heads to their Figures,
though some of them had but seven; however, the Moderns
ordinarily divide their Figure into ten Faces: That is, from the
Crown of the Head the Sole of the Foot, in the Manner follow
ing. From the Crown of the Head to the Forehead, is the third
The Face begins at the lowest Hairs which are
Part of the Face.The Face begins at the lowest Hairs which are
upon the Forehead, and ends at the Bottom of the Chin. The
Face is divided into three proportional Parts; the first contains the
Forehead, the second the Nose, and the Third the Mouth and Chin.
From thie Chin to the Pit between the Collar Bones, are two Lengths
of  Nose. From the Pit betwixt the Collar-Bones to the Bottom of
the Breast, one Face. From the Bottom of the Breast, to the Navel,
one Face. From the Navel to the Genitals, one Face. From the
Genitals to the upper Part of the Knee, two Faces: The Knee

contains half  face. From the lower Part of Knee to the Ancle, 

two Faces. From the ancle to the Sold of thie Foot, half  Face.
 MAN, when his Arms are stretched out, is, from the longest
Finger of his right Hand to the longest of his left, as broad as he is
long. From one Side of the Breasts to the other, two Faces. The
Bone of the Arm called Humerus, is the: Length of two Faces,
from the Shoulder to the Elbow. From the End of the Elbow to
the Root of the littie Finger, the Bone called Cubitus with Part of
the Hand, contain two Faces. From the Box of the Shoulder-Blade
to the Pit betwixt the Collar-Bones, one Face. If you will be sa
tisfied in the Measures of Breadth, from the Extremity of one Finger
the other, so that this Breadth should be equal to the Length of
the Body, you must observe that the Boxes of the Elbows with the
Humerus, and of the Humerus with the Shoulder-Blade, bear the
Proportions of half  Face, when the Arms are stretched out. The
tole of the Foot is the fisch Part of the Figure. The Hand is the
Length of  Pace. The Thumb contains  Nole. The Inside of
the Arm, from the Place where the Muscle disappears, which makes




the Breast, called the pectoral Muscle to the Middle of the Arm,
four Noses. From the Middle of the Arm to the Beginning
of the Hand five Noses. The longest Toe is  Nose long. The
two utmost Parts of the Teats, and the Pit betwixt the Collar-Bones
of  Woman, make an equilateral Triangle.
FOR the Breadth of the Limbs no precise Measures can be given;
because the Measures themselves are changeable, according to the
Quality of the Persons, and according to the Movement of the Mus
cles.
   

 


 

CHAP. VIII.
OF DRAWING THE BODY AT FULL LENGTH.
FIRST make your Oval for che Head, and having divided it,

according to the Instructions already given, draw  perpendicular
Line from the Top of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, and measure
out eight Lengths of the Head. This Line is of special Use to di
rect you in placing the Figure upright; and in the Action of the
Posture, where it falls in, and where it swells out. One Head'
Length from the Chin, yon must draw the Breasts; the third Mea
sure reacheth to the Navel; the fourth to the Privities; the fifth to
the Middle of the Thigh; the fixth to the lower Part of the Knee;
the seventh to the lower Part of the Leg; and the eighth to the Heel
and Sole of the Foot.
OBSERVE in every Measure, what Touches there are of the Mus
cles. Draw that Leg first, on which the Body stands; then draw
the other; and after that the Arms and Hands; but draw, at first,
all the Parts very lightly, with  Coal only; because there is least
Trouble in altering and rubbing out the Coal. As for the Hands,
they are twice as long as they are broad, and each of their Parts has
its Length, Breadth, and Thickness. The Nail upon the Finger is
about half the Joint it is upon. The Length of the Foot is  sixth
Part of the Heighth of  Person; and the Length is five Eights more
than the Breadth. The Length of the Face and Hands ought to be
exactly






exactly equal, and makes but just the tenth Part of  Person
Heighth.
THE Rules in drawing Children are as follow: Some make  Child
to contain five Measures of the Head, viz. from the Top of the
Head to the Privities, three, and in the Thighs and Legs two more;
the Breadth between the Shoulders, the Length of  Head and 

half; the Breadth of the Body above the Navel, the Length of one
Head ; and the Breadth of the upper Part of the Thigh is the third
Part of two Lengths of the Head; the Breadth of the Knee is just
the Measure there is betwixt the Eyes and the Chin; the Small of the
Leg, and the Brawn of the Arm, are of the Thickness of the
Neck.
In general, let it be obderved always to begin wich the right Side
of the Piece you are copying, for by so doing you will always have
what is done before your Eyes, and the rest will follow more natu
rally, and with greater Ease; whereas, if you begin with the left
Side, your Hand and Arm will cover what you do first, and deprive
you of the Sight of it; by which Means you will not be able to pro
ceed with so much Ease, Pleasure, or Certainty. As to the Order
and Manner of your Procceding in drawing the human Body, you
must first sketch the Head; then the Shoulders, in their exact
Breadth; then draw the Trunk of the Body, beginning wich the
Arm-pits (leaving the Arms 'till afterwards)and so down to the Hips
on both Sides; being sure to observe the exact Breadth offthe Waist.
When you have done this, then draw that Leg which the Body
stands upon, and afterwards the other, which stands loose; then
draw the Arms, and last of all, the Hands.
TAKE Notice also of the Bowings and Bendings of the Body,
making the Part opposite to that which bends correspond in bending
with it. For Instance, if one Side of the Body bends in, the other
must stand out answerable to it; if the Back bend in, the Bel
ly must stick out; if the Knee bend out, the Ham must fall
in, and so of any other Joint in the Body.
Finally, endea
vour to form all the Parts of your Figure with Truth, and in just
Proportion, not one Arm or one Leg bigger or less than the other;
not broad Shoulders with  thin flender Waifs, nor raw and bony
Arms, with thick and gouty Legs; but let therc be  Kind of Har
mony



mony and Agreement amongst the Members, and an agreeable Sym
metry throughout the whole Figure.
Bur as the Essence of all Drawing consists in making, at first, 
good Sketch, you must in this Particular be very careful and accu
rate; draw no Part perfect or exact, 'till you see whether the whole
Draught be good; and when you have altered that to your Mind
you may then finish one Part after another as curiously as you can.
In drawing the Eyes, Ears, Legs, Arms, Hands, Feet, &. great
Care, Study, and Pradtice, arc requisite: This must be learned by
carefully imitating the best Prints or Drawings you can get of Eyes,
Ears, &. for as to the mechanical Rules of drawing them by Lines
and Measures, they are not only perplexed and difficult, but also con
trary to the Practice of the best Masters. But the Actions and Pos
tures of the Hand are so many and various, that no certain Rules can
be given for drawing them that will univerfally hold good; and as
the Hands and Feet are difficult Members to draw, it is necessary and
well worth while, to bestow some Time and Pains about them,
carefully imitating their various Postures and Actions, so as not only
to avoid all Lameness and Imperfection, but also to give them Life
and Spirit.
In drawing  labouring Man, you must represent him wich strong
Limbs and raised Muscles, swelling and standing out; especially in
bearing Burdens, drawing Weights, scaping, walking, combatting,
or such like violent Exercises. In representing Persons asleep, you
must carefully avoid giving any such Postures or Actions in their lying
as would not in all Probability afford Rest; for  great Want of Judg
ment would appear in representing their Limbs or Bodies supported
by their own Force, and not by the Help of something else.
With Regard to the Representation of the Passions, Mr. De Piles
observes, That it is absurd, as well as impossible, to pretend giving
such particular Demonstrations of them as to fix their Expression to
certain Strokes which the Painter should be obliged to make Use of,
as essential and invariable Rules. This, fays he, would be depriving
the Art of that excellent Variety of Expression, which has no other
Principal than Diversity of Imagination, the Number of which is
infinite. The same Passion may be expressed several Ways, each





yielding more or less Pleasure, in Proportion to the Painter’ Under
standing, and the Spectator' Discernment.
THOUGH every Part of the Face contributes towards expressing
the Sentiments of the Heart, yet the Eye-brow, according to Mr. Le
Brun, is the principal Seat of Expression, and where the Passions
makethemseles most known. It is certain, says he, that the Pupil
of the Eye, by its Fire and Motion, very well thows the Agitatior
of the Soul; but then it does not express the Kind or Nature of that
Agitation, whereas the Motion of the Eye-brow differs according as
the Passions change their Nature. To express  simple Passion, the

Motion is simple; to express  mixt Passion, the Motion is com
pound. If the Passion be gentle, the Motion is gentle; if it be
violent, the Motion is so too. We may farther observe, says he,
that there are two Kinds of Elevation in the Eye-brows; one in
which the Eye-brows rise up in the Middle: This Elevation ex
presses agreeable Sensations; and it is to be observed, that then the
Mouth rises at the Corners: Another, in which the Eye-brows rise up
at the Ends and fall in the Middle, denotes bodily Pain; and then
the Mouth falls at the Corners. In Laughter all the Parts agree,
for the Eye-brows, which fall towards the Middle of the Forehead,
make the Nose, the Mouth, and the Eyes, follow the same Motion.
In Weeping, the Motions are compound and contrary; for the Eye
brows fall towards the Nose, and over the Eyes; and the Mouth ri

ses that Way. It is to be observed also, that the Mouth is the Part

of the Face which more particularly expresses the Emotions of the
Heart; for when the Heart complains, the Mouth falls at the Cor
ners; when it is pleased the Corners of the Mouth are elevated;
and when it has an Avertion, the Mouth shoots forward, and rises in
the Middle.
THE Head, fsays Mr. De Piles, contributes more to the Expression
of the Passions, than all the other Parts of the Body put together.
Those separately can only share some few Passions, but the Head ex
presses them all. Some, however, are more peculiarly expressed by
it, than others; as Humility, by hanging it down; Arrogance, by
lifting it up; Languishment, by inclining it on one Side; and Ob
stinacy, with  stiff and resulate Air, makes it stand upright, fixed
and stiff between the Shoulders. The Head also best shews our Sup
plications, Threats, Mildness, Pride, Love, Hatred, Joy and Grief:




The whole Face and every Feature contribute something, but more
especially the Eyes; yet though the Passions of the Soul are most
visible in the Lines and Features of the Face, they often require al
so the Assistance of other Parts of the Body: Without the Hands,
for Instance, an Action is weak and imperfect; their Actions, which
arc almost infinite, create numberless Expressions.
It is by them that partly we desire, hope, promise, call, and send
back; they are the Insruments of Threatening, Prayer, Praise, &.
By them we in  great Measure, approve, condemn, refuse, admit,
fear, ask, express our Joy and Grief, our Doubts, Regrets, Pain,
and Admiration: But to say how these Parts must be dilposed, for
expressing the various Passions, is impossible: Nor can any exact
Rules be given for it, both because the Task would be infinite, and
because every one must be guided in this by his own Genius, and the
particular Turn of his Studies.

CHAP. XI.
OF DRAPERY.
In the Art of cloathing your Figures, or casting the Drapery upon
them with Elegance and Propriety, many Things are to be ob
served: However, this Art consists chiefly in three Points, viz. the
Order of the Folds or Plaits, the different Quality of the Stuffs, and
the Variety of their Colours. As to the Folds, they ought to be so
managed, as that you may easily perceive what it is they cover, and
distinguish it from any Thing else; as for Instance, that you see it
is an Arm that is under the Drapery, and not  Leg; or  Leg, and
not an Arm, &. Again, the Folds ought to be large, and  Con
trast should be observed between them; otherwise, in the first Case,
they break and divide the Sight too much; and, in the next Place,
the Drapery will be too stiff. As to the Quality of the Stuffs, it
should be well confidered; some Folds being abrupt and harsh, while
others flow more fsft and easy. Again, the Surface of some have 
Lustre, while others art flat and dead; and some are fine and trans
parent, while others are firm and solid. The Variety of Colours,
when well managed, makes the greatest Beauty in Painting: Some




are not equally agreeable, wich Respect to each other; and some are
never to be placed near certain others.
THE Drapery must never be made to adhere, or flick too close to
the Parts of the Body, but it must seem to flow round, and, as it
were, embrace them: Yet in such  Manner as that the Figure may
be easy, and have  free Motion.  great Lightness and Motion of
the Drapery are only proper Figures in much Agitation, or exposed to
Wind. The Nudities of the Figure should always be designed be
fore you procced to draw the Draperies, Draw the Out-Lines of
the Garments lightly; then draw the great Folds first, and stroke
these into lesser; taking Care that they do not cross one another.
The Draperies that cover those Parts which are exposed to great
Light must not be so deeply shaded, as to seem to pierce them; nor
should those Members be crossed by Folds that are too strong; left,
by the too great Darkness of their Shades, the Members look as if
they were broken. Folds, in general, should be large and as few as
possible: However, they must be greater or less, according to the
Quantity and Quality of the Stuffs, of which the Drapery is sup-
posed to be made; suit the Garments to the Body, and make them
bend with the Body, according as it itands in or out, straight or
crooked, or as it bends one Way or another; and the closer the
Garment fits to the Body, the narrower and smaller must be the
Folds.

THE Quality of the Person is asfo to be confidered in the Drapery:
For Instance, if they are Magistrates, their Draperies onght to be
large, fine, and flowing; if Country-Clowns, they ought to be
coarse and short; and if Ladies and Nymphs, light and soft, &.
Folds, well imagined, give much Spirit to any Kind of Action, be
cause their Motion implies the like in the acting Member, which
seems to draw them forcibly, and make them more or less stirring,
as the Action is more or less violent. An artful Complication of
Folds, in  circular Manner, greatly helps the Effect of Fore-Short
enings. All Folds consist of two Shades, and no more, which
you may turn with the Garment at Pleasure, shadowing the inner
Side more deeply.
THE Shades in Silks and fine Linnen are very thick and small,
requiring little Folds and  light Shadow. Observe the Motion of
the Air or Wind, in Order to draw the loose Apparel alf flying one





Way; and draw that Part of the Garment, that adheres closest to

the Body, before you draw the looser Part that flies off from it, left, by

drawing the loose Part of the Garment first, you should mistake the
Position of your Figure, and place it awry.
Rich Ornaments, when judiciously and sparingly used, may some
times contribute to the Beauty of Draperies. But such Ornaments
are far below the Dignity of Angels or heavenly Figures, the Gran
deur of whofe Draperies ought rather to consist in the Boldness and
Nobleness of the Folds, than in the Quality of the Stuff, or the
Glitter of Ornaments. Light and flying Draperies are proper only to
Figures in great Motion, or in the Wind; but when in  calm Place,
and free from violent Action, their Draperies should be large and
flowing, that, by their Contrast, and the Fall of the Folds, they
may appear with Grace and Dignity.

CHAP. .
Or DRAWING MIXED FIGURES.
IN Order to draw the Form of any Beast, begin at the Forehead,

with the Lead or Coal, drawing downward the Nose, Mouth,
upper and neither Chap, ending the Line at the Throat. Then view
ing it; again, from the Part where you formerly begun, continue it
over the Head, Ears, and Neck, till you have given the full Com
pass of the Buttock. Afterwards mark out the Legs, and touching
out the Breast with the Eminency thereof, finish the Tail, Paws,
Tongue; Teeth, Beard, and the several Shadows.
In drawing Beasts, you must be well acquainted with their Shape
and Action, without which you will never perform any Thing excel
lent in this Way; and whatever Beast you draw, you must be sure
to give  Sketch of the Landskip of the Country natural to that
Beast.
In drawing Birds, you are to begin also at the Head, continuing
the Breast-line from under the Throat down to the Legs; then begin
at the Pinion for making the Wing; this being joined to the Back






line, the Figure will be presently finished. The Eyes, Legs, and
Tail, are to be drawn last; the Feathers beginning at the Head very
small, must fall backwards one Way in five Ranks, still inceasing
till finished
Instects, as Flies, Bees, Wasps, Grasshoppers, Worms, and such
like, are drawn wich great Ease, providing you, for the first Time,
have the Original before your Eyes.
In drawing  Flower, begin from the Rose-tust or Wart in the
Middle, as in  Rose or Marigold, with the yellow Tust, which be
ing made, draw Lines equally divided from thence to the greatest
Compass or Extent of the Flower. They may be drawn either fully
open, or in the Bud; the Leaves may first be drawn rudely, after
wards giving them their Veins or Jaggedness.

CHAP XI.
Or DRAWING LANDSKIPS, BUILDINGS, &.
ALL Drawing consists in nicely Measuring the Distances of each
Part of your Piece by the Eye. In Order to facilitate this, you

are to imagine in your own Mind, that the Piece you copy is divided
into Squares: As for Example; suppose or imagine,  Perpendicular
and an horizontal Line crossing each other in the Center of the Pic
ture you are to copy: Then suppose also two such Lines crossing
your own Copy. Observe in the Original, what Parts of the Design
those Lines intersect, and let them fall on the fame Parts of the sup
posed Lines in your Copy. If you are to draw  Landskip from Na
ture, take your Station on  rising Ground, where you may have 
large Horizon, and mark your Tablet into three Divitions down
wards, from the Top to the Bottom; and divide, in you own Mind,
the Landskip you are to take, into three Divisions also. Then turn
your Face directly opposite to the Midst of the Horizon, keeping
your Body fixed, and draw what is directly before your Eyes, up
on thie Middle Division of your Tablet; then turn your Head, but
not your Body, to the left Hand, and delineate what you view there,
joining it properly to whiat you had done before. Lastly, do the



same by what be seen on your Right-hand, laying down every
Thing exactly, both with Respect to Distance and Proportion.
Make the nearest Objects in your Piece the hightest, and those that
are further off to shoot away lower, till they come almost
level with the Line of the Horizon, lessening every Thing propor
tionably to its Distance, and observing also, to make your Object
fainter and less distinct, the farther they are removed from your Eye.
Make all your Light and Shades fall one Way, and let every Thing
have its proper Motion, as Trees shaken by the Wind, the small
Boughs bending more, and the large one less ; Water agitated by
the Wind, and dashing against Ships or Boats, or falling from  Pre
cipice upon Rocks and Stones and spurting up again into the Air,
and sprinkling all about ; Clouds also in the Air, now gathered with
the Winds, now violently condensed into Hail, Rain, and the like ;
always remembering that whatevers Motions are caused by the Wind
must all be made to move the same Way.

Let the Work imitate the Season it is intended to represent ; as,
if you intend it for  WInter Piece, represent the selling of Woods,
sliding upon the Ice, Fowling, Hunting, &. making the Trees
every where naked, or laden with snow, or Hoar Frost ; the Earth
bare ; the Air thick or heavy ; the Water froze, with Carts passing
over it, &.

Let every Scite have uts propoer Adjuncts, or additional Graces, as
the Farm-house, Wind-mill, Water-mill, Woods, Flocks or Sheep,
Herds of Cattle, Pilgrims, Ruins of Temples, Castles and Monu
ments, with  Thousand other Things, propoer to particular Sub
jects.



s