TH 
SCHOOL OF RAPHAEL,
OR, THE




STUDENT'





Guide to Expression in Historical Painting.
ILLUSTRATED
By Examples engraved by DUCHANGE, and others,
Under the Inspection of
Sir       AS
DORIGN ,
From his own DRAWINGS,
After the most celebrated Heads in the Cartons at the Queen’ Palace.
To which are now added,
The OUTLINES of each HEAD,
And also several PLATES of the
Antique Statues, Skeletons, and Anatomical Figures,
Most celebrated
Engraved by an Eminent  RTI ST.
WITH
Instructions for young Students in the Art of DESIGNING.
  
The PA SSIONS, as characterised by RAPHAEL in the CARTONS,
Described and explained by BENJAMIN RALPH.
LONDON:
Printed for JOHN BOYDELL, ENgRaveR; in Cheapside.
MDCCLXXXII.



INTRODUCTION
It is usual for thé compilers of Drawing-Books, not only to complain of thé ignorancé and in-
accuracy of all that have preceded them, but to raise new expectation without any sense of the
danger of new disappointment. The author of the following sheets, however, intends not;
by depreciating the labours of others, to procure that credit for his own, which the same arts of
supplantation may as effectually destroy : from  fincere love for the art itself, from  desire of
communicating the means of improvement to others, and from  well-established hope, that
the science of painting (for in historical compositions it is surely more than an art) is reviving
in all its splendour in this island, he has been induced to recommend the incomparabie examples
in this book; and he is persuaded they will contiibute to the proficiency of every one, whose
happy genius urges him to excel in  study, that not only leads to the knowledge of TRUE BEAUTY;
but directs the application of it to innumerable purposes of entertainment and use.
It was indeed, at first, determined to give only the outlines and finished heads; with an explana-
tion of the characters, from  consideration that such  collection was peculiarly adapted to the use
of painters, or at least of those who had already attained to  competent degree of excellence in
the art. But, as no bounds can be set to the genius of youth, so no limits ought to be put to
the means of improvement; and, in order to render this work useful to the learner as well as the
proficient, it was afterwards thought necessary to prefix some examples even of the rudiments
of design, as well as of those of the most elegant of the human form, and to give with them
the best instructions that could be collected : and as it is undoubtedly true, that the Grecian
and Italian schools are the only treasuries of design, from which could examples be taken with
so much propriety as from the Grecian ’statues and the works of Raphael  Accordingly, all the
examples have been taken from them, except the geometrical figures and the bones and muscles
of the human body, which are selected from the works of those authors that are esteemed most
correct ; to whom, however, no recourse would have been had, if the subjects could have been
supplied from the same source.
Though no examples of perspective are given, yet it must not be inferred, that this omission of
so useful  part of science is occasioned either by ignorance of the art itself, or inattention to the
just improvement of this work, to the design of which the examples of perspective are wholly
foreign : it is, indeed,  complete study of itself; and, as such, the practice of that incomparable
method laid down by Dr. Brooke Taylor; and with great pains and ingenuity explained by Mr.
Kirby, is earnestly recommended.
The principal design of this work is to encourage the study of the most profound part of
painting, the characteristies of the passions; in order to which, the sacred histories, represented
in the inimitable Cartons of Raphael, have been considered separately; and the principal charac-
ters in each described and referred to in the several heads in the work; and an Index is given
for finding the paffions under their proper denominations; referring to the description of each,
and also to the design of the character itself-
Le Brun, the only author who has written on the passions as  painter, and given rules for
describing them, has certainly succeeded very well, so far as he goes; but his examples, instead of
answering all the purposes of study, appear, upon comparing them with those in the Cartons,
to be extremely defective ; nay, it may be affirmed, that  person who has only studied Le Brun, will
be at  loss when he views some of the characters in the Cartons to know what paffions are ex-
pressed in them, and yet the ideas will be found to be, in the highest degree, exalted, just, and




significant; and he will be struck with astonishment and disgust, when he returns to his former
study, in which he will find no traces to lead his ideas back to the point from which they first set

out *.
The Cartons are, indeed,  vast fund of variety, from which every man may enrich himself
without diminishing the heap, or depriving those who come after him of their share of the inex-
haustible treafure bequeathed to the whole world by that incomparable painter.
If, therefofe, the explanation of the Cartons should be found defective, let it be remembered,
that the attempt is new: that the characters described are those of the Holy Jesus and his immediate
followers, who were the greatest and best of mankind; and that the Cartons are the labours
of the first genius in painting that has appeared in the world since those of ancient Greece, of
whose stupendous performances we have nothing left but the names.
* This author, however he may be censured or ridiculed for such an asfertion, cannot help saying, that  collection of the
passions, as they are found in nature, might be made from the works of Mr. Hogarth, which would do honour to that master,
and prove of great utility to young students.


of the STUDY of
GEOMETRICAL FIGURE 


THOUGH this part of the Work will undoubtedly be censured by those who are contented
with  superficial knowledge of thé Art of Designing, yet the end proposed will be suffici-
ciently answered if it meets with the approbation of the few ; let those who deride admo-
nition, and chuse to wanton upon the surface of the stream, float gently down it, and divert them-
selves with the sticks and weeds with which they will be insensibly and inevitably entangled.
" Errors like straws upon the surface flow,
" Those who would search for Pearls must dive below."
However, it is not expected, nor is it indeed necessary, that  perfect Designer should be  perfect
Geometrician ; but it is certainly expected that he should be acquainted with the form and con-
struction of the most simple Geometrical Figures, which are in fact the basis of the art he would
study : to those therefore who would attain to  masterly manner of Designing, it is recommended to
study carefully the Figures described in PLATE .; to make them familiar, and to endeavour to
imitate their forms rather by the hand, guided by Judgment, than the Rule and Compass, for as
Fresnox judiciously observes, The Compass should ratber be in the Painters eyes, than bis hands.
But as the true construction of these Figures is easily attained, it will probably argue either self-suf-
ficiency or indolence not to be acquainted with it.
Explanation of the GEOMETRICAL FIGURES in the First Plate.
FIGURE 
To BisecT for cut in two cqual parts)  given Line.
Set one point of the Compasses in , and opening them something more than half the length of
the Line, describe  semicircle, and from the point  do the same, and draw  line through their
intersections.
 IGURE II
To divide  given CircLE into four equal Parts.
Draw  line through the Center , and proceed as in FIG. .
 IGURE III
From  given Point , in  right Line, to erect  PERPENDICULAR.
Set one point of the Compasses in , and opening them at pleasure, set off the distances  , and
proceed as in FIG. .
Vol. .
FIGURE


Explanation of the GEOMETRICAL FIGURES in the First Plate.

FIGURE IV.
Upon  Point situate at or near the end of à Line, to erect  PERPENDICULAR.
From the point  on the line  , extend the Compasses, at pleasure, to the Center , from
which describe  circle, and from the intersection in the line AB at , draw  line through CG
which will cut the circumference at , from which draw  line to the point .
FIGURE .
Shews the manner of drawing PARALLEL LINES, which needs no explanation, and may be drawn
to any distance required.
 IGURE VI.
To form  SQuare from  given Line.
Erect  perpendicular (by the rule given in FIG. IV. ), upon which and the base line, set off
with the Compasses the line proposed, and keeping the same distance, draw the circular lines CD ,
and AD , from whose intersections at  draw the lines DC and  .
FIGURE VII.
From two given lines to form  PARALLELOGRAM, Or LONG SQHARE.
Draw the line CD at pleasure, upon which set off the longest given line , erect  perpendicular
at , upon which set off the given line , mark off the line  from , and the line  from ,
and draw the lines AG and GF.
 IGURE VIII.
From  given Line to form an ÉQUILATERAL TRIANGLE.
Take the length of the given line AB with the Compasses, and from the points  and  draw
circular lines, from whose intersection draw AC and '.
FIGURE IX.
ls an attempt to shew, with certainty, how to draw that curved line which the Author of the
Analysis of Beauty has, with as great propriety as authority, termed, the line of beauty;, and upon the
use and properties of which he has obliged the world with  very elegant, ingenious, and instructive
Treatise : it has however been objected, that he has omitted to give  rule whereby the precise line of
beatety may be found ; in consequence of which objection, and in order to enforce the study of that
line, this figure is given; not as  mathematical demonstration, nor as an insult upon the author of
the Analysis of Beauty (whose meaning is very obvious, though perhaps not so fully explained as to
silence the clamours of ignorance and detraction), but as à line extremely well worth studying, being
in itself simple, elegant, easily drawn, and the precise line of beauty described by that great artist,
whose plain unaffected manner of referring to the most familiar objects for the explanation of his ideas,
we shall endeavour to follow, and inform the Reader, that it is to be found in an ornament well
known to every school-boy; that of  six-pointed star, of which the contrasted halves of any two
opposite points give the line required.
The





Explanation of the GEOMETRICAL FIGURES in the First Plate.

The construction of the Ninth FIGURE.
Divide  circle into four equal parts by the rule before given. The semi-diameter, or the distance
from  to  will, if the figure be drawn exactly, be equal to one sixth part of the circumference,
set off therefore half the diameter from  to , and from  to , and keeping the same distance
from the point  draw EC, and from the point  draw CD.
FIGURE .
This figure is founded upon  precept said to be given by the celebrated MicHAEL ANGELo to his
scholar Marcus de Scienna, which, according to Lomazzo, was, ee that he should always make  figure
et pyramidal, serpent-like, and multiplied by one, two, and threek : which precept, as the Auchor
of the Analysis observes, hath remained  Mystery down to this time; and indeed it appears not only
to be mysterious but absurd ; to talk of multiplying by the number One is  grofs impropriety ; and that
MICHAEL ANGELo should advise his scholar always to make  figure pyramidal and serpentine, and
multiplied by those numbers, must be  mistake, for every figure in  picture cannot possibly admit
of such  rule : for instance, it is not to be preserved in  figure sitting or stooping, and consequently
MICHAEL ANGELO, who well knew the necessity of such attitudes, would never impose such 
stricture. The truth is, this famous precept had suffered the fate of many other excellent tradi-
tional rules before it came to Lemazzs, who transcribed it as it was delivered to him, contenting
himself with the authority of the master, and the ambiguity of the precept itself. It is perhaps more
rational to believe, that MicHAEL ANGELo endeavoured to persuade his pupil to accustom himself to
draw  figure, or line, which was pyramidal, serpentine, and increasing in the proportion of one, two,
and zbree, as  fure means of acquiring  habit of designing the outlines of tEc human body in 
masterly manner, and thereby, as the Author of the Analysis terms it, always expressing the lines of
beauty and grace; Louazzo proceeds to explain the foregoing precept thus: : In which precept (in
 mine opinion) the whole mysterie of the arte consisteth. For the greatest grace and lise that  pic-
ture can have, is, that it expresse motion; which the painters call the spirite of  picture : nowe
 there is no forme so fitte to expresse this motion, as that of the flame of fire; which, according to

Aristotle and the other philosophers, is an elemente most active of all others ; because the forme
 of the flame thereof is most apt for motion, for it hath  conus or sharpe pointe, wherewith it
seemeth to divide the aire, that so it may ascende to his proper sphere. So that  picture having

this forme will be most beautiful.

Now this is to be understood after two fortes ; either that the conus of the Byramis be placed
 upwardes, and the base downwardes, as in the fier; or else contrary wise, with the base up-
 wardes and the conus downwardes. In the first it expresseth the width and largenesse of  picture
about the legges and garmentes below ; shewing it slender above pyramidall wise, by discovering
 one shoulder and hiding the other; which is shortned by the turning of the body. In the seconde,
 it sheweth the figure biggest in the upper partes ; by representing either both the shoulders, or
 both the armes, shewing one legge and hiding the other, or both of them after one sorte, as
 the skilful painter shall judge fittest for his purpose. So that his (Michael Angelo’) meaning is,
that it should resemble the forme of the letter  placed right, or else turned the wronge way, as
  ; because then it hath this beauty. Neither ought he only to observe this forme in the whole
 body, but even in every part ; so that in the legge, when  muscle is raysed outwardes on the one

side, that which answereth directly on the contrary side, must be drawn in and hid (as may be
seene in the life).
The last parte of Michael Angelo his observation was, that  picture ought to be multiplied by
one, two, and three. And herein consisteth the chiefest szill of that proportion, whereof  mean
 to intreate more at large in this booke. For the diameter of the biggest place, betweene the knee

and the fcote, is double to the least, and the largest part of the thigh triple. '
In the observations on the Art of Painting of Du Fresnoy , it is said,  That the outlines which
 are in waves, give not only  grace to the parts, but also to the whole body, as we see in the An-
 See Haydocke’ Translation, printed at Oxford   See Dryden’ Translation of Du Fresnoy’ Art of Painting, .  tinous,


Explanation of the GEOMETRICAL FIGURES in the First Plate.

 tinous, the Venus of Medicis, and others. And further it is said,  Besides, that the figures and
their parts ought almost always to have  serpentine and flaming form naturally; these sorts of out-
 lines have  know not what of life and seeming motion in them, which very much resembles the ac-
 tivity of the flame and of the serpent.
Elsum, in his Art of Painting', after he has quoted the above precept of Michael Angelo, has
this remarkable passage :
 But for as much as there are two sorts of pyramids, the one straight as is that near St. Peter’ in
 Rome, called the pyramid of Julius Caesar; the other waived like flame, and is called Michael
 Angelo  serpentine. This latter also  painter must imitate, his contours must turn and wind like
 serpent
It is presumed that the Tenth Figure has all the properties mentioned by the foregoing authors; it
actually expresses motion as that of  flame, of  streamer agitated by the wind, is  true represent-
ation of the decreasing swell of  wave, and is consequently  proper study for those who are emulous
of excelling in designing the outlines of the human body; and though it may not carry with it suf-
ficient proof of its being the very precept of Michael Angelo, it is hoped the time which is bestowed
on its consideration will not be thrown away.
The construction of the Tenth FIGURE.
Upon the line  draw  circle Cat pleasure, take the diameter of that circle, and from the cir-
cuiference of the circle  upon the line AB draw thie circle , which will be twice the diameter
of , then take the distance from the centers Cand , and from the circumserence of the circle 
draw the circle , which will be three times the diameter of & the lesser circle, and proceed to draw
the curves in the same manner as described in FIG. .
FIGURE XI.
Shews the manner of dividing  Line into any Number of equal Parts.
This figure will be found to be of great use in forming squares for drawings from pictures, whether
they are to be enlarged or reduced, and is constructed in the following manner.
Draw AB, the line proposed, and from  draw the line   at plcasure, then setting the Com-
passes in , cut the lines AB and AD in EF, and keeping the same distance in the Compasses
from , cut the line AB at , then take the distance EF, and setting it off from  to , draw the
line BI, upon which (the line in the example being divided into eight parts; set off at pleasure seven
equal parts, and do the same upon AD observing always to set off one part less than the number
required), draw lines from the marks in  to thole in AD, and the line  will be divided into
eight equal parts.
* See Elsum’ Art of Painting after the Italian manner, printed at London  THE
ART OF DESIGNING OR DRAWING.
THE theory of design is the knowledge which is acquired by reading the best authors who have
laid down rules for the attainment of the art scientifically, and given their judgment upon
the performances of the greatest painters. By  thorough knowledge of the theory of design, those
who are themselves unable to draw the most simple objects, may be qualified to pass sentence upon
the works of the best masters; and in this case theory being separated from practice, is usually con-
sidered in another light, and distinguished by the appellation of taste. There is also another way of
acquiring taste without reading, and that is by frequently examining good pictures in the presence of
such as are esteemed judges of the art, who seldom fail of giving their opinion without reserve ; and
thus, according to the portion of knowledge they possess, and the understanding of those who are
attentive to their decisions, theory or taste may be obtained in  greater or lesser degree.
Theozy, therefore in this sense of the word, has hitherto been the great support of painting: had
tafte been confined to practical study only, so many noble and invaluable pieces would not now have
been found in the palaces of Princes and the houses of great men, whose avocations could not per-
haps otherwise permit them to acquire any taste at all for this art, and consequently painting would
have found no patronage.
The practical part of design is the constant application of the hand, assisted by the understanding,
in the imitation of variety of forms.
Those objects, whether persons or places, of which we have but  transient view, are, in the
memory, like sketches made with charcoal upon paper, which either the slightest rubbing or  blast
of wind will entirely deface : how then shall the hand, unaecustomed to exercise in this art, perform
its function, when the mind itself, after the object has been removed from before it  short time,
can retain only  confused idea of its resemblance, Theory and practice, therefore, ought to be in-
separable; and the knowledge of either without its affociate, can never produce any thing like per-
fection.
From what has been already said it is obvious, that drawing, considered only as such, is nothing
more than an habit, by which the hand, being accustomed to follow the traces of the eye, conveys
upon paper or other materials the similitude of objects, and can only. be obtained by unwearied ap-
plication and great attention.
By practice the hand acquires  facility which gives freedom, and this frecdom must constantly be
corrected by judgment in placing every particular part in the object to be delineated in its proper
order : it must be observed, that judgment is not here meant to be that exertion of the understand-
ing which would be requisite to compose an historical picture, or well-imagined landschape, but re-
lates only to proportion, or an accurate consideration of the distance of one feature, limb, or part
from another; it being no unusual thing for such as draw very well practically, to be utterly inca-
pable of composing or inventing, which ought to be with more propriety ascribed to genius.
The Manual Part of Designing consists in two Operations,
OUTLINE AND RELIEF.
The first of these, with regard to buman figures, comprehends anatomy and proportion :
The second, light and shadow; and these are produced by batching with chalks, pen and ink, and
black lead, or washing with Indian ink, bistre, &.
Proportion and relief are also absolutely necessary in other parts of design, as landschape orna-
ments, &.
The necessary materials for designing are charcoal, red black and white chalk, Indian ink, bistre,
black lead pencils, crow quill pens, and camels hair pencils.
The




The charcoal should be chosen with  fine grain, such as will mark freely, and may be discharged
easily by brushing it either with  feather or silk handkerchief; it is of great use in sketching or mark-
ing out the general idea of the figure or part to be designed; and the strokes being easily effaced, the
drawing may, by degrees, be brought to its due proportion, and be afterwards more ccrrectly finished
with either of the chalks.
It has been already said of what importance the geometrical figures in Plate . are to the art ofde-
signing: let thiem therefore be carefully studied and frequently drawn, even while the student thinks
himself qualified to proceed further ; for as confinement to dry studies often creates disgust, it is rather
recommended to the learner to blend the practice of them with the most easy examples in the other
plates.
Let not the student be deterred from proceeding by the appearance of difficulties; what is thought
unsurmountable may be conquered by repeated trials; and the wonder will be, that it should ever
have appeared in so discouraging  light.
It will be sound extremely advantageous to hold the port crayon, or other instrument, something
more than two inches from the bottom ; for freedom is the very essence of design.
Begin rather with parts than  whole figure.
An attempt to draw the figure of  man by one who is unable to mark the outline of  head, will
be unsuccessful, and such an effort instead of applause will certainly meet with contempt.
Proceed, therefore, with designing the different features of the face; and each of them in different
positions; and when these can be performed with accuracy, it will be proper to begin with  whole
head.
The examples of the oval for drawing the face and head in Plate . should now be carefully con-
sidered, and Fig. XIV. in that plate, is an example of an head according to the most exact propor-
tion. The oval is divided by  perpendiculaf line from top to bottom, and that line into four equal
parts: the upper division describes the space from the top of the head to the lowest hair upon the
forehead ; the next division passes between the eyebrows and eyelids, and not through the eyes, as
has been erroneoussy taught ; from thence to the bottom of the third division is the length of the
nose ; and the fourth contains the mouth and chin: this last is again divided into three equal parts;
the first of which shews the space from the bottom of the nose to the middle of the mouth, the
second contains the under lip and the space between that and the chin, and the chin fills the
third part of the lower division of the face: the length of the eye is reckoned one fifth part of the
breadth of the face, which is also the breadth of the nose from the extremity of each nostril, and the
mouth is nearly of the same measure ; the ear is of the same length with the nose.
Observe, therefore, to place every feature properly : let the nose be set directly under the center
of the forehead, and the middle of the mouth exactly under that of the nose; place the eyes upon 
line, that there may appear no distortion, and be careful that the eyes and mouth are parallel to
each other.
Of three quarter faces and profiles there are many fine examples in this book, and therefore little
more need be said of them. It has been sometimes recommended to provide  piece of box turned
in the shape of an egg, to mark off the several divisions upon it, and, by turning it various ways, to
observe the different appearance of the lines ; but it would be much better to try the same experi-
ment with  small plaster head, which may be more easily procured, and will certainly answer the
purpose much better.
The student having frequently and carefully designed the head and its parts, may now turn his
attention to the other extremities of the human body, which are the hands and feet: these have ever
been esteemed  difficult part of design; and various authors considering them as almost al ways ap-
pearing foreshortened, have given their proportions and laid down rules for drawing them under those
appearances. But these, it is apprehended, are so many fetters to the understanding, and stumbling
blocks in the way of genius ; cautious judgment should be our conductor; the eye hardly ever sees
them in any other situation, and it is by the eye the hand should be guided: the hand must mark
nothing but what the eye directs, and the eye can discern no part but what the docile hand may
delineate in its proper place. In short,  strict attention to nature, or good imitations of her, will
always lead to truth and elegance; and if the design of any subject whatever happens not to be per-
fect when finished, our observations must have been erroneous; and nothing remains but by repeated
efforts to amend those parts which the judgment will discover to be incorrect.
The foregoing study will naturally lead to the arms, trunk, and thighs; of all which several ele-
gant examples may be found in Plates III, IV, and : in Plate . are two views of the celebrated







Torso of Michael Angelo, of which no greater recommendation can be given, than that it was the
chief study of the great painter and sculptor whose name it bears.
It will next be proper to attempt designing  whole figure; and as this depends, in  great mea-
sure, upon proportion as the foundation of symmetry, it may not be impertinent to give the meafures
of the human body, according to the rules laid down by Mons. Du Piles in his Observations on Fres-
noy’ Art of Paiuting.
The MEASURES Of  HUMAN BODY.
The ancients have commonly allowed eight heads to their figures, though some of them have
but seven. But we ordinarily divide the figures into : ten faces;.that is to say, from the crown

of the head to the sole of the foot, in the following manner :
From the crown of the head to the forehead, is the third part of the face.
The face begins at the root of the lowest hairs which are upon the forehiead, and ends at the
bottom of the chin.
The face is divided into three proportionable parts;  the first contains the forchead, the second

the nose, and the third the mouth and chin.
From the chin to the pit betwixt the collar bones, are two lengths of  nose.
 From the pit betwixt the coilar bones to the bottom of the breast, one face.
From the bottom of the breasts to the navel, one face.
From the navel to the genitories, one face.
From the genitories to the upper part of the knee, two faces.
The knee contains half  face.
From the lower part of the knee to the ancle, two faces.

From the ancle to the sole of the foot, half  face.

 man when his arms are stretched out, is, from the longest finger of his right hand to the
 longest of his left, as broad as he is long.
 From one side of the breasts to the others two faces.
 The bone of the arm, called bumerus, is the length of two faces, from the shoulder to the

elbow.
 From the end of the elbow to the root of the little finger, the bone called cubitus, with part of
the hand, contains two faces.
From the box of the shoulder-blade to the pit betwixt the collar bones, onè face.
 If you would be satisfied in the measures of breadth, from the extremity of one finger to the

other, so that this breadth should be equal to the length of the body, you must observe, that the
boxes of the elbows with the bumerus, and of the bumerus with the shoulder-blade, bear the pro-
portion of half  face, when the arms are stretched out.
The sole of the foot is the sixth part of the figure.
The hand is the length of  face.
The thumb contains  nose.
The inside of the arm, from the place where the muscle disappears, which makes the breast
(called the pectoral muscle) to the middle of the arm, four noses.
 From the middle of the arm to the beginning of the hand, five nofes.
The longest toe is  nose long.
The two outmost parts of the teats and the pit, betwixt the collar-bones of  woman, make

an equilateral triangle.

For the breadth of the limbs, no precise measure can be given ; because the measures them-
selves are changeable, according to the quality of the persons, and according to the movement
of the muscles.
The foregoing rules, strongly impressed upon the memory, will prove of infinite advantage, as
well in comparing the proportions of the antique statues with one another, as in judging of the
different productions of nature in the formation of the human body, when considered in design-
ing from the life; but as variety in composition is absolutely necessary, care must be taken that
too strict an observance of the above measures may not destroy it: nor will the subject always
* This depends on the age and quality of the persons. The Apollo and Venus of Medicis have more than ten faces. See the figures,
The Apollo bas  nose more.
See Flate . Fig. XIV.
Plate Xand XI.
The Apollo has half  nose more, and the upper balf of the Venus de Medicis is to the lewer part of the belly, and not to the privy
parts.





allow that the figures should preserve the same proportion; which the ingenious author of the
Analysis of Beauty has, in his chapter of Proportion, very judiciously remarked in his Observations
upon the celebrated Statue of the Apollo-Belvederex, in the following words :
May be,  cannot throw  stronger light on what has been hitherto said of proportion, than
by animadverting on  remarkable beauty in the Apollo-Belvedere, which hath given it the pre-
ference even to the Antinous :  mean  super-addition of greatness, to at least as much beauty
and grace as is found in the latter.
These two master-pieces of art are seen together in the same apartment at Rome, where the
Antinous fills the spectator with admiration only, whilst the Apollo strikes him with surprise ;
and, as travellers exprefs themselves, with an appearance of something more than human:
which they of course are always at  loss to describe: and this effect, they say, is the more
astonishing, as, upon examination, its disproportion is evident, even to  common eye. One
of the best sculptors we have in England, who lately went to see them, confirmed to me what

has been now said, particularly as to the legs and thighs being too long, and too large for the

upper parts. And Andrea Sacchi, one of the Italian painters, seems to have been of the same
opinion, or he would hardly have given his Apollo, crowning Pasqualini the musician, the exact
proportion of the Antinous (in  famous picture of his now in England) as otherwise it seems to

be  direct copy from the Apollo.
Although in very great works we often see an inferior part neglected, yet here it cannot be the
case ; because, in  fine statue, just proportion is one of its essential beauties: therefore it stands
to reason, that these limbs must have been lengthened on purpose, otherwise it might have easily
been avoided.
So that if we examine the beauties of this figure thoroughly, we may reasonably conclude, that
what has been hitherto thought so unaccountably excellent in its general appearance, hath been
owing to what hath seemed  blemiss in  part of it: but let us endeavour to make this matter as
clcar as possible, as it may add more force to what has been said.
Statues, by being bigger than life sas this is one, and larger than the Antinous) always gain
some nobleness in effect, according to the principle of quantity; but this alone is not sufficient to

give what is properly to be called greatness in proportion.
Here the author refers to two figures of dwarfs or lilliputians, in the prints given with his book;
and proceeds with saying, that : were they to be drawn, or carved, by  scale of ten feet high,

they would still be but pigmy proportions ; as, on the other hand,  figure of but two inches
may represent  gigantic height. 
Therefore greatness of proportion must be considered as depending on the application of
quantity to those parts of the body, where it can give more scope to its grâce in movement ; as
 to the neck for the larger and swan-like turns of the head, and to the legs and thighs for the
more ample sway of all the upper parts together.  Objects are greater, or less, by Comparison.
There is no other way of conveying the idea of  giant than by comparison ; he must be accom-
panied by one or more figures of the same proportion, but they must be drawn upon  lesser
scale ; but if to an extraordinary stature it should be requisite to add superior strength, it must
be done, as the before-mentioned author ingeniously observes, by  judicious exaggeration of
particular parts of the body : the Farnesian Hercûles is  fine example of uncommon bodily
strength. See Plate VII.
It is entirely owing to the neglect of comparing objects, that particular views of mountains,
rocks, and lakes of water, are almost generally deficient : the trees, buildings, vessels, and
figures, which are necessarily introduced with the principal object, are usually drawn in much
greater proportions than they ought to be, and this error never fails to destroy the effect de-
sired : that which was intended to represent  stupendous mountain, conveys the idea of  paltry
hill ; huge rocks appear like inconsiderable heaps of stone, and vast lakes of water are diminished
to the size of ordinary fish-ponds.









The Knowledge of Anatoux is the Basis of Design.
The truth of this affertion is clearly proved by Mons. Du Piles, who, in his Principles of Paint-
ing, says, : As it is in vain to desire to profit by  bare sight of fine things, if we do not well

conceive them; so it is impossible thoroughly to understand the beauty of the antique, any
more than truth in nature, without the help of anatomy. We may, indeed, by secing and
 designing the antique, acquire  certain greatness of design ; and, in the main, get  practice
 tending to good taste and delicacy; but these advantages, if void of knowledge and principles,
can only dazzle the spectator by  specious shew, and by ill-placed remembrances of things. 
 man may be in raptures on seeing the fine works of antiquity, and yet be far from knowing

the genuine source of those beauties which he admires; at least, if he be ignorant of that
 fundamental part of design, anatomy.
If then anatomy be the basis of design, and enables us to discover the beauties of the
 antique,  cannot but observe, that the knowledge of so much of it as the painter and sculp-
 tor require, is easily retained; and that the neglect of this attainment proceeds only from its
 being thought to lead towards driness of design, and pedantry of manner.
 ANatouy is  knowledge of the parts of the-human body ; but to painters that only which
 relates to the bones, and the principal muscles which cover them, is needful.
 Nature has furnished us with bones for the solidity of the body, and strength of the mem-
 bers : to them she has fixed the muscles, as exterior agents, to draw them whither she pleases :
 the bones determine the measures of length, and the muscles those of bigness in the parts of
 nature ; at least, it is the office of the muscles to settle the form and exactness of outlines.
 Tis indispensably necessary to be well acquainted with the forms and joints of the bones, because
 motion often alters their measures; and likewise to understand the situation and office of the mus-

cles, since the most striking truth in design depends upon them.
The bones themselves are motionless, and stir only by the help of the muscles. The muscles
have their origins and insertions: by their origins they are fastened to  bone, which they were

never intended to stir; and by their insertions to another bone, which they draw when they please

towards their origins.
Every muscle has its opposite muscie; when one acts the other yields, like well-buckets, one of
which descends as the other comes up: the acting muscle swells, and contracts next to its origin ;

the other that obeys, dilates, and relaxes.
The largest bones, which are moved with the greatest difficulty, are covcred with the largest
tmuscles; these are often aided by others, which are designed for the samc office, and thereby
 increase the force of motion and make the part more apparent.
 We often observe, in the naked parts of antique figures, and even in nature itself, certain swells,
 the reason of which we cannot discover, without considering the situation and office of the muscle
 which is the cause of them. Eut those who are skilful in anatomy, see all in seeing  part, and

know how to remove from the eye what the skin and fat seem to conceal, and what is hid to those
who are ignorant of this science.
As the knowledge of anatomy is absolutely necessary for the attainment of perfection in design,
 very particular attention to the examples of the bones and muscles in Plates VI, VII, VIIl,
and IX, is recommended.
When the student has acquired  tolerable habit of designing, and also made himself equally
conversant with the bones and muscles, it will be found of the utmost advantage, in drawing the
human body, to sketch out in the first place the ofteology, or skeleton of the figure, in its pro-
per proportion, and in the attitude required ; which may be done either from  print, painting,
or nature itself: the next operation will be to delineate the proper muscles, marking each dis-
tinctly in its place in  bold manner; after which the figure will probably appear over-charged
with muscles. And now it will be of the utmost importance to recollect the idea of the waving
line, which is described in Plate . Fig. . for it will be only by  thorough comprehension of
the use of that line that the drawing will appear to be well or ill executed, when sinished: the
skilful in anatomy know, that where the insertions of the muscles appear too hard and over-
charged, and the hollows too deep, which is always the case in  prepared muscular figure, that
nature has wisely contrived to remedy the defect and fill up those vacancies, by placing therein
certain quantities of fat, which softens the harshneis and inequality of the lines, and produces that





inexpressible grace which is always found in the outlines of well-proportioned bodies, and
which has been so happily imitated by the ancients.
As naked figures cannot be introduced with any propriety, except in some particular subjects,
where there is an absolute necessity for them, it becomes  matter of the greatest importance to
cloath them gracefully : it will now therefore be proper to give some
RULES POR DESIGNING OE DRAPERIES.

THE gradation before recommended for designing naked figures, by beginning with the
osteology, may, with equal propriety, be applied to the designing of Draperies : for as
that method will be sound of the utmost utility for placing the muscles correctly ; so first designing
the figure naked, and afterwards proceeding to cast the Drapery, will be found in this point
equally beneficial. It will not be necessary to finish with that exactness which is required for such
as are intended to remain in that state; but the just proportion being given, and the parts boldly
marked, the mistakes that are found in the performances of those who proceed with less caution,
will be prevented. The best authors, who have treated upon the manner of designing Draperies,
concur in enforeing the utility of this method.
It will also be necessary in designing Draperies to observe the following precepts:
. Carefully avoid overcharging the figure with an unnecessary quantity.
 Shew as much of the form of the body under it as possible.
 Where large draperies are requisite, throw them into few folds, but let those be large
and graceful.
 On the contrary, loosen those from the body which are close and short, by small folds
judicioussy placed ; which will take off that stiffness which would be the consequence of their
sitting too strait.
 When much drapery is necessary, let the greater part of it fif convenient) be thrown
into shadow.
 Observe to give tender shadows to those folds which fall in the lights, that the hollow
parts may not appear too deep and cutting.
 Let the folds be well contrasted, and avoid strait lines as much as possible.
 Make the folds contrast the body and limbs.
  judicious repetition of folds in  circular form, contributes greatly to characterise  fore-
shortened limb.
 The drapery of figures moving with great activity, should play as if agitated by the
wind; but that in proportion only to the velocity with which the figure appears to move ; on
the contrary, in fixt attitudes keep the drapery still.
II. Numberless examples of fine draperies may be found in prints after the great masters;
but none are fitter to be consulted than those of the Cartons: let them be designed carefully,
and the artist will be better enabled to cast them himself in  true taste, when he afterwards
makes designs from real draperies.
When the student has made  considerable progress, and is able to copy  picture, drawing,
or print, with freedom and exactness, let him proceed to finish his studies by considering the an-
tique and nature. The collection of casts from the antique statues, at the Royal Academy for
Painting and Sculpture, are accessible to the ingenious.
It will be necessary to conclude with one useful caution : let the student be careful how he
studies the statues; let him remember, that the best of them are only memorials of the intense
application of those great artists, whose lives were spent in eadeavours to express their own idea
of perfection, which varied according to the different genius or taste of each master, and the
different nature of the materials he wrought upon; and that those performances which come nearest
to nature are the best. And let it be further remembered, that  design correctly made after the
finest statue, will never convey any other idea than that of  statue: there is  stiffness inse-
parable from marble or plaster, which is conveyed to, and infallibly distinguishes the designs
made after them from those made after nature; and that stiffnefs should be avoided with the ut-
most care and assiduity.





DESCRIPTION
OF THE
CARTONS of RAPHAEL URBIN.
WHEN  man enters into that awsul gallery at Hampton-Court ssays Mr. Richardson, in
his Essay on the Theory of Painting), he finds himself amongst  fort of people superior
to what he has ever seen, and very probably to what those really were. Indeed this is (speaking
of grace and greatness) the principal excellence of those wonderful pictures, as it must be al-
lowed to be that part of painting which is preferable to all others. These inimitable pieces are
called Cartons, from their being executed upon paper; and are nothing more than coloured
drawings, upon  washed ground previously prepared for that purpose, the shadows of which
are made by hatching with the point of  large pencil, and the whole are very highly finished.
They were originally intended as patterns for tapestry, and were entirely the work of that great
master Raphael Urbin. It is almost impossible to consider these pictures, without supposing that,
as the Miraculous Draught of Fishies is the only miracle of our Saviour’ to be found among them,
it is more than probable, that what this country now happily possesses, is but  part of  most stu-
pendous work of this great man, and that many more glorious Cartons of the life and miracles
of our Saviour have perished in oblivion; for it can hardly be conceived, that this single subject
could particularly engage the attention of Raphael, among many others which would undoubt-
edly have made better pictures, and been more suitable to his genius ; and the Carton of Christ’
charge to Peter, and the regular succession of the acts of the apostles, seem greatly to confirm
this opinion. However, as it is an argument that probably will not be contested, and cannot be
proved, it can only be lamented, that perhaps some accident, or the premature death of that great
master:, has deprived the world of an invaluable treafure.
CARTON 
The MIRACULOUS DRAUGHT of FISHES.
And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not, from benceforth thou shalt catch men. Laujke, ch.. .  was an amazing event ; but as the principal persons were few, and half of them
necessarily engaged. in the management of their nets, the historical expression is confined
to three figures only, which are those of our Saviour, Peter, and James. The principal figure
in this picture is Christ, who is pronouncing the words above quoted, in order to remove the
apprehension of Peter, who, in  fine posture of supplication, has just uttered these words,
 Depart from me, for  am  sinful man,  Lord. Our Saviour’ figure and action are per-
fectly great and graceful; and in his character, divinity, benignity, and tenderness, are express-
ed in the highest degree.  In Peter’ countenance, fear, wonder, and solicitude, are blended in 
most extraordinary manner, and compose  character of expression worthy of Raphael ;  the figure
in the same boat, supposed to be that of James, is also finely imagined and drawn ; awe
and attention are strongly marked in his face, and he seems, by his action, to have acquiesced
in the supplication of Peter, as acknowledging himself unworthy of being the companion of Di-
vinity. IThe rest of the figures, as has already been said, are chiefly concerned in attending to





 DESCRIPTION OF THE

their employment, which, as they were in another vessel, naturally engrossed their attention ;
only the nearest of them seems to have caught some part of the conversation, and appears to
listen: this last figure, and another, who are pulling up the net, are finely drawn, contrasted, and
foreshortened; and the whole figure of the old man in the stern of the boat, who is very attentive
te his businéss, is extremely fine.
The perspective in this Carton (in which the point of sight is placed pretty high) occasions the
sea to make  fine back ground for the figures, which, from its natural hue, fails not of shewing
the colouring of the figures to the utmost advantage. At  great distance, upon the sea-shore,
appear several groupes of figures, designed in  masterly manner, the principal of which seems to
consist of  number of persons who are employed in the baptism of infants. Nothing need be said
to the objection commonly made by small critics to the- size of the boats, that having been fully
answered by Mr. Richardson ; who has also mentioned the fine effect of the sea-fowl, which are
artfully and judicioussy placed in the fore-ground, and indeed could be very ill spared.
CARTON II
CHRISTS CHARGE tO PETER;
COMMONLY CALLED,
THE DELIVERY OF THE KEYS.
He said unto bim the tbird time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me Peter was grieved,
because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me And he said unto bim, Lord, thou
knowest all things, thou knowest that  lave thee. Jesus faith unto him, feed my sheep. Jonn,
chap. XXI. ver.  principal figure in this picture is that of our Saviour, which Mr. Richardson is of
opinion has received some injury, and is not at present what Raphael made it. * This:
supposition, it is believed, has never been contradicted; and whoever attentively compares the
taste of design in this figure with those of the apostles in the same Carton, or that of our Sa-
viour in the Miraculous Draught of Fishes, must be convinced, that it falls many degrees short of
that great painter. Perhaps, by some who may contend for its being Raphael’, it may be urged,
that, like Leonardo da Vinci, in  fimilar case, he was baffled by thie greatness of his own idea;
but whichever argument holds good, we must be content to take it as it appears. Mr. Ri-
chardson also observes, that the time chosen is the moment of our Lord’ having just spo-
ken; and that in consequence of our Saviour’ interrogating Peter,  Lovest thou me more than
 these?’ the rest of the apostles were eager to reply to that question, by assuring their Lord,
that their love for him was at least equal to Peter’; and this solicitude is finely expressed in
every character. The next principal figure is that of Peter, who, according to the history, is re-
presented upon his knees, with the utmost humility attending to and receiving the charge given
him by his divine Master. The head is dravn in profile, and the face is entirely in shadow.  It
may, be here observed, that the shadow cast by Peter’ body serves admirably to bring the figure
of our Saviour forward, and also to keep the principal groupe together. The third princi-
pal figure is St. John, whose expression and attitude Mr. Richardson mentions as an improve-
mient upon the story. He says, our Saviour, by commanding Peter to feed his sheep, seemed
to indicate  preference in favour of that apostle, as has been observed; and that St. John,
who was the beloved disciple, may, therefore, be supposed to have been under  particular con-
cern on that account. Accordingly he appears to address himself to our Lord with extreme ar-
dour, as if earnestly endeavouring to convince him of the sincerity of his love.  The atten-
tion of all the apostles is directed to our Saviour, except one,  who seems to press forward ; and,
by turning his liead, which is seen between two profiles, hinders the repetition which would









have unavoidably happened if he had been looking the same way. The heads of the apostles
are amazingly designed, and full of expression ; and their attitudes are finely varied and con-
trasted. Thé draperies are noble and well cast; that of our Saviour only appears to be rather
heavy, and unsuitable to him at this time, as being after his resurrection. But admitting that
this figure has suffered, the injury may, in this particular, be attributed to the alteration of it by
some other hand. Mr: Richardson, who had studied the Cartons, , observes, that the small
piece of drapery in  part of the garment of the outermost apostie, is of great consequence to
this picture; which, being folded as under his arm, breals the strait line of an unplcasing mafs
of light, and gives  more graceful form to the whole ; which artifice is also assisted by the boat.
Of the same consequence to the principal figure is the flock of ffieep placed behind, which helps to
break the lines of the drapery, detach the figure from its ground, and illustrate the history.
CARTON III
The LAME MAN HEALED;
COMMONLY CALLED,
The BEAUTiFUl GATe of the TEMPL Es
Then Peter said, silver and gold babe  none, but fuch as  have give  thee : In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazaretb, rise up and walk.
And be took bim by the right hand, and lift bhim up, and immediately bis feet and ancie bones
received strength. Acts, chap. il. ver.   great composition is divided into three distinct groupes, by means of the
magnificent columns which appear in the front of the picture, and are  part of the co-
lonade which supports the roof of the portico. The two apostles Peter and John, the cripple,
and four figures, whose heads only are seen, compose the groupe in the centre : one side of the
picture is filled with people going to the temple, and its opposite with others coming from it;
which disposition Raphael has advantageously employed in contrasting these two subordinate groupes,
by opposing the backs of some of the figures to others which are seen in front, and further con-
trasting these by several which are in profile.
There is not, perhaps, in the world,  picture so thoroughly characterised, or so artfully
managed, as this Carton. The moment of Peter’ having pronounced the words, : in the
 name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk, is the time chosen by Raphael; and
is the instant when the lame man finds himself suddenly enabled to rise; when the muscles of
his limbs, released from the contraction which till now with-held and deprived him of their
use, are expanding, and an extraordinary impulse urges him to the exertion of their hitherto
useless functions; all which is most amazingly conceived and expressed. At this period, those
who were apprized of something extraordinary which was then transacting, are endeavouring to
thrust forward on the side of the picture where the cripple is placed; and these, with  woman
and  boy who are hastily passing on to the temple, together with the inimitable boy in the front
of the picture, who is eagerly pulling back one of the figures, remarkably characterise the princi-
pal subject of the Carton, which is that of the agents of Divine Power giving strength and
agility to the torpid limbs of the man who was born lame. Wonder and amazement are
finely expressed in the characters of the spectators ; and on the side of the picture next to
Peter, who with great dignity has conferred the divine gift, every thing is still, but expresling
silent amazement. Thus, in the parts where dignity should be preserved, all is quiet; and
where strength and activity are given, every thing is in motion. The character of the cripple
is sinely imagined, it is persectly that of  mean person; and the expression of joy and gra-
titude, which appcars in it, is finely balanced by  mixture of doubt and astonishment; and he
seems scarcely to believe the reality of the blessing he is receiving. * The character of Peter

is devout and majestic; JFand that of John is full of divinity, and superlatively graceful ; he is








represented, with the utmost pity and affability, concurring with Peter in this act of true piety
and charity.  The rest of the heads in the same groupe are finely invented and drawn, particu-
larly that of the old man leaning upon his crutch, Jand of him who is looking over John’ shoulder.
IIt is remarkable, that the same airs of the head, which Raphael has given to the two
apostles, are nearly the same with those of the man and woman on that side of the picture ;
and the action of Peter’ arm is repeated in the same man with  very little variation. He has also
introduced another cripple into this groupe, whose character is not altogether uilike that of him
who is healed ; but the expression is of another kind, and shews  malevolence and disinclination
to believe the truth of this miracle ;  which seems to be one reason why he was placed behind
the apostle, as à situation most properly adapted to one of his way of thinking; but this figure
is of prodigious use, and is moreover  fine eontrast to the other; and the repetition in the rest is
so judicioussy managed, that it has no ill effect; but of this groupe particular notice will be taken
in speaking of the by-works or ornaments of this Carton.
There is  wonderful expression of malignity in the character of the man who presses his
lips with his singer, in the same groupe. The woman with the child in her arms has 
character full of expression, is exquisitely designed, and perfectly great and graceful. IThe fine
boy in the fore-part of the picture, who being unconcerned is eager to be going, and pulls the
man’ garment, is à fine contrast to the figure of the cripple; and at the same time breaks 
mass of shiadow, which would otherwise have had  very disagreeable effect. This boy is also con-

trasted by another, who is led along hastily by  woman with  basket upon her head; Ff and

these, as has already been observed, give motion to that side of the picture. The drapery upon
this woman’ arm is artsully swelled and folded towards the elbow, and breaks the straitness which
would have appeared from her action, and could not but have offended the eye. It will now be
proper to speak of the ornaments; and other accidental decorations, which are usually called
bye-works.
The principal of these are the columns, which, with regard to the picture, are the finest that
could possibly be imagined, and in themselves are  proof of the amazing genius of Raphael. The
effect of the waving line, as an ornament, is perhaps no where made use of to such advantage,
nor better proves its gracefulness. To confirm this assertion, let any one substitute in their stead,
or ideally substitute, the lonic, or Corinthian; or any other order; and let it be enriched with
flutings, and all the decorations that can possibly be given to those orders, and then compare it
with Raphael’. What an astonishing alteration must ensuel How cutting, how disagreeably
heavy will the innovation appear  and how very considerably must the picture suffer by the change 
Besides as the columns were arbitrary, and the painter had once deviated from the established
rules, he was at liberty to do what he pleased; and therefore Raphael has apparently made use
of this licence for the purpose sollowing : lt was doubtless necessary, that the principal groupe
should not only possess the centre of the picture; but occupy more space than the others, in order
to maintain its character of distinction from the subordinate ones: in consequence of which,
Raphael has made the intercolumination greater between the first and second column, than be-
tween the second and third,  part of which is cut off by the side of the picture.
This being
allowed, it will not be difficult to give what is apprehended will be thought  sufficient reason
for the repetitions before mentioned ; and why the same number of figures, nearly in the same
attitudes, the cripple excepted, were introduced into this groupe. It is certain, that if this part
of the picture had been otherwise managed than it is, by too great  variation in the attitudes
from those of the principal groupe, the inequality of the intercolumniation would have been more
apparent ; and consequently every common observer would have taken the liberty of condemning
it as an oversight in Raphael. The great artifice, therefore, is concéaled in the similitude of the
figures which compose these groupes. The same number are employed in both. In the principal
groupe, the whole figure of the cripple is seen; in the other, the body is large; but being upon
his knees, his legs are hid by the columin, and the space occupied by his hand and arm, which
rests upon  staff, is by no means equivalent to the room gained by the disappearing of his legs ;
and yet this staff and limb seem to fill up the space. The distance from the knees of the cripple
to the column, is greater than that between the feet of the lame man and the sume column; and
boch being near the ground-line or front of the picture, cause  great deception.  he woman witl
the child in her arms is similar to John; but she is placed much nearer thie column. Jolin’ arm










is employed in holding the child, and consequently does not appear; and  light well-falded
piece of drapery supplies the place, and forms  mass which receives the shadowed parts of the
cripple’ head and body. The man is in an attitude similar to that of ’eter ; but the column is
placed so as to be partly hid by his hand, by which he expresses his astonissment, falls exactly
in the centre between the two columns, as does that of Peter in the principal groupe; but lest
this should be too remarkable, the hand of the woman is seen close by it, naturally and grace-
fully applied to her breast; and this with the infant’ head make  sufficient variation, and does
not in the least destroy the principal intention. It being absolutely necessary to introduce the whole
arm of the figure of the man, and the hand being to be placed in the centre, the arm is un-
avoidably required to be bent rather more than that -of Peter; but this was not  sufficient vari-
ation, and therefore  kind of short open sleeve; which reaches about half way down to the elbow,
was added; and this also produces another variation. To carry on this artifice in every part,
Raphael judged it expedient to have the same number of figures in each groupe; but whercas
in the principal one there are three heads between that of John and the column, and none be-
tween that of his and Peter’, so in this there appears but  part of one between the woman and
the column, and the other three are placed in the space between the man and woman. The same

artifice is also finely kept up in the distant colonade; where, in the same space, two rows of

the same columns appear in perspective, and by their contrast occasion the distance between the
columns on the opposite side to appear larger than it really is. In short, this Carton is altogether
the most consummate picce of art that probably ever was or ever will be produced.
CARTON IV;
The DEATH of ANANIAS.
But Peter Jaid, Ananias, wby bath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to
keep back part of the price of the land; Whilst it remained, was it not thine cwne And
after it was sold, was it not in thine ovn powerà Why hast thou conceived this thing in
thine heart à Thou bast not lied unto men, but unto God. And Ananias kearing these words
fell down, and gave up the ghoft. And great fear came on all that heard these things.
Acts, chap. . ver.    all the various ways ordained by the Almighty for putting  period to the present exist-
 ence of human nature, there is none so affecting or alarming as the stroke of sudden
death ; whenever, therefore, this happens, it appears more or less terrible to those who survive,
according to the state of the soul at that moment when it is separated from the body. The
death of Ananias was, therefore,  subject capable of exciting horror in an extraordinary de-
gree, supposing it to have been only  common accident: but the circumstance of his death was
much more terrifying, as it was  manifestation of the divine wrath upon him,  who had not lied
 unto men, but unto God. This alarming event happened at  time when the minds of the peo¬
ple were filled with the amazing things which they both saw and heard ; when universal benevo-
lence. possessed the hearts of those who adhered to the doctrine taught by the apostles. There-
fore such an event must have struck those, who were witnesses to it, with horror and reverence ;
with detestation of the act itself, and with reverential awe for the apostle, whose fore-knowledge
of the fraud practised by Ananias, made him openly accuse him in the words above mentioned.
Raphael has told this story in  manner worthy of his sublime genius; and the time chosen is so
very evident, that it needs not be mentioned.
This Carton is composed of three distinct groupes, and Ananias is the principal figure; but it
required no less than the profound skill of this great master to make him appear so: the figure
being prostrate by necessity, must have appeared to some disadvantage had the spectators been all
standing, even though they had inclined as much as the two men who are stooping over him. Ra-






phael, therefore, has most judiciously given all the figures in the fore part of the picture such atti-
tudes, as at once persectly correspond with the story, and make the figure of Ananias more conspicu-
ous. Accordingly, the subordinate figures are all either kneeling or stooping; and these, at the
same time, give an inexpressible dignity to the apostles, who are standing, and form  distinct
groupe in the middle of the back part of the picture, in the centre of which Peter is placed, who is
described as having just pronounced the accusation. The whole figure of Ananias is inimitably fine,
but the expression in his character is amazing. There appears to be strongly marked in the features
not only the stroke of death as  corporcal suffering, but the agonies of  wounded conscience à ;
from which immediately proceeds the writhing contorsions of the body and limbs, the very extremi-
ties of which appear to be contracted and convulsed. The character of Peter is also finely ima¬
gined and designed : there is  holy severity in his countenance which is inexpressibly great;
his attitude is majestié; and though his situation is something remote, it is impossible to avoid
seeing that his is the second principal figure in the picture. The whole groupe of apostles are
characters of great dignity ; each seems collected within himself, and revolving upon this terri-
ble catastrophe; and one of them, who is next to Peter, appears with reverential awe to address
himself to the Almighty, and is  fine character  Horror, fear, and amazement, are blended
in the character of the man, who is opposed to Ananias; who by his situation and attitude
appears also to be rendering up his goods to the apostles, and possibly was intended for Joses
called Barnabas, who is mentioned in the latter part of the preceding chapter ; and this figure
makes the finest contrast imaginable to that of the dying man. The woman next to him dis-
covers her terror in  manner perfectly adapted to her sex, as well as the circumstances of the
storys. Her féar compels her to turn round, the natural preparative for flight; and this occasions
her figure to contrast that of the man before described in  fine manner. The character of John,
who is very properly employed in relieving the necessitous persons who compose  part of one of
the subordinate groupes, is extremely graceful ; compassion and benevolence are strongly express-
 in his coutenance**, and his action discovers, that he not only relieves them with money, but

likewise bestows with it his advice, and appears to exhort them to make  proper use of it. The
apostle, who seems to beckon to some who are supposed to be out of the picture, to bear testimony
of the punishment inflicted on Ananias, is  character of great dignity, and his attitude is finely
varied from that of Peter’ Yf.
The draperies in this Carton are perfectly fine, and extremely well cast; particularly those of the
apostles, which are remarkably graceful, and the folds finely disposed and contrasted. That of
Ananias requires particular observation; he has less than any other figure in the picture, his arms,
legs, and feet, being entirely naked. This possibly to some may appear absurd, but it is  fine
artifice ; the violent agitation of the muscles is thereby made apparent; and the limbs of the
figures near him being mostly covered, serve to shew his figure more distinctly, and of course help
to discover its consequence. In short, the whole composition of this picture is perfectly great and
striking, and is  remarkable instance of the genius of Raphael. In the Carton of the Lame Man
healed, there is  luxury of fancy displayed in the ornaments with which it is enriched; in this its
grandcur, dignity, and effect, are totally derived from the invention and disposition of the charac-
ters. Ornaments there are none; and the bye-works are extremely plain and agreeable to the sim-
plicity of the church of Christ in its infant state; the chief of them is the curtain, which is behind
the apostles; it is indeed simple, but then it is finely folded, and serves admirably to break the
straight line, which is made by the heads of the apostles, which, without this help, must have
appe red somewhat disagreeably. The back ground is also artfully varied, and relieved by an
opening on one side, and  flight of steps, with figures ascending them, on the other.









CARTONS of RAPHAEL URBIN.
 .
ELYMAS the SorcereR struck with Blindnefs.
nd nou behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee , and thoit shalt be blind, not seeing the light
of the sun for à season. And immediately there fell on him  mist and  darknefs, and be
went about seeking some to lead bim by the hand. Acts, chap. xin. ver.  terror and astonishment are strongly expressed in this picture, yet it appears
of  different kind, and produces  different effect from that in the Carton of the Death of

Ananias. The punishment of Elymas was to him dreadful and grievous, and to the beholders
terrifying and wonderful; but is apparently considered by them no otherwise than as it relates
to this instance of the divine judgment inflicted on him. The Death of Ananias inspired horror
also, not without  mixture of pity for the sufferer, who, before the discovery of his crime, was
probably esteemed as  good and devout man ; on the contrary, the Sorcerer was  person, of
whom it may reasonably be judged the people stood in awe; and that he was rather feared on
account of his power, than beloved for his virtues. This will evidently appear, when the manner
in which Raphael has told this story is considered. Every one of the spectators discovers terror
and surprise; but none (except one of the lictors, who stands near the proconsul) discovers the
least expression of pity. Elymas, though in the midst of numbers, appears to be alone; and
he extends his arms in vain,  seeking some to lead him by the hand ;’ nor does the admirable
figure, who stands between him and the proconsul, and who, with the utmost amazement, looks
stedfastly in his face, seem inclinable to offer him the least assistance. Indeed, there are but
few of the spectators who appear to give any attention at all to him ; the majority of them
being employed either in relating, or attending to the relation of the punishment inflicted upon
him. Elymas, who is the principal figure in this picture, according to the observation of Mr.
Richardson, is blind from head to foot, and is altogether  most inimitable character. Perhaps
Raphael hardly ever conceived one more expressive; and though this great master thought
proper to assist the understanding, by making the subordinate figures more fully explain the
principal subject, yet this figure was alone sufficient to have done it. Dejected arrogance is
amazingly described in his character ’, together with that shame and confusion, which must natu-
rally have appeared in it when he felt the irresistible force and superiority of the divine power.
His attitude is also extremely fine, and can only be thoroughly understood by viewing the picture
itself, or  good copy, or print after it. The apostle Paul is the next principal figure; he is
placed opposite to the sorcerer, and is represented with one arm extended, as having just de-
nounced sentence upon him, to the execution of which, with  look of holy satisfaction, he
seems to demand the proconsul’ attention. He is likewise distinguished by  book, which he holds
under the other arm. In his character, which appears in prosile, the expression is awful and
maiestic : his whole figure is finely imagined and drawn, full of dignity, and perfectly graceful.
The next is the proconsul Sergius Paulus, who is more affected than any of the spectators :
terror and astonishment are expressed in his countenancet, and evidently discover, that he feels
the force, and is sensible of the equity of the divine judgment; but it appears in  manner
perfectly becoming his character, and he sits amazed at the punishment of Elymas, and convinced
of the truth of the doctrine preached by the holy apostles. The apostle Barnabas, who stands be-
hind the sorcerer, is employed in explaining his fate to those who, by their situation, must
necessarily be ignorant of it, as being placed behind him, which he is represented as doing with
great zeal and energy. IThe man, who stands between Elymas and the proconsul, is prodigieusly
fine; he is, indeed, all amazement and attention; and in his character there is express. 
mixture of doubt, and an eagerness to discover whether the sorcerer’ blindness is real or not.
The man, whose head appears between that of Paul and the side of the picture, is also full of
expression : he is apparently  believer, which is shewn by  fine mixture of fear and devotion in




 DESCRIPTION OF THE
his countenance. ’ There is likewise great expression in the lictors, who stand upon the steps;
and also in the rest of the characters which compose this picture. The draperies in general are
extremely fine, particularly that of Paul, which is noble, well cast, and folded; that of the
forcerer is also finely imagined, and suitable to bis character. The scenery, or back ground, of this
Carton is magnificent, and well adapted ; it will be sufficient to say, that in order to break the
stiffnefs of unilormity, Raphael has taken some liberties in the architecture, which produce an
effect that makes ample amends for any seeming irregularity.
CARTON VI.
PAUL and BARNABAS at LYSTRA.
And there sat  certain man at Lystra, impotent in bis feet, being  cripple from bis mothers
womb, wbo never had walked. The same heard Paul speak, who stedfastly beholding bim,
and perceiving that be had faith to be bealed, said with  loud voice, stand upright on thy
feet , and he leaped and walked. And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lift
up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, the gods are come down to us in the likenefs
of men. And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was chief
speaker. Then the prieft of Jupiter wbich was before their city, brought oxen and garlands
unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people. Which when the apostles
Barnabas and Paul heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out.
Acts, chap. xiv. ver. ê— this Carton the simplicity and purity of the Christian religion is finely opposed to the
pompous idolatry and superstition of the heathens; the divine behaviour and modesty of

the two apostles is infinitely more striking and greater than all the tumult and parade of
the sacrifice, which the priests, attended by the people, are about to make to them. The manner
in which Raphael has described this ceremony, is perfectly fine and agreeable to the custom of
the Romans; and is entirely taken from the bas-relief of the Trajan column, the priests and
boys employed in the intended sacrifice being almost exactly copied from thence, particularly
the priest of Jupiter,  who is in all respects the same, except in the drapery, the figure in
the column being without any. In the characters of the priests and people there is  general
expression of enthusiasm and superstitious fear, which is finely described. Paul is the principal
figure in this picture: he is represented as standing upon  kind of step, from whence he is
about to descend, in order to stop the mistaken religious fury of the people; and at the same
time, with the utmost grief and perturbation, which is admirably expressed, in his coun-
tenance, is rending his garment, and exposes part of his breast, which produces  fine effect in
the imagination . The apostle Barnabas, who stands behind him, is  sine character; he is
seen intirely in shadow; but his attitude and expression are incomparable : grief and pity are
blended in his countenance, and he clasps his hands together with  fervour not to be described.
Mr. Richardson, in speaking of this Carton, and the sacrifice represented in it, says,  the occa-
sion of all that is finely told. The man who was healed of his lameness, is one of the for-
wardest to express his sense of the divine power, which appeared in those apostles; and to
shew it to be him, not only  crutch is under his feet on the ground, but an old man takes
up the lappet of his garment; and looks upon the limb, which lie remembered to have
been crippled, and expresses great devotion and admirations; which sentiments are also seen
 in the other, with  mixture of joy. Mr. Richardson might have added gratitude also,
And, indeed, if it be allowable to
which is visibly expressed in the character of the cripple *.
censure so great à master, the place in which this man is found is liable to some objection. Paul,
in looking siedfastly upon him, perceived  he had faith to be healed;’ and he is here represented
among the erowd of idolators, and appears to be one of the most zealous to assist at  cere-
mony so utterly disagreeable to his holy benefactors. To this it may be objected, that as he pro-










CARTONS of RAPHAEL URBIN.
bably had not had time to be fully instructed in the Christian faith, this was the only way in
which he could possibly testify his gratitude; but it is submitted, whether he might not, with
moré propriety and equal advantage to the picture, have been introduced in the place of the
man, who is on the fame side of the picture with the apostles, employed in bringing  ram to
the sacrifice à; or at least in some other situation, in this particular more agreeable to his dispo-
sition to receive the religion of Christ. The whole figure of this man is finely designed, and
vastly exprefsive; but the leg, which the old man is looking at, is remarkably elegant, and was
undoubtedly painted from nature. The figure of the old man is also finely drawn and imagined,
and his attitude, whiei is stooping, brings several subordinate figures into view, which cquld
not otherwise have been seen. The architecture in the back ground of this Carton is magni-
ficent; the forms of the buildings are finely varied; and the whole together exhibits  noble
composition.
CARTON VII;
PAUL preaching at ATHENS.
Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars-hill, and said, Te men of Athens,  perceive that in all
tbings ye are too superstitious : For as  passed by, and beheld your devotions,  found an altar
with this inscription, to the urknonr GOD; wohom, therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him
declare  unto you. Acts, chap. xvii. ver.   invention, exprefsion, design, variety and decorum, are allowed to constitute  fine historical
composition, this Carton certainly deserves the character it has long maintained, of being one

of the greatest performances of Raphael.
This fine picture is divided into three groupes; the first of which is composed of four figures,
among whom the apostle is eminently distinguished, as indeed he is from every other in the
picture ; his situation being so extremely remarkable, that he is shewn to the greatest advantage
that can possibly be conceived. The man who is about to ascend the steps, the woman behind
him, and eight other figures who are represented standing, compose the second groupe; and the
third is formed by six persons who are sitting. This last is placed between the first and second;
nearly in the centre of the picture.
The character of Paul is universally allowed to be the most sublime: performance that
ever was produced by the pencil of Raphael; and Mr. Richardson, who passionately admired
this figure, with  warmth peculiar to himself swhich, perhaps, upon this and some similar
occasions carried him  little too farl, says, : But no historian, or orator, can possibly give
me so great an idea of that eloquent and zealous apostle, as that figure of his does; all
the fine things related, as said or wrote by him, cannot; for there  see  person; face,
air, and action, which no words can sufficiently describe, but which asfure me as much
as those can, that that man must speak good sense, and to the purpose. Thus much is be-
yond contradiction, that nothing hitherto produced can give so great an idea of the person of Paul,
or can better help to illustrate the divine zeal and elocution which that apostle so eminently possessed;
than the awful, majestic and expressive character, which the hand of Raphael has given themF.
Raphael has employed every artifice, in order to make the apostle particularly conspicuous;
all the figures in the picture are subservient to that purpose; the man and woman at the bottom
of the steps are actually nearer to the eye than the apostle, but their situation causes the base line
of the picture to cut off part of their height; and as they are both stooping, they are effectually
prevented from lessening the importance of the apostle. He has managed the figures that appear
behind the apostle in the same manner, by placing two of them lower than Paul, and the third
sitting upon the upper step; by which means they are sufficiently degraded. The figures in thé
second groupe, who are seen standing, are situated upon the ground, their heads mostly inclined;
and are also at  considerable distance ; and those who compose the middle groupe are at  still







greater distance, and are represented sitting. But the gigantic statue of Mars, which is introduced
with great propriety, is of infinitc service to the picture ; it is placed beyond the outermost figures
of the second groupe ; therefore the distance of this statue being considered, and the height and
bulk of it compared with the figure of the apostle; it will be found to reduce the last to  moderate
size, and also serves admirably, by its magnitude, to balance that side of the picture.
Among  great variety of fine characters in this picture, next to that of the apostles, is that of
the man who is ascending the steps, in whose countenance awe and reverence are finely blended  ;
nor need the most common observer be told; that this man and the woman behind him are intended
to represent Dionysius and DamarisF, who, we are informed by the history, were converted.
The expression of extreme attention in the three figures nearest to Dionysius in the second
groupe, is most admirably describedf; nor is that of the man in the same groupe, who
presses his lips with his finger, less to be admiredI. The three figures behind the apostle,
who are apparently displeased with his discourse, are finely invented , particularly that of him
who is sitting and rests his chin upon his hand; in his character envy and malignity are finely

described**.
Leonardo da Vinci, in his treatise upon Painting, has given it as  precept, that : In grave
and serious compositions, when asfemblies arc held, and matters of importance debated, let but
sew young men be present; it being contrary to custom to intrust affairs of this nature in the
hands of youth, who are not less able to give council, than they are willing to receive it;
and who, therefore, have two reasons for absenting themselves from these kinds of meetingsFf-
This precept is no where better illustrated than in this Carton, where there is  wonderful ex-
pression of attention, decorum and gravity, in the old men; and, on the contrary, the few voung
persons who are introduced in the picture appear froward, impatient, and impetuous, and con-
tempt and dislike are strongly expressed in each of their characters; for which reason part of these
turbulent persons are judiciously thrown into the most distant groupe, and others are placed

behind the older men. 
In the distance between the buildings, in the centre of the picture, are seen two sigures, who
appear to be talking together, and seem to be of no consequence to the composition, but their
use is great ; they not only serve to break the straight line made by the heads of those who are
sitting, as also the parallel lines made by the columns of the temple and the adjacent piazza, but
connect the principal and two subordinate groupes together; and without them the picture must
have suffered considerably.
The attitudes of the figures are extremely sine and expressive; the draperies noble and well
cast, particularly that of the apostle, which is admirably designed. The architecture is elegant,
not rich, but suitable to the taste of the Athenians, and properly adapted to the picture ; as is the
distant view of the country, it being customary for them to place the statue of Mars, as the
guardian of the city, at the entrance into it.
Upon the whole, it may not be improper to conclude, with comparing the ideas of two
such great painters as Raphael and Leonardo da Vinci in similar subjects, by the following
extract from the writings of the latter, who, in describing the manner in which  public
oration should be represented, says, : To represent  person haranguing  multitude, consider,
in the first place, the subject matter on which he is to entertain them, in order to give

him an action suitable to the occasion; for instance, if the business be to persuade, let it
appear in his gestures; if it be to argue and deduce reasons, let him hold one of the

fingers of his left hand between two of those of the right, keeping the other two shut; let
his face be turned to the asfembly, and his mouth half open, so as that hie may appear to

speak; if he be sitting, let him seem as about to rise, advancing his head  little forwards ;
if he be represented standing, let him recline  little with his head and breast towards the people ;
 and let the assembly be seen listening with silence and attention; let all their eyes be fastened
on the speaker, and let their actions discover somewhat of admiration ; let some old man be seen
wondering at what he hears, with his mouth shut, his lips drawn close, wrinkles about the
corners of his mouth, the bottom of his checks, and in the forehead, occasioned by the eye-
brows, which must be raised near the setting on of the nose; let others be represented sitting,












with their fingers clasped within each other, bearing up their left knee ; another old man may
 be seen with his knees thrown across each other, his elbow leaning on his knee, and with his
 hand supporting his chin, which may be covered with  venerable beard. 
The similarity of the ideas of these two great men will be better discovered by comparing the
Carton with the foregoing quotation, where, though several things are differently expressed, yet,
upon the whole, the thought is so nearly alike, that it might be almost implied, that either Leo-
nardo’ idea had been put in execution by Raphael; or, could there have been  probability of it,
that the latter had dictated to the former when he was composing his book.































































































































































Passions.
Fear and Astonishment

and Awe

and Devotion

and Wonder

and Amazement

and Reverence
Horror
Incredulity
oy, with Gratitude
Malevolence
Malice, with Incredulity
Placidity
Reverence
Severity

Solicitude
Sorrow with Pity
Superstition
Surprize
Surprize and Gratitude
— with Doubt
— and Attention
Terror, with Compassion
em
Thoughtfulness
Wonder
Wonder and Astonishment
Zeal






Cartons.
Death of Ananias
Paul and Barnabas
Elymas the Sorcerer
The same
The lame Man healed
The Miraculous Draught of Fishes
Death of Ananias
Paul preaching
The same
Paul and Barnabas
The lame Man healed
Paul preaching
The lame Man healed
The same
Paul and Barnabas
The same
Death of Ananias
Christ’ Charge to Peter
The same
The same
Paul and Barnabas
The same
The same
The same
The lame Man healed
The same
Paul and Barnabas
The same
Death of Ananias
Paul preaching
The same
The lame Man healed
Elymas the Sorcerer
The same


 Number.


 and   and 