
 
THE
ART of PAINTINC
 Joseph Bertlews
ded      
TEACHING.
The speedy and perfect Acquifition of
that rt without  Mafter.
By Rules fo eafy, and in  Method to natural as to
render this charming Accomplifhment uiverfally attainable.
CONTAININC,
Wood; for Landskips, Ter-
 The Difference between
Painting in Miniature, and
raffes, Water, Ruins,
other Kinds of Painting.
Rocks, Coc.
II. The Management of Co-
IV. The Art of Painting all
Serts of Flowers, with the
lours in Draperies, Linnen,
proper Colours required to
Lace, Furrs, tOc.
reprefent Nature to the
III. The Method of mixing
higheft Perfection.
Colours for Carnations; for
. The various Methods of
painting of Architecture, or
any Building of Stone or
Painting.
Tranllated from the Onginal FRENCHs




The FIFTH EDITION.



To which are now added,
. Certain Secrets of one of
II. Some general inftructive
the greatelt Ralian Pain-
Leffons for the Art of
ters for making the fineft
Drawing. And
Colours, Burnished Gold,
III. The Wefufnets and Be-
Shell Gold, Cc.
nefit of Prints,




   

 ONDON:
Printed for . HoncEs, at the Looking-Glass, fa-
cing St. Magnus-Church, Lendon-Bridge, and WI.
COOPER, at the Glebe, Pater-nefter-Rew.  His: Grace
 Of MONTACU,
MASTER of the GREAT WARDROBE,
GREAT MASTER of the Molt Ho-
nourable ORDER of the BATH, and
KNIGHT of the Moft Noble ORDER
of the GARTER.
May it please Tour Grace:
NE of the nobleft
Purpofes of the Art
of Painting being
to preferve the Images of
Mluftrious Pertons to Pof
terity


DEDICATION.

erity, this Treatile is na-
turally infcrib’ to One of
the moft illuftrious Perfo-
hnages of this Time.
But your celebrated Pa-
your for the Charming Art,
leads me alfo naturally to
addrels VOUk CRACEon
this Occafion, to whom we
are to highly indebted for
the Advancement of Paint
ing and all the Polter Arts
In Great-Britain.
The noble and generous
Ofe you have conflantly
Princely
made of your
Rank





 and illuftrious Quali-
ities, for the Protection and

Encouragement of Arts,
and the Culcivation and
Tmbellifhment of Human
Life, has diffinguith’ your

CRACE as one of the Clo-
ries of the Age, and en-
 you as an invalua-
ble Blefling to your Coun
Str thereforepub-
dith  Treatife on the Art
of Paintins, without pay-
fing Homageto your GRACE

gat the same Time, and put
ting


DEDICATION
ting it under the Protec-
tion of  Name that has
the higheft Authority with
all the polite and ingenious
Part of Mankind.
 am,
 LORD,
Tour Grace 
most obedient,
and most devoled,
bumble Servant.
THE


 EFACE.

HE ART of PAINTING
wants no Mans Eloquence
to recommend it. It ra-
withes wherever it appears;
and lays the whole World
in Subjection to its Charms.  shall not
therefore, with the Generality of Wri
ters on this Subject, enter into  Detail
of Beauties and Perfections, which are
univerfally known and admird; and give
 recommendatory Character of what
has every where the higheft Reputation.
My Bufinesshere, by way of Preface, is
only to give some Account of the fol.
lowing Treatife: And this  shall do by
way of Extract from the Original Pre-
face; which being written in the Romish
Commu-





The PREFACE.
Communion, with  peculiar and very
filial Regard to the Religious, the whole
of it would not, perhaps, appear very
gracefully in the Language of  Protef
tant Country.
To guard againft any Offence which
sKilful Painters might be led to take at
the Publication of this little Affemblage
of Instructions, it is declard, that it was
ot intended for them, but for the Tyros
only and Novices in the Art, and fuch
a cannot eafily be provided with  Maf-
ter to qualify them for this charming
Employment. And it is certain, there
are Thoufands of Perfons in Great Bri-
sian, as well as in other Nations, who
have  greater Paffion for this Art
than they have Opportunity to cultivate
 The Country affords but few Pain-
ters, whofe Instructions are of any Va.
lae; and good Pieces of this Kind are
very fare among us; while great Num-
bers of both Sexes, of Fortune and Lei-
fure, who with  Genius for Painting.
are devoted to  Country-Life, languith
away many  heavy Hour for want of
some Intelligence in this Art, which
they might pass very agreeably with 
little


HO PREF ACE.
little Skill im II. And, perhaps,  rural
Life, of  Recess in the Country, can-
not be sweetend by  more elegant
Amufement.


The Author of the following Treatife

has conceald his Name, but infinuated
enough in his Preface to let us know He
was  Man of Fortune, who painted
only for the Entertainment of his Friends
:and his private Diverfion. This  men-
tion to thew the Reader, that he need
not be apprehenfive of that Fallhood and
Referve we too often meet with in Books
fof this Subject written by profess’ Pain
ters. Hedrew up his Papers, (of which
 the following are  Tranllation) for the
 Instruction of some Perfons of Quality at

ga diftance from him; who fucceeded fo
happily in their Purfust of this Art by the
Help of them only, that on their Inftan-
ices, he refolv’ to make them publick;
 that every one, with the leaft


 Genius for the Art of Painting, would
 find his Method as plain and intelligible,
and reap as much Benefit from his In-
 structions, as his Pupils of Quality; fince
 has begun at the very Elements, or
. , , of Mimature, and omitted not
the


The PREFA  .
the leaft Matter or Circumftance that is.
requifite to  full and perfect Elacidation
of the Art.
 shall only add, that the French were
charm’ with the Work, as foon as it
was publifh’; and made such  Demand
for it, that it quickly ran through fc.
veral Editions; and preading among
their Neighbours on the Continent, has
been tranflated with great Success into
their respective Tongues.
 


 OL. AINTING
IN
MIN.AIURE, &.
 not here to celebrate
the Prailes of Painting: Many
learned Nch, who have to
happily treated of the Dignity
 Excellence of this charming
Art, have faved me the Labour; fince what
they have faid of Painting in General, is
alfo true of Miniature in Particular.  will
:only add in  few Words, the Peculiaricies
which diftinguish it from every other Spe-
:cies of Painting.
It is more delicate.
It requires  nearer View.
It is not eafily done but in Littls.
It is wrought only upon Velum or Paper.
And the Colours are diluted only with
Gum-water.

To


 fucceed in this Art,  Man should be
perfectly skilled in the Art of Designing or
Drawing. But as moft People who affect
the one, know little or nothing of the
other, and would have the Pleafure of
Painting, without giving themfelves the
Trouble of learning to defign, (which is
indeed, an Art that is not acquired without
 grear deal of Time, and continual Appli-
Cation,) Inventions have been found our to
supply the Place of it; by means of which
 Man defigns or draws, without knowing
how to design.
II. TE firft is Calking. That is, if you
have  Mind to do  Print or Design, in
Miiature, the Back-fide of it, or another
Paper, mult be blacken’ with Small-coal,
and then rubb’ very hard with the Finger
wrapt in  linnen Cloth: Afferwards the
cloth muft be lightly drawn over the Side fo
blacken’, that no black Grains may remain
upon it to foil the Velom you would paint
upon; and the Print or Draught muft be
faftened upon the Velom with four Pins,
to keep ir from shifcing. And if it be ano-
ther Paper that is blacken’, it muft be put
between the Velom and the Print, or
Draught, with the blacken’ Side upon the
Velom. Then with  blunced Pin or Nec-
dle, you muft pats over the principal Lines
of Strokes of the Print, or Draught, the
Coniours, the Plans of the Drapery, and
OVeF





 every thing elfe that mutt be diftin-
suithed; prefting to hard, that the Strokes
may be fairly marked upon the Velom un
derneath.
III. CoPyiNe by Squares is another con-
venient Method for fuch as are but litrle
skilld in the Art of Defigning, and would
copy Pictures, or other Things, that cannot
be calked. The Mechod is this: The Piece
mult be divided into many equal Parts by
lirtle Squares, marked out with Charcoal, if
the Piece be clearand whicith, and the Black
can be fairly feen upon it; or with white
Chalk, if it be too brown and dusky.
After which, as many Squares of equal Dr-
mentions mult be made on whire Paper,
upon which the Piece muft be defigned;
becaufe if this be done immediately upon
Velom, (as one is apt to mifcarry in the
firff Accempt) the Velom may be foiled with
falfe Touches. But when it is nearly done
upon Paper, it mult be calked upon the
Velom in the Manner before defcribed.
When the Original and the Paperare thus
order’, obferve what is in each Square of
the Piece to be difigned, as  Head, an Arm,
 Hand, and to forch; and place it in the
corresponding Part of the Paper. And thus
finding where to place all the Parts of the
Piccs, you have nothing to do but to form
them well, and to jon them together. By
this Nicthod you may reduce or cularge
B Piece to what Compats joupleafe, making
the Squares of your Paper greater or letter
than thofe of the Orrginal; but they mutt
always be of an equal Number.
IV. To copy  Picture, or other Thing,
in the Jame Size and Proportion, another
Method is, to make ule of varnith’ Paper,
or of the Skin of  Hog' Bladder, very
trantparent; fuch as is to be had at the Gold-
beaters. Talc or Kinglats will likewife do
a well. Lay any one of thofe Things
upon) our Piece; and, thro' it you will fee
all the Strokes and Touches; which are tobe
drawn upon it with  Crayon or  Pencil.
Then take it off; and fattening it under
Paper or Velom, fet up both againtt the
Light, in the manner of  Windew. and
with  Crayon, or  filver Needle, markout
upon the Paper or Velom yon have put up-
permoft, all the Lines and Touches you shall
fee drawn upon the varnished Paper, Blad
der, Talc, or Ifinglats you have made ule of,
and which will plainly appear thro' this
Window.
After this Manner, making ufe of the
Window, or of Glats expoted to the Light,
you may copy all Sorts of Prints, Defigns,
and other Pieces, on Paper or Velom; lay.
ing and faftening them under the Paper of
Velom, upon which you would draw them.
And is  very good, and  very eaty Con
trivance for doing Pieces of the Jame Size
and Proportion.
I you have  Mind to make Pieceslook
another Way, there is nothing to be done
but to turn them; laying the printed or
drawn side upon the Class, and faftening
the Paper or Velom upon the Back of it:
remembring to let your Lights fall on the
lek Side.
 good Method likewife to take  true
Copy of  Picture in Oil, is to give 
Touch of the Pencil upon all the principal
Strokes, with Lake tempered with Oil; and
to clap upon the Whole  Paper of the fame
Size: Then pafting the Hand over it, the
Touches of the Lake will stick, and leave
the Defign of your Piece expreffed upon the
Paper, which may be calked like other
Things. But you muft remember to take
off, with the Crum of Bread, what remains
of the Lake upon the Picture, before it be
dry.
You may likewife make ule of Pounce,
made of powder’ Charcoal put in  linnen
Rag; with which the Piece you would
copy muft be rubb’, after you have prick’
all the principal Strokes or Touches, and
faftened whice Paper, or Velom, underneath.
. Bur  furer and cafier Hlelp than all
thefe, for one who knows nothing of De
figning, is  Mathematical Compals. It  made of cen Pieces of Wood, in
form of Rulers, half  quarter of an Inch
thick, half an Inch broad, and  Foot long,
 
Of.


or more, according as you have  blind ro
draw Pieces of  greater of leffer Size. To
faciluare the Conftruction of this Infirument,
 here exhibt  Figure of it, with an Ex-
planation of the Manner in which it is to
be uied.

 liitle Beard  is to be of Fir, and
cover’ with linnen, or any other Cloth,
becaute the Piece you copy, and the Velom
of Paper you copy upon, muft be fixed
Upon It. Upon this Board muft the Com-
pals allo be fixed, with  large Pin, by the
End of the firtt Foor , deep enough to
keep it clofe, but not to deep as to hunder
It from turning eafily. When you have 
Mind to reduce Things, place your Origi-
hal on the side of the FoorC, and the Ve-
lom or Paper you would draw upon, on the
side of the Foor ; removing the Velom
or drawing it nearer, according as you in-
tend to reduce or enlarge.
In





 order to enlarge  Piece, you have
othing to do but to change the Places of
your Original and your Copy, placing the
latt rowards , and the other on the
Sitle of .
And in both one and the other Method,
 Crayon or leaden Needle mult be put in
the Foor, under which the Velom lies; and
 Pin,  little blunted, in that over the Ori-
ginal; with which all the Traces are to be
followed; conducting the Pin with one
Hand, and with the other preffing genely.
upon the Crajon or Needle, that marks the
hen the Cravon, or Needle,
Velons.
bears fufficiently upon the Velom, you have
 Occafion to rouch it.
By this Inftrument you may alfo draw in
equal Dimenfions: But in order to this, the
Compats mult be fixed in another Manner
upon the Board; for if it is to be faftened
upon it by the Middle at ; and your Ori-
ginal and your Copy muft be fix’ on each
Side of this middle Foot, at equal Dillan-
ces; or from Corner to Corner; that   to , when the Pieces are large.
One may likewife draw feveral Copies at
once of equal and different Dimentions.
VI. THESE are all the Heips  can give
to fuch as are not Mafters of Design. For
thofe that are, they have nothing to do
with them.
B therefore, your Piece is marked
our upon the Velom, you mult pats with 
Pencil of very clear Carmine, ever all the
Praces, to the end they may not be effaced
a you work. Then clean your Velom with
the Crum of Bread, thar no Black may re
Inain ipon it.
VII. Voux Velom muft be pafted upon
 little Plare of Brats or Wood, of the Size
you weald make your Piece, to keep it
frin and ight; but this pafting muft be on
the Edges of your Velomonly, and behind
the Plate For which Purpole your Velom
muft exceed yeur Plate above an Inch on
every Side. For the Part you paint upon,
mult never be pafted; becaufe it would not
only give it an ill Look, but you could not
take it off if you would. Cur off the litle
Shags and Locks of the Velom; and wer
ting the fair Side with  linnen Cloth, dipt
in Water, clap the other upon the Plate
with  clean Paper between them: So
much as hangs over, muft be pafted upon
the Back of the Plare, drawing it equally
on all Sides, and hard enough to ftretch it
well.
ViIl. THE chief Colours made ufe of
for Painting in Ministure, are
Carmine





 and Florence Lake
Rofe Pink
Vermillion.
Red Lead
BrownRed.
Red Orpiment
Ultramarine
Verditer-
Indigg
Cfall-fione
Vellow Oker—
Duich Pink

Gamboge
Naples Vellow
Pale Mafticot
Deep Vellow Mafticot
Ivory-Black.
Lamp- Black:
True Indian Ink
Biftre, or Woodfoot
Raw UUmber—
Burnt Umber—






 White
Crayons of all Colours
Gold and Silver-shells
Leaf- Gold or Silver
Pallets of lvory, and Pencil sticks
Ivory Boxes, containing lvory-
Shells in which are put the
Colours for Miniature.
NV.. All the Colours above specified, with every
Implement and Urenfit, neceffary in the Prac-
tice of Painring in Miniarure, are prepared
and fold at most Print-Shops in London and
Wektminfter.
The Seven traufparent Colours, which are
used where Writingis seen thre the Colour.
Lake
Bine
Vellow
Liquid  Grass-Green
Dark-Green
Purple Colour
Brown
IX. As


I As all Colours taken from Earth and
other heavy Matter, are always too coarle,
be they never to well ground, especially for
delicare Work, becaule of  certain Sand
remaining in them; the finell Parts may be
drawn out by diluting them with the Finger
in  Cup of Warer. When they are well
steeped, let them fettle  while: Then pour
out the cleareft, which will be at Top, into
another Veffel. This will be the finelt, and
mult be let dry; and when tis ufed, muft
be dilured with Gum-water, as  shall fhew
hereaffer. This is  very good Contrivance,
especially for Flake-white, in which there is
 chalky Matter; which, like the coarfe and
heavy Paris in other Colours, finks to the
Bottom of the Cup it is Itsep’ in.
. Ir you mix  little of the Gall of an
Ox,  Carp, or an Eel, particularly of the
laft, in green, black, gray, yellow and
brown Colours, it will not only take away
their greaty Narure, but alfo give them 
Luftre and Brighinets they have not of
themfelves. The Gall of Eels mufthe taken
out when they are skinn’, and hung upon
 Nail to dry; and when you wouldufe it,
it muft be diluted with Brandr, and  liitle
of it mix’ with the Colour you have dilu
ted already. Thislikewife makes the Colour
Rick better to the Velom, which it hardly
  when it is greaty: Moreover, this Gall
hunders it from fcaling.
KL. SoME Colours are made clearer by
Fire, as Tellow OOaker, Brown Red, Ulira-
marine, and Umber. Allothers are darken’
by it. But if you heat the faid Colours
with  sharp Fire, they change; for the Brown
Red becomssyellow; Vellow Ocker becomes
red; Umber reddens alfo. Ceruse by Fire
takes the Colour of Citron, and is often
called Mofficot. Oblerve, that Fellow Oker
heared becomes more tender than it as,
and foffer than Brown Red. Likewile Brown
Red heared becomes foffer than fine Vellow
Oaker. Both are very proper. The finelt
and cruelf Uhramarine heated upon ared hot
Iron, becomes more glittering; but it waltes,
and is coarfer and harder to work with in
Miniature, when tis purged after this
Bianner.
XII. All thefe Colours are diluced in
little Cups of Ivory, made on purpofe, or
in Sea-fhells, with Water, in which Gum-
Arabic and Sugar Candy are put. For In-
Hance, in  Glats of Water put  Piece of
Gum as big as  Walnut, and half char
Quantity of Sugar Candy. This laft hinders
the Colours from fcaling when thy are laid
on, which they generally do when they want
It, of the Velom is greaty.
This





 Gum-water muft be kept in  neat
 Bortle corked; and never mult you take any
Gour of it, with  Pencil that has Colour
 it, but with  Cuill, or fome fuch
Thing
Some of this Water is put in the Shell
with the Colour you would temper, and
dilured with the Finger till it be very fine.
If it be too hard, you muft let it fokten in
the Shell with the faid Water, before you
dilute it. Afferwards let it dry. And do
thus with every Colour, except Lilly-Green,
Sap-Green, and Gamboge, which mutt be
temper’ with fair Water only. Bur Clira
marine, Lake, and Biftre are to be more
:gumined than other Colours.
If you make ufe of Sea-shells, you muft
let them kleep two or three Days beforehand
in Water. Then cleanfe them in boiling hor


Water, mix’ with Vinegar, in order to
carry off  certain Salt, which otherwife
Ricks to them, and spoils the Colours that
are put to them.
KIIl. To Know whether Colours are
fufficiently gumimed, you have nothing to
do but to give  Stroke of the Pencil upon
your Iland, when they are dilured, which
dries immediately : If they chap and fcale,
there is too much Gum, if they rub out by
pafting the Finger over them, there is too
little. It may be feen likewife when the
Colours are laid on the Velom, by paffing
the


 Finger over them. If they flick to it
like  Powder, it is  Sign there is not Gum
enough, and more muft be put in the Water
with which you temper them. Take Care,
though, you do not put too much; for that
makes the Colour extreamly hard and dry.
It may be known likewife by their Glewiness
and Brightness:  the more they are gum-
ined, the darker they paint: And when you
have  Mind to give  greater Strength to 
Colour, than it has of ittelf, you have nothing
to do but to give it  great deal of Gum.
KIV. PROVIDE yourfelf with an lvory
Pallet, very finooth, as bigas your Hand;
on one Side of which the Colours for the
Carnation, of naked Parts of  Picture, are
to be ranged in the following Manner. In
the Middle put  great deal of White, pretty
largely (pread; becaute it is the Colour moff
made ufe of. And upon the Edge, from the
Left to the Right, place the following Co-
lours, at  little Diftance from the White.
Mafticot
Durch Pink
Orpiment
Fellow Oker
Green, composed of Verditer, Durch
Pink, and Whire, in equal Quan-
tities.
Blew, made of Ultramarime, Indigo
and Whice, to  great Degree of
Paleness.
Ver





 and
Black
On the other side of the Pallet, pread
Lorme White in the fame manner as for the
Carnation. And when you have  Mind to
Paint Draperies, or other Things, place near
the White the Colour you would make em
of, in order to work as  fhall thew hereafier.
XV. THE UUfe of good Pincils is  great
Matter. In order to make  good Choice,
wer them  little; and if the Hlairs keep
clofe together, as you turn them upon the
Finger, and make but one Point, they are
:good: But if they clole not together, but
make feveral Points, and some are longer
:than others, they are good for nothing; not
:for dotting in particular, and leaft of all for
Carnation. Whenthey are too tharp point-
red, with only fouror five Ilairs longer than
the reft, yet clofing all together, they are,
notwithllanding, good; but they muft be
:blunted with  Pair of Scizzars, taking care
fat the same time you do not clip away too

 much. Tis proper to have two or three
fors of them; the largeft for laying the
Grounds, and Dead-colouring; and the fnall-
:et for smissing.

To bring the Hairs of your Pencil tojoin
clofe together and make  good Point, you
 mult ofen put the Pencil juft between your
Lips


 when you are ar Work, moiftening
and prefting it clofe with the Tongue, even
when there is Colour upon it; for if there
be roo much, some of it is taken off by this
means, and enough lek for giving fine and
equal Touches. Yow need not apprehend
this will do you any Harm. None of the
Colours for Miniature, except Orpiment
(which is Poifon) when they are prepared,
have either ill Tafte or ill Quality. This
Expedient muft especially be ufed for detting,
and for simmshing, particularly the naked Parts
of  Picture, that the Toucks may be neat
and fair, and not too much charged with
Colour. As for Draperies and other Things,
as well in dead-colouring as in finishing, is
fufficient, in order to make the flairs of your
Pencil join well, and to unload it when it
has too much Colour, to draw ir upon the
Edge of the Shell, or upon the Paper you
mult put upon your Workcoreff your Hland
Ofl, giving fome Strokes upon it before you
work upon your Piece.
XVI. To work well in MMimature, you
mult do it in  Room that has but one Win-
dow, and fix yourfelf very near it, with 
Table and  Desk almoft ashigh as the Win
dow; placing your felf in fuch  Manner,
that the Light may always come in on the
left Side, and never forward, of on the
Right.
XVIl





 WHEN you would lay  Colour
on all Parts equally firong, as for  Ground,
you mult make your Mixtures in Shells, and
=put in enough for the Thing you defign  for if there be not enough, tis 
great Chance but the Colouryon mix after-
wards, is too dark or too light.
XVIIL ArTER having spoken of Velom,
Pencils and Colours, let us now thew how
they are to be employed. In the firft Place,
then, when you would paint  Piece, be it
Carnation, Drapery, or any Thing elfe, you
muft begin by Dead-colouring, that is to lay,
by laying your Colours on with liberal
Strokes of the Pencil, in the fmoothelt man
her you can, as the Painters do in Oil; not
giving it all the Force it is to have for  fi
mishing:  mean, make the Lights  littie
brighter, and the Shades lets dark than they
ought to be; becaufe in dotting upon them,
as you muft do after dead colouring, the
Colour is always fortified, and would at latt
be too dark.
KIK. THERE are feveral Ways of Dof-
ting; and every Painter has his own. Some
make their Dots perfectly round. Others
make them  little longith. Others baich
by little Strokes, that Cross each other every
way, till the Work appears as if it had been
wrought with Ders. This laft Mcthod is
the


 belt, the boldell, and the foonelt done.
Wherefore  advife fuch as would paint in
Minialure, to ule it, and to mure them-
felves from the firft to dot in the plump and
the soft way; that is to fay, where the Dots
are loft, in  manner, in the Ground upon
which you work, and only to much appears
as is fufficient to make the Work feem dot-
ted. The bard and the dry Way is quite
the reverfe, and always to be avoided. This
is dene by dotting with  Colour much dar
Ker than your Ground, and when the Pen-
cil is nct moiften denough with the Colour,
which makes the Work feem rough and un-
CVell.
XL. Srupy likewife carefully to less and
drown your Colcurs one in another, to that
If may not appear where they disjoin; and
to this end, fokten or allay your Touches
with Colours that partake of borh, in fuch
fort that it may hot appear to be your
Touches which cut and disjorn them. By
the Word Cut,  conceive what manifeftly
separates and divides, and does not run in
and blend it felf with the neighbouring Co-
lours; which is rarely practis’' but upon the
Borders of Drapery.
XXL. WHEN your Pieces are finilk’, to
Beigbten them  lirde, gives them  fine Air.
That is to fay, to give, upon the Extremity
of the Lights, fmall Touches with  Colour
yet










 lighter which muft be loft and drowned
 the reft.
XXII. WAEN the Colours are dry upon
your Pallet, or in your Shells, in order to
ute them, they muft be dilured with Warer.
And when you perceive they want Gum,
which is seen when they cafily rub off the
Iland or the Velom, if you give  Touch
with them upon ether (as  have faid alrea-
dy) they muft be temper’ with Gum-water,
inttead of pure Water, till they are in  good
Condition.
KXIIL. THERE are feveral forts of Grounds

 for Pictures and Portraitures. Some are
 dark, compoted of Biftre, Umber.
and Cologn-Earth, with  litde Black and
"Wbite Others more yellow, in which is

mixed  great deal of Oker. Others grayer;
which partake of Indigo. In order to paint.
  Ground, make  Wath of the Colour or
: Mixture you would have it, or according to
 that of the Picture or Portranure you would
copy; that is to fay,  very light Lay, in
which there is hardly any Thing but Water,
in order to foak the Velom. Then pals
another Lay over that, fomewhat thicker,
and ftrike it on very finoothly with large
Strokes, as quick as you can, not touching
twice in the fame Place before it be dry; be
caule the fecond Stroke carries off what has
been


 laid on at the firtt, especially when you
lean  litle too hard upon the Pencil.
XXIV. OTHER dark Grounds are like.
wife made of  Colour  little greenith; and
thofe are moll in Ofe, and the properelt to
lay under all forts of Figures and Portraitures,
becaufe they make the Carnation, or naked
Parts of  Picture, appear very fine; are laid
on very eafily, and there is no occafion to
dot them, as one is often obliged to do the
others, which are rarely made fmooth and
even at the firtt; whereas in thefe one fel-
dom fails of Succets at the firft Bour. To
make them, you muft mix Black, Duich
Pink and White all together, more or lets of
each Colour, according as you would have
them darker or lighter You are to make
one Lay very light, and then  thicker, as
 faid of the firft Grounds. Vou may allo
make them of other Colours, if you pleale,
but thefe are the moft common.
KXV. WREN you paint  Hloly Perfon
upon one of thefe Grounds, and would paint
 small Cloryround the Hlead of your Figure,
you muft not lay the Colour too thick in
that Part, or you may even lay none at all,
especially where this Clory is to be very
bright burlay for the firtt Time with While
and  lirtle Oker mix’ together, of  firt
ficient Thicknels; and in proportion as you
 frem the Place of the Hlead, put  litrle
more Oker; and to make it lole ir felf, and
dye away, with the Colour of the Ground,
Baich with  free Stroke of the Pencil, for
lowing the Round of the Glory, fomefunes
with the Colour of which it is made, and
fometimes with that of the Ground, mixing
 litile White or Oker with the laft, when
it paints too dark to work with: And do
this till one be infentibly loft in another, and
othing can be seen to disjoin them.
XXVI. To fill an entire Groand with 
Glory, the brightell Part is laid on with 
licle Oker and White, adding more of the
firft, in proportion as you come nearer the
Edges of the Picture. And when the Oker
is not flrong enough (for you muft always
paint darker and darker) add Gall-sone. af
terwards  lixtle Carmine; and, lattly, Biftre.
This firft Laying, or dead-colouring, is to be
made as foft as poffible, that is to fay, let
thefe fhadowings lose themfelves in one and-
ther without Cap or Interfection. Then
the Way is to dot upon them with the same
Colours, in order to drown the Whole to-
gether, which is pretty redious, and  listle
ditficult, especially when there are Clouds
of Glory on the Ground. Their Lights mult
be fortified in proportion as you remove
from the Figure, and finithed, as the reft,
by detting, and rounding the Clouds; the
bright


 and obicure Parts of which muft run
inienfibly into one another.
XXVII. For  Day-ky, take Ullramarine,
and  good deal of White, and mix them
together. With this make  Lay, as finooth
as you can, with  large Pencil and liberal
Strokes, as for Grounds applying it paler
and paler as you defcend towards the Hori
 which muft be done wich Vermiltion or
Red Lead, and with White of the fame
Strength with that where the Sky ends, or
tomething lels; making this Blew lofe it felf
in the Red, which you bring down to the
Skirts of the Earth, or Tops of floules,
imixing towards the End, Gall-stone, and  deal of White, in fuch  manner that
the Mixture be still paler than the former,
without any vifible Interfection or Parting
between all thefe Colours of the Sky.
XXVIIl. WEN there are Clouds in the
Sky, you may spare the Places where they
are to be, that is to lay, you need not lay
on any Blew there, but form them, if they
are reddith, with Vermillion, Gall-fione and
White, with  liule Indigo, and if they are
more upon  Black, put in  good deal of
the latt; painting the Lights of one and the
ther with Mastrcot, Vermiltion and White,
more or less of any of thefe Colours, accord-
ing to the Strength you would give thenm,
or according to that of the Orizinal you
C rounding the Whole as you det; for
 tis  difficuit Matter to lay them very fmooth
at the firlt painting. And if the Sky is not
even enough, you muft dot it alio.
It is at your Plealure to exempt the Places
:of the Cieuds, for you may lay them upon
the Ground of the sky, heightening he
bright Parts by putting  good deal of White,
and forcifying the shadows by uting iufs.
:This is the thercelf Way.
KKIK.  Night or fformy Sky is done
 with Indigo, Black and White, mixed roge-
:ther; which is laid as for  Day-Sky. To
this mixture muft be added Oker, Vermilli-
on, or Brown-Red for the Clouds; the Lights

: of which are to be of Mafticot, or Red Lead,
and  little White; now redder, now yel
:lower, at Difcretion. And when it is  tem
peltuous Sky, and Lighreningappears in some
Places, be it blue or red, it is to be done
as in  Day-Sky. drowning and lofing the
whole together at the firtt -forming or dead
colouring, and at the finithing.
  oII 
AAITE
S CMMTHHEE


 . SK

 
 DRAPERTES
XXN.  painta blew Drapery, pit
Tltramarine near the Wbits
upon your Pallet; and mix  Part of one
with the other, rill it makes  fine Pall,
and has  Body. With this Mixture you
muft form the brightelt Parts; and then,
adding more Uttramarine, form tuch as are
darker; and go on after this manner till
you come to the decpeft Plaits, and the
thickeff Shades, where you muft lay pure.
Ultramarine And all this mult be done as
for  Firft-forming or Dead colouring; that

 to fay, laying the Colour on with free
Strokes of the Pencil, yet as finooth as you
can; losing the Lights of the Shadows with 
Colourneither to pale as the Lights, nor fo:
dark as the Shades. Then dot with the
same Colour as in the firft -forming, but 
small matter deeper; that the Dots may be
fairly feen. All the parts mult be drowned
one in another, and the Plasts appear with-
out Incerfection. When the Ulramarine is
ot dark enough to make the deeper Sha-
dows, how well foever it be guinmed, miy
 lirle Indigo with it to finith them. And
when the Extremities of the Lights are not
bright enough, heighten them with White
and  very lule Uliramarine.
XXXI


  Drapery of Carmine is done
in the fame manner as the blne; except,
that in the darkeft Places there is to be 
Lay of pure Vermillion, before you dead co-
lour with Carmine, which muft be applied
at top, and in the firongeft Shades, it muft
be gumm’ very much. To deepen it the
more, mix  lirtle Biffre with it.
XXKII THERE is likewife made another
Red Drapery, which is firft drawn wich
Vermiltion, wnxing White with it to dead co-
lour the bright Places; laying it pure and
unmixed for fuch as are darker; and addine
Carmine for the grand Shades. Tis finiflid
afterwards, like other Draperies, with the
Jame Colours. And when the Carmine with
the Vermillion don' darken enough, work
with the firft alone, but only in the decpert
of the Shades.
XXXIII.  Drapery of Lake is made in
the Jame Manner with that of Carmine,
mixing  good deal of Whire with it for the
bright Places, and very little for thofe that

 are dark.  is finithed likewile with detting,
but you have nothing to do with Vermillion
in Ii.
XXKIV. Violet Draperies are likewife

done after this Manner; affer making  Mix
 ture of Carmine and Uhramarine, putting

always



 White for the bright Parts. If you
would have your Vicler be Columbine or
Dove-Colour, there muft be more Carmine
chan Uhramarine: But if you would have
it blewer and deeper, put more Uttramarins
than Carmine.
XXXV.  Drapery is made of  Fless.
Colour, beginning with  Lay made of White,
Vermillion, and very pale Lake; and making
the Shades with the same Colours, ulinglets
White in them. This Drapery muft be very
pale and tender, becaute the Stuff of this
Colour is thin and light; and even the Shades
of it ought not to be deep.
XXXVI. To make  yellow Drapery
put  Lay of Mafficot over all; then one of
Gamboge upon that, excepting the brighteff
Places, where the Aafficot muft belef en-
fire. Then dead colour with Ofer mixd
with  lirde Gamboge and Masticot, putring
more or less of the laft, according to the
Strength of the Sbades. And when thefe
Colcurs don' darken enoush, add Gall-stone.
And Gall-sone pure and unmux’ is ufed for
the thickeff Shides, mixing  littie Biffre
with it, if there be occation to make them
Kill darker. Vou finith by dotting with the
same Colours you dead colour’ with, and
losing the Lights and the Sbades in one an
Otber.
 is you pur Naples-Eeliow, or
Duich Pink, in lieu of Mafficot and Gambege
you will make another fort of Fellow.
KXKVIII THE Green Drapery is made
by  general Lay of Verditer with which
it you find it too blue, mix Mafficot for the
Lights, and Gamboge for the Sbades. Atter-
wards add to this mixture Lilly-Green or
Sap-Greentofhadow with; and as the Shades
are thicker, put more of thefe latt Greens;
and even work with them pure and unmix’,
where they are to be extreamly dark. You
finith with the fame Coloure,  little darker.
By putting more Vellow, or more Blue
in thefe Colours, you may make different
forts of Greens, as you pleafe.

XXXIN. To make  Mlack Drapery, vou
dead colour with Black and White, and fi=
with with the fame Colour, putting more
Black, as the Shades are thicker; and for
the darkeft, mix Indigo with it, elpecially
when you would have the Drapery appear like
Velvet. Vou may always give some Touches
with  brighter Colour, to heighten the
Lights of any Drapery whatfoever.
XL.  white woolen Drapery is made
by  Lay of White, in which there muft be
 very finall matter of Oker Orpiment or
Gall-Hone, that it may look  little yellowifli.
Then
C dead colour, and finith the Shades
with Blue,  lutle Black, White and Biffre;
putting  great deal of the laft in the darkeft.
XLL. THE Light-Gray is begun with
Black and White, and finith’ with the fame
Colour deeper.
XLII. Fox  brown Drapery, make  Lay
of Biftre, White and  lude Brown-Red;
and thadow with this mixture, made  hitle
darker.
KLIII. THERE are other Draperies, cal-
led variable, becaute the Lights are of  dif

serent Colour from the Shales. Thefe are
moftly uted for the Veftments of Angels, for
young and gay People, for Scarts and other
giry Actire, admitting of  great many Folds,
and flowing at the Pleafure of the Wind

The moft common are the Violet; of which
they make two Sorts, one, where the Lights
are blue; and the other, where they are yel
low.
XLIV. Fon the fult, pur  Lay of Ulira
narine and very pale White upon the Lights,
and Chadow with Carmine, Ulramarine and
White, as for  Drapery wholly Violet; fo
that only the grand Lights appear blue. Vet
they muft be dotted with Violet, in which
there is  great deal of White; and loft in-
fenfibly in the Shades.
XIV.


 THE other is done by putting upon
the Lights only, intlead of Blue,  Lay of
Mafficot; working the reft as in the Drapery
all Violet, excepting, that it muft be docied,
and the ligbt Parreblended with the Badowy,
that  the Tellow with the Violet, with 
Little Gamboge.
XLVI. THE Carmine-Red is done like
the laft; that is, let the Lights be done with
Mafticot, and the Sbades wick Carmine, and
to lose the one in the other, make Ife of
Gamboze.
KLVII. THE Lake-Red is done like that
Of Carmine.
XLViIl ThE Green is done as the Lake;
always mixing Verditer with Lilly or Sap-
Green, to make the Sbades which are not
very dark.
KLIK. SEVERAL other Sorts of Draperies
may be made at Difcretion, always taking
care to preferve the Union of the Colours,
not only in one fort of Cloth or fo, but alfo
in  Groap of feveral Figures; avording as
much as the Subject will allow, the putting,
of Blue near the Colour of Fire, of Green
againtt Black; and fo of other Colours which
cut and disjon, and whofe Union is not
kind enough.
. SE.
  SEVERAl other Draperies are made
of foul Colours, as Brown-Red, Biftre, In-
digo, &cc. And all in the fame manner.
Likewife of other Colours, fimple and coim-
pound; the Agreement between which, is
always to be minded, that the Mixture may
produce nothing harth and difagreeable to
the Eye. No certain Rule can be laid down
forthis. The Force and Effect of your Co-
lours are only to be known from Ofe and
Experience, and you muft work according
to that Knowledge.
LI. Linen Cloaths are done thus: After
drawing the Plars or Folds, as is done in 
Drapery, put  Ley of White over all: Then
dead-colour, and finith the Sbades with 
Mixture of Uitramarine, Black and White
uling more or less of the laft, according to
their Strength or Tenderness; and in the
greateft Decpnings put Biffre, mix’ with 
licde White giving only some Touches of
this Mixture, and even of pure Bifre upon
the Extremities of the greatelf Shadows,
where the Folds muft be drawn, and loft
with thereft.
LII. THEY may be done in another man-
her, by making  general Lay of this Mix-
ture of Uhramarine, Black and very pale
Whise; and dead -colour, as  faid before,
with the same Colour, but  little decper.
And


 when the Shades are dosted and finith’,
heighten the Lights with pure White and
lose them with the Deepnings of the Linnen.
But of whatever fort you make them, when
they are finith’, you muft give  yellowith
Teint of Orgiment and White to certain Pla-
ces; laying it lightly on, and as it were in
Water; to that what is underneath may,
notwichflanding, plainly appear, as well the
Shadows as the Dotting.
LIII. Tellow Linnen Cloaths are done by
purring  Lay of White, mix’ with  little
Oker. Then form and finith the Shades with
Biffre, mixed with White and Oker; and in
the thickeff Sbades ufe pure Biftre. And be-
fore you finith, give some Teints here and
there of Oker and White, and others of White
and Ultramarine, as well upon the Sbades  Lights; but let them be very bright;
and drown the whole together in detting,
and Twill look finely. As you finith, heigh-
ten the Extremnies of the Lights with Mas-
ficol and White. Vou may add to this Sort
of Linnen, as well as to the White, certain
Bars from Space to Space, as in Turkey-Man-
tuas; that is, small Stripes blse and red with
Ultramarine and Carmine; One of Red be-
tween two of Blue very bright and clear
upon the Lights, and deeper upon the Shades.
Virgins are pretty ofc dress’ with Vails
ofthis fore (by Popess Painters), and Scarts
of this Kind are pat abour Necks that are
bare
  ; becaute they become the Teint mighty
well.
LIV. Is you would have both thefe Sorts
of Linnen tranfparent, and the Stuff or
other thing that is beneach, appear through
them, make the firtt Lay for them very
light and clear, and mix in the Colour to
fhadow with,  little of that which is under
neath, especially towards the End of the
Shades; and only do the Extremities of the
Lights, for the Fellow, with Mafficot and
While; and for the White, with pure White.
They may be done in another Manner,
especially when you woud have them allto-
gether as clear as Muslin, Lown, or Garwze.
To this End form and finith what is to be
beneath, as if nothing was to be putover it.
Then mark our the light and clear Folds
with White or Mafficot; and  Shadewy
with Biftre and White, or with Black, Blue,
and Whre, according to the Colour you
would make them of ; making the reft fome
what fainter Ver this is not necelfary but
for the Parts that are not to be fo clear.
LV. Crape is done the same Way; ex-
cepting, that the Folds of the Sbades and the
Lights, and the Borders too, are to be mark’
out with little Filaments of Black upon what
is underneach; which is likewife to be
finifhed beforehand.
E WHEN you would make  Stufflike
 watered Tabby, make the Waves upon it
with  Colour  little lighter, or  lictle dar-
Ker, in the Lights and the Shades.
LVII THERE is  Manner of touching
Draperies, which diftinguiffes the Silken
from the Woolen. The latt are more ter-
reftrial and sensible; the others more light
and fading. But it muft be obferved, that
this is an Effect, which depends partly upon
the Stuff, and partly upon the Colours and
for employing thefe in  Manner futable to
the Subjetts and the Deepnings of Painting,
. will here touch upon their different Ona-
lities.
LVIII. We have no Colour, which par-
takes more of Light, nor which comes
nearer the Air, than White; which thews it.
to be fickle and ffeeting. It may, never-
thelets, be held and brought to by fome
neighbouring Colour, more heavy and Jen-
fble; or by mxing them together.
LIX. Blue is  moft ffeeting Colour: And
to we fee, that the Sky and the remofeft
Views of  Picture are of this Colour but
it will become lighterand fickler, in Propor-
sion as it i with White.
  PURE Black is the heaviell and moft
terreftrial of all Colours; and the more of
it you mix with others, the nearer youbring
them to the Eyc.
Nevertheless, the different Dispofitions
of Black and White make alfo their Effects
different: For White often makes Black dif
appear; and Black brings White more into
View. as in the Reffection of Clobes, of
other Figures to be made round, where
there are always Parts that Jy, as it were
from the Eye, and deceive is by the Craft
of Art: And under the White are here
comprehended all the light Colours, as un
der the Black, all the heavy Colours.
Ultramarine  then, foft and light.
Oker is not to much fo.
Mafticot is Very light; and to is Verditer.
Vermillion and Carmine come near this
Qualiry.
Orgiment and Gambege not to near.
Lake holds  certain Mean, rather fofe
than rough.
Duich-Pink is an indifferent Colour, eafily
taking the Qualicy of others. So it is made
terreftrial by mixing it with Colours that
are fo, and on the contrary, the moft light
and fleeting by joiningit with White or Blue.
Brown-Red, Umber, Dark-Greens, and
Biftre, are the heavieft and moft terreftrial,
NeAtto Plack.
IXI.


 SKTITUL Painters, who under-
Hland Perspettive, and the Harmony of
Colours, always obferve to place the dark
and sensible Colours on the Fore-Parts of
their Pictures; and the moft light and ffeet-
ing they ufe for the Diftances and remote
Views. And as for the Onion of Colours,
the different Mixtures that may be made of
them, will learn you the Friendship or
Antipathy they have to one another. And
upon this you muft take your Meafures for
placing them with such Agreement as shall
pleate the Eye.
LXIl. For the doing of Lace, French.
Points, or other Things of that Nature, put
over all  Lay of Blue, Black and White, as
for Lmen: Then heighten the Flower-work
with pure Wbite Afterwards make the
Sbades above with the firft Colour, and fi-
with them with the fame. When they are
upon the Carnalion, or naked Parts of 
Picture, or upon any thing elfe that you
would thew through another, finith what is
beneath as if nothing was to be pur over it.
and at Top, make the Points or Lace with
pure Whice, fhadowing and finithing them

with the other Misture
LXIII. Is you would paint  Fur, you
muft begin with  kind of Drapery, done,
if it be dark, with Biffreand White, making
 Shadowings of the same Colour, with
lets White. If the Fur be Whice, do it with
Blue, White and  little Biftre. And when
this Beginning or Firtt-forming is done,
inflead of dotting, draw finall Strokes, turn.
ing, now in one Manner, now in another,
according to the Courfe and Flatting of the
Hair. Heighten the Ligbts of dark Furs
with Oker and White; and of the other with
White and  lutle Blne.
LXIV. For doing  Building, if it be of
Stone, take Indige, Biftre and While, with
which make the Beginning or firft Form of
it; and for fhadowing it, pur less of this
latt; and more Biffre than Indige, according
to the Colour of the Stone you would paint.
To thefe you may likewife add  little Oker,
bech for the forming and the finithing. But
to make ii finer, you mult give, here and
there, especially for old Fabricks, blue and
fellow Teints, some with Ofer, others with
Uhramarine, mixing always While with
them, whether before the Firtt-forming
provided they appear through the Draught,
or whether upon it; loosing and drowning
them with the Reft when you finith.
LXV. WAEN the Building is of Wood,
as there are many Sorts, it is done at Dif
Cretion; but the moft ordinary Way is to
begin or fuft-form with Oker, Biffre and
White, and finith without While, or with
Very



very little; and if the Sbades are deep, with
pure Biffre. In the other they add fome-
times Vermiltion, Comeumes Green or Black;
in  Word, juft according to the Colour
they would give it; and they finith with
Dotting, as in Draperies and every thing
cllc.
  Fode
Of CARNATIONS, of the Was
ked Parts of Painting.
LXVI.JTHERE are in Carnation fo
many different Colourings,.

that it would be  difficult
Thing to give general Rules upon to varia-
ble  Subject. Nor are they minded, when
one has gor, by Cuftom and Practice, fome
Habit of working eafily: And fuch as are
arrived to this Degree, employ themfelves
in copying their Originals, or elfe they
work upon their ldeas, without knowing,
how: Infomuch that the moft Skilful, who
do it with less Reffection and Pains than
others, would likewife be more put to it to
give an Account of their Maxims and
Knowledge in the Matter of Painting, if
they were to be asked what Colours they
made ule of for making fuch and such  Co-
Jouring,  Teint here, and another there.
Never





 as Beginners, for whom  this little Work, want some Inftruc-
sion at the firft,  will thew, in general,
after what Manner feveral Carnations are to
be done.
LXVII. In the firft Place, after having
drawn your Figure with Carmine, and or-
dered your Piece, apply, for Women and
Children, and generally for all tender
Colourings,  Lay of White, mixed with
never fo lade of the Blue, made for Faces,
of which  have told the Compofition: Bur
let it hardly be feen.
LXVIll AND for Men, inftead of Blue.
they put in this firft Lay  little Vermillion;
and when they are old,  little Oker is min'
ith it.
LKIK. APTERWARDsfollow all the Tra-
ces with Vermillion, Garmine and White,
mixed together; and begin all the Sbades
with this Mixture, adding White in Proper-
tion as they are weaker and putting but
little in the darkeff, and none, in  manner,
in certain Places, where flrong Touches
are to be given; for Inftance, in the Curner
of the Eye; under the Nofe; at the Ears;
under the Chin, in the Separations of the
Fingers; in all the Jomes; at the Corners of
the Nais; and generally in every Part,
whereyou would mark out Separations in
Shades





 that are obfcure. Neither need you
fearto give to thofe Places all the Force and
 Strength they ought to have as foon as you
begin or firft -formthem, becaute in working
fat cop with Green, the Red you have put
there is always weakned.
LXK. APTER having begun, or firtt
formed, or dead coloured, with Red, make
blue Teints with Ultramarine and  great
deal of White, upon the Parts which jy
from the Eye; that is to fay, upon the Tem
ples; under and in the Corners of the Eyes;
on both Sides the Mouth, above and below;
fa little upon the Middle of the Forehead;
between the Nofe and the Eyes; on the Side
of the Cheeks; on the Neck, and other Pla-
ces where the Fleth has  know not what
blue Caft with ir.
Fellowith Teints are likewife made with
&Oker, or Orpiment, and  lvile Vermillion
mixt with White, under the Eye-brows; on
the Sides of the Nofe towards the Borrom;
 little underneath the Checks, and upon the
 other Parts which rife and come nearer the
).
 especially, for thefe Temts, that the

natural Complexion is to be obferved, in
order to carch ic. for Painting being an
Innntation of Narure, the Perfection of the
Art confifts in the Jultness and Simpliciry
of the Reprefentation, especially in Face-
Painting.
LXXI



 WHEN, therefore, you have done
your firft Lay, your Dead-colouring, and
your Temts, you muft work upon the Sbades,
dotting with Green for the Carnations, or
naked Parts; mixing, according to the Rule
 have given for the Teints,  litde Blue for
the Parts which py from the Eye, and on
the other Iland, making it  little yellower
for thofe that are more sensible; that is to
fay, which rife, and come nearer the Eye.
And at the End of the Shades, on the Side
of the Light, you muft blend and lose your
Coiour infenfibly in the Ground of the Car-
nation with Blae, and thenwith Red, accord.
ing to the Places where you paint. If this
Mixture of Green deesnot work dark enough
at firft, pats over the Shades feveral times,
now with Red, andnow with Green always
docting: And this do till they are as they
should be.
LXXII. Awn if you cannot, with thefe
Colours, give the Sbades all the Force they
ought to have, finith, in the cdarkelt, with
Biftre mixt with Orpiment, Oker, or Ver-
million, and fomeumes with pure Biftre,
according to the Colouring you would
make; but lightly, laying on your Colour
very clear.
LKXIII Yow muft dot upon the clear
and bright Places with  lnde Vermillion of
Car



 mist with much White, and  very
Sinall Matter of Oker, in order to lose them
with the padowy, and to make the Teints
die away intentibly into one another; taking
Care, as you dot, or batch, to make your
Strokes follow the Turnings and Windings
of the flethy Parts. For tho' the Rule be
to cross always, this Dotting of Hlarching
ought to appear  lietls more here, becaule
It rounds the Parts.
And as this Mixture might make  Co-
louring too red, if it was alwaysto be ufed,
they work likewife in every Part, to blend
the Teints and the Shades, with Blue and 
litde Green, and much White, to mixed as to
be very pale; excepting, neverthelels, that
this Colour muft not be put upon the
Cheeks, nor upon the Extremities of the
clear Parts, no more than the other Mix-
ture upon thefe laft, which muft be left
withall their Light as certain Places of
the Chin, of the Nofe, and of the Fore-
head, and upon the Checks; which, and
the Checks, ought, neverthelels, to be red-
der than the relt, as well as the Feet, the
Hollows of the Ilands, and the Fingers of
both.
Obferve, that thefe two laft Mixtures
ought to be to pale, that the Work shall
hardly be vifible; for they ferve only to fof-
ten its to umte the Teints withoneanother,
and the Shades with the Lights, and to
drown the Traces. Care mult likewife be
takenn,



 that you work not too much with
the Red Mixture upon the blue Teints, nor
with the Blse upon the others; but change
the Colour from Time to Time, when you
perceive it works too blue or too red, till
the Work be finithed.
LXXIV. THE White of the Eyes mutt be
Shadowed with this fame Blue, and  little
Fleth-Colour, and the Corners, on the Side
of the Nofe, with Vermillion and White;
giving them  little Touch of Carmins.
The Whole is foftened with this Mixture of
Permillion, Carmine, White, and  very fmall
Mater of Oker.
The Apples or Balls of the Eyes are done
with the Nixture of Ullramarine and Wbite
the latt prevailing  little, adding  little
Rifre, it they are yellowith; or  litile
Black, if they are gray. Make the lirtle
black Circle in the Middle, called the Chryf
ral of the Eye, and shadow the Balls with
Indigo, Biftre, or Black, according to the
Colour they are of; giving to each  finall
Touch of pure Vermiltion round the Chryf-
tal; which muft be left with the relt at the
Finithing. This gives Vivacity to the Eyc.
The Round or Circumference of the Eye
is done with Biffre and Carmine; that is to
fay, the Slits or Partings and the Eye-lids,
when they are large and bolds especially
the upper ones; which muft after wards be
 with the Red or Blue Mixtures
have mentioned before, to the End they
may be loft in one another, and nothing
seem interfected.
When this is done, give  little Touch of
pure White upon the Chrytal, on the Side
of the Lights. This makes the Eye shine,
and gives Life to it.
LXXV. THE Mouth is dead coloured
with Vermiltion, mixd with White; and fi-
nith’ with Carmine, which is foftened as
the reft. And when the Carmine does not
work dark enough, mix  lirde Biffre with
Il. This is to be underflood of the Corners
in the Separation of the Lips; and particu-
larly, of certain Mouths half open.
LKEVL. THE flands, and all the other
Parts of Carnation, are done in the fame
manner as the Faces; obferving, that the
Ends of the Fingers be  little redder than
the relt. When your whole Work is form’
fand docted, mark the Separations of all the
Parts with little Touches of Carmine and
Orpiment mix' together, as well in the
EBadorwy as the light Places; but  little
Ideeper and fronger in the Firft; and lose
fthem in the reft of the Carnation.
 THE Eye-brows and the
 are dead colour’, as are the Shades
fof Carnations, and finithed with Biffre, Oker,
Of


 Black, according to the Colour they are
of, drawing them by little Strokes the Way
they ought to go, that is to fay, give them
all the Nature of Hair. Th: Lights of them
mult be heightened with Oker and Biftre, 
little Vermillion, and much White.
LXKVIII Fon the Hair of the Head,
make  La: of Biftre, Oker and White, and
 litle Vermiltion. When it is very dark
colour’, ufe Plack inflead of Oker. After-
wards form the adorwy Parts with the same
Colours, putting lets White in them, and
finith with pure Biffre, or mix’ with Oaker
or Black, by small Sirokes very fine, and
clofe to each other, waring and buckling
them according to the Curling of the Hlair.
The light Parts muft allo be heightend by
Little Strokes with Oker or Orpiment, White
and  lixle Vermillion. After which, lose
the Lights and the Shades in each other, by
working fomerimes with  dark, and fome-
tunes with  pale Colour.
And for the Hair about the Forchead,
thro' which the Skin is feen, it muft be firtt
formed with the Colour thereof, and that
of the Carnation, working and fhadowing
with one and the other, as if you defigned
to paint none. Then form it, and finiffi
with Biftre. The Lights are to be heigh-
tend as the other.
Gray


 Hlair is dead colour’ with Whife,
Black and Biffre, and finithed with the fame
Coloer, but deeper heightening the bright

and clear Parrs of the Hlair, as well asthofe
ofthe Eye-brows and the Beard, with White
and very pale Blue, after having form’
ythem, as the others, with the Colour of the
Fleth, or Skin; and finith with Biftre.
LXKIK. Bur the mott important Thing
 foken one'’ Work, to blend the Teints
in one another, as well as the Beard and the
Hair about the Forehead, with the other
Hair and the Carnation, taking elvecial
Care not to work rough and dry. and that
the Traces, Turnings and Windings of the
Carnation, or naked Parts, be not inter-
fecded.
You muft likewife accuftom yourfelf to
Apat White in your Colours only in Propor-
Ation as you work lighter or darker. For the
Colour you ufe the second time mult be
always  little flronger and deeper than the
firft, unlets it be for sostening.
LXKK DIFFERENT Colouringsare ea-
fily made, by putring more or less of Red,
or Blue, or Fellow, or Bifre, whether for
the Dead-colouring, or for the Finithing

That for Women ought to be blucith: That
for Children  little red; and both freth and
forid. That for Men ought to be yellower;
especially when they are old.
IXXXI


 To make  Colouring of Dealh,
there muft be  firft lay of White and Or.
piment, or very pale Oker: Dead-colourwith
Vermution, and Lake, inttead of Carmine,
and  good deal of Whise; and afterwards
work over it with  green Mixture, in which
there is more Blse than any other Colour,
to the endthe Fleth may be livid and of 
Purple Colour. The Temts are done the
but
Same Way as in another Colouring;
there muft be  great many more blse than
yellow ones, especially upon the Parts which
fy from the Sight, and about the Eyes; and
the laft are only to be upon the Parts which
rife, and come nearer the Eye. They are
in: de to die away one in another, according
to the ordinary Manner; fometimes with
very pale Blse, and fomerimes with Oker
and White, and  lde Vermiltion; foftning
the Whole together. The Parts and Con.
cours muft be rounded with the fame Co-
lours.
The Mouth is to be, in  Manner, of 
 Violer. is dead-coloured, however,
with  lule Vermiltion, Oker and White;
but finithed with Lake and Blse. And t it the deep Strokes, they take Biffre and
Lake; with which they likewife do the same
to the Lyes, the Nofe, and the Ears.
if it is  Crucifix, of some Martyr, upon
whom Blood is to be seen; affer the finith-
ing


 the Carnation, form it with Vermiltion,
and finith it with Carmine, making in the
Drops of Blood  little bright, reffecting
Spark, to round them.
For the Crown of Thorns make  Layof
Sea-Green, and Mafficot. Thadow it with
Biffre and Green; and heighten the clear
and light Parts with Mafticet.
LXKKIl. Isxow is formed, or firtt laid,
with Indigo,  linde Black and White; and
finithed with pure Ludige, heightening it
with White.
LXXXIIL Fok painting Fire and Flames,
the Lights are done with Mafficet and Or-
piment and for the Shades, they mis Ver-
million and Carmine.
LXXKIV.  Smoke is done with Black,
Indigg and White, and fometunes with
Biftre. One may likewife add Vermiltion
or Oker, according to the Colour it is to be
Of.
LKKRV. PEARIsare painted by purting
 Lay of White, and  litle Blne. They
are sbadowed and rounded with the fame
 Colour deeper:  small white Dot is made
almoft in the Middle, on the side of the
Light; and on the other side, between the
Shalow and the Edge of the Pearl, they
  Touch with Mafficot, to make the
Reffettion; and under the Pearls is made of
lirtle Shadow of the Colour of the Grount
they are upon.
LXKKVI DIAMONDS are dane with
pure Block: Then they heighten them withf
lixtle Touches of White on the side of the
Light.
It is the fame Thing for any others
fewels you have  Mind to paint: There
is nothing to be done but to change thef
Colour.
LKXKVIl. For making  Fisure 
Gold, fut  Lay of Shell-Gold, and Thadow
it with Gall-stone.
Sitver is done the fame Way; excepting/
that it muft be fhadow’ wich Indigo.
LXXNVIIl THus have  particularly
fet down feveral little Matters to help Be.
ginners, for the Method of doing thefe,
and the Colours that are ufed in them, willf
likewife help for such Things as  have not
inctioned, wakking for the Skill and Faci
liry which Time and Experience are ufedto
give to fuch as apply themfelves to this Art.
One great Meansto acquire  Perfection
in it, is to copy excellent Originals. We.
enjoy with Pleafure and Tranquility the
Labour and Pams of others. Bur  Man
muft


 copy  great Number before he is
able to produce as fine Ellects; and it is
better to be  good Copier than  bad Au-
thor.
The Instructions  have given for the
Mixtures and different Tinctures for the
colouring of Carnations and other Things,
may particularly ferve for working after
Prints, where nothing is Keen but Black
and White; though they are not unprofita-
ble when one begins to copy after Pictures
without Skill in the Management of Co-
lours, and without knowing their Force
and Effect. For there is this Differenc:
between Minnature and Painting in Oil,
that in the latt, the Colours are taken upon
the Pallet, juft as they appear in the Pic
ture, where they are laid on ar once
infomuch that neching is to be done but
to confider  little, what will make fuch 
Light, and what tuch  Sbade. But it is
not thus in Mimature, where pretty often
the latt Lay that is applied, does not keep
Is Colour, but takes another from the
Firtt that has been wrought underneath;
or rather, one and the other compose 
Third, which has the defired Effed. And
though, for Example, it be White, Green,
Carmine, Blue, Orpinent, Biffre, &cc. or
which this Colouring is compoted, thefe
Colours, nevertheiefs, do not procdice it,
if you mix them together; for it is not
only


 by working, firft with one, then with
another, that the Thing is done. And
when  Man fees this Effect, without hav-
ing seen how it is produced, he mull, at
leaft, be  Conjurer to difcover the Order
and Manner of it, fuppoting that he hath
neither Book nor Matter. For this Reafon
 applied myfelf to particularize fo many
little Instructions in this Macter; and  af-
fure myfelf, that Experience will thew to
tuch as are in  Capacity to make ufe of
them, that tho' they are small, they are not
lets ufefil.


Of


 LANDSKIPS.
LXXRIN.  Tis parcicularly for Land.
sips that the  Arci-
cle is efteemed; and the following, on the
Nature and different Qualiries of Colours;
becaufe the Order and Diftribution that are
made of them, will do much towards
thewing the remote and the near Views,
which deceive the Eyc. And the greateff
Painters of Landskip have always obferved
to place the moft terreftrial and fenlible
Colours upon the firft Lines of their Land-

Kig, erving the lighteff for the Dif.
CanCes.
But that  may not wander from my De-
ign, intlead of general Precepts,  will
Rop to give Beginners some parricular in-
Pructions for Practice.
RC. In the firtt Place, after having or-
dered the Economy of your Landship as of
your other Pieces, you muft form the near-
off Grounds or Lands, when they are to ap-
pear dark, with Sap or Lilly-Green, Biffre
and  lirtle Verditer, to give  Body to your
D Then dos with this Nixture, but
 little darker, adding fomerimes  lttle
Black Co.
For fuch Pieces of Ground as the Light
falls upon, and which are therefore clear
and bright, make  Lay of Oker and Wbite:
Then fhadow and finith with Bifire. In
some they mix  little Green, particularly
for Chadowing and finithing.
There are fometimes upon the Fore
part certain reddith Lands; which are dead
coloured with BrownRed, White and 
lirtle Green, and finithed with the fame,
puiting  little more Green in them.
Fer the making of Grats and Leaves
upon the Fore-ground, you muft, when that
i finithed, form with Sea-Green or Verditer
and  ltde White; and forthofe that arevel-
lowith, mux Mafficot. Afterwards (hadow
them with Lilly-Green, or Biftre and Gall-
pone, if youwould have them appear wither’ .
The Grounds or Lands at  little Dif
fance, are formed with Verditer, and sha-
doured and finifhed with Sap-Green, adding
Biffre for some Touches here and there.
Such as are at  greater Diftance, are
done with Sea-Green and  little Blne; and
Shadow’ with Verditer.
in  Word, the fartherthey go, the more
blncish they are to be made; and the farchelt
Diftances ought to be of Ullramarine and
White; mixing in fome Placesfmall Touches
of Vermiltion.
XC WATER is painted with Indigeand
White, and (hadow’ with the fame Colour,
but deeper: And to finith ir, instead of dot-
ting, they do othing but make Strokes and
Traces without croffing; giving them the
Jame Turn with the Waves, when there are
any. Sometimes  litle Green mult be
mixed in certain Places, and the light and
clear Parts heightened with pure White, par-
ticularly where the Water foams.
Rocks are dead-coloured like Buildings of
Stone; excepting, that  lirtle Green  for forming and fhadowing them.
Blue and yellow Teints are made upon
them, and left with the reft in finithing.
And when there are finall Branches, with
Leaves, Moss, or Grafs, when all is finith’,
they are to be railed ar Top with Green
and Mafficot. They may be made yellow,
green, and reddiffis for appearing dry, in
the fame Manner as on the Ground. Rocks
are dorted as the reft; and the farther they
are off, the more grayith they are made.
Caftles, old Houfes, and other Buildings
of Sione and Wood, are done in the Man-
her  have mentioned before, speaking of
thofe Things, when they are upon the firtt
Lines. Bur when you would have them
appear at  Diftance, you muft mix Brown-
Red and Vermillion, with much White; and
Shadow very tenderly with this Mixture;
and the farther they are off, the weaker are
 Strokes to be for the Separations. If
they are covered with Slate, it is to be made
bluer than the reft.
RCII. TREES are not done till the Sky
be finifhed: One may, neverthelels, spare
the Places of them when they contain 
good Number: And however it be, such as
come near the Lye, are to be dead colour’
with Verditer mixing fomeumes Oker and
shadow’ with the same Colours, adding,
Lilly-Green. Atterwards you mult work
Leaves upon them by detting without
croffing: For this muft be done with finall
longith Dors, of  darker Colcur, and pret-
ty full of it; which muft be conducted on
the Side the Branches go, by little Tufts of
 litile darker Colour. Then heighten the
Lights with Verditer or Sea-Green, and Mas-
ficot, making Leaves in the Jame Manner:
And when there are dry Branches or Leaves,
they are dead -coloured with Brown-Red or
Gall-fone, with White; and finithed with
Gall-sone, without White, or with Biffre.
The Trunks of Trees are to be dead -co-
lour’ with Oker, Whife, and  little Green
for the light and clear Parts and for the
dark, they mix Black, adding Biffre and
Green for fhadowing one and the other.
Blue and yellow Teints are likewife made
uponthem, and little Touches given here and
there with White and Mafficct, fuch as you
ordinarily fee upon the Bark of Trees.
The


 appear among the
The Branches,
Leaves, are done with Oker, Verditer and
White; or with Biffre and White, according
to the Light they are placed im. They mult
be shadow’ with Biffre and Lilly-Green.
Trees, which are at  little Diltance, are
dead coloured with Verditer and Sea-Green;
and are shadow’ and finithed with the fame
Colours, mix’ with Lilly-Green. Whenthere
are some, which appear yellowith, lay with
Oker and White, and funth with Gall-sione.
For fuch as are in the Diltances and re-
more Views, you muft dead colour with
Sea-Green with which, for finishing, you
muft mix Wltramarine. Ileighten the Lights
of one and the other with Mafficot, by small
disjormed Leaves.
 the moft difficult Part of Landskip;
and, in manner, of Miniature, to leaf  Tree
well. Tolearn, and break one' Iland to
it  little, the Way is to copy good ones;
for the manner of rouching them is fingular,
and cannot be acquired but by working
upon Trees themfelves; about which you
muft obferve to make little Boughs, which
muft be leased, especially fuch as are below
and towards the sky.
And generally, let your Landskips be co-
loured in  handfom Manner, and full of
Narure and Truth; for tis that which gives
them all their Beauty.
D 


  es


 Luwites 
Of FEOWERS.
XCIIl.   is an agreeable Thing to paint
Flowers, not only on account

of the Splendor of their different Cclours,
but allo by Reafon of the little Time and
Pains that are beftowed in trunming them.
There is nothing but Delight in it, and, in
 manuer, no Applicacion. Yon mann and
bungle  Face, if you make one Eye higher
of lower than another,  finall Nofe with 
large Bfourh, and to of other Parts. But
the Fears of thefe Dilproportions confirain
not the Mind at all, in Flower-Paming;
for unlels they be very remaikable,
they spoil nothing.
For this Reafon
moft Perfons of Qualiry who divert them-
felves with Painting,
Keep to Flowers.
Nevertheless you mult apply yourfelf to
copy juitly. And for this Part of Mini-
ature, as for the reft,  refer you to
Nature, for the is your beft Model. Work,
then, after narural Flowers; and look for
the Teints and different Colours of them
upon your Pallet.  little afe will make
you find them eafily: And to facilitate this
to you at the firft,  shall, in the Continu-
 of my Delign, Thew the Manner of
Painting fome; for natural Flowers are not
always to be had; and one is often obliged
to work after Prints, where nothing is leen
but Graving.
XCIV. Trsageneral Rule, that Flowers
are defigned and laid like other Figures;
but the manner of forming and finithing them
is different For they are firft formed only
by large Strokes and Traces which you
maft curn at the firtt the way the Small ones
are togo, with which you finith this Turn-
ing arding much thereto. And for finith-
ing them, inflead of hatching or dotring,
you draw finall Strokes very fine, and very
clofe to one another, without croffing; re-
pafting feveral Times, till your dark and
your clear Parts have all the Force you
would give them.
Of ROSES
XCV.  FTER making your firft Skerch,
  draw with Carminethe Red-Rose;
and apply  very pale Lay of Carmine and
White. Then form the Shades with the
Same Colour, purting lets White in it: And
lattly, with pure Carmine, but very bright
and clear at the firtt forcifying it more and
more, as you proceed in your Work, and
according to the Darkness of the Shades.
This is done by large Strokes. Then finith;
Work
DS


 upon it with the fame Colour by
little Strokes, which you muft make go the
same Way with thofe of the Graving, if it
be  Print you copy; or the Way the
Leaves of the Rofeturn, if you copy after
 Painting, or after Nature; loling the dark
in the clear Parts, and heightening the
greatelt Lights, and the brighteff or moft
lightfome Leaves, with Whife and  little
Carmine. Von mult always make the Hlearts
of Rofes, and the Side of the Shadow,
darker than the Reft, and mix  little Indigo
for shadowing the firft Leaves; particularly,
when the Rofes are blown, to make them
seem faded.
The Seed is dead-coloured with Gamboge;
with which  little Sap-Green is mixed for
Thadowing
Rofes ftreaked with feveral Colours,
ought to be paler than others, that the
Nixture of Colours may be better feen;
which are done with Carmine;  little dar.
Ker in the Sbades, and very clear in the
Lights; always batching by Strokes.
For Whire Rofes you muft put  Lay of
White; and form and finith them as the
Red; but wich Black, White and  lirde
Biffre; and make the Seed  litle yellower.
Fellow Rofes are done by purting in
every Part  Lay of Masticot; and Chadowing
them with Gamboge, Call-stone, and Biftre;
heightening the clear and light Places with
Mafticel and Whits.
The


 Styles, the Leaves, and the Buds of
all forts of Rofes, are formed with Verditer
with which is mixed  little Mafficot and
Gamboge; and for (hadowing them, they add
Sap-Greek, puttinglets of the other Colours,
when the Shades are deep. The Ourfide
of the Leaves ought to be blewer than the
Infide: Wherefore it muft be dead-colour’
with Sea-Green, and Sap-Green mix’ with
that for fhadowing, making the Veins or
Fibres on this Side clearer than the Ground;
and thofe on the other Side darker.
The Prickles, which are upon the Stiles
and Buds of Rofes, are done with lirtle
Touches of Carmine, which are made to go
every way; and for thofe that are upon the
Stalks, they are formed with Verditer and
Carmine, and shadow’ with Carmine and
Biffre; making the Bottom of the Stalks
more reddish than the Top; that is to fay,
you mult mix with the Green, Carmine and
pure Biftre.
OF TULIPS
XCVI.   there are an Infinity of Tulips,
 different from one another, one
cannot pretend to mention the Colours with
which they are all done.  will only touch
upon the handlomelt, called preaked: And
thefe Streaks are dead -coloured with very
clear Carmine in fome Places, and with dar-
Ker in others; finithing with the fame Co-
D by little Strokes, which mult be carried
the fame Way with the Streaks. And in
others is put  firtt Lay of Vermillion. Then
they form them by mixing Carmine, and
finith them with pure Carmine.
In some they put Florence-Lake over the
Vermillion, intread of Carmine.
Some are done with Lake and Carmine
mixed together, and with Lake alone, or
with White and Lake for the firtt forming;
whether it be Rofe-Pink, or Flerence-Lake.
There are fome of  Purple Colour,
which are formed wich Ulramarine, Car-
mine or Lake, fometimes blewer and fome
times redder. The Manner of doing both
one and the other, is the same: There is no
Difference but in the Colours.
You mult in certain Places, as between
the Streaks of Vermillion, Carmine, or Lake,
Lometmes put Blue, made of Ultramarine
and White, and fometmes  very bright
Purple, which is finithed by Strokes as the
reft, and loff with the Streaks. There are
Jome likewife which have fallow Teints, that
are made with Lake, Biffre, and Oaker,
according as they are. But this is only in
fine and fare Tulips, and not in the common
Cles.
For thadowing the Ectrom of them, they
erdinarily take Indigo and White for fuch
whole Streaks are of Carmine.
For fuch as are of Lake, they take Black
and White; with which, in some Biffre is
ixd;


 and in others, Green. Some are
likewife to be shadow’ with Gamboge and
Umber and always by Strokes and Traces,
that turn as the Leaves turn.
Other Talips are likewile done, call’dbor-
dor’ that is to fay, the Tulip isnot ftreaked
but on the Edges of the Leaves, where
there is  Border.
It is White in the Purple.
Red in the Vellow.
Yellow in the Red.
nd Red in the Wbite.
The Purple is laid with Ultramdrine,
Carmine and White fhadowing and finithing
it with this Mixture. The Border is (par’;
that is to fay, let only  light Lay of White
be put there; and let it be shadowed with
very bright Indigo.
The Fellow is form’ with Gamboge, and
thadowed with the fame Colour, mixing
Oker, and Umber or Biftre with it. The
Border is laid with Vermillion, and finithed
with  very small Mater of Carmine.
The Red is form’ with Vermillion, and
finithed wich the same Colour, mixing Car-
mine or Lake with it. The Bortom and the
Border are done with Camioge and for fi-
nillung, they add Gall-fone and Umber or
Biftre.
The White is thadowed wich Black, Blue,
and White. Indian ink is very proper for
this. The Shadowings of it are very tender.
 produces alone the Effect of Blne and
Whites


 mixed with other Black. The
Border of this whice Tulip is done with
Carmine.
In all thefe Sorts of Tulips, they leave 
Nerve or Sinew in the Middle of the Leaves
that are brighter than the reft. And the
Borders are drowned with the Bottom by
fmall Traces, turning crosswife; for they
muft not appear cut and feparated, as the
reaked or party-coloured.
They make them likewife of feveral other
Colours. When they happen to be such
whole Bottoms on the Infide are black, as it
were, they form and finith them with
Indigo, as allo the Seed about the Nozzle or
Stalk. And if the Bortom is yellow, it is
form’ with Gamboge; and finished by add-
ing Umber or Biftre.
The Leaves and the Stalks of Tulips are
ordinarily form’ with Sea-Green. and tha-
dowed and finithed with Lilly-Green, by
large Traces all along the Leaves. Some
may likewife be done with Verditer, ixing
Masticot, with it, and fhadowed with Sap-
Green, that the Green of the Shades may
be yellower.
The EMONY, or WINDFLOWER.
KCVII. THERE are Several Sores of
them as well double as fingle.
Thelaftare ordinarily without Streaks. Some
are made of  Purple Coour, with Purple
and


 White, shadowing them with the same
Colour, some redder, others blewer; some
times very pale, and fomeimes very dark.
Others are form’ with Lake and White,
and finithed with the fame, purting lets
White some without any White at all.
Others are form’ with Vermillion, and
thadow’ with the fame Colour, adding
Carmine.
We fee likewife white ones, and some of
 Citron Colour. The latt are laid with
Mafficot; and one and the other fhadow’
and finith’ fomerimes with Vermillion, and
fometimes with very brown Lake, especial
ly near the Seed, at the Borrom; which is
often likewife of  blackifh Colour, that  with Indigo, or Black and Blue; mix-
ing for fome,  little Biftre. and always
Working by very fine Strokes and Traces,
and lesing the Ligbts in the Shades.
There are others that are brighter and
clearer at the Bottom, than any where elfe;
and fomeumes they areperfedly white there,
though the reft of the Flower be dark.
The Seed of all thefe Emonies is done
with Indigo and Black, with  very litcle
White; and thadowed with Indige; and in
Some, tis railed with Mafticot.
The double Emonies are of feveral Co-
lours. The handfomelt have their large
Leaves ftreaked. Some are done, that  streaked or party-coloured, with Vermil-
lion, to which Carmine is added for the finith
ing


 thadowing the reft of the Leaves with
Indigo, and for the fmall Leaves within,
 Lay is put of Vermillion and White, and
they are thadowed with Vermillion, uxd
with Carmine, mixing here and there fome
fronger Touches, especially in the Heart
of the Flower, next the great Leaves on the
Side of the Shadow. They finith with Car-
mine, by little Strokes and Traces, turning
the fame way with the mixt, or Party-Co-
lours, and the Leaves.
They form and finith the Streaks or Party-
Colours of fome others, as well as the
small Leaves, with pure Carmine. leaving
nevertheless, in the Middle of the laft 
little Circle, in which is laid dark Purple,
which is loff with the Reft. And when
all is finith’, they give fome Touches
with this fame Colour round about the
finall Leaves, especially on the side of the
Shadow  drowning them with the large
ones, the Remainder of which is shadow’
either with Indige or Black.
in fome, the fmall Leaves are done with
Lake or Purple, tho' the Party-Colours
of the large ones be done with Carmine.
There are others, whole mixt Colours
are done with Carmine, in the Middle
of moft of the large Leaves putting in
some Places Vermillion underneach; and
lesing thefe Colours with the Shadows of
the Bottom; which are done with Indige
and White. The fmall Leaves are laid
with


 Mafficot, and shadow’ with very
(dark Carmine on the Side of the Shade,
and with very clear on the Side of the
Light; leaving there, in  Manner, pure
Mafticot; and giving only some little
Touches with Orpiment and Carmine, to
ifeparace the Leaves; which may be Chadow’
fometimes with  litle very pale Green.
There are Double Emomes painted all
Red, and all Purple. The firft are form’
Twith Vermillion, and Carmine, in  Man-
tner, without White, and shadow’ with
pure Carmine, well gumin’, that they
may be very dark.
Purple Emonies are laid with Purple
and White, and finithed wich White.
In  Word, there are double Emonies,
as there are fingle ones, of all Colours;
land they are done in the fame Manner.
The Green of one and the other  with which Mafficet is mixd
 forming. Tis fhadow’ and finith’
with Sap-reen. The Styles of them
are  litle reddith; wherefore they are
Shadow’ wich Carmine, mix’ with Bif-
itre, and fomerunes wich Green, after hav-
ing laid them wich Masticot.
The CAENATION and the PINE.
 with Pinks and Carna-
XCVIII
 tions as with Emonies and
Tulips that is, there are fome mixt-co-
flour’, and others of one fingle Colour.
The


 firft are ftreaked and diverfified
Lomerimes with Vermillion and Carmine.
fomerimes with pure Lake, or wich White
Some Streaks very dark, and others very
pale, fomerimes by little Streaks and 
verfifications, and fometimes by large ones
Their Bottoms are ordinarily fhadow’
with Indige and White.
There are Pinks of  very pale Fleth.
Colour, and ftreaked and divertified with
another,  little decper, made with Vermif
lion and Lake.
Ochers, which are of Lake and White,
are shadowed and ftreaked withour White.

Others all red; which are done with Ver-
millien and Carmine, as dark as poffible.
Ochers all of Lake.
And laftly, there are others, wherein
Nature or Fancy is the Rule.
The Green of one and the other is Sea-
Green, thadow’ with Lilly-Green, or Sap
Green.
THeREDLILLY.
XCIX. &  is laid with Red Lead; formd
with Vermiltion, and in the deep
eft of the Shades, with Carmine; and 
nith’ with the same Colour by Strokes and
Traces, turning as the Leaves turn. The
clear and light Parts are heightend with
Red-Lead and White. The Seed is done
With Vermillion and Carmine.
The


 Green Parts are done with Verditer,
Thadow’ with Lilly or Sap-Green.
TheDAYLILLY.
HER Eare three Sorts of them;

The Gridelin,  lirtle red.
The Gridelin, very pale.
And the Whice.
For the Firft they put  Lay of Lake
and WBite: and fhadow and finith with the
fame Colour deeper mixing  little Black
to deaden it, especially in the darkeft Places.
The second are laid with White, mixt
with  very lnle Lake and Vermillion, in
such manner; that thefe two laft Colours
are hardly feen. Afterwards they fhadow
with Black and  little Lake working red

der in the Middle of the Leaves, next the

Stalks; which ought to ii, as ano rne Seed,
of the same Colour, particularly towards the
Top; and at the Botrom  little greener.
The Style of the Seed is laid with Maj-
ficot, and shadow’ with Sap-Green.
The other Day-Lillies are done by put-
ting  Lay of pure White, and Shadowing
and finithing with Black and White.
The Stalks of thefe laft, and the Greens
of them all, are done with Sea-Greey, and
Thadow’ with Sap-Green.
The


 HYACINTH, Or PURPLE
FIOWWER.
Cl. INHER Eare four Sorts of them.

The Blue  little dark.
Others paler.
The Gridelin.
Aand the Whire.
The firlt are laid with Ultramarine and
White and shadow’ and finithd wich less
White.
Others are laid and thadowed with pale
Blue.
The Gridelines are formd with Lake
and Wbite, and  very fnall Matter of UI.
tramarine, and finith’ with the fame Co.
lcr  intle deeper.
For the laft, they pur  Lay of White,
then they shalow them with Black, with 
little Whire, and finith them all by Strokes
and Traces, following the Turnings and
Windings of the Leaves.
The Green and the Stalks of fuch as are
blue, are done with See and Lilly-Green
very dark: And in the Stalks of the Firll,
may be mixed  little Carmine, to make
them reddith.
The Stalks of the two others, as allo the
Green, are form’ with Verditer and Maffi
cot, and shadow’ with Sap-Green.
The


 PIONY.
CIl.  Lay of Venice-Lake and Whice
  muft be pur on all Parts, prerty
rong: Then Chadow with lels White, and
with none at all in the darkeff Places. After
which finish with the fame Colourby Traces,
turning them as for the Rose; gumming it
very much in the decpeft of the Shades,
and raifing the Lights and the Edges of the
molt lightfome Leaves with Whne and 
little Lake. Lintle Veins are likewife made,
which go like the Strokes in harching, but
are more vifible.
The Green of this Flower is done with
Sea-Green, and thalowed with Sap-Green.
COW-SLIPS.


CIIIT HEY are of four or five Co-
lours.
There are some of  very pale Purple.
The Gridelin.
The Whice and the Vellow.
The Purple is done with Ultramarine,
Carmine and White; purring lets White for
Thadowing
The Gridelin is laid with Venice Lake,
and  very fmall Mater of Ulramarine,
with much White; and fhadow’ with the
Jame Colcur decper.
For the White,  Lay of Wbite mutt be
put, and they muft be shadow’ with Black
and


 White, and finith’, as the others, by
Traces, of Strokes.
The Heart of thefe Cow-sips is done with
Mafticot in the Chape of  Star, which is
Shadow’ with Gamboge, making  litle
Circle in the middle with Sap-Green.
The Vellow are laid with Masticot, and
Thadow’ with Gamboge and Umber.
The Styles, the Leaves, and the Buds,
are formed with Verditer, mixt with  litile
Mafticot; and finith’ with Sap-Green;
making the Fibres or Veins, which appear
upon the Leaves, with this same Colour;
and heightening the Lights of the largel
with Mafficet.
TheRENUNCULUS, or CROW-FOOT.

CIV. FHER  are several Soris of
them: The fineftare the Orange
colour’. For the firlt, they put  Lay of
Vermition, with  very small Mater of
Gamboge, and add Carmine for fhadowing;
finithing it with this laft Colour, and  lir-
tle Galt-Stone. In the others may be pur
Venice Lake, instead of Carmine, especially
in the Heart of the Flower.
The Orange-colour’dare laid with Gam-
boge, and finith’ wich Gall-Stone, Vermiltion,
and  lutle Carmine leaving some little
yellow Streaks.
The


 Green of the Stalks is done with Ver-
diter and very pale Mafficot; mixing Lilly-
Green to Chadow them.
That of the Leaves is  little darker.
The CROCUS

HER Eare of two Colours
CV.
Fellow.
And Purple.
The Vellow are form’ with Mafticot and
(Gall-Stone, and thadowed with Gamboge and
(Call-stone After which, upon each Leat,
son the ourfide, are made three Streaks, fe-
parate from one another, with Biftre and
pure Lake; which are left, by little Traces,
in the Bottom. The infide of the Leaves
tis left all Vellow.
The Purple are laid with Carmine, mixt
with  licde Ultramarine, and very pale
White. They are form’ and finith’ with
iless White; making likewife, in some, pur
ple Stripes or Streaks, very dark, as in the
Tellow; and in others, only fmall Veins.
The Sced of both is Vellow and is done
with Orpement and Gall-Stone. For the
Isryles, they pur  lay of White and tha-
Idow with Black, mixt with  lirtle Green.
The Green of this Flower is form’ with
ivery pale Verditer, and fhadow’ with Sap-
GreCH.
The





 IRIS.
CVI. THE Persian Iris is done by pur.
ting, for the infide Leaves, 
Lay of White and thadowing them wich
Indige and Green together; leaving  lixile
whice Separation in the middle of eachleaf:
And for thofe on the outfide, they put in
the same Place  Lay of Mafficet; which
is shadow’ with Gall-Stone and Orpiment;
making little, dark and longith Dots, over
all the Leaf, at  little Diftance from one
another. And at the End of each are made
large Strains, with Biffre and Lake in Jome,
and in others with pure Indigo, but very
black. The Reft, and the outfide of the
Leaves, are fhadow’ with Black.
The Green is form’ with Sed-green, and
Very pale Mafficot, and Shadow’ with Sap-
Sreen.
The Susian Iris is laid with Purple and
White purcing  lintle more Carmine than
Ultramarine. And for the Shades, espect
ally in the middle Leaves, they put less
White and, on the contrary, more Ultra-
marine than Carmine; making the Veins of
this very Cclour, and leaving in the id
dle of the infile Leaves  little yellow
Sinew.
There are others, which have this very
Sinew in the firft Leaves; the knd of which
only is bluer than the Reft. Others are
ha


 and finith’ with the fame Purple,
redder: They have allo the middle Sinew
on the outide Leaves, but white, and
Thadow’ with Indigo.
There are likewife gellow ones which
are done by purting  Lay of Mafficot and
Orpiment; Thadowing th im with Gall-stone,
and making the Veinsupon the Leaves with
Biftre.
The Green of one and the other is done
with Sed-green, mixing  lude Mafficot for
the Styles. They are fhadow’ with Sap-
Pr JASMIN
(CVII.YT is done with  Lay of White,
& and Chadowed with Blackand White;
and for the outfide of the Leaves they mix
alude Biffre; making the half of each, on
this fide,  lutle reddith with Carmine.
The TUBEROSE.
CVIIL ,OR the doing of this, they make
£  Layof White, and Chadow with
Black, with  lirde Biffre in some Places;
and for the Ourfide of the Leaves, they mix
 little Carmine, to give them  reddifh
Teint, particularly upon the Extremities.
The Seed is done with Mafficot, and tha-
dow’ with Sap-green.
The Green of it is laid with Verditer
and thadowed with Sap-green.




 HELLEBORE

CIX. 
HE Flower of Hellebore is
 done almoft in the Jame Manner,
that is, let it be laid with White, and tha
dowed with Black and Biffre, making the
outfide of the Leaves  litle reddith here
and there.
The Seed is laid with dark Green, and
Laisd with Mafficot.
The Green of it is foul and rulty, and
i formed with Verditer, Masticot and
Biffre, and finithed with Sap-Green, and
Biftre.
The WIIITELLLY
r laid with White, and thadowd
CA.
 With Black and White.
The seed is done with Orpiment and Gall-
Bone.
fand the Green is done as in the Tubeross.
The SNONDROP.

 formed and finiffied as the
CXI
- White Lilly. The Seed is laid
witt. Mafficot, and shadow’ with Gall-
HonE.
And the Green is done with Sea and
Sap-Green.
The


 JoNOUIL.
  laid with Massicot and
CXII.
 Gall-fone, and finithed with
Camboge and Gall-ftone.
The Green is formed with Sea-Green, and
Shadowed with Sap-Green.
The DAFFODIL.
CKIII.  . Daffodils, the yellow, the
  double, and the fingl, are done
by purting  Lay of Mafticot. They are
form’  with Gamboge, and finithed by add-
ing Umber and Biffre; excepting the
Boll in the Middle, which is done with
Orpiment and all-stone, and bordered, or
edged with Vermillion or Carmine.
The Whice are laid wich White, and
Shadowed with Black and White. excepting
the Cup or Bell, which is done with Maftr-
cot and Gamboge.
The Green is Sea-green, shadowed with
Sap-Preen.
The MARICOLD.
CXIV. VT is done by putting  Lay of
& Mafficot; and then one of Gam-
boge thadowing it with this verr Colour,
after Vermillion is mixed with ir. And for
finithing, they add Gall-fose and  little Car-
Mine.
The
  Green is done with Verditer, tha
dowed with Sap-green.
The Aubtrian ROSE.
CXV. XOR making the Indian Rofe, they
put  Lay of Masfrcot, and ano-
ther of Gamboge. Then they form it, mix-
ing Gall-fone; and finith it with the laft
Colour, adding Biffre and  very imall Mar-
ter of Carmine in the decpelt Shades.
The Indian PINK or FrenchMARICOLD.
CXVl. IT is done by putring  Lay of
Gamboge; thadowing it with this
Colour, after you have mixed  good deal
of Carmine and Gall-stone with it; and
leaving about the Leaves  little yellow
Border of GGamboge, very clear in the Lights,
and darker in the Sbades.
The Seed is shadowed with Bifre.
The Green as well of the Rose as the
Pink, is form’ with Verditer and finithed
with Sap-green.
The SUNFLOWER.

 formed with Mafficot and
CRVII
 Gamboge, and finithed with
Gall-fone and Biffre.
The Green is laid with Verditer and
Aiafiuct; and thadowed with Sap-green.
The


The PASSIONFLOWER.
 done as the Rose; and
CXVII
the Green of the Leaves
likewife: But the Veins are done with 
Darker Green.

POETICAL PINES and SWEET.
WILLIAMS.

CKIK. & Hic  are done by pucting 
Lay of Lake and White; (ha-
dowing them with pure Lake, with  little
Carmine for the latt; which are afierwards
dotted on all Parts wich lirtle round Doce,
teparate from one another And the

Threads in the Middle are raifed with
White.
The Green of them is Sea-green, which
is finifhed with Sap-green.
The SCABIOUS.
CKK. THERE are two forts of Scatious,
& the Red and the Purple. The
Leaves of the firft are laid with Florence-
Lake, in which there is  lile White. and
thadowed without White And for the Mid-
dle, which is  great Boss or Husk, in
which the seed lies, tis formed and finith’
with pure Lake, with  lirde Ultramarine or
Jndigo, to make it darker. Then they make
little white longith Dots over it, at  presty
Dit



 from one another, clearer in the
Light than in the Shade, making them go
every. Way.
The other is done by putting  Lay of
very pale Purple, as well upon the Leaves,
as the Bots in the Middle; shadowing both
with the same Colour,  little deeper: And
intlead oflitde Whue Touches for the Seed,
they make them Purple And about each
Grain they make out  little Circle, and this
over the whole Poss or Hlusk in the Middle.
The Green is formed with Verditer and
Moafficot, and (hadowed with Sap-Green.
The SWORD or DAYLLLY.
  
CLX.. &  laid with Florence-Lake and
 very pale White; formed and
finifhed with pure Lake, very clear and
bright in fome Piaces, and very dark in
others; mixing even Biffre in the thickeft
of the Shades.
The Green is Verditer, fhadowed with
Sap- Green.
HEPATICA OT LIVER-WORT.

CKXI. THERE isRed and Blne. The
laft is done by purting on all
Paits  Lay of Uhramarine, White, and  Carmine or Lake; shadowing the infide
of the Leaves with this Mixture, but deep-
cr excepting thofe in the firtt Rank; for
which, and for the ourfide of every one of
them,


 they add Indigo and White, that the
Colour may be paler, and not to fine.
The Red is laid with Lake Columbine,
and very pale White; and finith’ with lets
White.
The Greenis done with Verditer, Mafticet
and  little Biftre, and hadowed with Sap-
green, and  iutle Biffre, especially on the
outfide of the Leaves.
The POMEGRANATE.

CKKIII. TF HE Flower of the Pomegra-
 nate is laid with Red-lead;
Shadowed with Vermillion and Carmine; and
finished with this latt Colour.
The Green islaid with Verditer and Mas-
biiot, and thadowed with Sap-green.
The Flower of the Indian BEAN.
 done with  Lay of Ls-
CXXIV.
 vant-lake and White; Tha-
dowing the middie Leaves with pure Lake;
and adding  little Utramarine for the
Others.
The Green is Verditer, shadowed with
Sap-Green.
The COLUMBINE.

CXXV.
HIERE are Columbines of fere-
ral Colours: The moft com-
mon are the Purple, the Gridelin, and the
Red
  For the Purple, they lay with Uhra.
marine, Carmine, and White; and Shadow
with this Mixture, deeper.
The Gridelin are done the fame way,
putting  great deal lets Ubramarine than
Carmine.
The Red are done wich Lake and White.
finithing with lets White.
There are fome mixt Flowers of this
Kind, of feveral Colours; which mult be
form’ and finifh’ as the others, but paler
making the Mixtures of  little darker Co-
Jour.
The LARESHEEI.

 FHERE are of different Co
lours, and of mixt Colours;
The moft common are the Purple, the Gri-
delin, and the Red; which are done as the
Columbines.
WIOLETS and PANSIES.
CRRYH TTIOLETS and Panses
are done the fame way; ex-
cepting, that in the laft, the two middle
Leaves are blewer than the others; that is
the Borders or Edges; for the Intide of
them is yellow; and there little black Veins
are made, which take their Beginning from
the Heart of the Flower, and dye away to-
wards the Middle.
The


 MUSSIPULA, or CATCHIFLY.
CXXVIIIHIERE are two Sorts of it;
the White and the Red:
The laft is laid wich Lake and White, with
 little Vermillion, and finithed wich pure
Lake. As for the Knot or Nozzle of the
Leaves, it is formed with White and  very
Lmall Matter of Vermillion, mixing Biftre,
of Gall-stone, to finith it.
The Leaves of the White are laid with
White; adding Biftre and Mafticot upon the
Knots; which are shadowed wich pure Biftre,
and the Leaves with Black and Wbite.
The Green of all thefe Flowers is done
with Verditer and Mafticot, and Thadowed
Willi Sap-green.
The CROWN IMPERIAL.

CXKIK.  HEREare of two Colours,
 the Fellow and the Red.
The Firft is done by putring  Lay of Orpi-
ment, and thadowing it wich Gall-fone and
Orfiment, with  lude Vermiltion.
The other is laid with Orpement and Ver-
million; and thadowed with Gall-stone and
Vermiltion, making the Beginning of the
Leaves next the Style, with Lake and Biftre,
very dark; and Veins with this Mixture,
both in one and the other, all along the
Leaves.
The
  Green is done with Verditer and
Mafficot; and shadowed with Sap-green and
Gamboge.
The SICLAMEN OF SOW BREAD.

CREN.  HE Red is laid with Carmine,
 little Ultramarine, and much
White and finished with the same Colour,
deeper; putting, in  manner, only Carmine
in the Middle of the Leaves, next the
Heart, and in the reft add  little more
Uliramarine.
The other is laid with White, and Chadow’
with Black.
The Stalks of one and the other ought to
be  little reddith.
And the Green, Verditer and Sap-Green.
The GLLIFLOWER.
CKKKL THERE are feveral Sorts of
Gilliffowers; the White, the
Tellow, the Purple, the Red, and the Mixt,
Of Various Colours.
The White are laid wich White, and tha
dowed with Black, and with  little Indigo in
the Hlearr of the Leaves.
The Fellow, with Mafficot, Gamboge and
Gall-stone.
The Purfle are formed with Purple and
Wbite; and finithed with lets White; mak-
ing the Colour brighter in the Heart, and
even  little yellowith.
The Red wrin Lake and White; finithing
them with White.


 mixt-coloured are laid with While.
and the Mixtures are fometimes made with
Purple, in which there is much Ultramarine:
Others again, in which there is more Car-
mine. Sometimes they are of Lake; and
Tometunes of Carmine. Some are done with
White; and others without White; fhadow-
ing the reft of the Leaves with Indigo.
The Seed of all is formed with Verditer
and Mafticot; and finithed with Sap-green.
The Leaves and Styles are laid with the
Same Green, inixing Sap-green to finith
them.
 should never have dons, were  to fet
down here all the Flowers that may be pain-
red. But  have mentioned enough, and
t many to give an Idea of others; and 
Dozen would have been fufficient, were one
always to work after Nature; for then there
would be nothing to be done, but to paint
what one fees. But  thought, that as
Prints are molt frequently copied, it would
be pleating to find here the Colours, with
Which different Flowers are done. How-
ever, to finith as  have begun, every one
i at Liberty to take and to leave what he
thinks proper.
CXXXIl.  shall not add here any par.
ticular Inttruction upon other Subjects. It
is not necellary: And this litile Irearife is
already larger than  defigned ir.  will
only fay in general, that Fruies, Fithes,
Set
  and all Sorts of Reptiles, are to
be rouched in the fame Manner as the Fi
gures of Menare; that is, harched of dor
ted.
Birds and all other Anmalsare done, like
Flowers, by Strokes, of Traces.
CKXKIIL Never make ufe forany of thefe

Things, of White-lead.  only proper
in Oil. It blackens like Ink, when only
temper’ with Gum especially if you fet
your Work in  moift Place, or where Per-
Jumes are. Cerase of Venice is as fine, and
of as pure  Whire. Be not sparing in the
ufe of tlus, especially in forming or dead
colouring; and let it enter into all your Mix-
tures, in order to give them  certain Body
which will render your work glewith, and
make it appear foff, plump, and ftrong.
The Taite of Painters is, neverthelels,
different in this Point. Some ale  little of
It, and ethers nene at all. But the Manner
of the laft is meagre and dry. Others ufe &
great deal; and, doubrlets it is the beft
Method, and moft followed among skilful
Perfons: For befides that it is speedy, one
may by the ufe of it, copy all Sorts of Pic
tures, which would be almoft impoffible
orherwife notwithflanding the contrary
Opinion of Come, who fay, that in Mim-
ature we cannot give the Force and all the

olherent Temrs we fee in Pieces in Oil.
Eur this is not true; at leaft of good Pan-
tersj


 and Effects prove it preity plaimly-
For we fee Figures, Landskips, Pictures,
and every thing elle in Miniature, teuched
in as grand, as true, and as noble  Manner
(though more tender and delicate,) as they
are in Oil.
However,  know, that Painting in Oil
has its Advantages; were they only thefe,
that it exhibus more Work, and takes uplets
 defended likewife againtt
the Injuries of Time; and the Right of
Birth muft be granted it, and the Glory of
Antiquity.
But Miniature likewifehas its Advantages;
and without repearing fuch as  have men
tioned already, tis neater and more com-
modious. You may eafily carry all your
Implements in your Pockers, and work
when and wherever you pleafe, without
Tuch  Number of Preparations. Vou may
quit it and refume it when and as often as
you will ; which is not done in the other
in which one is rarely, to work dry.
But obterve, that it is in one, and the 
ther, as in  Play; in which the greateft or
lealt Perfection of the Actors does not
confifl in playing high or low Parts; but
in playing extremely well the Parrs they
undercake: For if Hle, who has the loweft
Charalter, acquits himfelf better than ano-
ther who acts the Hero, doubtlels he merns
greater Applanfe.
Tis


 
Tis the same Thing in the Art of Paint
ing. Iis Excellence does not depend upon
the Greatnels of the Subjett, but upon the
Manner in which it is handled. Hlave you
 Talent for one Thing, don' throw your
self inconfiderateiy upon another: And if
you have received from Heaven some Spark
of this delicate Fire, know wherefore it is
given you, and cherifh and improve it. Some
catch the Airs of  Face well: Others fuc
ceed better in Landskips Some work in
little, who cannot do it in large. Some are
skill’ in Colours, who know little of Design.
Others, lattly, have only  Genius for Flow
ers. And even the Bafans got themfelves
 Fame for Annnals; which they touched
in  very fine Manner, and bewer than any
thing elfe.
Wherefore let every one be content with
hus own Genius, without affecting the Ta-
lent of another, and taking  Flight beyonl
his Strength; for it is very idle to force Na-
ture to give us what the has refuled us: And
it concerns our Prudence, as well as Mo-
defty, not to take it in our Hleads to thew
an Excellence we have not; for this were to
ditcover our Imperfections, and to labour
to our Shame. On the contrary, it is no
Difgrace to you, that you don' poffets alone
all the Parts, which have given Reputation
to great Painters. Every one of them had
his Perfection and his Weakness; and every
one of usought to be content with his Por-
tion:


 The main Point is to cultivate it with
Care.
And though this little Book will certainly
contribure thereto; yet  prefent it you only
as  Supplement to better Meas. With-
out doubt, one may learn more advanta-
geoully under an excellent Mafter, from
whom one might receive all the proper
Rules and fine Maxims of the Art, and by
whom one might fee them put in Practice.
And though the Contrivances for Drawing,
which  have fet down at the Beginning,
are infallible, yet Tis much better to get 
Faculry in the true and genume Art of it:
For if you have not, to lupply this Defed,
 very peculiar Genuis, and an extraordi-
nary Juftness of Eye and Iland, draw your
Pieces as corretly as you may, Twill be 
Ilazard bur they are spoild in the End, and
have neither Proportion nor Beanty; be.
caufe in the Application of the Colour, you
very cafily lofe the Srokes and Traces; and
not without great Difficulty can you reco-
ver them, if you underfland not fomething
of Drawing.  earneftly exhort, therefore,
all Lovers of Painting, to learn to draw cor-
rectly, to copy indefaugably, and with the
greatelt Exactnels, good Originals, in 
word to rife by eafy and ordinary Steps to
the Perfection of this charming Art, the
Rules of which, like all otiiers, are foon
learnt; but that is not enough. They muft
be put in Execution. The Tbeory is nfelets,
with


 the Praftice; and the Prattice
without the Theory, is  blind GGuide, which
leads us out of the Way, inflead of con
ducting us whether we would go. But to
understand well what one would do, and to
do well what one underttands, is the true
Way to do and underftand  great deal in
Time; and of  good Scholar to become an
excellent Mafter.
For what remains,  fet not up for fuch
 One. And yer  can affure fuch Perfons
as will take the Trouble to enter into this
litte School, with fome Inclination and
Apinets to learn, that they will have no
Caufe to repent it. For though they should
Rtay in it with no Pleafure,  believe, at lealt,
they would not go our of it without some
confiderable Advantage.

 
  making and preparing of feveral
FINE CoLOURs, and other Things,
requifite for PAINTING in MINT
ATURE.

The Secret of an Italian for the making of
CARMINEANd ULTRAMARINE
Othing can excell the Colours
made after the following Me
thods, nor is any Thing made
 with greater Eafe. They have

an inexpreffible Brightnets and
Vivacuy. never change, and are made at
 very little Cofl. But the Proof will do
them more Credit than all  can fay of em.

 fufficient that  lay down the Methods:
 begin then with
CAR


 EEP  Pound of Brasst Wood of Fer
 pambuca, of the Colour of Gold, for
three or four Days, in an earthen Velfel or
Por of whice Wine-Vinegar. After having
broken it well in  Mortar, boil it half an
Hour. Thenfals or ftram it through  very
coarle Linnen Cloth, and fet ir again upon
the Firc. Take another lintle Pot of Whice
Wine- Vinegar, and in ir fleep or temper
eight Ounces of Allam. Pur this Allum, fo
temperd, on the other Liquor, and fir it
about weil with  Spartle. The Scum or
Froch char riles, is your Carmise. Take ii
off, as it riles, and ler ir dry. The fame
may be done with Cocbineal inflead of
Brasil.
ULTRAMARINE


AK Eten Ounces of Linfeed-Oil : Put
£ it in an earthen Por or Placter with
leven or eight Drops of common Water;
and then fer and keep it on the Fire till it be-
gins to boil. To this pur  Pound of whice
Virgin’- Wax, broken in small Pieces. When
the Wax is melted, put in  Pound of Greek
Pitch mixing with it four Ounces of pow-
derd Mastick, which muft be melted before
in  Pot by it felf, with two Ounces of Tuy-
pentine. Let the Whole boil for an Hour:
and








 then let the Compofition drop into cold
Water and when it is of the Confiffence of
Butter, it is done enough. But if you find
Jany hard callous Bits in it, tis  Sign
fthe Mastick is not melied enough; and
fthen you muft put the Composition again
upon the Firc.
The whole being done enough, put La.
 Lazuli in  Crucible upon the Fire rill
fit be as redas the Firs it felf. Then throw
ffit into whice Wine- Vinegar. Twill drint
up the Vinegar till it burft and reduce it self
 little Pieces; which muft be beat to
Powder. Then incorporate this Powder
swith  litle of the fore-mention’ Compo-
Plition, the fmalleft Matter poffible; and
keep it thus for about fifteen. Days: After
which, fix  Board, bending  litde down-
wards, upon the Edge of  Table. It will
be proper to have  Channel or Furrow cur in
 this Board. Under the Board place  Glats
Recever, and put your blue Pafte on the

top of the Channel; and over the Pafte fix
 Veffel of Warer, to diftil Drop by Drop
Hupon the Pafte, and with the fmail End of
 fine polifh’ Stick, affift the Waterro di
late the Pafte, by firring and moving in 
litle to and fro very sently. The firtt  which comes off Drop by Drop, is
the blueft. When it comes off not to fine
afferwards, you muft change your Veffel co
receive the second Blse. After which, there
comes off  Third; which is likewife of
Ofe


 and muft bekept. Let thefe three Sons
of Ultramarine dry. Then take and pir
them feparately in little Bags of whice les.
ther.

  

OT HER
  CA
For the making of Carmine and Ul
tramarine, after different Ways; like.
wife fine Lakes, Columbines, Greem,
and other Colours, after feveral Me.
thods. All proper for Miniature.
CARMINE
FJAKE three Pints of Spring- Walet
which has not pass’ through Lead
Pifes: Pour it into  glaz’ earthen Pots
and fet it on the Fire. When it is ready
to boil, put in half or  quarter of an Ounce
of the (rain of Coban of Dyer' Red, which
the Feather Dyers afe, reduc’ to  fine
Powder. Then let it boil about three quar
t of an Hlour; or till the fourth Part of
the Water be confumd. But take Care ir
be  Coal -Fire. After which, firam this
Water through  Linnen Cloth into another
glaz’ Veffel; and hear it till it begins to
 Then add to it an Ounce of Cocbineal,
and  quarter of an Ounce of rnatto, both
freduc  to Powder fepararely; and let this
Mixture boil away to half, or, in better
better Terms, till it railes  black Scuin,
Iand be very red; for by means of Boiling it
Stakes  Colour. Take it off the Fire; and
Isrew in it half an Ounce or three Pinches
fof pulveriz’ Roach—Allum, or of Roman
Allum, which is reddith and better; and
  quarter of an Hour after, ftram it
Ithrough  Linnen-Cloth into  glaz’ Vef
fol; or elfe divide it in feveral litle Dutch
 of glaz’ Porringers; where let it fettle for
twelve or fifieen Days, and you will fee on
 the Surface  mouldy Skin. which muft be
Itaken off with  Sponge, and the Matter
underneath expos’' to the Arr. When the
Water at the Top is evaporated, dry the
Matter which refts at the Bortom; and
gund it upon  very hard and very fmooth
Piece of Marble or Porphyry. and then
fift it through  very fine Scarce.
Obterve thar the Quantity of thefe Ingre-
dients is not fo fixed to the Proportion 
have laid do vn, but that you may put in
more or lels of them at Diucretion, accord-
ing to the Depth or Degree of the Colour
you



 defire. If the Carmine is to be redder
they pur more Arnatto; if more of  Crim.
fon, they ule more Cochineal. But all of
them are to be pulveriz’ feparately; andd
the Grain of Coban or Dyers Red is firtt ot
boil alone, and the others all together in
abovc.
ULTRAMARINE
 REhall  Pound of Lapis Lazuiy
 and gur it urin red hor Coals; and
there let it ttay tiil it be an over as red as the
Coals themfelves. Then quench it in viry
ftrong Vinegar, and grind it upon  Por
phyry, of any other Stone that' very hard
with rectified Brandy. The more you grind
 the finer will be your Ultramarine.
it he upon the Porphry, or in any Veffel,
till you have made the Paftel with which ths
Lapis is to be incorporared.
For the making of this, take  quarter of
 Pound of Bee-wax,  quarter of  Pound
of Turpentine, the same Quanity of Robn,
and the fame of Linfeed Oil. Nele the
whole together over  llow Fire, and when
it begins to boil, pour it into  glard
Pot. This is the Pafte of Ultramarine, of
which take  Quantny equal to that of the
Lapis, and Kneadit together upon the Por
phyry or Marble. When they are well in
corporated, leave them for one Night. And
afterwards, to bring out the Ulframarine,
which


 is in this Palic, pour clear Water
upon it, and knead it wish your flands, as
Palte is Kneaded, and the Ultramarine will
come out; for the receiving of which, place
 Porringer, of other proper Veffel, under
your Llands. Ler  fertle in this Warer,
till you fee the Ulramerine at the Borrom of
it.
ANOTHER
RAKE four Ounces of Linseed Oil; four
 Ounces of new Bec-Wax, four Ounces
of the Litharge of Silver, one Ounce of Ro-
fin, one Ounce of Miffic in Droys, four
Ounces of Burgundy-Prich, two Drams of
Frankincenfe, and one Dram of Dragon'
Blood. Bear finall each of the dry Ingre
dienes in  Mortar, feparacely. Then heat
the Linseed-Oil in an earthen Pan till it
finmers, then pur in your other Ingredi-
ets one after another, lerting the Dragon'
Blood be the laft, and ffirring the Whole
about continualiy with  Stick. This your
Pafte will be done enough when it flicks to
your Fingers lke Gl.. at which tune put
in your Laps-Lasuti, having before-hand
made ir red hor in  Coal-Fire, quench’
it in Whice Wine-Vinegar, ground it upon
the Marble after dryme it, and fified it
through one of the finell Scarces, as  faid
before. When they are well incorporated,
and have been let alone for Twenty four
Hours,


 take Spring- Water and no other;
and with this Warer kneading your Palte
well, you will fee the firft blue Tincdure
come out, which is the finell and beft. Do
thus three times, always kneading with
Spring Water. Finally, for the laft Operation,
take spring-Warer, and make it luke-warm;
With this Knead the Remainder of the Com
pofition, taking our the Afhes. Then pur-
ring both into an Alembick, and diftilling
them, you will find at the Botrom the Gold
which was in the Lapis.
Some Knead their Pafte all at once in  full of Water luke-warm, into which
goes the Uhramarine which they dry in
the Sun. They likewife leave the Lapis,
for the Space of  Monch, incorporated with
the Palle, before they draw any Oltramarin
from it; and put in the Pafte, instead of
Linfeed Ol and Turpentine, Ol of Turper
fine only. and black Pitch, inftead of Bur-
sundy- Pitch. For the Lapis, they hear in,
quench it and grind it, in the Manner be
fore shewn.
FINELAKE
XA KE  Pound of good Brafil, which
 boil in three Pints of Lye, made with
the Afhes of Vine-Twigs, till half the lye
be confumed Let it fertle and ftram it
Then boil again what you have ftrained,
with freth Brafil, with Cocbineal, and Terra
meritas





 there muft be only an Ounce.
Mind, when you take this Liquor off the
Fire again, that you put in an Ounce of
calcin  Allam, bearen very finall, and dif
solve it by firring it about with  Stuck,
adding half  Dram of Arsenmc. After
wards, to give it  Body, take two Ounces
of the Sound or Cuttle-Fisp- Bone, reduce it
to Powder, and throw it in. Ler this dry
leifurely. Then grind it wich  great deal
of Water in which let it foak: Then fraim
it through  Linnen-Cloth. After which,
make lircle Cakes of it; which let dry upon
Palte-board. Iyon would have the Lake
redder, put in Lemon-Juice, and to make
it darker, add Oil of Tartar
ANOTHER LAKE
   Shreds of Scarlet, and boil
 them in Lye made with old ices of
Wine, or with calin’ Tartar This Lye
has the Property of lepararing the Dye
from the Scarles -threds. When it has bol’
long enough, take it off, and put in Cocbe-
neal, powder’ Mastic, and  lule Roach-
Allum. Boil the whole again. Then ftrain
Ithrougha fine Bagtwice or chrice quirehot.
The firft time the Bag muft be queez’ with
twe Sticks from toptobortom. Then take out
the grots Matter remaining in the Bag, and

walh


 it well. Stram the liquid Marter,
which you prefted out with the Sticks,
again through the Bag, and you will findon
the Sides of the Bag  Pafte, which (pread
upon Pafte-board, or divide into litde Por
tions upon Paper, and let it dry.
LARE COLUMBINE
ARE three Pints of the finelt diftilld

Vinegar and  Pound of the finet
Brafil of Fernambuca; which cut in fmal
Pieces, and Heep in the Vinegar for above
 Month at the leaft: The longer the better.
Afterwards leeth the Whole in Balneo Miarie
till it boils up three or four Times. Then
let it fertle  Day or two. After which,
prepare  fourth Part of powder’ Allum,
and put it in  very clean earthen Pan, and
ftram the Liquor into the Pan upon the
Alum. Then let it fetle for one Day.
Heatthe whole againtill the Lequor funmers,
and let it ferle twenty four fiours. Then
prepare two Bones of the Sound or Cuttle.
KpBs, upon which pour your Liquor, which
ought to be  little warm; and ffir it about
with  Stick till it be cold. Afferwards let
it feecle  Hours: Then Htrain ir. Obferve,
you muft fram it with the Allam, before
you throw it upon the Bone of the Curtle.
. .
 make  fine Purple-Colour of the gross
Part, or Sediment of Lake-Columbine,
besides that made with Carmine, for Oil
and Water Colours.
AKE the Sediment of Lake Columbine,
 which falls to the Botrom of the Vial,
in which is the Bone of the Cuttle-fiss. Ler
it dry, and griad ir. There is nofine Lake
to lively. If you mix ir with Lake, you
will give the Lake mere Strengch and Vi-
gour.
LILLYGREEN
TAKE the bleweft Flowers of Lillies:
 Separate the Tops of them, which
are filky, and fave only them, (for the reft
is of no Ufe) and pull our the yellow Fibres.
Bruife in  Stone Morfar the Flowers you
have pick’; and when you have done that
well, throw three or four Spoonfuls of
Water upon them, more or lets according
to your Quanticy of Fowers. But you
mult firft diffelve  lttle Alum, and  very
little Gum Arabic, in the Water. After-
wards grind the whole together very well.
Then frain it through  coarfe  imnen
cloth; and putting this Juice in Shells, dry
it in the Air.
ANO.
  WAT.
FTER yeu have picked and cleanted
  the Flowers, brusted and put Alum-
water to them, as  juft now faid, throw
upon them  little Curck-lime in Powder,
in the manner they lugar  Sallet. It has
the Property to change their Colour, and
to purify them. Afterwards prets our the
fuice in.  Shiells.
ANOTHER and  better WAV.
RUISE Allum and Gram of Avignon,
 and mix them together with Water.
Then boil the wholeupon the Fire, or upon
hor Athes, till the Water be yellow. Next
bruife the Lilly Flowers in  Mortar, and
pour upon them  little of this yellow
Water, according as you would make the
Green lighter or darker. Afterwards ftrain
the Juice through  Bag or Cleth made of
Goar' Hair, (for Linnen takes all the Co-
lour) and pour it into large Shells which
fet full in the Sun; for if they are placed in
the Shade, the Green becomes mouldy and
slewy.
ANOTHER.
AKE Leaves of Iris. Mince or chop
 them very imall, and put them into
 Giats or Delff Veffel; or, which is better,
into


  Brass or Copper Pot, with powder’
Allum and Quick-lune. Ler the whole rot
together for ten or twelve Days; and then,
being rotten, press it into Shells; for, that
the blue Colour may become green, it is
berter that the Flowers putrify. The Green
 darker and more lively, when only the
Leaves are bruifed, and prefied immediatelys
without letring them ror, after having
frewed powdered Allum upon them.
Another with VIOLETFLOWERS
RE EN, of the Leaves of March Vio-
lets is made in the fame Way. But you
muft have  greater Quantity of them: And
this Green is darker than that of the Iris.
But obierve, that infread of Lime, you may
put the Gram of Avigner, or Dyer' Fellow,
bruifel with Allam. Tis much betterthan
Lime for changing the Blde into  Green.
Green may likewife be made with the
Flowers of Panfies in the same Mianner.
SAP.GREEN
 KE small red Seeds of Amomum,
- and fill  Log' Bladder with them,
putting in  litle Allum. Let it hang up
in  Room fome Time; and the Seed
corrupting, will change into this Sort of
Green.
  take Buckthorn Berries: Beatthern
in  Mortar, and throw to them  littlepow-
dered Allum. Then (queeze out the Juice;
and purting it in  Bladder, tie it clofe and
hang it up. This Green will harden in the
Bladder.
DUTCIIPINE.
 

to generally made with Spams-White
 and the Grain of Avigion, or Dyer'
Fellow. Bur ir changes when made of those
  is better therefore to make it of
Whae-Lead, or Cerufe, which mutt be
ground very fine, and temper’ upon Por
phyry; of which it muft be taken with 
wooden Spartle, and let dry in the fhady
part of  Room. Aferwards take the Gram
of Avignon or Dyers Tellow. Reat it to
Powder in  Marble Mertar with  wooden
Pettle, and boil it with Water in  leaded
carthen Pot, till abeut  third or more is
confurmed. Strain this Decocdion through 
Linnen Cloth; and putim it the Quantiry of
two or three Hazel-nuts of Allum, to keep
it from changing its Colour. When it is
diffoly’, temper the White with this De-
coltion; and bring it to the Form of  pretty
thick Pap; of which, kneading it well be-
tween your flands, make little Balls or Cakes,
and put them to dry in  very arry Rcom.
When they are dry, dilute them again with
thhe fame Decoltion, and put them again to
dry


 And thus do three or four Tinmes, ac-
cording as you would have the Pint light-
or or darker, letting ir dry very well each
Tims. Obferve, that the Juice or Decor
tion mult be hot, when you temper the
Palte with it; and that another Decoction
mult be made, when the firft is turn’ and
corrupted, taking Care not to rouch it with
Iron or Steel, but to ufe  wooden Spartle.
The right Ufe of ALLUNI.

HEbeft Wayroute Allum in Lilly-
 Green, and other Compound-Colours,
which change without this mineral Salt, is
to bear it precty finall, and pur it in  listle
Water upon the Fire; for otherwife it will
never diffolve well. This Wateryon (prin-
Kle on your Flowers, or Juices of Colours.
Bur the lets Allum the better, becaufe it
burns when there is too much.
To purifyVERMILLION.
Lunober or Vermillion, being made of

Mercury and Sulphur, it muft be clean
fed from the Impurities it has contracted
from thee Mlinerals, which darken as Luf
tre, and make erturn. Now this Purgation
i done in the following Manner.
Grind Cinnaber in Stone, with pure Water,
upon Porphyry: Then put it in  Glass or
Delft-Veffel; and let it dry. Afterwards puc
Oring
  to it; and mix them in fuch Manner
that the rme penetrate all the Cinnaber,
and cover ir. Let the Whole fettle, and
the Cinnaber being at the Bottom, turn out
the Urine, and add freth to it, leaving it all
the Night; and continue to change the
Orine for four or five Days, till the Cinna-
ber be well purg’. After that, pour upon
the Cinnaber Whites of Esgs, well bearen
with fair Water, and to that the Water co
ver the Whires.  Mis the Whole together
With  Hazel-Stick, and let it fetle Change
the Liquor twice or thrice, as before, and
always keep the Veffel clofe Hopt, to keep
out the Duft, which makes the Cinnaber
turn or change. And when you would make
Ife of i temper it with Cum-Water for
that will not change it.
ANOTHER WAT.
&
LIND the Cinnaber, already in Pow-
 der, upon Porphyry, with Children'
Orne, or with Brandy, and let it dry in
the Shade.
Hyou would take off its Darknets, and
make it of  brighter Red, infule in Brandy,
or in Orine,  little Saffron; and with this
Liquor grind the Cinnaber.
 


 Direction for the making  very fine
BURNISHD COLD.

HIE Wood of the Frame, or of any

other Piece, which you would gild,
muft be extremely fnooth; and to give it
 farther Polifhing, rub it over with the
Ear of  Sea-Dog. Then finear it over twice
or thrice with Glew, made of the Clippings
of white Glove-Leather; and put on nine
or ten Lays of Whice. When it is quine dry,
rub it over with Shave-Grafs, to make it
fncother and finer. Next, warm  little
Glew over the Fire with Water, in which
dip  Piece of very fine Linnen, firft made
very clean, and pats it over the White.
Then apply two or three Lays of Gold Co-
lour, and more, if it has not Colour enough.
When Tis perfectly dey, rub it fourly with
 dry Linnen-Cloth, till in glitters. Then
pats  large Pencil, dipt in the frongett
Brandythat is to be had, over the Gold-Co-
lour, and let your Leaf-Gold be ready cut
upon the Leather -Cullion to lay on as foon
as you have pass’ the Pencil over and
when it is dry, polith it with  Dogs
Tooth.
To make Glove-Glew.
AK   Pound of Glover' Clippings
 Put them to Heep in Water fome

Tune:


 Then boil them in  Kettle wich
twelve Ouarts of Water, ill the Water be
confum’ to two Quarts. Then ftram 
through  Linnen Cloth into  new earthen
Pan. To know whether the Glew be ftrong
enough, try, when it is quite cold, and has
got us Confiffence, if it be fliff and firm un
der the Hland.
To make Whice for the round.


HE Glew being made, take whice
 Chalk, and reduce it to Powder with
 Knife, or grind it upon  Marbls. Mclt
the Glew, and make it very hor. Then
take ir off the Fire, and put  fufficient Quan
city of White in it to make it as thick as Pap.
Leave it to feep for half  Cuarter of an
Hour, and then ftir it about with  Briftle
Brush.
Take fome of this White, and put more
Giew to ir, to make it brighter for the firft
and second Lay; which muft be applied by
bearing with the End of the Brufh.
Mind, that you let each lay dry well
before you put on another. If tis Wood
you work on, you mult put on  Dozen.
If it is thick Paper, fix or fiven are futh
Clent.
This done, take Water. Dip  foff Bruth
in it and draiming it with your Fingers,
rubyour Work with it, to make it fmoother.
When your Bruth is full of White, you mult
walh


 it again, and change the Water  it is too white.
You may likewife Comernnes make Ife of
 wet Linnen-Rag in lien of the Brush.
Your Work being very even, let it dry.
and when it is fo, rub it with Shave Grass,
or  Bit of new Linnen-Cloth, to make it
Jof and free.
To make  Ground on which to Gild and Sit=
ver in another Manner
 KE  Quarter of  Pound of very
 choice and fine Bole Armoniac, that
Ricks upon the Tongue, and is greaty to
the Touch. Diffolve ir in Warer, and
then grind ir, adding the Bigness of  Fil-
berd of Lead-Ore, and the Bignets of  Pea
of Candle-Tallow which prepare thus:
Melt it; then throw it into cold Water
andfinger it about in the Water, and it will
be fit for Ufc. The Bignets of  Pea is
enough for one Grinding
As you grind, you may add  little Soap-
Sud to the Bole Armomac. WWhen this Com-
pofition is ground, put it in fair Water;
which change from tune to time, in order
to preterve it.
When you would ufe it, temper it with
melted Glew, fomewhar warm and if the
Glew be as ftrong as thar you have whitend
Part of Water, and mix
with, add  third
It
  with the Bole Armoniac, to the Conlif-
tence of Cream. Then apply it with 
Pencil upon your Work, putting three or
four Lays, and letting each lay dry very
well before you apply another. When
it is all dry, before you gild or filver it, rub
it  little with  foff Linnen-Rag.
To layon the Gold and Silver.
( ET the Piece, you would gild or filver
 over, in  reclining Pofture, and wer
any one Place with  Pencil dipt in fair
Water. Then lay on your Gold; having
cut it before upon  Leather-Cuflion. 
muft be taken up with Corton, or  large
Pencil. When all is gilded, let it dry- but
not in the Sun, or in the Wind: And when
it is dry chough, polith it with  Dogs
Tooth.
To know whether it be dry, pats the
Tooth  lirtle over some Places. If it does
not flide eafily, but rears the Work off, it is
 Sigh it is not dry.
But on the other Iland, take Care ir be
not toodry. for this makes it harder to po
lifh, and takes away from its Lufire. In
very hot Weather, three or four Hours are
fufficient to dry it. But fometimes it re-
quires  Day and  Night.
 deaden Gold.
AKE  fine lively Red with Red.
IVl Lead,  lirde Vermittion, and the
White of an Egg well bearen. Grind all
together upon  Marble, and put some of
it in the deep Places with  very fine
Pencil.
To deaden Silver
 EE Ceruse, and grind it wich Wa
ter. Then temper it with Fith of
 The firtt is the beft.  with  Pencil on the Places to be
deaden’.
To make Shell-Gold and Sbell-Silver.
  Leaf Gold, more or less, accord
as ing to the Quanty you would make,
upon  very clean Marble. Grind it with
new or clear Honey till it be excremely foft
under the grinding Stone. Then put it in
 Glats of fair Water, and ftir it about and
change the Water till it remains clear. Get
 Penny-worth or fo of frong Water Pur
your Gold in it, and let it fteep there two
Days. Then take it out; and the flrong
Water may ferve again. The Method is
the fame for Silver.
WWher





-


 you would lay ether of them on,
you muft temper them with Water,  litle
gumimed; and to fleck and finooth them the
better, let it be Soap-Sud. Tis proper allo
to pur under the Gold  Walh of Gall-Stone.
 appear the finer for it.
You mult lay but the leaft Gold and Sil
ver that can be upon Pieces in Mimature.
excepting for Pillets and Girdles; becaute
this looks affected, and gives them  gaudy
theatrical Arr.
 OME
GENERAL INSTRUCTIVE
  DSCI 
FOR THE
ART of DRAWING

HE ingenious Author of the
preceeding little but valuable
Treatife, has laid down feveral
Rules for delincating or copying
Pictures or Prints, by fuch as
could not draw, knowing very well that the
Performance of the former would be very
deficient withour the Practice of the latter,
and he recommends it as the furelt Way, to
excel in that charming Art of Painting in
Miniature, of which he has to freely and in
genuoully given tuch fulland plain Inftructions.
It is to be admired that moft Perfons from
their Infancy, have  Fondness for Pictures,
and Children love to buty themfelves, with
draw


 Colouring, and handling  Pencil.
but this Fondnels for the generaliry wears off
by Degrees, and is by moft quire neglected.
The chief Reafon of which, as  prefume,
is the Trouble and Pains they apprehend
will attend the Acquifition thereof.
It is certain that every one is not endued
with  Difpofition or natural Inclination,
to that ingenious Art, hor can it be artain’
by Labour and Pains without  Genius.
But such as find them felves dispoted, should
by all means come to  Refolution to attempt
the Practice thereof
Parents therefore would do well to watch
and obferve diligently the Inclination of
their Children, and finding that by Inflind
they thew  natural Genims, and Capacity
for Ingenuity, when of their own Accord
they will take Delight in drawing, fhadow-
ing and finithing any Thing they attempt
to copy, and feem to take  Pride in their
Performances. They should by all means
be encouraged, and be instructed by  good
Mafter, in the beft Manner, in the funda-
mental Rules and Precepts requitite to be
Known in the Progress and Practice of
either Drawing, Defigning, or Paumting.
It frequently happens that  bright
Genius, an Artiff born, has no Opportu-
nity to receive the Infiructions of  Malter,
or is by Diftance in the Country de-
prived of the Converfation with Artifls,
and


 ingenious Practicioners his only Way
is then to furnith hunself with fuch Books
that may guide him in his Purfut after thar
Knowledge he fo fondly arns at; and for
th: Benefit of fuch thefe Leffons are inten
ded, not doubring they will meet with the
tame Encouragement and Reception by the
Ingenious, as the preceeding Work, viz.
The Art of Painting in Mimature, has done,
to which fourth Ediion  have added thefe
infiructive Leffons, for the Art of Drawing,
as brietly, plain and ealy as poffible.
II
UCH as intend to make themfelves
 compleat in the Art of Drawing, should
firft learn the Principles of Geomerry and
Perspettive, and thereby inform their Minds
of true Symetry and Proportion; this being
 Subject to be mer with in Books wrote by
skiifal Arcifts for that Purpofe,  shall for
Brevity Sake ouut enlarging upon it.
The common Rules for Beginners are
commonl; to draw the particular Members
of the Bodies of Men, and firtt of all: The
Pace or Head is attempted by drawing
an Oval, or the Shape of an Egg, with the
feveral Dimentions of the Cross, by which
 Learner may underfland the better to ex-
press the Turnings and Motions of the Pace
in the different Attaudes, hereafter exem-
plifyed.



 this Oval for the Hlead or Face belong
the Eyes, Eyc-brows, Nofe, Mouth, and
Ears; and to place them in their proper
Situations, the Cross is drawn for that
Purpofe.
After you have formed an Oval, drawa
Perpendicular down the Middle, this cross
again in the Middle with  diametrical
Line, which you divide in five equal Farts,
each being the Breadch of one Eye. This
is called the ocularline, on which you place
the Lyes, and is with the Perpendicuar,
which gees from the Top of the Forehead,
through the Middle of the Nofe, Mourh,
and Chin, called the Crofs, upon which the
Lyes, Nofe, Mouth, and Ears, are to be
placed in their proper Situations, as jes
may obferve in Fig.  But for the better
Apprehention of fuch as are unacquainted
with the ule of the Crots in the Oral, or
with the many Varrations of the fame, as in
Turnings and Motions of the Head, an
Experment has been found, to make the
ute of the Crots more plain and incelligib:,
which is this Have  Piece of Weed
turned in the Shape of an Egg, as in
Fig.  Then draw  Line from Point to
Point lengthways, through the Bidft of the
Esg, as in Fig.  Divide this in two equal
Parts, by cutting  right Angle as you fee
Fis.  having drawn the Eyes,
Nofe, Mouth,  in their proper Place,
you may by the Pofition of the Ess,
see the
Decli-


 of Inclination of Faces, and
according to the Pofition of Fig.  you will
see it fronting. Turning the Egg or Oval
alittle from the left to the right, the ftraight
perpendicular of the Crots will change and
prelent itfelf in an Arch, as in Fig.. ac-
cording to which you project the Nofe
beyond the round of the Oval, and place
the reft of the Members of the Face in their
proper Lies, as in Fig.  The same  be obferved in turning the Figure of the
Oral the contrary Way, as in Fig.  Again,
the Oral inclining downward, the Crots
will appear as in Fig.  And the Face
looking down as in Fiz.  The Oval
being turned backwards, the Crots will
change again, as in Fiz.  And  Face
drawn according to thole Lines will appear
like Fig.  After this manner you may
form  Variety of Faces, except thofe which
are fideways, which are commonly drawn
by means of  Perpendicular, as you fee in
Fis. r upon which you place the Forehead,
Nofe, Mouch, and Chin; ler them be in
what Difpofition they will. See Fig.  are the neceffary Rules for delign-
ing or drawing  Face, which if well ob-
ferved and practifed, will in  lictle Time
furnith  Learner with lively Ideas to Jraw
Faces, with good judgment, and give them
mafterly Strokes and Tonches, of which
otherwife, by meerly drawing or copying
after Prints, he would have been unacquaint-
III.
ed with.


 VING advanced and mounted the
 firlt Scep, and the young Praditioner
is well grounded in drawing the Oval and
Face, he may then exercile humfeif, to copp
with great Care and Diligence, after good
Draughts and Prints. The former being
the molt proper for fuch as incend to exer
cife the Art of Painting, and the larter for
such as propofe to practice Erching of
Graving; beginning with fuch as are caff
andgeing forwards to fuch as are more dit
ficult, and having arrived to some Perfection
 this, he may adventure to copy affer
Panrings, and to contract large Pictures
inro acall, obferving  due Proportion; and
by diligent Practice he will accuftom him-
felf to quets well, and acquire  free and
fure fland in Defigning
Next to this  young Practitioner may
venture upon copyingafter Figures of Plast
ter of Paris, which is more difficult than
either drawing after Prints or Paintings,
and shall be more fully treated of in its pro-
per Place.
The beft Patternsto draw or copy after,
is Life afelf, or all natural Things. Here
an Arrift has  large Field to range in, and
he need never be idle, but may always find
innumerable Subjects to improve his Talent;
which can not be better done than by Dili-
gence and Application.
IV.


 come to the Practice of the Artof
- Drawing itfelf, and firft of drawing after
Draughts, Prints, or Pictures: You muft
frlt of all oblerve to fix your Principal in 
proper Light, to as to fee in diffind and
plain, placing it at  proper Diltance accor
ding to the Largeness of the Picture or
Draught you defign to copy, putting it
Rraight before you, and not flat, for then
you would fee in forethorten; the Paper
vou draw upon fix, five or fix double, on 
Board, holding that on your Knees, with
which you elevate it as high as you would
have it Thus you will the beccer compare
your Draught with the Principal beforeyou,
which otherwife in cafe your Draught lay
far, you could not do to well. Thus being
fixed for to begin your Piece, guets firft the
Middle of the Picture, or whatever you
intend to copy after, and make  Mark with
your Coal, in the Middle on your Paper
From this Mark  on will guets at the pro-
per Diftances of the Figures difperted in the
Pieces, if there be more than one, and by
taking Heed of the cantal Strokes with
free and flight Touches, you will foon fee
whether the Poficion of your Figures be
jult, leaving the small Breakings or Partings
to the next Drawing; and thus by Patience
and Pratice you will not only readily, but
alfo


 judicioully attain with Delight to your
Purpofe.
Having made  rough Skerch, examine
whether the Dilpofition and Actions of
the Figures, anfwer thofe in the Prici
pal before you; correct and amend fuch

Parts as you fee amiss, by adding of taking
off, till you find it antiwer yon Purpofe, and
having made thus  rough Skeich, you may
proceed, and draw it neater and berter, ob-
ferving the various Turnings that reprefen
themielves, either in the Actions or Drapery,
taking fleed not to make the firtt Skerch
worfe or fpoil it, by being about to make it
better, which may loon happen, if due Care
is not taken in preferving that Difpofition
you approved of before, and having thus
the second time, drawn your Sketch over
with Charcoal, examine and correct it affer
the Principal, and fuffer not  Fault to pats
withour Correction; for it will be more for
your Honour to make one good Draught,
than an Hundred withour Obfervation or
judgment.
In this cafe it is proper for an Arrift to
divere himself between Whiles, by Reading
Mulick, or looking over of Prints; then
taking  freth View of his Performance and
examining it, he may difcover  Fault he
did not fee before.
✓


 drawing after Figures of Plaifter of
 Paris, you muft choofe  proper Light.
The Room you draw in should be large and
have  Light northwards, to high, that the
Shade which your Figure makes upon the
Ground, be equal, or little lets than the
Height of your Figure you are to draw
Aftet.
You may alfo draw conveniently by the
Lamp, which fome Artifts prefer before
Day-light, becaufe the Shades appear more
rongand Charp, for this Purpofe they hang
 Lamp at  convenient Hleight, well pro-
vided with Oil and divers Wicks, and to
prevent the Light preading itfelf too much,
but remain more conflant, they put some
Oil Paper, through which the Light can-
not fhine, behind it, and thereby it preads
the fronger upon the Model they copy.
Set yourfelf from the Figure you are to
draw, three Times as far as it is high, in
such  Manner, that your Eye may in 
Rraight Line, behold the Model, hangings
Plumb-line before it; and having drawn 
erpendicular Line on your Paper, jou ob-
ferve what comes either on the one Side or
other, to your View, and then make 
rough Skerch of the Pofition of the Figure
What 
in the beft Manner you are able.
have here faid of drawing after Plaifier of
Paris,


 by the Lamp, is not to be obferved
in General, for as it cafts flrong and hard
Shades, they are judged not to nacural and
sweet as those caufed by the Light of Day,
and are therefore not approved of by the
generality of experiencd Arcifts. And in
cafe they do draw by the Lamp, they put
 Frame with Oil Paper, between the Wio-
del and the Light, and ther by break the
Harfhness of the Shade: Yon muft fer allo
 whice or gray Paper behind the Model,
that you may perceive the Reffexions the
Detter.
VI.
 CHas would make  further Progress
 and Improvement in Drawing, mult ne
cellarily ffudy Anaromy, elpecially as far  relates to the Mufcles. An Artift having
the fundemental Knowledge in this Study
will foon apprehend the regular Motion of
the Members in the Hluman Body, when
otherwif: he will be in the dark, and not
able to give any Reafon or Diftinction why
this orthat Mufcle, is in ether this or that
Pofition, Swelling, or Contraction. The
Mutcles which are the principal Caufe of
the changeable Motions or Poftures of the
whole Body are chieflythefe:  Thole Be
hind che Ilips.  Thofe of the Loms.  of the Back  Thofe of the Throat.
 The Mutcles of the Shoulder.  Thote
Of


 the Breaft, beginning at the Nipples,
and ending at the Small of the Belly; all
the Motions and Changes of which may be
obferved from the Life, to which  refer the
Praltitioner; but before he artempts this,
he will do well to draw firft after anaromical
Figures, many of which are extant in Cop-
per-place Prints, and then after such as are
call in Plaifter of Paris by which Mcans
and the reading of anatomical Lectures upon
the Mutcles, he foon will form  right
judgment and Idea in drawing his Figuies
to Perfection,
and in their regular Poltures
and Motions.
VII.
ATURE, or the Life, is compleat in
& all Things, and to umitate the meanett
Proluction of Nature, . quires  matterly
Hand. This may invire us to chufe her
for our Partern and chief Object to draw
affer. This cannor be better purin Execu-
tion, than for to chufe  Company of inge-
nious young Men, with whom  young
Beginner jomtly may spend one or two
Days in  Week, under the infiruction of
an able Mafter, to draw after Life; that  fay, after  naked, flrong, and robuft
Man, of broad Shoulders,  fair Breaft,
very well mufcled, thick Thighs, long
Legs, and of  proportionable Sizz. And
having put this your Model in the Polture
 have agreed on, and furnished the
Rcom with  proper Light, fuch as has
been defcribed under the afth Article, you
proceed to copying, every one to his beft
Skill, without defpiting one another' Per
formance; but rather instructing and encou
raging each other with Modefty and good
Manners.
For fanding Actions, the Perfon drawn
by, is commonly placed on the Ground;
but when fitting or lying, it will be proper
to have him placed on  Table at  conve.
ment Ileight.
VIII
 is cuftomary for Beginners as well as
able Mafters, to draw with Charcoal, ii
being the eafieft rubbed out again, in cafe
of  Fault. Others make ufe of Black-lead,
with which they draw the Outlines and after-
wards finith their Pieceseither with Crayons
or other Things they are ufed todraw with
but this is more fitter for experienc’ Mat
ters than young Practitioners.
The feveral Ways made ufe of in finifh-
ing  Draught, depends upon the Choice of
the Arcifts; fome ufe Red Chalk; others
Black Chalk; others draw with  Pencil,
which is called wathing, and is done with
several Sap-colours, as Indian ink, Biftre, or
Chunney Scor, of Wood Smoke, ground in-
digo, ground Red Chalk, and the like,
Others


 again finith their Pieces with wricing
Pens, which Way is the moft redious, and
not to be recommended, but to fuch as in
tend to pratice Graving on Copper-plates.
Some ale Pens made of Keeds, and many
Figures with them
great Mafters have drawn
in bold Strokes; some chule Charcoaldipp’
in Linfeed Oil, but this muft be ufed quickly
and readily, and is only fit for large Things;
others make ufe of Tobacco-pipe Clay
wherewith they draw on blue or other co-
loured Paper, and heighten the Lights with
white Chalk: Of this Tobacco-pipe Clay
are allo made Crayons or Paftils of various
Colours, with their different Shades, and
they are thus done: Take Tobacco-pipe
Clay, and with  little Water temper it with
what Colour you pleafe; work it well toge
ther, roll  into Paftils, and lay them on 
clean Paper to dry. Some will put Gum or
Size in the Water; but then the Crayons
commonly prove hard and become ufelefs.
Thefe are the common Methods Practity-
oners make ufeof in finithing their Draughts;
moft of them chufe Paper, some indeed
prefer Parchment and other Things, but
white Paper has been approved of by moft
Artifts for skerching, harching, and wathing,
with all Sorts of Water-colours; Crayons
indeed are bett managed on blue or any
Other coloured Paper.
  Lear


 should, in drawing after
 Draughts, follow the Manner of their
Principal, that in to doing they may be
accuftomed to it all their Life-time. If you
haick with  Pen, take Hleed to avoid
feratching; endeavour to make the Strokes
free and bold, beginning from the fine or
tharp End to the broad; tome flat and equal
Shades muft be drawn with equal Hlarches,
let them be fine of Coarle.
In drawing with Crayons hold your Paf-
tils straighe forwards, and they will not fo
foon become blunt, for turning them be-
Tween your Fingers, they will wear and yet
Keep their Point continually, fo that you
may draw  whole Draught without icrape-
ing your Paltils.
Roulling is allo pratifed by some, and
differs not much from harching; only to
make it look clofe and blended one in and-
ther, it muft be dofied with some Corton
fixed in  Goofe Quill. When in this man-
her you begin to fhadow your Draught, do
it firft fainr, finooth, and even, to asit may
appear as if wathed with  Pencil; then you
shade your Draught in the darkeft Places,
with Hatchings in  graceful and mafterly
Manner thus by harching and dofting the
one upon the other, you willaccultomyour
felf


 to  mafterly Iland in Drawing. This
fort of dofling or harching is done with
eitherred or black Chalk. Inflead of Cot
ton some make ufe of  Hlair Pencil, that is
finged blunt ar  Candle.
As much as this Manner of Drawing is
admired by fome,  cannot recommend. it
for it makes the Workmanthip hard, fliff,
and occafions  Breaking in the flat Parts,
except it be in finall and curious Picces.
The Cuftom of great Mafters has been to
afe but one Thing in their Hands at once,
by which they have compleated ther
Draughts, without afing Cotton or the like.
However if one defigns to make fomerhing
curious and nice, the aforefaid manner of
dolling will not be amiss, only  would not
have the Practtioner accuftom humfelf to it
alrogether. If one draws Counterfeits,
especially upon coloured Paper, let him
(mooth the Edges of the Heightenings with
the like coloured Paper rolld up to  sharp
Pointat one End; with this joumay fweeten
or foften the Edges, to as to appear nether
t hard nor sharp.
There is  fingular Manner Come Artifts
ufe of Wallung, performed with  Pencil
dipt in Ink, or any other Sap-colour, and
to pencild on all Sorts of either white or
coloured Paper, they wath therewith in any
Draught the principal Shades, and afterwards
work over them flightly, with  Pen or
black Chalk. This is  geol mafterly Man
G and looks exceedingly well. in wathing
you muft obferve to lay on firft, the fofe
and faint Shades, finoothing the Edges with
 clean Pencil, moiftened  little with your
Tongue; when this is dry, go over the
darker Shades with  deeper Colour thus
you proceed with  third and fourth Shade,
till you fee your Draught perfect, always
taking fieed not to make your Work too
hard ar firft; the faint Shades, especially on
colcured Paper, mult be imperceptibly lolt,
fince the Heightening with Whice will help
 are two Proferties neceltary to
be underffood in the Art of Drawing,
the one is general, the other particular: All
 composed confift of certain Parts,
which together carry on  Correfpondence:
They make  general Mass or Lump, and
are by our Sight diftinguished either in
general or particular. If then you draw
either after  Print, Picture, or Life, ob-
ferve the general Form reprefented to you,
which confifts of feveral Parts, examine
whether it be round, (quare, trangular,
long or thort; and this is bett obfervable
with an half thur Eye, without oblerving
the Parts as are contained in the General.
For Example, Suppofe  Head complearly
finithed, the circumferent Strokes confii-
TTES


 the general Mals; the Eyes, Nofe,
Mouth, Coc. are the Particulars contained
in the General; the Queftion is, whether
this Face may be known by the Paris in
Particular, or all the Parts in the circumfe-
Tent Strokes
 shall anfwer this with the following
Examples: Suppofe two Paces be drawn
with fomething that may be eafily wip’ off,
very like each other; wipe the circuimferent
Stroke of one Face clean away, fo that no-
thing remain but the finall Parts, as the
Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, C and you will pre-
fently find, that the Likenels of the Face is
gone, or if about thofe particular Partsyon
draw another circumferent Line, differing
from the former, you will behold another
Likenets in the Face, much differing from

 it had before By this it appears
plainly that the Parts themfelves, do not
reprefent themfelves in their Being, before
they are jomed to their general Our-ftrokes.
Asthefe particular Parts are obferved in the
general of the Hlead, the same is to be taken
Nonce of in the Arms, Hands, Legs, and
Feet; for although, in respect to the whole
Body, they are but Parts, yet in themfelves
they are general to the Parts they contain.
As the Arm has its Mutcles, the Bending of
the Elbow. The Hands have their Fingers,
and Fingers again their Members, and fo
on. In the Jame Manner is the Knowledge
of Things bidden in the Generalicy of all,
.   Man whom we know very well be
at Tome reafonable Diftance, fo that we can
not know him by some fmall Parts, as by
his Eyes, whether brown or gray, nether
his great or fnall Nofe, his red of pale Face,
nor any other fnall Part of his Body, not
withflanding we shall knowthis Man at this
Diftance By what Means? By mmeans of
the General, for the general Lump feen
by you, even when his Eack is turned upon
yeu, will make you prefently know hum.
EI.
Now come to fay fomeching concerning
& the Nature and Virtue of Lights and
Shades: There are no Things in Nature
which can be diftinguished by us, in  leffer
or further Diftance from us; nor can it be
without
exprefted by the Art of Drawing,
this Knowledge, for without Dark and
Light, nothing refembles what it ought to
do, for it is that, which gives  Being and Re
prefentation to all Things. To prove this,
draw  Counterfeit upon  white Paper,
with black Chalk, when finithed it is like
the Perfon, and judged to be well drawn;
here it may be asked, Whar Correfpondence
has black Chalk, wherewith you made your
Shades, and the white Paper, by which the
Light is reprefented with the Original, that
is Lifer To which lantver, It is not the
black



 Chalk, nor the whice Paper, nor any
fingle Strokes drawn, but it is the Effect of
the Lights and Shades in their proper Places,
that reprefent Life itfelf to us, for it is im
poffible, that either  round Circle or Spot,
of  flat Colour, should reprefent  Globe,
except the Roundness, is given it by Light
and Shadow.
XII.
 OUNG Pratitioners or Learners,
should by all Means ufe themfelves
to the beft Manner of Drawing; that  to
finith their Work, plain, finooch, near, and
eaty, to blend the Shades and Lights, to as
to be loft the one in the other. This they
mult endeavour by indefaigable Pains, and
although in the Beginning it will feem dif-
ficul, and their Performance difpleating; yet
let not this difcourage them from purfuing
their Aun, for none are born Mafters, and he
that never did do ill, cannot expect ever to
do well; one Day brings on another, and
with it fome Amendment, till you arrive to
Perfection, which will be  Reward for all
the Labour and Pains, you have taken
in the Acquifition of this charming Art.
XIII.
Picture or Drawing that wants Per-
 Spective, is looked upon as irrational
and dead; wherefore  shall inform le
  Practitioner what it is, and how to
attain the Knowledge of that Science, fo
neceflary in Deligning and Painting
Perspective is that which caulesall Things
contained in  Draught or Picture, to come
forward, or fink backward, and caufes them
from the firft to the laft, to fland in their
due and proper Places; as allo the Vacuum
or Emplinels between Body and Body, to
go from you, or come forward naturally to
the Eye, as though it were acceffible. And
as  real Perspective shews the Diltance
which every Arch or Pillar has, the one
after the other, as allo the flanding of Peo-
ple in their proper and fingular Places, fo
likewife in  Draught or Picture, by the
Diminution of Light and Dark, the Diftance
mult be obferved agreeable to the appro-
priated Declination; and every Draught or
Picture, whether after Narure or Plaifter of
Paris, you mull well obferve what appeareth
forwards or backwards and how one
Thing follows another. This is one of the
moft difficult Siudies belonging to the Art
of Drawing and Painting, wherefore 
Practitioner ought to inform humfelf in
Time, either by the Inttruction of  Maf-
ter, or by reading of Books of Perspec-
TIVe.
XIV


 gone through the principal
 Properties belonging to the Art of
Drawing, it will now be requifite to fum
up what has been faid, for making your
Work compleat and perfect.
 In your rough Skeich obferve to bring
in  good Spirit, free and pleating to the
firtl View.
 Corred the firft rough Draught in
the drawing it over again, and accultom
yourfelf in reprefenting the Shadows and
Touches with the Coal, in order to be cer-
tain in the Pofition of your Fisures.
 Hlaving compleated your Delign as far
 relatresto the ufe of Charcoal, then draw
with either your Pen or Pencil, with dili-
gent Care, the Out-lines, endeavouring to
keep of bring in, all the Beauties, Comeli-
nets, and Gentiliry of the Figures; taking
particular Care and Diligence to oblerve
and keep the Bendings and Motions of the
Body, and the eaty displaying of the Folds
ings of  Garment, in their Comelinels
and genteel Difpofition; for it ofcen happens
that by  small Bending,  whole Part of 
Figure is entirely spoild. This is  Fault
Youth are much addicted to, by obferving
thofe finall Bendings too much, which they
commonly make toobig, and thereby der
prive  Piece of that Beauty, which with 
  Precaution they might have preferved;
and this puts me in Mind to caution young
Practnioners not to rely to much on the
Particulars, but the General, as  have
obferved already, in the Ath Article, for in
being too attentive in finifhing, and obfer-
ving the little and infignificant Parts, you
lofe that which ought to make the moft
Shew of amafterly Performance, therefore
let your chicfell Care be to obferve and
finith the General Parts to Perfection, for
the small or particular ones, may be put in
afterwards with more Eafe. This is an
Article highly necelfary for young Practiti-
oners to be instructed in; but to the Shame
of their Teachers, moft of them are kept
ignorant in this Particular. Thus some
Painters will take Abundance of Pains to
draw  Face near at Iland with all its De-
formities, if it has any, as Pits of the Small
Pox, Scars, Spots, and the like, when
otherwife, at  convenient Diftance, they
might have the General with the Particular,
in  more agreeable Appearance than it then
reprefents wfelf, and that with less Pains
and Trouble; but this is the Cafe with many
Pretenders in the Arr of Painting; that
they cannot draw  Portraiture to be any
thing like, except they bring in all the
Mlarks, Wrinkles, C you draw withred or black Chalk,
take Hleed your Strokes be not hard, or too
Charp, especially in the light Parts, in the
frong


  



Witch



   
ma
B fhady Parts you may carry  bold
droke; always obferve that in the fhadow.
ing of your Piece, the Strokes lofe and va-
with away, to that one might judge as if
you had finithed your Piece, without draw-
ing the Circumference of our Lines, for
thus it will be agreeable to Nature, where
no Stroke can be feen; this you may ob-
ferve in  Picture as well as in good Prints
Of Drawings.
It will happen that in Drawing between
Whice and Whire, and againtt the Light,
 Stroke or Out-line muft be drawn, for to
exprets the Draught, and diftinguith ir from
the Ground, especially when drawn on
white Paper; but this you should endeavour
to thun as much as poftible, and not do it
except Necefficy compel you to it, and you
have no other Means left to avord it; but
as  cannor here fpeak of all the Caufes
incident to this Cafe,  will only exemplify
one for the better Apprehention of young
Practicioners, by the two Faces in the op-
pofite Print.
The Face  as you plainly perceive, is
drawn compleat with an Out-line Stroke,
and the Face Bonly reprefents the Shadows
that are underneath the Nofe, Mouth, Esc.
The Queltion is, whether an Error is com-
mitted in the Face , which might by the
Our-line of the Face  be amended.  for
my Part fay no, but on the contrary  ob
ferve in the Face Ba fingular Curioficy and
Beauty,


 where Whice againtt Whice makes
 Termination without  circumferent
Stroke.
Apprehending well this Example, you
will improve if in your Drawings, and gam
thereby  fingular and accomplifhed Man-
Rer.
What  have faid on this Hlead, is to be
obferved with due Caution, for as  rough
Sketch only confifts in circumferent Lines
or Strokes, neverthelels Dexterity gives it 
fingular Beauty; you may by this Rule ap:
prehend how to work on coloured Paper,
where by the Heightnings, you may do
much, and fave many Strokes, you are
obliged to express on white Paper.
XV.
Now come to the finifhing Part; here

you muft not childifhly or apithly imi
late Stroke for Stroke, but obferve the In
rent of the Mafter, in his Expreftions, Dif
pofitions, Shades and Lights in his Figures.
If you draw  Face after  Picture, of
after Life, obferve the Paftions and Phi
ognomy thereof: Take Norice by what
Strokes, Touches, Turnings, Shades, or
otherwife, fuch  Face is made to look
forrowful or merry, crying of laughing,
old or young, wild or modeft, foul or
clean, homely or beautiful; and by obler-
ving this, you will not only follow the same
Strokes


 Touches, and Shades, as near  to exprets the fame Actions and
Paltions, but alfo you will retain the fame
in your Mind, and underfland it with 
well grounded Knowledge.
When you begin to finith your Draught,
take Hfeed you make not the Shades at firft
to hard or deep as they mutt be when fi-
nifhed. you may eafily bring them to be
darker, but not to to make them lighter.
Acquire  good Judgment in difpoling your
Shades, to that they may fling Things either
backwards or forwards. For wharever you
draw with, let it be Redlead, Indian Ink,
Black Chalk, Cec. Von mult exprets one
extream Dark or Light, and therefore accut-
tom yourfelf from your beginning to draw;
to fhadow very light and fweet, fame and
even, and bring in the Perspective of Dark—
nets as much as poffible, and by obferving
this, you will find yourfelf feldom deceived
but gain Honour and Applaute by your Per
formance.
Be careful to keep your Draught in one
even and equal Condition, to that it may
not appear as if compoted of dark and light
Spots; but let the Lights and Shades cor-
respond and agree together, the leffer dark
with the faime, and the faint with fronger
Lights, otherwife your Work will prefenrly
incline to hardness and ftiffnets; which, if
you examine Life, you will never meet with
there.
Whey


 you draw on coloured Paper,
after  Print or Draught, obferve the even
Likeness of Dark and Light, keeping the
oreat Parts of Lights and Shadows, and the
 intermixt Parts in the Jame Manner,
that the greater may always have the Pre-
dominancy over the lefs.
 shall conclude with advifing young
Practtioners to obferve in all their Perfor
mances  true Symetry and Proportion, of
pecially in all the Parts of  human Figure.
Ler them firff well be Mafter of every Par-
ticular, for it is the  BC, or Alphabet,
which when well learned, is cafily joined
together into Words; and he who can de-
lineare well, the Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, Ears,
E will readily form  well proportioned
Face, and after he has ufed himfelf to draw
Hands, Arins, Legs, Coc. he will calily
cCinpile  whole Body.
There are indeed feveral eminent Pain.
ters, who have in their Writings endea-
voured to teach young Practitioners, the
Art of true Proportion and Symerry, by
Geomerrical and Perspective Rules, how to
form an Ovalout of  Circle,  Perpendicular
Into  Square, according as the one or
other Object is reprefenting itfelf to ones
Eyes; but as this Way of proceeding is ve
ry redious, and likely to deter joung Be-
ginners,  fertil Genius will, like many
other great Mafters, advance in his Perfor
mances by more cafier Steps, and form 
rue


 Ided in his Conception of Nature
WElf.
In relation to the true Symetry of the
Human Body, it is to be admired, that
from the Dunenfion of  Toe or Finger,
the whole corporeal Subltance may be de-
monftrated; to that three Sculpiors in three
different Places, having agreed on the true
Meature of the Heighr, may work on one
Statue, and when the Limbs are brought
and fixed together, will make  perfed
lmage according to Art.
 Man that is well proportioned is eight
Jumes as high as his Head, that is, from the
Hair of his Forehead to his Chin; his Face
is three Nofes long, and his Foot is one
Fifth of his Length.
II would feem incredible to some People,
did their own Experience not convince and
latisty their Curiofity, without any Coll or
Charge, that  Thread which reaches three
tames about the End of the middle Finger,
should be juft to long as totake in the Com-
pats of ones Wrift; and that fix tinies of
that Length, is the Meafure about ones
Walte, over the Navel this may be eafily
tried by winding  Thread fix Times about
the Writt, and then meafuring the Walte.
 Thread which goes round ones Fere-
head, will allo reach from the Chin behind
the Neck; and it is remarkable, that by ex-
tending ones Ilands and Arms as far as one
can, the two Ends of the middle Fingers
will


 determine ones Height, and  Man
placed in thar Pofture, will defcribe  Oua-
drant, whole Centre is the Privy Paris.
Alfo if  Man extends his Ilands and
Feet, in the Figure of  St. Andrew’ Cross,
and fixes one End of the Compals to the
Navel, and the other to the extream Parts, ir
will take the urmoll Parts of the Ilands and 
Feet in the fame Circle. The Length of
the Face and ones Hland are equal; as are
the Height of the Forehead, the Length of
the Nofe, the Ears, the Thumb, and the
Space from under the Nofe to the Chin
II is obfervable, thar all that is doubled,
is in true Order on each Side, and all that
is fingle in the Middle of the Body. If ,
Man refts on one Leg,  Plumb Line mult,
fall from over his Forehead, Nofe and
Navel, to his Feec if he firs, he makesf
with his Knees and Back  direct Angle.
Here  cannot omit  Queltion, viz.
Whar were the proportionable Joints and)
Features of the great Coloffus at Rbodes the
whole Height whereof was  Foor?
It does appear by this Hleight char the
Trunk was  Foot wide, the Face  long, and his Nofe and Thumbs each
 Footlong. From such like Observations

we may inform ourfelves of many Thingsf
in Antiquity, by comparing and calculating

the Dimentions of one Part to the other,
and thus find out the true Proportion.
The


 rot 
The Usefulness and Use of
PRIN  .
GHIAT which  now am about to
treat upon is concerning Prints,
the Invention whereof is allow’,
by all Lovers of Artand Inge—
nuity, to be one of the happieft
Productions of later Ages.
Prints are in our Age arriv’ to to high
 Degree of Perfection, and good Gravers
have given us to many on all forts of Mar
ters, that it may truly be faid, they are the
Depofitories of all that is fine and curious
in the World.
Their Origin was in the Vear  and
arofe from one Maso Finiguerra,  Gold-
finith of Florence, who grav’ his Place,
when cafting some off in melied Sulphur,
he perceiv’ that what came out of the
Mould was mark’ with the fame Prints as
his Place, by the Black which the Sulphur
had taken from his Graving: Hle rry dro do
as much on Silver Plates with wer Paper,
by rouling it finvothly with  Rouler, which
alto succeeded.
This Novelty tempted Baccio Baldim, 
Goldfinich of the same City, to try whether
he


 could do the fame, and his Success of
calion’ him to engrave feveral Plates of
Sandro Boticello' Invention and Delign, and
upon this Andrew Maniegna, who was at
Rome at that ime, fet about engraving fome
of his Own Pieces.
The Knowledge of this Invention geting
Into Flanders, Martin of Antwerp, then 
Janious Painter, engrav’ Abundance of
Plares of his own Invention, and fent fe
veral Prints into Italy, which were markd
thus, . . Vasari in the Life of Marce,
Antonio,  Painter, gives an Account of the
greatell part of his Subjects, of which there
was one amongtt the reft, (the Vition of Stl
Antony) that pleasd Michal Angelo, ther:
very young, to well, for the Invention of
it, that he colour’ it. Affer Martin of
Antwerp, Albert Durer began to appears
and gave the World an infinice Number of
fine Prints, as well in Wood as in Copper,)
all which he fent to Venice to be fold.
Marco Anlome, who happen’ ac thaif
time to be there, was fo rarith’ with the
Beauty of thefe Prints, that he copy’ Sixp
and Thirey of them, which reprefenced ourt
Saviour' Paffion, and thefe Copies weref
receiv’ ar Rome with to much the more
Admiration, by how much the more the
were finer than the Originals. At the famef
fune Hage du Carpi, an Italian Painter of if
incan Capacity, but of  Wit apt for Inven
tion, found our by means of feveral Plaresf
 Wood, the way how to make Prints re-
temble Deligns of Claro Ofcure, and fome
Years after the Invention of Etching was
dicover’, which Parmegiane foon made ufe
Of.
Thefe firft Prints drew the Admiration
of all that faw them for their Novelty, and
the skilful Painters who work’ for Glory
 willing to ufe them to fpread their
Works over the World. Raphael, among
others, employ’ the famons Marco Antomo
to engrave feveral of his Pittures and De-
signs, and thofe admirable Prints were to
renown’, that they carry’ the Name of
Rapbael through the:World.  valt num-
ber of Gravers have made themfelves famous,
fince Marco Antonio, in Germany, Ialy,
France, and the Low Countries, and have
publiffrd as well by Graving as Eiching, an
infinice number of Prints on all forts of Sub-
jeds, as well Hiftories, Fables, Embleims,
Devifes, Medals, Annnals, Landskips, Flow-
ers, Fruns, as in general all the vifible
Productions of Art and Nature.
There is no body, of what Condition
or Profeffion foever, but may profit very
much by inspecting into Prints. Divines,
Philofophers, Soldiers, Travellers, Geo.
graphers, Painters, Sculptors, Archireds,
Gravers, Lovers of the Fine Arts, all that
are curious in Hiffory or Antiquity, and in
thort, all who having no particular Profef
fion,


 Men of Honour and Fortune, can
adorn their Minds with the Knowledge of
those Things, that may render them the
more worthy of Elleem.
It is not pretended that Perfons are ob-
lig’ to fee all the Prints that have been pub-
lith’, to know how to profit by them; the
infinice Number of them prefenting at once
to many different Ideas to  Mans View,
will rather confound than inform him:
Thole only, who are born with  great and
 clear Genins, who have been us', for
sometime, to the Sight of to many different
Things, canmake them profitable to them,
and fee them all without Confufion.
Every particular Man may chule thofe
Subjects that are moft proper for him, that
may either refreth his Memory or frengthen
his Judgment, in which he should be di
rected by the Inclination he has for Things
of his own Golt and Prefetfion.
As for Example, nothing is more fuita-
ble to Divines than Prints which relare to
the Sacred Hiftory of the Oid and New
Teftament, and every thing which difcovers
the Exercife, or the Perfecution of the pri-
nitwe Chriftians: The Antique Basso Re-
levo', which in ma: Places inform us of
the Ceremony of the Heathen Werfhip: In
thort, any thing that has relation to our
own, whether it be Sacred or Profane.
For


 Philofophers: All the Demonftrative
Figures, which relate not only to the Ex-
periments of Phyfick, but all that may en-
creafe their Knowledge in natural Tings.
For thofe that are bred up to War: The
Plan and Elevation of fority’ Cities, the
order of Bartles, and Books of Fortification,
of which the demonttranve Figures are the
greatelt Part.
For Travellers: The particular Views of
Palaces, of Cities, and confiderable Places,
to prepare them for the Things they are to
fee, or to preferve the Ideas of thofe they
have feen.
For Geographers The Maps and Plans
necelfary in their Profeffion.
For Painters: Every Thing that may
Rrengthen them in their Art, as the Antique
Pieces, and thofe of Raphael and Caracci
for the good Gont, Cerrectness of Defign,
the Dignity of Manner for the choice of the
Hairs of the Head, the Paffions of the
Mind, and the Attitudes. Thole of Correg-
gio for Grace and Delicacy of the Expres-
sions; thole of Tihian, Bafan, and the Lom-
bards for the Character of Truth, for the
fimple Exprestions of Nature, and above all,
for the Golt of Landskips. Thole of Ry-
bens, for the Grandeur and Magnificence
of his Invention, and the rtifice of Claro
Ofro. In thort thote that, tho' they may
II
be


 defective in some particular part of them,
may yet have fomerhing in them fingular
and extraordinary, for the Painters may
draw  confiderable Advantage from all the
different Manners of thofe that have gone
before them, who are, as to many Flowers,
from whence, like the Bees, they may fuck
 Juice, which incorporaring with their
proper Subltance, will bring forth such
Works as are ufelul and agreeable.
For Sculptors. Statures, Basso Relievos,
Medals, and other Anrique Works, those of
Raphael, Polidoro, and the whole Roman
School.
For Archifetts. The Books that concern
their Profeffion, and tharars full of demon
ftranve Figures of the Invention of their
Ruchors, or copy’ from the Hnliqte.
For Gravers.  Collection of Pieces of
different Manners, as well graved as eichd.!
This Collection should alfo ferve to thew
them the Progress of Graving, from Albert
Durer to the Gravers of our own Tines,
which will include the Works of Marcof
Antonio, Cornelius Cort, the Caracer, Sade-
lers, Pontias, Belfvert, Goltius, Maler, Vof-
terman, Vifcher, and  great many more

thar  have not named, who had  particular
Character, and who by different Ways,
Rrove all of them to imitate either Nature,
when they did fomething of their own in
VentioR, or Pictures of different Manners,
when


 they only aimed at the Farchfulnels
In comparing thus the
of Imitation.
Works of all thefe Mafters, they may judge
which of them underffood beft the Manage-
ment of their Tools, of Light, and the
ulefulnels of Harmony, as it relates to Claro
Ofnro: which of them in their Operations
reconciled Delicacy and Force belt, and in
their Productions were moft fentible and
exact, that making  good fe of thefe
Lights, they may have the laudable Ambr
tion to equal or furpats thefe skilful Mafters.
For the Curicus in Hiffory and Anriqui-
 Every Thing that has bien engraven
belonging to facred or profane Iiftory, the
Fable, antique Baso Relieves, the Trajun
and Antonine Pillars, the Books of Medals
and Stones engraved, and feveral Prints
that may help them in the Knowledge of
thofe Things they would know, or to keep
thofe they know already in their Memory.
In short, for thole that to be more happy,
and more Gentleman-like, would form their
Golt by the Sindy of good Things, and
have  realonable Tincture of the fine Arts,
othing is more neceffary than good Prints.
Their Sight, with  little Reffection, will
readily and agreeably inform them of every
Thing that may exercife their Reafon, and
Rrengthen their Judgment. They may fill
their Memory with the moft curious Things
of all Times, and all Countries, and in
learning the different Hiftories, learn the
I Manhers of Painting: They will
judge readily, by the Pacilicy with which
they may open  few Leaves, and to com
pare the Productions of one Mafter with
thofe of another, and by this means, in pa-
ring their Time, they will spare their Ex
pence alfo; for it is almoft impoffible to put
the Pictures of as many Mafterstogether in
 Room, as will fuffice to form  perfect
Idea of the Work of each Mafter, and
when at  vall Charge,  Man has filled  Chamber with Pictures of different
Manners, he cannoe have doove two or
three of eacl, which is not enough to en:-
hle him to make  nice Judgment of the

Character of the Painter, or the Extent of
his Capacity; whereas by means of Prints,
one may eafily fee the Works of feveral
Mafterson  Table, one may form an Idea
of them, judge by comparing them one
with another, know which to chule, and by
practifing it offen, contract  Habit of 
good Taffe, and  good Manner, especially
it we do it in the Company of any body,
that has Difcernment in thefe Things, and
can dillinguith what is good, from what is
but indifferent.
Such as have any Paffion for the fine Arts
take  regular Method in their Collections;
they do it by the Painters and their Difci
ples. In the Reman School they place
Raphael, Michael Angelo, their Difciples,
and their Contemporaries. In that of
Venite


 Giorgione, Titian, the Baffanm, Paole
Veronese, Tintoret, and other Venetians. In
that of Parma, Corregio, Parmegiano, and
thofe char followed their Gont. In that of
Bologna, the Carracci, Guide Diminichine,
Albani, Lanfrance and Guerchino. In that
of Germany, Albert Durer, Holben, the lic
tle Mafters, William Baur, and others. In
that of Planders, Othe Venins, Rubens,
Vandike, and thofe that practited their
Rules. In the same Manner they put the
Mafters of the French School, and thofe of
other Countries in their feveral Claffes.
Others collect their Prints by the Gravers,
without Respect to the Painters: Others, by
other Fathions, and indeed it is reafonable
that every one should have Liberty to do in
this what feems to him to be ufeful and
agreeable.
Tho' one may at any Time, and in any
Age, benefit ones felf by the Sight of Prints,
yet Youth is more proper for it, than any
Other Part of Man' Life, becaufe Memory
is the Gift of Childhood, and while Perions
are young, they ought to make Ufe of it as 
Magazine, to lay up Things, that may
contribute towards forming their Judg-
Melit.
If the Ancients had had the fame Advan-
tage in this as we have, and if they had,
by means of the Prints, tranfimicted what
they had done, that was fine and curious,
to Pofterny, we should have diftindly
Known


 Abundance of Things, of which we
have but confuled Ideas in Hiftory; we
should fee the ftately Monuments of Mem-
pbis and Babylon, and the Temple of Teru-
falem which Solomon built with fo much
Magnificence; we should make  Judgment
of the Building of Atbens, Cormib, and
old Rome, with more Grounds and with
more Certainty than we now can by the
poor Remains that are left of them. Pay
Jamas, whe has made fuch an exact De-
scription of Greece, would have accompa-
ied his Difcourfes with demonftrative
Figures, which might have been handed
down to us, and we might have feen wich
Pleature, not only the Temoles and Pala
Ces, as they were in their Perfection, but
we should alfo have inherred from the anci-
en Workmen the Art of good building.
 for want of thefe Means thar the Mla-
chines of Archimedes and the elder Iliero are
loft, and the Knowledge of Diosorides'
Plants, as alfo, of feveral Anmals, and of
 great many of the curious Productions
of Nature, which the Studies and Medita
tions of the Ancrents difcovered: Bur not to
treuble ourfelves any longer in grieving for
the Loss of Things which we cant recover,
let us profit ourfelvesby thofe Prints that we
have amongtt us.
 IN IS.










 THE
Several Articles contained in this Book.



Article the EIEST.
 the Difffrence between Painting in Ministure,

 and other Kinds of Painting.
.  The Method of Calking
 How to copy by Squares
 Of feveral other Methods of Drawing
 Of the Mathematical Compaffes
 Of Delineating your Piece with Carmine
VII. How to Rrerch your Vellum
Vill. Of the Colours ufed for Painting in Mini-
ature
IX. How to draw out the finell Parts from Colours
partaking of Earth and other coarfe and heavy
Matter
 How Ox or Eel Gall is to be ufed in Colours  Of Purifying Colours by Fire
 How to temper them, and to make Vfe of
Sea Shells
 How to know if the Colours be well gumm’ is
Kiv. in what Manner the Colours are to be place!
upon the Pallet
 Of Pencils.
 Of the Light proper to work in
EVII.


 CONTEN  .
XVII. Of mingling Colours
 Of Dead Colouring
KIk. How to Dot
 That the Colours muft be loff and drowned
in one another.
 How to heighten or fer off your Work
 How to manage your Colours when dry on the
Palletor in the Shells
 Of darkith Grounds
 Of greenith Grounds
 Of Paintings Glory
XXVl. Of illing an entire Ground with  Glory
RXVI. Of  Day-Sty
XXVIII. Of Clouds
 Of  Night or tempeffuous Sty
Of DRAPERIES.
XEX. Of the Blue
KXXL. Of the Carmine Red
XXXIL. Of the Vermillion Red
XXXIII. Of the Lake Red
XXXIV. Of the Viclet
XXKV. Of the Fleth-coloured
XXXVI. Of the Vellow
XXXVII. Of another Vellow
XXXVIll. Of the Green
XXKI. Of the Black
 Of the Woolen- White
 Of the Gray
 Of the Minim or brown coloured
 Of variable Draperies
 Of the Violet varying into Blue
 Of the Violet varying into Vellow
 Of the Carmine varying into Vellow
 Of the Lake Red varying into Felow
 Of the Green varying into Fellow
 Of feveral other Colours, and the (ision
to be obferved
 Of





The CONTEN TS.
. Of other Colours, foul or dirty, and their
 or Agreement
 Of White Linnen, without Heightening
 Of the same with Heightening
 Of Vellow Linnen
 Of Linnen tranparent
 OfCrape
.VI. To ware  Stuff, or make it like  watered
 How to diflinguith filken and woollen Dra-
 LIx. LK. Lxl. Of the different Qualiies
  Of Lace and Point
 OfFurs
 Of Euildings  Stone
 Of Buildings of Weod.
Of CHKWLITIUter
 Of Carnations in General
LXVIl. Of thofe of Women and Children, and
 all teffder Colourings
 Ofthat of Men
LXIN. Of the Firft Forming and Shadowing
 Red
 Ofthe Teints
 Of the Dotting with Green
LXKII. How to give Strength to the Shades and
 finith them
 How to dot and finith the Lights
 Of the Eyes
 Of the Mouth
 Of the Hands and the whole Carnation
LXKVIl. Of the Eye-brows and the Beard
 Of the Hlair of the Head.
 How to foften your Work
 Of different Colourings
 Of that of Death
IXEXII


The CONT EN ..
LXEXIL. Fon
LXXXIII Fire and Flames
LXEXIV Smoke
LXXNV. Pearls
LXEXVI
Dismonds and other Jewels
LXKNVII Of Golden and Silver Figures
LXXXVIII Of the Oilicy of the several Inflruc
tions contained in this Book
LKKEIR. Of Landships
XC. Of Terralfes
XCl. Of Waters, Ruins, Rocks, and other
Things happening in  Landship.
RCI. Of Trees
XCIIl. Of Flowers
XCIV. How to firtt-draw and finith them
ECV. Of Refes
XCVI. Of Talips
XCVII. Ofthe Emony or Wind Flower
TTOUITIl. Orils Dornocion wnd who Pink
XCIK. Of the RedLilly
. Of the Day Lilly
Cl. Of the Hyscinth, or Purple Flower
 Of the Piony
CIII. Of Cowslips
CIV Of the Renonculus, of Crow-foot
CV. Of the Crocus
CVI. Of the Iris
VII. Orthe Jeltamin
CVIII. Ofthe Tuberofe
CIX. Of the Hellebore
CX. Of the Whue Lilly
CXI. Ofthe Snow Drop
CXII. Of the Jonquil
CXIII Ofthe Dabodil
CKIV. Of the Marigold
CXV. Of the Aulrian Rofe
CXVI. Of the Indian Pink or Fr. Marigold
CXVII. Ofthe Sun Flower
CViIl. Or the Pattion Flower
CKIK. Of Post. Pinks and Sweet Williams



 CONTEN  .

CXX. Of the Scabious
CXXI. Of the Sword or Day Lilly
 Of the Hlepatica, or Liver wort
 Of the Pumegranale
CXXTYOf the Flower of the Indian Bean
 Of the Columbine
 Ofthe Larks Foot
 Or Violet and Panfies
 Of the Muffipula or Catch Fly
 Of the Crown Imperial
 Of the Siclaman or Sow- Bread
 Of the Gillifower
 Of Fruits and Animals in General
 Sorr of White is to be uted, and of
various iethods of Painting in Mini-
ature, Coc.
 for the making and preparing
of feveral Colours, requifice for Painting
in Miniature, C Carmine and Ulramarine
    Fine Lake
  Columbine
 Colour
 Green
 with Violet Flowers
 Green
 Pink
 right ufe of Allum
 purify Vermillion
 Way
 very fine burnifhed Gold
 make Glove Glew
 make Whire for the Ground
 make  Ground on which to gild and filver in
another Mianner
 lay on Gold and Silver
 deaden Gold
 CONTENT .
 deaden Silver
 make Shell Gold and Shell Silver
Some general Leffons for thes Art of

DRAWINC.
II An Introduction
 Common Rules for Beginners
 What to copy by
 Of the practical Part in drawing after Prints
 Drawingafter Plaiffer of Paris
VI. Of the Study of Anatomy, neceffary for De
 Drawing after Nature
ViIl. The feveral Ways ufed in finithing  Draught  Leffons for Choice in Copies to draw by
. Of the general and particular Parts to be ob-
 in Drawing
 Concerning the Light and Shadow
KII. Young Praltitioners ought to accuftom them.
 to the beft Manner of Drawing
 Of Perspestive
 General Obtervations
XV. Of Symetry and feveral other Properties in 
 Draught
 The Ofefulness and Ufe of Prints




