THE
ARTISTS ASSISTANT
IN
DRAWING, PERSPECTIVE, ETCHING, ENGRAVING, MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING,
PAINTING on GLASS, in CRAYONS, in WATER-COLOURS, and on SILKS and SATINS.







CONTAINING
The Easiest and most Comprehensive RULES
For the Attainment of those truly USEFUL and
POLITE ARTS,
Methodically digested,
And adapted to the Capacities of YOUNG BEGINNERS.
ILLUSTRATED WITH
Suitabie EXAMPLES engraved on Copper.
The THIRD EDITION, Improved.

LONDON:
Printed for Robert Sayer, Map and Print-Seller,
°  in Fleet-Street, and John Smith, ° as the Act directs,  January,  has ever been the Misfortune of those who
have prosessed to lay down Rules for the At
tainment of any Art or Science, to leave them
enveloped with Difficulties, which, if not ut
terly insuperable, at lealt dilcourage the Learner
from proceeding in  Study which he can have
little Hopes will ever reward his Pursuit.
From hence we may reasonably infer, that
the said Professors were totally unacquainted, if
not with the Theory, at least with the Practical
Part of what they undertook to teach others;
and that the Instructions they have given were
founded rather upon  bare Supposition of their
Efficacy,
than upon the furer Bafis of long and
repeated Experience, which alone could have
ensured their Success, and from which, with
all due Deference to the Judicious, (whofs
Sanction we shall at all Times be ambitious to
deserve) we may venture to answer for the Prac
ticability of our own.
To obviate every Objection, and to remove
all those Difficulties which had so long blocked
up the Path of Science, and retarded, if not
wholly impeded the Pupil, in his Progress to the
Temple of Fame, was the chief View in com
piling the subsequent little Treatise.









Over and above the Improvements made in
illustrating the several Arts hitherto so imper
fectly and unitelligibly explained, we have
introduced Directions for Scraping in Mezzo
tinto, which, in this Edition, are still farther en
larged, and which, as they have never been be
fore attempted in any Books of this kind, we
flatter ourselves will be the more acceptable;
especially when it shall appear from the Rules
laid down for the Performance of this Art, that
it is fo easy to be attained, that  tolerable Profi
ciency in Drawing will enable any one to under
take it with all imaginable Prospect of Suc
cess.
The Reader will also find, in this Impression,
the Addition of  very useful Problem, in the
Article of Perspective, illustrated by  new
Plate.
As this Book is chiefly intended for the Use
of young Practitioners, we have purposely
avoided all abstruse Expressions and obsolete
Terms, contenting ourselves with such  familiar
Stile as we judged most likely to inform those
Minds we would with to improve: Yet, as the
Ideas ef an Artist are not wholly to be conveyed
without some necessary Terms peculiar to each
Branch, we have taken Care to explain such as
could not be omitted without  manifest Injury
to the Work, by familiar Words of  synoni
mous Tendency where-ever they occur; so that
we apprehend we have not left the least Stum
bling-Block for the Reader to encounter.
 










THE
ARTISTS ASSISTANT, &.

CHAP .
OF DRAWING.
DRAWING is the Art of representing by
Outlines and Shadows the various Producti
ons of Nature and Art, and of enlarging and
contracting Objects in the most exact Proportion.
This Art recalls to our Memory Things long since
past, and rescues from Oblivion the Deeds of our
illustrious Ancestors, at the same Time that it revives
their Image in our Mind, by preserving their Fea
tures for many Generations. In  Word, it may be
said to be the silent, but most expressive Language of
Nature, which speaks to the Eye, is underitood by
all Nations, and conveys an Idea where even Words
themselves would prove deficient.
After giving some General Directions for the At
tainment of this truly polite and rational Amusement,
which is the Basis on which all the rest of the Arts
depend, we shall confider it more particularly under
the following Heads, and lay down the most copious
and intelligible Rules for each respectively, viz.
Copying of Draughts,
Drapery,
Emarging and Contrasting,
Landskip,
Imitation of Life,
Light and Shadown,
History.





The Implements necessary for Drawing are, 
Ruler, Compasses, Charcoal,  Black lead Pencil.
Penknife, Porte-Crayons, Black, White, and Red
Chalk, Crayons, Indian Ink, Crow-Quill Pens, Ca
mel' Hair Pencils, Fitches, Paper of several Sorts,
and Porte-Folios.
General Rules for Drawing.
THE first Thing to be observed is the Choice of
proper Originals; and here we would recom
mend Le Clerc’ Principles of Drawing as the easiest
and best calculated for the Instruction of Beginners.
This may be had, Price   at the Publishers of
this Work.
Having provided this, begin with the Outlines of
the several Features, as Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Ears,
&. as they occur in the Book. Practise these often
over, till you are quite Master of them; then procced
to  Profile or Side Face, after that to an Oval or Full
Face; always remembering that each of these must
be perfectly attained before you venture to proceed
further.
When you can copy  Face correctly, the next
Thing is, to draw the several Limbs or Parts of the
Body, as the Hands, Arms, Feet, Legs, &. then
go on to the Body itself; which having done, you
will be able to undertake  whole Figure, observing
carefully the exact Proportions and Bearings of one
Part with respect to the other.
The Learner ought to be particularly cautious that
he do not attempt  whole Figure before he has made
himself Master of the several Parts; for this is begin
ning the Work at the wrong End, and is indeed the
same Thing as if  Man should attempt to climb to
the Top of  House without the Help of the Stairs.










As for Beasts, Birds, Fruit, Plants, &. we deem
it useless to give Directions for drawing them, as it is
Wellknown, thar he who has fo far improved his Ideas
as to be able to draw  Human Figure correctly, will
find it no Difficulty to perform every other Branch of
this Art.
Skerch or draw all your Outlines faintly, with 
Piece of soft Charcoal (which may be known by the
Pith in the Middle) cut to  Point like  Pencil; and
when you see any Thing amiss, whisk it out with 
Fandkerchief or Feather, correct your Errors with 
Black-Lead Pencil, and compare your Work with the
Original, till every Part of them perfectly correspond.
This done, finish your Outlines with Black Lead or
Indian Ink. This advice, properly uttended to, will
save you an infinite deal of Trouble, in drawing over
and over again, to your no small Discouragement.
If you prefer Indian Ink, rub it with Water upon
 Marble (sold for that Purpose at the Star, Holborn
Hill) and with  Crow-Quill Pen perfect your Out
Iines; then rub out the Marks of the Pencil with
Brend.—Keep three or four different Shades of Ink
in the Hollows of your Stone, to distinguish your
Distances, reserving one of the Holes for Water.
When you are thoroughly versed in the Outlines,
your next Business will be to learn to shadow: But of
this hereafter, under the Article of Light and Shade.
Be not too hasty at first setting out, which will but
impede your Progress, and hinder your Improvement;
whereas, by bestowing  little more Time, you will
attain Perfection sooner than you can well imagine,
and Expedition will come of itself as you become
more experienced.





Of Copping of Draughts.
THEN you would copy  Print or Drawing

exactly of the same Size, rub the Back of it
with the Dust of Red Chalk or Black Lead; lay this
upon your Paper, and pin it down at the four Cor
ners; then with  blunt Point trace the Outlines and
Breadths of the Shadows; which done, having care
fully examined it, to see that nothing be omitted, take
it off, and finish it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another Way to make an exact Copy, and at the
same time to preserve the Original, is, to lay  Piece
of transparent Paper upon it, and draw the Outlines
thereon with  Black-lead Pencil; then between that
and the Paper you intend to draw upon, place  Piece
of thin Post-Paper, reddened or blackned at the Back;
after which, proceed to trace and finish it according
to the foregoing Rule.
If you would reverse your Original, you need only
turn the transparent Paper, with the Drawing you
have made upon it, downwards upon the Post-Paper,
and trace it as above directed.
Of Enlarging and Contracting.
Divide your Original with  Pair of Compasses into

any Number of Squares, and rule them across
with  Black-lead Pencil from Side to Side, and from
Top to Bottom.
Then, having your Paper of the Size you intend,
divide it into the fame Number of Squares, either big
ger or less, as you would enlarge or contract it.
Place jour Original before you, and draw Square
by Square the several Parts; observing to make the
Part you are drawing fall into the same Part of the
Square as it does in your Original. To prevent Mis




takes, number the Squares both of the Original and
Copy, as in Fig.  and II. of the Drawing-Plate.
Then outline it with Indian Ink, rub out the Marks
of the Pencil with Bread, and shade it at Pleasure.
Of Imitation of Life.
LET the Person you draw after be of  proporti
onable Size, and well shaped; place him in the
easiest and most natural Attitude, then sketch faintly
with your Charcoal the Head, or any of the Limbs
separately; which having carefully done, proceed to
finish with your Pencil.
When you have sufficiently practised the several
Parts or Limbs, you may draw the whole Figure, in
whatever Attitude you think proper to place it; be
ginning with the easiest and proceeding by degrees
to the more difficult Postures, as Time and Experi
ence shall enable you.
Be sure to finish your Outline so correctly, mark-
ing all the Muscles as they occur) that, even before
you give it any Shadow, it may have fome Resem
blance of the Person.
The true Proportion which one Part of  Human
Figure bears to another, may be seen in Fig III.
which will serve as  Standard to examine your Draw
ing by; except where the Figure is to be fore-short
ened, in which Cafe Nature will be the best
Guide.
In drawing of  Likeness, Care must be taken to
express the Passions in the most lively manner; which
is to be done by observing the peculiar Cast and Dis
position of every Feature with the exactest Nicety:
And as this is, of all the Parts of Drawing, by far
the most difficult, it will require  more than ordi
nary Attention, and should be last attempted.




 
Of Drapery
DRAPERY is the Art of Cloathing your Figures

with Elegance and Propriety.
When your naked Figure is outlined, first draw
the Outlines of the Drapery lightly, then the greater
Folds, and afterwards the lesser; observing never to
let them cross each ether.
Particular Regard is to be had to the Quality of the
Drapery; as the Folds of Stuff or Woollen Cloth are
more abrupt and harsh, and those of Silk more flow
ing and easy. Linen, Cambrick, Gauze, &. as
their Substance is lighter than either, require  still
greater Delicacy in expressing the waving of the Folds,
by the Faintness of their Shadows.
The Drapery should not stick too close to the Bo
dy, but must seem to flow round as it were; yet in
such  Manner, as that the Motion of the Figure
may be free and easy.  great Lightness and Motion
of the Drapery should only be used, when the Fi
gures are supposed to be in much Agitation, or ex
posed to the Wind; but in  calm Place, and free
from violent Action, their Drapery should be large
and flowing, in order to give them  more graceful
Appearance.
Let the loose Parts of the Drapery blown by the
Wind all flow one Way; and draw that Part which
lies closest to the Body, before you draw those which
fy off.
Suit your Garments to the Body, and make them
bend with it. The closer the Garment sticks to the
Body, the narrower and smaller must be the folds;
and if it fits quite close, there will be no Folds at all,
but must only have  faint Shadow, to represent the
Part of the Body which lies under it.













By observing diligently in what Manner the Dra
pery flows upon any Person standing or sitting before
you for that purpose, you will see in what Manner to
dispose your Folds and Shadows, according to the
unerring Rule or-Nature.
Of Landskip.
LANDSKIP represents the Face of the Country
—— as it appears to our View, with all the various
Objects analogous thereto; as Towns, Castles,
Churches, Houses, Trees, Hills, Cattle, Rivers,
Rocks, Ruins, &.
Be caretul to augment or lefssn every Object ac
cording to its Distance, making the most remote ob
jects fainter and less distinct as they appear to the
Eye, and enlarging them proportionably as they ad
vance nearer.
Shew the Sky cloudy or clear, as Occasion re
quires; and if you introduce the gun, let it be rising
or setting; either of which Representations will give
an additional Grace to your Picture, as they repre
sent Nature in its liveliest and most agreeable Ap
pearance.
Adapt every Part of your Landskip to the Season
of the Year, and the Time of the Day you intend it
to reprefent, and dilpose your Lights and Shades with
consistent Propriety.
Lastly, we would recommend it to Practitioners in
this noble Art, to rise early in  fine Morning that
they may have  better Idea of the Harmony and
Beauty of the Works of the Great Creator, which
would wonderfully replenish their Minds, as to Co
lour and Effect.





Of Light and Shade.
THE true Distribution of Light and Shade in 
Picture is absolutely necessary to be known;
as it not only determines the proper Distance of onc
Object from another, without which the whole
would be an undistinguishable Mass of Confusion,
but it gives likewise to each respective Object in
Substance, Roundness, and Effect.
Shadowing is performed with the Pen or Pencil;
in either of which great judgement is required.
Having made your Outlines correct, the first Thing
is to observe from which Side of the Original the
Light comes in; which, if natural, is either from
the Right Hand or Left; for whenever the Light ap
pears in the Middle of  Picture, and seems to glare
more than ordinary, it is caused by  Candle; 
Lamp, or some other luminous body, and is called
an artificial Light.
Lay on your little Tints first, disposing them as
you see they are done in the original; and then pro
ceed to the deeper ones, till you come to the darkest
Parts of all: For you may at any Time darken your
Shadows, when you cannot lighten them.
Let all your Shadows in the fame Piece fall on the
same Side; that is, if the Right Side of  Man' Face
be dark, so must be the Right-side of his Body, Arm,
Leg, Thigh, &. But if the light Side be darkened
by the Opposition of some other Body intercepting the
Light, it must receive  contrary Shadow.
Make your Shadows fainter as they grow. towards
the Light, breaking them gradually, that they may
not appear too sudden or harsh.
If you shade with Black-lead or with Crayons,
you may blend your Shadows, and often them one
Into another as you require, with  Stump made of
Paper










Paper or Glove-Leather rolled and tyed hard, and
cut almost to the Point, with which you may also
weaken your Shades where they are too strong.
When one Part of the Body projects over or before
another, the Part projecting must receive  stronger
Light: Those Parts that bend inward must be made
so much the darker, and shadowed deepest next the
Light.
Two equal Lights must never be made in the same
Picture: The strongest Light should fall upon the
Middle of the Piece, (where the principal Figures
ought to stand) diminishing gradually towards the
Extremities.
By frequently examining into Nature, you will
have an Opportunity of improving your Ideas of Light
and Shade, and will be enabled to form  proper
Judgment of the Effect which the different Rays or
Degrees of Light will produce in  Picture; for which
Reason you should never let flip an Opportunity of
remarking the various Appearances you meet with.
Of History.
THIS Branch of Drawing presents to our View
Things past, prefent, and future.
An Historical Picture must describe the Transaction
represented, in  Manner so clear and conspicuous,
as to convey an Idea of it to our Minds, as fully as
could be done by  verbal Description: And Care
must be taken to preserve such an Analogy or Con
nection between the Figures, that not one may seem
to be introduced but for fome End or Purpose. And
as, in Dramatic Writing, it is essential to make every
Person speak consistent with the Part he represents, so
here it will be equally necessary to observe the same
Propriety of Character, and make every Figure lock
the Sentiment it is intended to express.







CHAP. II.
OF PERSPECTIVE.
PERSPECTIVE is the Art of delineating Ob

jects (as they appear in Nature upon  plain

Surface) according to their Distance and Height
perpendicular to the Horizon, between the Object
and the Eye.
This Art is of great consequence to those who
would excel in Drawing, Etching, Engraving, Car
ving Bas-Relief, or Painting; for being well un
derstood, the Artist will be enabled to know when to
adhere to the strict Rules, and when to depart from
them with Propriety.
Explanation of the Terms used in Perspective.
 BASE or Fundamental Line, is the Bottom-Line
of the Drawing on which the perfon is supposed
stand, with his Face towards the Point of Sight.
 Perpendicular is  Line drawn upright with resp
ect to any Part of the Base.
 Parallel Lines are Lines equidistant from each
other as the Horizon to the Base.
 Horizon is the most distant Part of  Plain,
where the Clouds, seeming to touch the Earth, limit
the Sight. The Horizontal Line gives the Heigh tof
the Eye; for we cannot see any thing above the Ho
rizon which does not exceed this Height:
Yet the
Summit



Summit of  Mountain may be above the Horizon,
though its Foot be far beneath it



 Point of Sight is that Part of the horizontal Line
where all the visual Rays center in  Point.
 Visual Rays are Beams of Light conveying the
Likeness of any Object to the Eye or Sight, and the
Knowledge thereof to the Mind or Understanding.
 Points of Distance are suppoled Points set off on
the horizontal Line, at equal Distances on each Side
the Point of Sight.
 Diagonal Lines are those drawn from the Points
of Distance to the extremities of the Base Line.
 Abridgment of the Square is the line where the
Diagonals intersect or cross the visual Rays, and must
always run parallel to the Base. It is only made where
the Sight is limited by  Perpendicular, as the far
ther End of  Church, Hall, Room, &. And sup
posing  Person to stand thereon,  parallel Linedrawm
through the Point of Sight will feem to pass through
the Eyes, and will conxequently shew what Height
that Perion ought to be.
The nine foregoing Definitions are illustrated in
Fig. . of the Perspective Plate.
 Point of direct View. This is nothing more
than the Front View of  House, Church, &. or
in other Words,  Geometrical Elevation raised from
 Plan or Ground Plot, and comprehending an equal
Space on both Sides of the Point of Sight. See
Fig. XIV.
II. Point of oblique View, is when we see the Ob
ject sideways or aslant. Example: Suppose  Per
son was to draw  View of  Canal with fome re¬
markable Building he is desirous to shew more dif
tinct, he must place himfelf (on the Base or Funda
mental Line) opposite to that Building, that the Ray
of Light may be more oblique; by which means the
admired Building will be less fore-shortened, and ap




pear to greater Advantage, the Points of Sight being
still before him, though not in the Middle of the Pic
ture. See Fig. XV
 Accidental Points are those where Objects end in
the horizontal Line, but neither in the Points of Sight
or Distance; and serve for Streets, Houses, Chairs,
Roads, &. which take different Directions. As for
Example: Suppoxe  Street leading to the Point of
Sight, and from it two others branch, the one on the
Right Hand, the other on the Left, and take  dif
ferent Direction; these two last Streets make what
we call accidental Points, terminating in some Part of
the horizontal Line, on each Side of the Point of
Sight. See Fig. XVI. The same is to observed
in  Grove, Park, &. where the Walk you are in
directs immediately to the Point of Sight, and the
Avenues branching out on either Side terminate also
in different Parts of the Horizon.
Ichnography is the Plan or Ground-Plot of any Ob
ject that is to be raised in Perspective.
Scenography is the Art of bringing any Thing raised
in Perspective from an Ichnographick Plan to it’ due
Proportion, according to the Distance in which it is
placed; that all Objects may be diminished according
to their Distance in  Picture, in the same Degree as
they are diminished by Distance in anatural Prospect.
 Scenographic View may be either direct, as in
Fig. XIV or oblique, as in Fig. XV.
AS the Art of Perspective is constructed upon Geo

metrical Principles, it will be necessary, previous
to the Rules themselves, to learn the following intro
ductory Operations.
 From  Point in  given Line AB to raise  Perden
dicular. See Fig II.
Draw with the Ruler the given Line AB; then fet
one Foot of your Compasses in , and extending
















them to rather more than half the Length of the Line

AB, sweep the Arch cd; and with the same Extent
 of Compasses fet one Point in , and sweep the Arch
ef ; then, without altering the Compasses, set one
Foot in , and describe the Arch hi; next rule
through the Points cg, to interfect the Arch hi in ,
and draw the Line from  to , which is the Perpen
dicular required.
 Another Way. See Fig. III.
From the Point  take the equal Distances AB and
AC on each side of it, then stretch †he Compasses to
any Distance greater than AB or AC, and with one
Foot of them in  sweep the arch de; then, with
the same Extent of the Compasses, set one Point in ,
sweep the Arch fg; and these two Arches will inter
sect ach other in the Point , from which  Line
drawn to the Point  is the Perpendicular required.
 To draw one Line parallel (or equidistant) to another
given Line AB. See Fig IV.
Extend your Compasses. to the Distance of the Pa
rallel you require; then with one Foot in any Point
of the given Line, as in , describe the Arch de.
Again, without altering the Compasses, six one Foot
in any other Pont, as in , and sweep the Arch gh;
then rule the Line IK, touching the outward Parts of
the two Arches, and that will be the parallel to the
given Line.
 To bisect or divide  given Line AB into two equal
Parts. Se Fig. .
Take with your Compasses any Distance greater
than half the given Line; then, with one Foot of
them in , sweep the Arch cc; and with the same
Distance, setting one Foot in , sweep the Arch dd;
and these Arches will interfect cach other in the Points




gh ; which joined by  Perpendicular, will intersect
AB in the middle Point . 
 Upon the End  of  given Line AB to raise  Per
pendicular. See Fig. VI.
Place one Foot of the Compasses in , and extend
them to any Point  without the given Line; then
set one Foot of them in  and turn the Circle   and
, and through   draw the Diameter   , meeting
the Circle in , join  , and that right Line is the
Perpendicular required.
 To turn the Circle through any three given Points not
in  right Line. See Fig. VII.
Fix three Points at any Distance you think proper,
as at   and , and join them by the right Lines
AB and BC; then by Fig. , bisect the Line AB
with the Line de; which done, bisect the Line BC
with the Line fe; and from the Center , where
these Lines meet, extend your Compasses to , and
describe the Circle ABCG.
 To draw an Oval. See Fig. VIII.
Draw  given Line AB, which divide into four
equal Parts; fet one foot of the Compasses at , and
from that Center describe  Circle  ; with the same
Extent of Compasses place one Foot in the Center ,
and turn the Circle  ; then with one Foot still in
, extend your Compasses, and turn the Arch  ;
and with the same Extent, placing one Foot in ,
describe the Arch   ; join the Intersections with 
Perpendicular from  to  ; next, place one Foot of
the Compasses in , sweep the Arch LL, and without
altering them, set one Foot in , and describe the
Arch  .







 Another Method for an Oval. See Fig. IX.
Draw  given Line AD, and with the Compasses
extended, placing one Foot in , with the other turn
the Circle  , then, without altering your Compasses,
on the Line AD in the supposed Point  sweep the
Circle   and through the Points  , where the
two Circles interfect, draw the Perpendicular   ;
then fix your Compasses with one Foot in , and ex
tend thein so as to describe the Arch    to the lower
Extremities of the Circles; then, with the tare Ex
tent, with one Foot in , sweep the Arch  , to join
the upper Extremities.
By these Examples it will appear, than an Oval of
any Form or Size may be constructed at Pleasure, on
ly taking care always to six the Compasses equidis
tant from the given Line AD in the Perpendicular hi. 
Practical Examples in Perspective.
 To draw  square Pavement in Perspective. See
Fig. . and XI.
SUPPOSE your Piece of Pavement to consist of  of Marble, each  Foot Square.
Your
first Business is, to draw an Ichnographical Plan or
Ground Plot of it, which is thus performed. Having
made an exact Square of the Size you intend your
Plan, divide the Base and Horizon into eight equal
Parts, and from every Division in the Base to its oppo
site Point in the Horizon, rule Perpendicular Lines;
then divide the Sides into the same Number, ruling pa
rallel Lines across from Point to Point; So will your
Pavement be divided into  square Feet; because the
eight Feet in Length, multiplied by the same in Breadth
give the Number of square Feet or Pieces of Marble
contained in the whole: then rule Diagonals from




Corner to Corner; and thus will your Ground Plot
appear as in Fig. .
Now, to lay this in Perspeclive, draw another
Square to your intended Size, and divide the Base,
Line AB into eight equal Parts, as before; then six
your Point of Sight  in the Middle of the Horizon
DE, and from the same Point rule Lines to every Di
vision in the Base AB; after which, rule diagonal
Lines from  to , and from  to , answerable to
those in the Ground-Plot, and your Square will be
reduced to the Triangle ABC; then from the Point
, where the Diagonal   intersects the Line AC,
to the opposite Intersection , where the Diagonal
EA crosses the Line CB, rule  parallel Line, which
is the Abridgment of the Square.
Then through the Points where the Diagonals cross
the rest of the Lines which go from the Base to the
Point of Sight, rule parallel Lines, and your square
Pavement will be laid in Perspective, as in Fig. XI.
 To find the Height and Proportion of any Objects, as
they appear above the Horizon, on  supposed Plane.
See Fig. XII.
First, rule your horizontal Line NO, and fix your
Point of Sight, as at ; then mark the Place of your
nearest Pillar, by making  Dot for the Base or Bot
tom, as at ; and another for the Summit or Top,
as at : Rule  Line from  to the Point of Sight
, and another from  to , and these two Lines
will give the Height of any Number of Pillars. As
for Example: Suppose you would have  Pillar at ,
fix your Dot for the Base, and rule from thence  pa
rallel Line to meet the Diagonal AM at : then
rule the Perpendicular DE to the Diagonal BM:
which Perpendicular is the Height of your Figure re
quired at . Or, if you would place Pillars at  and
, observe the same Method, ruling the Parallels FG







and IK, the Perpendiculars GH and KL will
 give theur Heights at the Distances required.
To find the Diameter or Thickness of Pillars at

any particular Distances, you are also to be guided by

the nearest the Base. For instance: Suppose your
nearest Pillar AB to be ten Feet high and one Foot
in Diameter: divide it from ’op to Bottom into ten
equal Parts, and fet off one of them upon the Base of
the Pillar: then rule  Line from the Point of Sight 
to the Diameter  and you will have the Thickness
of all your Pillars on their respective Parallels or
Bases.
 The same Rule exemplified in Objects below the Ho
rizon, See Fig. XIII.
If you would know the Heights of  Number of
Figures below the Horizon, rule your horizontal Line
QR, and fix your Point of Sight, as at  : then
place your nearest Figure, or mark the Dots for the
Head and Feet, by the Points  and , which an
swers the same Purpose; and rule from these Dots to
the Point of Sight the Lines AP and BP; and if you
would find the Height of  Figure to be drawn at , 
rule from thence the Parallel   to the Diagonal BP
and the Perpendicular   will give the Height re
quired. The same Directions will shew the Height
of  Figure at any other Distance you have  Mind to
place it, as at , , and , by ruling the Parallels fg,
ik, and mn: and from each of these their respective
Perpendiculars gh, kl, and no; which Perpendicu
lars will shew the Heights of the Figures at , , 
and .
 To draw  diret View. See Fig. XIV.
To illustrate this Example, suppose you were to
draw the Inside of  Church, as represented in this
Figure: First take your Station at the Point , in




the Center of the Base Line BC; from which you
have  Front View of the whole Body of the Church,
with all the Pillars, &. on each Side: then fix your
Horizon at any Height you think proper as at DE:
bisect it by the Perpendicular EA: and where these
two Lines interfect, is the Point of Sight . (This
Perpendicular will pass through the Centers of all the
Arches in the Dome or Cupola: which Centers may
be found by any three given Points, as in Fig. VII.)
Next divide your Base Line into any given Number
of Feet; and the visual Lines ruled from thefe Di
visions to the Point of Sight, will reduce all your
Objects to their just Proportion, by setting off their
Height upon  Perpendicular raised at their respective
Distances. The Base, in the Example here given,
is divided into twelve equal Parts of five Feet each;
from which (supposing your Front Column to be
 Feet high) take seven Divisions from the Base

Line of your Drawing, and fet them off upon the
Perpendicular GH; then, (supposing this Column to
be five Feet thick at the Base, fet off onc of those
Divisions upon the Parallel IK, which is the Breadth
required. So that, by proportioning this Scale to any
Distance by the foregoing Directions, you may not
only find the Dimensions of all your Columns, but
also of every distinct Part of them, as well as of all
the Doors, Windows, and other Objects that occur.
For Instance: Having found the Height and Breadth
of your first or nearest Column , draw from the
Top and Bottom of the said Column to the Point of
Sight the Lines HF and KF; after which, rule the
Line IF from the Base of the Column to the Polnt
of Sight, and you have the Height and Breadth of all
the rest of the Columns, as has been already shewn
in Fig. XII.
By ruling Lines. from the Points , , , , &.
to the Point of Sight, you will see that all the Sum












mits and Bases of your Columns, Doors, Windows,
&. must tend immediately to that Point; and by
Lines drawn from the Points     &. on
each Side, to the correspondent Points on the oppo
site Side, may be seen all the Parts of your Building
lying upon the same Parallel.
 To draw an oblique View. See Fig XV.
First, draw your horizontal Line  ; then, if
your favourite Object be on the Right Hand, as at ,
place yourself on the Left Hand upon the Base Line,
as at ; then from that Station erect  Perpendicu
lar ., which will pass through the Horizon at the
Point of Sight ; to which rule the Diagonals  
and  , which will shew the Roof and Base of your
principal Building , and will also, as before di
rected, serve as  Standard for all the rest.
Observe also, either in direct or oblique Views,
whether the Prospect before you make  Curve; for
if it docs, you must be careful to make the same
Curve in your Drawing.
 To draw  Perspective View, wherein are accidental
Points. See Fig. XVI.
Rule your horizontal Line ab, and on one Part of
it fix your Point of Sight, as at  ; from which rule
the Diagonals   and   on the one Side, and   and
  on the other; which will shew the Roofs and Bases
of all the Houses in the Street direclly facing you;
supposing yourself placed at  in the Center of the
Base Line:) Then fix your accidental Points  and 
upon the horizontal Line, and rule from them to the
Angles   and Im, (where tlie Streets on each Side
take  different Direction, towards the accidental
Points  and ) and the Lines   and gk give the
Roofs and Bases of all the Buildings on one side, as
lh and mb do on the other





Accidental Points seldom intervene where the Dis
tance is fmall, as in Noblemens Seats, Groves, Ca
nals, &. which may be drawn by the strict Rules of
Perspective; but where the Prospect is extensive and
varied, including Mountains, Bridges, Castles, Ri
vers, Precipices, Woods, Cities, &. it will re
quire such an infinite Number of accidental Points,
that it will be better to do them as Nature shall dic
tate, and your ripened Judgment approve.
 To find the Center for the Roof of  House, in an ob
lique View. See Plate IV.
Suppose from the Point of Sight , the visual
Lines   and AC be drawn, BC being one Per
pendicular given, and DE the other, rule the Dia
gonals from  to , and from  to , and the Per
pendicular FG, raised through the Point of their
Intersection, will shew the true Center of the Roof,
as will appear by ruling the Lines   and  .
For want of being acquainted with this necessary
Rule, many who have been well versed in other Parts
of Perspective, have spoiled the Look of their Pic
ture, by drawing the Roofs of their Houses out of
their true Perpendicular.








CHAP. III.
Of ETCHING.
ETCHING is  Method of working on Copper
 wherein the Lines or Strokes, instead of being

cut with  Graver, are eaten with Aqua Fortis.
This Art, being executed with greater Ease and
Freedom than Engraving, represents curious Subjects
better, and more agreeable to Nature, as Landskips,
Ruins, and small, faint, or remote Objects, Build
ings, &.
The principal Materials for this Art are the Plate,
hard and soft Ground, (the first for Winter, and the
other for Summer)  Dabber, Turpentine-Varnish,
Lamp-Black, soft Wax, and Aqua Fortis.
The Tools are, an Oil-Rubber,  Burnisher, 
Scraper,  Hand Vice, Etching-Boards, Etching
Needles, an Oil-Stone, and  Parallel Ruler.
The Plate may be had of any Size, and well po
lished, fit for Use, of Mr. Whittow, in Shoe-Lane,
Holbourn; Mr. Torond, in Little St. Andrew’-Street, or
Mr. Watts, in Great St. Andrew' Street, Seven Dials.
Directions for laying the Ground.
HAVING provided yourself with  Plate of the
Size of the Print or Drawing you intend to
copy, rub it well with an Oil-Rubber made of Swan
skin-Flannel, till all the Marks of the Charcoal used
in polishing it, entirely disappear; then, wiping off
the dirty Oil with  Linen Rag, dip your Finger in





some clean Oil, and touch it over every Part of the
Plate; after which, with your Burnisher polish the
Plate, till you can see your face in it: And in case
any Sand-Holes or Flaws appear, the Scraper will as
sist you in taking them out. The Marks left by the
Scraper are to be taken out with the Burnisher, till
nothing appear. Having fixed your Hand-Vice at
one End of the Plate, with  Rag and Whiting clear
the Plate carefully from Grease; then heat it over 
Charcoal-Fire, or lighted Paper, till it will melt the
Ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and dabbed
all over with the Dabber, till it is perfectly smooth
and even; then warm the Plate again, and holding
it up with the Ground downwards, smoak it all over
with  large Candle, taking Care that the Snuff of it
do not touch the Ground, and waving the Candle
continually ever every Part, so that the Ground may
not be burnt by heating it more in one Place than
another. If the Plate be large, you may bind four.
Penny-Candles together.
Directions for Tracing.
THE first Thing to be done, (while the Plate is
cooling, after the Ground is laid) is to rub the
Back of your Print or Drawing all over with  Bit of
Rag or Cotton, dipt in the Scrapings of Red Chalk,
and shake off the loose Dust, or wipe it off gently
with  clean Rag. Place the Red Side upon the Plate
making it fast at each Corner with  little Bit of soft
Wax. Lay your Etching-Board under your Hand,
to prevent bruising the Ground; then with  blunt
Etching-Needle trace lightly the Outlines and Breadths
of the Shadows, till the Marks of them appear upon
the Ground, which you must take Care not to pene
trate by tracing too hard.













As great Nicety is required in this Part of your
Work, it will be necessary now and then to lift up
one Corner of your Original, and examine whether
every Part be traced before you take it off, as it will
be extremely diffcult to lay it down agai in its for
mer Position.
Directions for Etching.
HAVING carefully traced your Original, take
it off and lay  Silk or Linen Handkerchief
next the Plate, and over that your Etching-Board;
then procced to the Etching; for which observe the
following Directions, which are adapted to every par
ticular Branch, as Landskips, Shipping, Portraits,
History, Architecture, &.
Distances in Landskips, or the faint Parts of any
other Picture, are the first to be done; and these are
to be worked closer and with  sharper-pointed
Needle: The darker Parts must be etched wider, and
with  blunter Needle; but, to prevent Mistakes, the
Needles may be marked, according to their different
Degrees, and the Uses for which they are intended.
As for the very faintest Parts of all, they are to be
left for the Graver, or dry Needle; of which here
after.
In Building, and all Architecture in general, use 
Parallel Ruler, till frequent Practice enables you to
do them well enough without.
The Needles may, when necessary, be whetted
upon your Oil-Stone, keeping them turning in your
Hand, so as to whet them equally all round. The
Oil-Stone will be farther ufeful in whetting the Scra
per, whlich is to be rubbed flat upon the Stone, and
with  steady Hand, keeping Oil conitantly upon the
Stone.







Of Biting, or eating in thie Work with Aqua Fortis.
FIRST examine your Work carefully, to see that
nothing be omitted; and if any Scratches appear
upon the Ground, or Mistakes be committed in the
Etching, they are to be slopped out, which is done by
covering them with  Mixture of Lamp-Black and
Varnish, laid on thinly with  Hair Pencil, which,
when dry, will resist the Aqua Fortis. But it will
be best to stop out these, as they occur to you in the
Course of your Work, for by this Means they will be
less liable to escape your Notice; and when the Var
nish is dry, you may etch over it again, if required.
The next Thing is, to enclose the Work with 
Rim or Border of soft green, or other coloured Wax,
about Half an Inch high, bending the Wax in the
Form of  Spout at one Corner, to pour off the Aqua
Fortis: And that it may not run out at any other
Part, take Care to lay your Wax so close to the Plate,
that no Vacancies be left.
Your Aqua Fortis must be single, and if too strong,
as will be seen in the Biting, take it off, and mix it
with  little Water, shaking them together in  Bot
tle; and when, by often using, it becomes too weak,
it may be strengthened by mixing it in  Bottle with

 little double Aqua Fortis. The Bottle which con
tains the Aqua Fortis should have  large Mouth, and
 Glass Stopple.
Let the Aqua Fortis lie on the Plate  short Time,
wiping off the Bubbles, as they arise, with  Feather,
which may remain upon the Plate while it is biting;
after which, take it off, and wash the Plate with Wa
ter; then let it dry, and by scraping off Part of the
Ground from the faintest Part of the Work, try if it
be bit enough; and if not, stop out the Part you
have






have tried with the Lamp-Black and Varnish; and
when that is dry, pour on the Aqua Fortis again.
When the faint Parts of your Work are bit enough,
stop them out, and procecd to bite the stronger Parts,
stopping them out as Occasion requires, till the whole
Work is sufficiently bit: Then warm the Plate, and
take off the soft Wax; after which, heat the Plate
till the Ground melts, pour on  little Oil, and wipe
the whole off with  Rag. When the Ground is
taken off, rub the Work well with the Oil-Rubber,
and wipe the Plate clean; then proceed to finish it
with the Graver, according to the following Di
rections.






CHAP. IV.
OF ENGRAVING.
THE Tools necessary for Engraving are, the
 Oil-Rubber, Burnisher, Scraper, Oil-Stone,

Neddles, and Ruler, already mentioned to be
used in Etching; also Gravers, Compasses, and 
Sand-Bag.
Gravers are of two Sorts, square and lozenge;
Three of each Sort should be provided. The first is
used in cutting the broader Strokes, the other for the
fainter and more delicate. No Graver should exceed
the Length of Five Inches and  Half, the Handle in
cluded, excepting for strait Lines.
The Sand-Bag, or Cushion, is used to lay the Plate
on, for the Conveniency of turning it about. The
Oil-Stone, must be of the Turkey Sort.
Of whetting and tempering the Graver.
AS great Pains are required to whet the Graver
nicely, particularly the Belly of it, Care must
be taken to lay the two Angles of the Graver, which
are to be held next the Plate, flat upon the Stone,
and rub them steadily till they are polished like  Mir
ror, and till the Belly rises gradually above tbe Plate,
so as that, when you lay the Graver flat upon it, you
may just perceive the Light under the Point; other
wise it will dig into the Copper, and it will be impos



 
sible to keep  Point, or execute the Work with
Freedom. In order to this, keep your Right Arm close
to your Side, and place the Fore-Finger of your Left

Hand upon that Part of the Graver which lies upper
most on the Stone. When this is done, in order to
whet the Face, place the flat part of the Handle in
the Hollow of your Hand, with the Belly of the
Graver upwards, upon  moderate Slope, and rub the
Extremity or Face upon the Stone, till it has an ex
ceeding sharp Point, which you may try upon your
Thumb-Nail. The Oil-stone, while in Use, must
never be kept without Oil.
When the Graver is too hard, as is usually the
Case when first bought, and may be known by the
frequent breaking of the Point, the Method of tem
pering the Steel is as follows
Heat  Poker red hot, and hold the Graver upon it
within Half an Inch of the Point, waving it to and
fro till the Steel changes to  light Straw-Colour;
then put the Point into Oil to cool: Or, hold the
Graver close to the Flame of  Candle, till it be of
the same Colour, and cool it in the Tallow: But be
careful either Way not to hold it too long, for then
it will be too soft ; and in this case the Point, which
will then turn blue, must be broken off, and whetted
afresh and tempered again, if required. But be not
too hasty in tempering; for sometimes  littlc whet
ting will bring it to  good Condition.
Of holding the Graver.
CUT off that Part of the Handle which is upon
the same Line with the Belly, or sharp Edge of
the Graver, making that Side flat, that it may be no
Obstruction.
Hold the Handle in the Hollow of your Hand;
and extending your Fore-Finger towards the Point,




it rest upon the back of the Graver, that you may
guide it flat, and parallel with the Plate.
Take Care that your Fingers do not interpose be
tween the Plate and the Graver; for they will pre
vent you from carrying the Graver level with the Plate,
and from cutting your Str

Directions for Engraving.
 Tthe Table or Board you work at be firm and
steady; upon which place your Sand-Bag with
the Plate upon it; and holding the Graver as above
directed, proceed to Business in the following Man
ner
For strait Strokes, hold your Plate firm upon the
Sand-Bag with your Left Hand, moving your Right
Hand forwards; leaning lighter where the Stroke
should be fine, and harder where you would have it
broader.
For circular or crooked Strokes, hold the Graver
stedfast moving your Hand or the Plate, as you see
convenient.
Learn to carry your Hand with such  Slight, that
you may end your Stroke as finely as you began it;
and if you have Occasion to make one Part deeper or
blacker than another, do it by Degrees: And that
you may do it with greater exactness take Care that
your Strokes be not too close, nor too wide.
In the Course of your Work, scrape off the Barb
or Roughness which arises, with the Belly of your
Graver; but be careful, in doing this, not to scratch
the Plate: And that you may see your Work pro
perly as you goon, rub it with the Oil-Rubber, and
wipe the Plate clean, which will take of the Glare of
the Copper, and shew what you have done to the best
Advantage.




 
Any Mislakes or Scratches in the Plate may be rub
ed out with the Burnisher, and the Part levelled with
the Scraper, polishing it again afterwards lightly with
the Burnisher.
Having thus attained the Use of the Graver, ac
cording to the foregoing Rules, you will be able to
finish the Piece you had etched, by graving up the
several Parts to the Colour of the Original; begin
ning, as in the Etching, with the fainter Parts, and
advancing gradually with the stronger, till the whole
is compleated.
The dry Needle (so called because not used till the
Ground is taken off the Plate) is principally employed
in the extreme light Parts of Water, Sky, Drapery,
Architecture, &.
For your first Practice, copy such Prints as are
openly shaded; the more finished ones being too dif
ficult, till you have gained farther Experience.
Great Choice of Prints of every Kind, fit for young
Beginners, may be had where this Book is published.
. . To prevent any Obstruction from too great
 Degree of Light, we would recommend the Use of
 Sash, made of transparent or Fan-Paper, pasted on 
Frame, and placed sloping at  convenient Distance
between your Work and the Light. This will not
only preserve the Sight, but, when the Sun shines,
cannot possibly be dispensed with.







 









CHAP. 

OF MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING.

THIS Art, which is of late Date, is recom
mended to the Practice of the ingenious Read
er, for the amazing Ease with which it is exe
cuted, especially by those who have any Notion of
Drawing,


Mezzotinto Prints are those which have no Hatch

ing or Strokes of the Graver, but whose Lights and
Shades are blended together, and appear likea Draw
ing of Indian Ink.
The Tools used in this Art are,
The Copper-Plate, Oil-Stone, Grounding-Tools,
Scrapers, Burnisher, and Needles.






Directions for laying the Mezzotinto-Ground.



MARK off upon the Bottom of the Plate the
Distance you intend to leave for the Writing,
Coat of Arms. &. then, laying your Plate with 
Piace of Swanskin-Flannel under it, upon your Table,
hold the Grounding-Tool in your Hand perpendicu
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually rock
ing your Hand in  right Line from End to End, till
you have wholly covered the Plate in one Direction:
Next cross the Strokes from Side to Side, afterwards
from Corner to Corner, working the Tool cach Time




all over the Plate, in every Direction, almost like the
Points of  Compass; taking all possible Care not to
let the Tool cut (in one Direction) twice in  Place.
This donc, the Plate will be full, or, in other Words,
all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear completely black.
Having laid the Ground, take the Scrapings of
Black Chalk, and with  Piece of Rag rub it over the
Plate; or you may, with two or three Candles,
smoak it, as before directed for Etching.
Now, take your Print or Drawing, and having
rubbed the Back with Red-Chalk Dust, mixed with
White Lake, proceed to trace it, as directed Page  for whetling the Grounding-Tool.
IF  Tooth of the Tool should break, it may be per
ceived in the Working by  particular Streak
or Gap, which will appear in the Ground in  strait
Line; in which Case the Tool must be whetted on
the Back, holding it sloping, and in  circular Man
ner, like the Bottom of the Tool.
Directions for scraping ihe Picture.
TAKE  blunt Needle, and mark the Outlines
only, then with  Scraper scrape off the Lights
in every Part of the Plate, as clean and smooth as pos
sible, in proportion to the Strength of the Lights in
your Picture, taking Care not to hurt your Outlines:
And that you may the better see what you do, with
the Thumb and Fore-Finger of the Left Hand hold
 Piece of transparent Paper, sloping, just over your
Right Hand, and you will soon be  Judge of the dif
ferent Tints ofthe Work you are doing; scraping off





more or less of the Ground, as the different Strengths
of Light and Tints require.
The Use of the Burnisher is, to soften or rub down
the extreme light Parts after the Scraper is done with,
such as the Tip of the Nose, Forehead, Linen, &.
which might otherwise, when proved, appear rather
misty than clear.
Another Method used by Mezzotinto-Scrapers, is
to etch the Outlines of the Original, as also ofthe
Folds in Drapery, marking the Breadth of the Shadows
by Dots which having bit of  proper Colour with
Aqua Fortis, according to the Directions given Page
 and  take off the Ground used in etching,
and having laid the Mezzotinto-Ground as in Page
 proceed to scrape the Picture as above.
Four or five Days before you think the Plate will
be ready for proving, notice must be given to the
Rolling-Press Printer, (the properest Person to Print
Mezzotintos, is Mr. Smith, King’-Head-Court, Shoe¬
Lane),to wet some French Paper, as no other will do
for this Work, and as that Time is necessary for it to
lie in Wet. When the Proof is dry, touch it with
White Chalk where it should be lighter, and with
Black Chalk where it should be darker; and when
the Print is retouched, proceed as before for the Lights,
and for the Shades use  small Grounding-Tool, as
much as you Judge necessary to bring it to the pro
per Colour; and when you have done as much as you
think expedient, prove it again, and so procced to
prove and touch, till it is entirely to your Mind.
When the Plate tarnishes in the Part where you are at
Work,  little Vinegar and Salt kept by you in 
Vial will take it off, wiping it dry with  clean Rag.
Avoid as much as possible over-scraping any Part
before the first Proving, as by this Caution the Work
will appear the more elegant.





CHAP VI.
Of PAINTING upon GLASS.
PAINTING upon Grass is an Art which has
generally appeared difficult; yet there is no Re
presentation can be more elegant than that of 
Picture done well in this Manner; for it gives all the
Softness that can be desired in  Picture, and is eafy
to work; as there are no Outlines to draw, nor any
Shade to make, but the Colours are put on without
the Trouble of either.
The Pictures are those done in Mezzotinto; for
their Shades being rubbed down on the Glass, the
several Lines which represent the shady Part of any
common Print, are by this Means blended together,
and appear as soft and united as in any Drawing of
Indian Ink.
Provide such Mezzotintos as you like; cut off the
Margin; then get  Piece of fine Crown-Glass, the
Size of your Print, (as flat and free from Knots or
Scratches as possible,) clean the Glass, and lay some
Venice Turpentine, quite thin and fmooth, on one
Side thereof, with  Brush of Hog’ Hair. Lay the
Print flat in Water, and let it remain on the Surface
till it finks; 'tis then enough. Take it carefully out,
and dab it between some Papers, that no Water may
be seen, yet so as to be damp.
Next, lay the damp Print, with its Face upper
most, upon  flat Table; then, holding the Glass
over it, without touching the Turpentine till it is




exactly even with the Print, let it fall gently on it.
Press the Glass down carefully with your Fingers in
several Parts, so that the Turpentine may stick to the
Print; after which, take it up; then, holding the
Glass towards you, press the Print with your Fingers,
from the Center towards the Edges, till there be no
Blisters remaining.
When this is done, wet the Back of your Print
with  Spunge, till the Paper will rub off wich your
Fingers; then rub it gently, and the white Paper will
roll off, leaving the Impression only upon che Glass:
Then let it dry, and with  Camel’ Hair Pencil, dipt
in Oil of Turpentine, wet it all over, and it will be
perfectly transparent, and fit for painting.
Colours proper for Panting upon GLASS.
THE several Sorts of Colours ground in Oil for
this Purpose, and tied up in little Bladders, may
be had of Mr. Dicker, opposite Newport-Market, and
Mr. Drake, or Mr. Sandys, in Long-Acre, whose Busi
ness it is (distinct from that of other Colourmen) to
prepare the finer Colours for Limners.



Whites. Flakes White. Spodium
Blacks. Lamp Black. Ivory-Black.
Reds. Rose Pink. Vermillion. Red-Lead. Indian Red. Lake Cinnabar.
Browns. Spanish Brown. Umber
Yellows. English Pink. Masticot. English Oker


















 
Saunders Blue. Smalt
Spruce Oker. Dutch. Pink. Orpiment



Greens. Verdigrease. Terra Vert. Verditer.

Blues. Blue Bice. Prussian Blue.



The Ultramarine (for Blue), and the Carmine (for
Red), are rather to be bought in Powders, as in that
Case they are less apt to dry, or be lost: And as the
least Touch of these will give the Picture  Caft, mix
up what you want for present Use with  Drop or two
of Nut-Oil upon your Pallet, with your Pallet- Knife.
The Pallets may be had at the Colour Shops above
mentioned: The Pallet-Knies arc fold at Mr. Bur
chell’, Cutler, in Long-Acre.
To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick 
Hole at the Bottom of each, and press it till you have
enough upon your Pallet for present use; because the
Colours are apt to dry and skin over.
Then lay  Sheet of white Paper on the Table,
and taking the Picture in your Left Hand, with the
Turpentine Side next you, hold it sloping (the Bottom
resting on the White Paper), and all the Outlines and
Tints of the Print will be seen on the Glass; and no
thing remains but to lay on the Colours proper for the
different Parts, as follows.
The METHOD of using ihe COLOURS.
AS the Lights and Shades of your Picture open, lay
the lighter Colours first on the lighter Parts of
your Print, and the darker over the shaded Parts; and
having once laid on the brighter Colours, it is not
material if the darker Sorts are laid  little over them;





for the first Colour will hide those laid on afterwards,
As for Example.
Reds.
Lay on first the Red Lead, and shade with Lake or
Carmine.
Yellows.
The lightest Yellow laid on first, may be shaded
with Dutch Pink.
Blues.
Blue-Bice or Ultramarine, used for the Lights,
may be shaded with Indigo.
Greens.
Lay on Verdigrease first, and then  Mixture of
that and Dutch Pink. This Green may be lightened
by an Addition of Dutch Pink.
When any of these Colours are too strong, they
may be lightened to any Degree, by mixing White
with them upon your Pallet; or you may darken
them as much as you please, by mixing them with 
deeper Shade of the same Colour.
The Colours must not be laid on too thick; but if
troublesome, thin them before you use them, with 
little Turpentine-Oil.
Take Care to have  Pencil for each Colour; and
never use that which you have used for Green with
any other Colour, without first washing it well with
Turpentine-Oil, as that Colour is apt to appear pre
dominant when the Colours are dry.
Wash all the Pencils after using in Turpentine
Oil.
Your Glass, when painted, must stand three or
four Days free from Dust, before it be framed.
All Sorts of Mezzotinto. and other Prints proper
for painting on Glass, may be had at the Place where
this Book is published.



 








CHAP. VII.
Of PAINTING in CRAYONS.
CRAYONS are to be had in Boxes, every Co
lour partitioned off separately, to prevent mix

ing.
The best are those of Switzerland fold by Mr.
Drake, or Mr. Sandys, in Long-Acre.
The different Colours are White, Black, Yellow,
Orange, Red, Purple, Blue, Green, and Brown;
and each of these have their several Shades, except
ing the two first.
Directions for using them.
THE Paper to be used on this Occasion is rough
Venice Paper, of  whited-brown Colour, and
the stiffer the better. That Sort called Cape-Paper is
found to be the best, because upon that the Colours
best distribute themselves. By this Method, Figures
may be drawn in their proper Colcurs as they appear
to the Eye, because the Colours may be matched
with the Crayons, and the Crayons being dry, will
not alter their colour; but the Colours, when wet,
appear deeper than when they are dry, which is apt
to deceive  young Beginner.
Another Way to make the necessary Preparations,
is to take some of the thickest and smoothest light Blue
or other Paper, and get  Straining Frame from 
Frame-Maker’ or Carpenter', on which strain fome





coarse Scotch or Irish Cloth, drawing and fastening it
wich small Tacks round the Edges, till it be quite
smooth ; after which, with  Spunge and fair Wa
ter gently wet the Blue Paper, and then with  Brush
or Rag, paste the Paper all over, and lay it carefully
on the Cloth, exactly even with the Straining
Frame; after which take it up, and laying White
Paper on the Table, place the Blue Paper down
wards, with one Hand keep the Straining-Frame
steady, and with the other rub the Cloth close to tho
Paper: Do this very carefully, and taking it up, lay
it on the Table with the Blue Paper upwards, and 
Piece of Paper under your Hand, and rub it close to
the Straming-Frame, without touching any other
Part, then let it stand to dry; after which fet it on
an Easal (which may be had at the Colour Shops)
and proceed as follows.
Make the first Sketch or rough Draught with Char
coal; then with Black, White, or Red Chalk, cor
rect what you see amiss. The Outline being thus
compleated, rub in your Crayons according to their
proper Colours, and then with your Finger or Fitch
soften and blend them together.











 

CHAP VIII.
Of PAINTING in WATER COLOURS.
THE Materials necessary for this Art are Gum,
Colours, Hair-Pencils, Fitches,  Pallet, and

Pen-Knife,

The Colours in general, are White, Black, Brown,
Red, Yellow, Blue, and Green.

The several Species of each are as follow:


Yellows. English Oker. Gall-Stone. Gamboge. Masticot, dark and light. Oker de Luce. Orpiment. Pink-Yellow, dark and light. Roman Oker. Saffron.
Whites. Flake White. Spanish White. White Lead.
Blacks. Burnt Cherry-Stones. Ivory-Black. Lamp-Black. 
Browns. Spanish Brown. Spanish Liquorice. Umber. 
Blues. Blue Bice. Blue Verditer. Indico. Smalt. Ultramarine.
Reds. Burnt Oker. Carmine. Cinnabar-Lake. Indian Lake. Red Ink. Red Lead. Vermillion. 
Greens. Green Blice. Green Pink. Sap-Green. Verdigrease. Verditer. 













































 


























Most of these Colours may be had ready prepared in
Shells, as also the Hair-Pencils, at the Colour-Shops
in Powders. If you use the latter,  Grind-Stone and
Muller must be provided, which are to be of Pebble,
and may be had at any Stone-Cutter'.
Directions for making the following mixed Colours.
Ash Colour. WHITE and Lamp-Black; or Indico and Black; or Cherry-Stone and White, shaded with Ivory-Black.




Bay Colour. Vermillion, with  little Spanish Brown and Black. 


Bright Red. Indian Lake and native Cinnabar.

Carnation. Lake and White shaded with Lake.

Changeable Silk. Red Lead and Water of Masticot,

shaded with Sap-Green.
Cloud Colour. White, light Masticot; or Lake and

White shaded with Blue Verditer;
or Blue Verditer alone.
Crimson. Cinnabar-Lake and White, shaded with Lake.


Flame Colour. Vermillion and Orpiment; or Red Lead and Masticot, heightened


with White.
Flesh Colour. White, with  little Lake, and Red

Lead; add Yellow Oker for 
swarthy Complexion.
French Green. Light Pink and Dutch Bice, shaded

wich Green Pink.
Glass Grey. Ceruse, with  little Blue of any
kind.
Hair Colour.
Masticot, Umber, Yellow Oker,
Ceruse, Oker-de-Luce, and Cher
ry-Stone Black.





















Lead Colour. Indico and White.
Light Blue. Blue Bice heightened with Ceruse
or Spodium.
Light Green. Pink and Smalt, with White, if
Need require.
Lyon Tawney. Red Lead and Masticot, shaded with
Umber.
Murry. Cinnabar Lake and White Lead.
Orange. Red Lead and  little Fine Masticot,
shaded with Gall-Stone and Lake.
Orange Tawney. Cinnabar, light Pink and  little
Masticot, shaded with Gall-Stone,
and Lake.
Pearl Colour. Carmine, with  little White, shaded
with Lake.
Popinjay Green. Green and Masticot; or Pink and 
little Indico shaded with Indico.
Purple. Indico, Spanish Brown and White;
or Blue Bice with Red and White
Lead; or Blue Bice and Lake.
Russet. Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Scarlet. Red Lead and Lake, with or without
Vermillion; or Carmine and Indian
Lake; or Native Cinnabar and
Red Lead, shaded with Indian
Lake.
Bice, Pink and White, shaded with
Green Pink.
Light Masticot and White, for the
lowest and lightest Parts; Red
Ink and White for the next; Blue
Bice and White for  third De
gree: and Blue Bice alone for the
highest Part of all. These are to
be all softened into one another at
the Edges, so as not to appear
harsh.





Sky-Colour for Drawpery. Blue Bice and Venice Ceruse; or

Ultramarine and White shaded
wich Indico.

Straw-Colour. Yellow Masticot, and  very littie

Cinnabar, shaded with dark Pink.
Violet-Celzur
Violet-Colour. Indico, White and Cinnabar Lake;
or fine Dutch Bice and Lake, shaded
with Indico; or Litmose, Smalt,
and Blue Bice; the latter most
predominant.

Water. Blue and White, shaded with Blue,
and heightened with White.
Directions for using the Colours. 


YOUR Pencils must be fast in their Quills, and
sharp-pointed after you have drawn them through
your Mouth.
Before you begin, have all your Colours ready be
fore you, and  Pallet for the Conveniency of mixing,
them;  Paper to lay under your Hand, and to keep
your Work clean, as well as to try your Colours
upon; also  large Brush called  Fitch, to wipe off
the Dust when your Colours are dry.
Lay your Colours on but thinly at first, deepening
and mellowing them by degrees as you see Occasion.
The quicker you lay them on, the evener and cleaner
your Drawing will appear.
Take Care to preserve all your Colours from Dust;
and before you use them, wipe your Shells and Pallet

every Time with  Fitch.
When you have done your Work, or would lay it
aside, be careful to wash out your Pencils in warm
Water.
For Face-Painting, mix, up  little light Carnation
or Flesh-Colour with Gum-Water in  Shell by it
felf. If it be for  fair Complexion, mix Vermillion




and White Flake together; and for  swarthy one, add
to the former  little Masticot or English Oker, or both.
Let your Flesh-Colour be always lighter than the
Complexion you would paint; for by working on it,
you may bring it to its true Colour.
In  large Shell, or upon your Pallet, lay your dif
ferent Shades of Flesh Colour, at  convenient Dis
tance from cach other; and always have ready  suf
ficient Quantity of White to lighten your Shadows.
For the Checks and Lips use  Mixture of Lake
and Red Lead, or Carmine, as Occasion requires;
and for blue Tints, (as under the Eyes, and in Veins,)
Indico or Ultramarine and White.
For grey faint Shadows, use White, English Oker,
sometimes Masticot; For deep Shadows, White,
English Oker, Umber; for darker Shadows, Lake
and Pink, which make  good fleshy Shadow.
In colouring Landskips, at first only lay dead Co
lours smooth all over the Piece, leaving no Part un
covered ; and be not over curious in this Part of the
Performance, but rather use  masterly Freedom;
and the Work, though seemingly rough to the Eye,
will have  good Effect when placed at  Distance.
Let not the Roughness of the Colour discourage
you; for it is eafily to be softened by Degrees with
the other Shadows, observing only to sweeten and
heighten them according as the Light falls.
In fome Places lay on strong Touches, and in those
Places bring your Work up together to, an equal
Roundness and Strength; tempering and sweetening
your Colours with  sharper Pencil than the first, that
no Lumps or harsh edges be lest, but that all your
Shadows may lie disperied, soft and smooth, gliding
gently, as it were, into one another.
You are not to finish any Part before the other,
but work up all the Parts gradually alike, till you fee
nothing wanting to compleat your Picture.





Having laid your dead Colours, begin first with the
lightest Parts, as the Sky, Sun-beams, &. then the
yellowish beams (which are to be done with Masticot
and White;) next the Blueness of the Sky, with Ul
tramarine or Smalt alone.) For Purple Clouds only mix
Lake and Whiter, making your Colours deeper as they
go upwards from the Horizon, except in tempestuous

Skis. The Tops of distant Mountains must be worked
so faint, that they may seem to lose themselves in Air.
Bring your Colours forward as your Distance de
creases; painting your first Ground next the Hori
zon downwards of  bluish Sea-Green, and as you
advance forwards, of  reddish or darker Green, till
you come to the Fore-Ground itself, which, as it is
to be the darkest Part of all, do with dark Green,
shaded with  dark Brown or Yellow; which Rule of
Shadow will also serve for the Trees on each respec
tive Ground.
All distant Objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the Eye, as has been already observed under
the Article of Light and Shade.
In colouring Trees, Boughs, and Branches, touch
in all the dark Shades first, raising the lighter Leaves
above the darker by adding Masticot to the dark Green,
which may be made with Bice, Pink, and Indico,
for the uppermost of all, which are to be done last;
touch lightly the Extremities of the Leaves with 
little Green, Masticot, and White, and fet off the
darkest Shadows with Sap-Green and Indico.
These Rules are adapted to general Appearances;
but the Learner may deviate from them as Nature shall
dictate.
With regard to Drapery, Fruit, Flowers, and
other Branches of Painting, the best Observations are
to be taken from the Objects themselves, or the most
curious and exact Representations of them.




RECEIPTS for those who paint in Water-Colour.
To make Gum-Water.
DISSOLVE one Ounce of pure white Gum
Arabic, and Half an Ounce of double-refined
Sugar, in  Quart of Spring Water; strain it through
 fine Sieve or  Piece of Muslin, and bottle it off for
Use, keeping it free from Dust.
Another Way.
Take some Gum-Arabic of the whitest Sort, bruise
it, and tie it up in  Piece of woollen Cloth, and
steep it in Spring-Water in  Glass or Earthen Ves
sel, till it be dissolved: If it be too stiff, add more
Water; and if too thin, more Gum.
With this Water you may temper most of your Co
lours; using such  Quantity, that being touched
when dry, the Colour will not come off. If the Co
lour shines there is too much Gum in it.
To keep tbe Flies from your Work.
When you have made your Gum-Water according
to either of the foregoing Discretions, add thereto 
little Coloquintida, which will preserve your Work,
when exposed, from being spoiled by the Flics.
To make liquid Gold for Vellum-Painting, Fans, &.
Grind the finest Leaf-Gold with strong Gum-Wa
ter very fine, adding as you grind it more Gum-Wa
ter as you see necessary. When you have ground it
as fine as you can, wash it in  large Shell; then
temper it with  little Mercury-sublimate, bind it in
the Shell with  little dissolved Gum, shake and spread
it equally all over the Shell, and use it with fair
Water only.





To make Liquid Silver for the same Purpose.
The Process for this is the fame with that of Liquid
Gold, only observing in the using it to temper it with
Glair of Eggs instead of Water.
To make the Glare of Eggs.
Take the Whites, and beat them with  Spoon till
they rise all in  Foam; let them stand all Night, and
they will be clarifed into good Glare.
To recover Liquid Silver that has contracted Rust.
If your Silver, by Length of Time or damp Wea
ther, become rusty, cover that Part of your Work
with Juice of Garlick, which will effectually recover
it.
To keep the Colours from sinking.
Boil four Ounces of Roch-Allum in  Pint of
Spring-Water, till it is thoroughly dissolved; then
filter it through brown Paper, and keep it for Use.
Before you lay on your Colours, take  Spunge,
and wet the Back of your Paper with this Water while
it is hot. This will not only prevent the Colours
from sinking, but will likewise give them an addi
tional Beauty and Lustre, and preserve them from
fading. If your Paper is not good, it must be washed
three or four Times with this Water, drying it every
Time.
If your Prints are to be varnished, wash them all
over with White Starch before you begin to lay on
your Colours.
To make Size for painting Scenes, and other Candle-Light
Pieces.
Steep  Quarter of  Pound of the Cuttings of
white Glove-Leather in Water for fome Time; then
take them out, and boil them in three Quarts of Wa




ter till it wastes to  Pint, and strain it through 
Cloth into an earthen Pan. When the Size is cold
if it fed firm under your Hand, it is strong enough.
You may prepare any Colours in this Size while it
is warm, and it will take off the Glare which would
appear upon them by Candle-Light, if mixed with
Gum-Water.
To recover Colours when decayed.
Take Rosemary-Water double-distilled, or pure
Spirit of Rosemary, and with  few Drops of it tem
per your Colours, which, however dead and faded,
will recover their Bloom and Brilliance.
This Water or Spirit will prevent the Bubbles in
White and Umber, which are troublesome in grinding.
PINK.
THE Single Pink does not admit of so great  Variety
as the Carnation, but is nevertheless so variegated
as ta make it an agreeable Flower for Sattins, Silks,
&. The most common are either White or Crim
son, others are striped White and Red, others are
White spotted with Red, others edg’ with Red; all
which may be work' according to the Rules for the
other Flowers so diversified wich the same Colours.
The Leaves and Stalk arc  Blueish Green, only at the
Joints there is for the most Part  Yellowith Tinge,
which is also at the Bottom of the Cup and Scales.





CHAP. IX.
PAINTING on SILKS, SATTINS, &.
WHEN the Out-Line is made according to the Ar
tists Fancy,  Wash of isinglass should with Care
be laid on to take away the Glare and Sleekiness of the





Sattin, otherwise the Colours will not work freely; the
Isinglass be melted in very clear Water, over the Fire,
so as not to be very glutinous, otherwise it will disco
lour the Sattin, and consequently spoil the Colours.
In the foregoing Rules we have recommended, for
the most Part, the Leaving the Paper for the light
Parts of  Flower, and Working with Colours mostly
transparent; but here the Lights are to be made by 
small Tinéture of the Colourof the intended Flower
mixt with the Flake-White, so much as just to make
 Degree from the Colour of the Sattin, if White, or
if any other Colour, to be mixt proportionably to the
Colour of the Flower; for instance, if  Blue Flower,
the Bice or Verditer,  very small Quantity of it with
the White, using less of it proportionally as the Shades
grow darker, and in the most dark Indico alone may be

used, it being by that Time rendered opaque enough;
but great Care must be used not to lay the Colours on
too thick, otherwise they will crack:  little white
Sugar-Candy will be found very necessary, when mixt
with the Gum-Water, as preventive to that Incon
veniency. If  Flower happens to be of so deep  Colour
as not to admit of any pure White in the lightest of
the Parts,  Sort of Priming of White should be laid
on, after which when dry, begin with the Ground
Colour of the Flower, proceeding gradually with the
Shades as in the above Directions, which, with the
seleted Examples we have annexed, peculiarly chosen
from Nature for the Purpose, we hope will be suffi
cient for our ingenious Students in this most delight
ful Amusement.
    .


