THE
ART of PAINTING
IN
MINIATURE

TEACHING
The speedy and perfect Acquisition of that Art
without  Master.
By Rules so easy, and in  Method so natural as to render
this charming Accomplishment universally aftainable.
CONTAINING
. The Difference between
Painting in Miniature and
other Kinds of Painting.
II. The Management of Co
lours in Draperies, Linnen
Lace, Furrs, &.
III. The Method of mixing
Colours for Carnations;
for painting or Architecture
or any Building of
Stone or Wood; for Land
skips, Terrasses, Water,
Ruins, Recks, &.
IV. The Art if Painting all
Sorts of Flowers, with the
proper COlours required
to represent Nature to the
highest Perfection.
. The various Methods of
Painting.

Transtated from the Original FRENCH.
The FOURTH EDITION.
To which are now added,
. Certain Secrets of one of
II. Some general instruetve
the greatest Italian Pain-
Lessons for the Artist
ters for making the finast
Drawing. And
Colours, Burnisned Gold,
III. Tlie Usefulness and Be-
shell Gold, &.
nefit of Prints.
LONDON;
Printed for . HODGES, at the Looking-glass on London-
Bridge, . JAMES at Horace  Head, under the Royal-
Exchange,
and . COOPER, at the Globe in Pater-
noster Row.
















To His Grace
THE
MONTAGU.
DUKE 

MASTER of the GREAT WARDROBE,
GREAT MASTER of the Most Ho-
nourable ORDer of the BATH, and
KNIGHT of the Most Noble ORDER
of the GARTER.
May it please Tour Grace.

ONE of the noblest
Purposes of the Art


of Painting being
to preserve the Images of
Illustrious Persons to Pos-
terity



terity, this Treatise is na-
turally inscrib’ to One of
mn
the most illustrious Perso-
nages of this Time.
But your celebrated Fa-
vour for the Charming Art,
leads me also naturally to
address YOURGRACEon
this Occasion, to whom we
are so highly indebted for
the Advancement of Paint-
and all the Politer Arts
ing
in Great-Britain.
The noble and generous
Use you have constantly
Princely
made of your
Rank



Rank and illustrious Quali¬
ties, for the Protection and
Encouragement of Arts,
and the Cultivation and
Embellishiment of Human
Life, has distinguish dyour
GRACE as one of the Glo-
and en-
ries of the Ag
dear’ you as an invalua-
to your Coun-
ble Blessing
try.
Icould not therefore puba
lissi  Treatise on the Art
of Painting, without pay-
ing Homage to your GRACE
at the same Time, and put-
ting



ting it under the Protec-
tion of  Name that has
the highest Authority with
all the polite and ingenious
Part of Mankind.
 am,
MY LORD,
Tour Grace 
most obedient,
and most devoted,
bumble Servant-
THE








THE
PREFACE.
THE ART of PAINTiNG


wants no Man  Eloquence
to recommend it. It ra-
vishies wherever it appears;
aus and lays the whole World
 - bjection to its Charms.  shall not
herefore, with the Generality of Wri-
ers on this Subject, enter into  Detail
 Beauties and Perfections, which are
iniversally ’known and admir ; and give
 recommendatory Character of what
jas every where the highest Reputation.
My Business here, by way of Preface, is
nly to give some Account of the fol¬
owing Treatise: And this  shall do by
way of Extract from the Original Pre-
ace; wliich being written in the Romiss
Commu-



Communion, with  peculiar and ve
filial Regard to the Religzous, the whe
of it would not, perhaps, appear ve
gracefully in the Language of  Protel
tant Country.
To guard against any Offence whic
skilful Painters might be led to take :
the Publication of this little Assemblag
of Instructions, it is declar', that it wi
not intended for them, but for the Tyro
only and Novices in the Art, and suc
as cannot easily be provided with' Ma-
ter to qualify them for this charmin
Employment, And it is certain, ther
are Thousands of Persons in Great Bri
tian, as well as in other Nations, wha
have  greater Passion for this Ar
than they have Opportunity to cultivat
it. The Country affords but few Pain
ters, whose Instructions are of any Va
lue; and good Pieces of this kind art
very rare among us; while great Num
bers of both Sexes, of Fortune and Lei
sure, who with  Genius for Painting
are devoted to  Country-Life, languist
away many  heavy Hour for want 
some Intelligence in this Art, whicl
they might pafs very agreeably with 



le Skill in it: And, perhaps,  rurd.
, or  Recess in the Country, can-
 be sweeten  by  more elegant
nusement.
The Author of the following Treatise
 conceal’ his Name, but insinuated
ugh in his Preface to let us know He
  Man of Fortune, who painted
ly for the Entertainment ofhis Friends
'his private Diversion. This  men-
 to shew the Reader, that hé need
 be apprehensive of that Falshood and
serve we too often meet with in Books
this Subject written by professd Pain-
. Hedrew up his Papers, (of which
 following are  Translation) for the
struction of some Persons of Quality at
listance from him ; who succeeded so
pily in their Pursuit of this Art by the
elp of them only, that on their Instan-
, he resolv  to make them publick ;
ping that every one, with the least
enius for the Art of Painting, would
ud his Method as plain and intelligible,
 reap as mnch Benefit from his In-
uctions, as his Pupils of Quality; since
has begun at the very Elements, or
, , of Mintature, and omitted not
the



ne least Matter or Circumstance thai
requisite to  full and perfect Elucidati
of the Art.
Isnall only add, that the French 
charm’ with the Work, as soon as
was publisn’; and made such  Dema
for it, that it quickly ran through
veral Editions; and spreading amo
their Neighbours on the Continent,
been translated with great Success ii
their respective Tongues.





















THE
ART Of PAINTING
IN
MINIATURE, &.
.
Undertake not here to celebrate


the Praises of Painting: Many

learned Men, who have so
happily treated of the Dignity
and Excellence of this charming
Art, have saved me the Labour; since what
they have said of Painting in General, is
also true of Miniature in Particular.  will
only add in  few Words, the Peculiarities
which distinguish it from every other Spe-
cies of Painting.
It is more delicate.
It requires à nearer Viety.
It is not easily done but in Little.
It is wrought only upon Velum or Paper.
And the Coiours are diluted only with
Gum-water.





To succeed in this Art,  Man should be
perfectly skilled in the Art of Designing or
Drawing. But as most People who affect
the one, know little or nothing of the
other, and would have the Pleasure of
Painting, without giving themselves the
Trouble of learning to design, (which is
indeed, an Art that is not acquired without
 great deal of Time, and continual Appli-
cation,) Inventions have been found out to
supply the Place of it; by means of which
 Man designs or draws, without knowing
how to design.
II. The first is Calking. That is, if you
have  Mind to do  Print or Design, in
Miniature, the Back-side of it, or another
Paper, must be blacken’ with Small-coal,
and then rubb’ very hard with the Finger
wradt in  linnen Cloth: Afterwards the
cloth must be lightly drawn over the Side so
blacken’, that no black Grains may remain
upon it to soil the Velom you would paint
upon; and the Print or Draught must be
fastened uron the Velom with four Pins,
to keep it from shifting. And if it be ano¬
ther Paper that is blacken’, it must be put
between the Velom and the Print, or
Draught, with the blacken’ Side upon the
Velom. Then with  blunted Pin or Nee-
dle, you must pass over the principal Lines
or Strokes of the Print, or Draught, the
Contours, the Plaits of the Drapery, and




ver every thing elle that must be distin-
guissied; pressing so hard, that the Strokes
nay be fatrly marked upon the Velom un-
derneath.
III. COPYING by Squares is another con-
venient Method for such as are but little
kill’ in the Art of Designing, and would
copy Pictures, or other Things, that cannot
be calkeq. The Method is this: The Piece
must be divided into many equal Parts by
little Squares, marked out with Charcoal, if
the Piece be clear and whitish, and the Black
an be suirly seen upon it; or with white
Chalk, if it be too brown and dusky.
After which, as many Squares of equal Di-
nensions must be made on white Paper,
apon which the Piece must be designed;
ecause if this be done immediately upors
Velom, (as one is apt to mniscarry in the
irst Attempt) the Velom may be soiled with
false Touches. But when it is neatly done
upon Paper, it must be calked upon the
Velom in the Manner before described.
When the Origmal and the Paperare thus
rder’, observe what is in each Square of
he Piece to be designed, asa Head, an Arm,
an Hand, and so forth: and place it in the
corresponding Part of the Paper. And thus
finding where to place all the Parts of the
Picce, you have nothing to do but to form
them well, and to join them together. By
this Method you may reduce or enlarge






 Piece to what Compass youplease, makin
the Squares of your Paper greater or lesse
than those of the Original; but they mui
always be of an equal Number.
IV. To copy  Picture, or other Thing
in the same Size and Proportion, another
Method is, to make use of varnisn’ Paper
or of the Skin of  Hog’ Bladder, vert
transparent: such as is to be had at the Gold-
beaters. Tale or Isinglass will likewise de
as well. Lay any one of those Things
upon your Piece; and, thro’ it you will see
all the Strokes and Touches; which are tobe
drawn upon it with  Crayon or à Pencil.
Then take it off; and fastening it under
Paper or Velom, set up both açainst the
Light, in the manner of  Window; and
with  Crayon, or  silver Needle, mark out
upon the Paper or Velom vou have put up-
permost, all the Lines and Touches you shall
see drawn upon the varnished Paper, Blad-
der, Talc, or Isinglafs you have made use of,
and which will plainly appear thro' this
Window.
After this Manner, making use of the
Window, or of Glass exposed to the Light,
you may copy all Sorts of Prints, Designs,
and other Pieces, on Paper or Velom ; lay-
ing and fastening them under the Paper or
Velom, upon which vou would draw them.
And tis  very good and  very easy Con-
trivance for deing Pieces of the same Size
and Proportion.







lf you have  Mind to make Pieces look
another Way, there is nothing to be done
out to turn them, laying the printed or
drawn Side upon the Glass, and fastening
the Paper or Velom upon the Back of it;
remembring to let your Lights fall on the
best Side.
 good Method likewise to take  true
copy of  Picture in Oil, is to give 
Touch of the Pencil upon all the principal
trokes, with Lake tempered with Oil; and
to clap upon the Whole  Paper of the same
Size. Then passing the Hand over it, the
Touches of the Lake will stick, and leave
the Design of your Piece expressed upon the
aper, which may be calked like other
Things. But you must remember to take
off, with the Crum of Bread, what remains
of the Lake upon the Picture, before it be
dry.
You may likewise make use of Pounces
made of powder’ Charcoal put in  linnen
Rag; with which the Piece you would
copy must be rubb’, after you have prick'
all the principal Strokes or Touches, and
fastened white Paper, or Velom, underneath.
 But  furer and easier Help than all
these, for one who knows nothing of De-
igning, is  Mathematical Compass. It is
generally made of ten Pieces of Wood, in
form of Rulers, half  quarter of an Inen
thick, half an Inch broad, and  Foot long,





or more, according as you have  Mind to
draw Pieces of  greater or lesser Size. To
facilitate the Construction of this Instrument.
 here exhibit  Figure of it, with an Ex-
planation of the Manner in which it is to
be used.









This little Beard  is to be of Fir, and
cover’ with linnen, or any other Cloth,
because the Piece you copy, and the Velom
or Paper you copy upon, must be fixed
upon it. Upon this Board must the Com-
pafs also be fixed, with  large Pin, by the
End of the first Foot , deep enough to
keep it close, but not so deep as to hinder
it from turning easily. When vou have 
Mind to reduce Things, place your Origi-
nal on the Side of the Foot , and the Ve-
lom or Paper you would draw upon, on the
Side of the Foot ; removing the Velom
or drawing it nearer, according as you in-
tend to redace or enlarge.




In order to enlarge  Piece, vou have
nothing to do but to change the Places of
your Original and your Copy, placing the
last towards , and the other on the
Side of .
And in both one and the other Method,
 Crayon or leaden Needle must be put in
the Foot, under which the Velom lies; and
 Pin, à little blunted, in that over the Ori-
ginal : with which all the Traces are to be
followed ; conducting the Pin with one
Hand, and with the other pressing gently
upon the Crayon or Needle, that marks the
Velom. When the Crayon, or Needle,
bears sufficiently upon the Veloimn, you have
no Occasion to touch it.
By this Instrument you may also draw in
equal Dimensions: But in order to this, the
Compass must be fixed in another Manner
upon the Board ; for if it is to be fastened
upon it by the Middle at ; and your Ori-
ginal and your Copy must be fix’ on each
Side of this middle Foot, at equal Distan-
ces: or from Corner to Corner, that is,
from  to , when the Pieces are large.
One may likewise draw several Copies at
once of equal and different Dimensions.
VI. ThESE are all the Helps  can give
to such as are not Masters of Design: For
those that are, they have nothing to do
with them.





When, therfsore, your Piece is marked
out upon the Velom, you must pafs with 
Pencil of very clear Carmine, over all the
Traces, to the end they may not be effaced
as you work. Then clean your Velom with
the Crum of Bread, that no Black may re-
main upon it.
VII. YoUR Velom must be pasted upon
 little Plate of Brass or Wood, of the Size
you would make your Piece, to keep it
firm and tight- but this pasting must be on
the Edges of your Velom only, and behind
the Plate: For which Purpose your Velom
must exceed your Plate above an Inch on
every Side. For the Part you paint upon,
must never be pasted: because it would not
enly give it an ill Look, but you could not
take it off if you would. Cut off the little
Shags and Locks of the Velom ; and wet-
ting the fair Side with  linnen Cloth, dipt
in Water, clap the other upon the Plate
with  clean Paper between them. So
much as hangs over, must be pasted upon
the Back of the Plate, drawing it equally
on all Sides, and hard enough to stretch it
well.
VIII. ThE chief Colours made use of
for Painting in Miniature, are





Carmine
Venice and Florence Lake
Rose Pink

ermillion
Red Lead
Brown Red
Red Orpiment
UItramarine
Verditer
Indigo
Gall-stone
Yellow Oker
Dutch Pink
Gamboge
Naples Yellow
Pale Masticot
Deep Yellow Masticot

AVOry-BlaCK
Lamp-Black.
True Indian Ink
Bistre, or Wood-soot
Raw Umber
Burnt Umber





Sap-Green
Verdegrease
Flake-White
Crayons of all Colours
Gold and Silver-shells
Leaf-Gold or Silver
Pallets of lvory, and Pencil-sticks
lvory Boxes, containing lvory-
Shells: in which are put the
Colours for Miniature.
. . All the Colours above-specified, with every
Implement and Utensil, necessary in the Prac-
tice of Painting in Miniature, are prepared
and sold at most Print-Shops in London and
Westminster.
The Seven transparent Colours, which are
used where Writingis seen thro the Celour.
Lake
Blue
YelloW
Liquid à Grass-Green
Dark-Green
Purple Colour
Brovn





IX. As all Colours taken from Earth and
ther heavy Matter, are always too coarse,
 they never so well ground, especially for
delicate Work, becaule of  certain Sand
remaining in them; the finest Parts may be
drawn out by diluting them with the Finger
in  Cup of Water. When they are well
steeped, let them settle  while: Then pour
out the clearest, which will be at Top, into
another Vessel. This will be the finest, and
must be let dry and when tis used, must
be diluted with Guin-water, as .shall shew
hereafter. This is  very good Contrivance,
especially for Flake-wbite, in which there is
 chalky Matter; which, like the coarse and
heavy Parts in other Colours, sinks to the
Bottom of the Cup it is steep  in.
. Ir you mix  littie of the Gall of an
Ox,  Carp, or an Eel, particularly of the
last, in green, black, gray, yellow and
brown Colours, it will not only take away
their greasy Nature, but also give them 
Lustre and Brightnefs they have not of
themselves. The Gall of Eels must be faken
out when they are skinn’, and hung upon
 Nail to dry; and when vou would use it,
it must be diluted with Brandy, and  little
of it mixd with the Colour you have dilu-
ted already. This likewise makes the Colour-
stick better to the Velom, which it hardly





does when it is greasy : Moreover, this Gal
hinders it from scaling.
XI. Soue Colours are made clearer by
Fire, as Tellow Oaker, Brown Red, Ultra-
marine, and Umber. All others are darken’
by it. But if you heat the said Colours
with  sharp Fire, they change; for the Browon
Red becomes yellow; Jellow Oaker becomes
red ; Umber reddens also. Ceruse by Fire
takes the Colour of Citron, and is often
called Masticot. Observe, that Yellow Oker
heated becomes more tender than it was,
and softer than Brown Red. Likewise Brovon
Red heated becomes softer than fine Yellou
Oaker. Both are very proper. The finest
and truest Ultramarine heated upon  red-hot
Iron, becomes more glittering; but it wastes,
and is coarser and harder to work with in
Miniature, when ’tis purged after this
Manner.
XII. ALL these Colours are diluted in
little Cups of lvory, made on purpose, or
in Sea-shells, with Water, in which Gum-
Arabic and Sugar Candy are put. For In-
stance, in  Glass of Water put  Piece of
Gum as big as  Walnut, and half that
Quantity of Sugar Candy. This last hinders
the Colours from scaling when thy are laid
on, which they generally do when they want
it, or the Velom is greasy.





This Gum-water must be kept in  neat
Bottle corked; and never must you take any
out of it, with  Pencil that has Colour
upon it, but with  Quill, or some such
Thing.
Some of this Water is put in the Shell
with the Colour you would temper, and
diluted with the Finger till it be very fine-
ff it be too hard, you must let it soften in
the Shell with the said Water, before you
dilute it. Afterwards let it dry And do
thus with every Colour, except Lilly-Green,
Sap-Green, and Gamboge, which must be
temper’ with fair Water only. But Ultra-
narine, Lake, and Bistre are to be more
gummned than other Colours.
lf you make use of Sea-shells, you must
let them steep two or three Days beforehand
in Water: Then cleanse them in boiling hot
Water, mix’ with Vinegar, in order to
carry off  certain Salt, which otherwise
sticks to them, and spoils the Colours that
are put to them.
XIII. To know whether Colours are
sufficiently gummed, you have nothing to
do but to give  Stroke of the Pencil upon
your Hand, when they are diluted. which-
dries immediately : lf they chap and scale,
there is too much Gum, if they rub out by
passing the Finger over them, there is too
little. It may be seen likewise when the
Colours are laid on the Velom, by passing





the Finger over them. If they stick to it
like  Powder, it is à Sign there is not Gumn
enough, and more must be put in the Water
with which you temper them. Take Care,
though, you do not put too much; for that
makes the Colour extreamly hard and dry.
It may be known likewise by their Glewiness
and Brightness: So, the more they are gum-
med, the darker they paint: And when you
have  Mind to give  greater Strength to 
Colour,than it has of itself, you have nothing
to do but to give it  great deal of Gum.
XIV. Provide yourself with an lvory
Pallet, very smooth, as big as your Hand ;
on one Side of which the Colours for the
Carnation, or naked Parts of  Picture, are
to be ranged in the following Manner. In
the Middle put à great deal of White, prettv
largely spread; because it is the Colour most
made use of: And upon the Edge, from the
Left to the Right, place the following Co-
lours, at à little Distance from the Wbite.
Masticot
Dutch Pink
Orpiment
Yellow Oker
Green, composed of Verditer, Dutch-

Pink, and Nhite, in equal Quan¬
tities.
Biew, made of Uitramarine, Indigo
and White, to  great Degree of
Paleness.




Vermillion
Carmine
Bistre, and
Black.
On the other Side of the Pallet, spread
ome Wbite in the same manner as for the
Carnation. And when you have  Mind to
paint Draperies, or other Things, place near
he Wbite the Colour you would make ’em.
of, in order to work as Ishall shew hereafter.
XV. ThEUse of good Pencils is  great
Matter. In order to make  good Choice,
wet them  little; and if the Hairs keep
close together, as you turn them upon the
Finger, and make but one Point, they are
good: But if they close not together, but
make several Points, and some are longer
than others, they are good for nothing; not
for dotting in particular, and least of all for
Carnation. When they are too sharp point-
ed, with only four or five Hairs longer than
the rest, yet elosing all together, they are,
notwithstanding, good; but they must be
blunted with  Pair of Scizzars, taking care
at the same time you do not dlip away too
much. Tis proper to have two or three
sorts of them: the largest for laying the
Grounds, and Dead-colouring; and the small-
est for finishing.
To bring the Hairs of your Pencil to join
close together and make  good Point, you
must often put the Pencil just between your




Lips when you are at Work, moistening
and pressing it close with the Tongue, even
when there is Colour upon it; for if there
be too much, some of it is taken off by this
means, and enough, left for giving fine ands
equal Touches. You need not apprehend
this will do you any Harm. None of thet
Colours for Miniature, except Orpiment
 which is Poison) when they are prepared,
have either ill Taste or ill Quality. This
Expedient must especially be used for dotting,
and for finisbing, particularly the naked Parts
of  Picture, that the Touches may be neat 
and fair, and not too much charged with
Colour. As for Draperies and other Things,.
as well in dead-colouring as in finishing, ’tis
sufficient, in order to make the Hairs of your
Pencil join well, and to unload it when it
has too much Colour, to draw it upon the
Edge of the Shell, or upon the Paper you
must put upon your Work to rest your Hand
on, giving some Strokes upon it before you
work upon your Piece.
XVI. To work well in Miniature, you
must do it in  Room that has but one Win-
dow, and fix your self very near it, with 
Table and  Desk almost as high as the Win-
dow ; placing your self in such  Manner,
that the Light may always come in on the
left Side, and never forward, or on the
Right.



When you would lay  Colour
equally strong, as for  Ground,
ke your Mixtures in Shells, and
 for the Thing you design to
there be not enough, tis 
but the Colour you mix after-
dark or too light.
After having spoken of Velom,
colours, let us now shew how
employed. In the first Place,
you would paint  Piece, be it
drapery, or any Thing else, you
by Dead-colouring, that is to fays
your Colours on with liberal
 Pencil, in the smoothest man-
as the Painters do in Oil ; not
the Force it is to have for  fi-
an, make the Light.  little
the Shades less dark than they
because in dotting upon them,
do after dead-colouring, the
ways fortified, and would at last
Here are several Ways of Dot-
dry Painter has his own. Some
Dots perfectly round. Others
  littie longish. Others batch
ces, that crofs each other every
Work appears as if'it had been
 Dots. This last Method is




the best, the boldest, and the soonest dc
Wherefore  advise such as would painting
Miniature, to use it, and to inure the-
selves froin the first to dot in the plump
the soft way; that is to say, where the 
are lost, in  manner, in the Ground upon
which you work, and only so much appear
as is sufficient to make the Work seem -
ted. The bard and the dry Way is qu
the reverse, and always to be avoided. 
is done by dotting with  Colour much da
ker than your Ground, and when the Pe-
cil is not moisten’ enough with the Colour
which makes the Work seem rough and 
even-
XX. Study likewise caresully to lose an
drown your Colours one in another, so thin
it may not appear where they disjoin; an
zo this end, soften or allay your Touch
with Colours that partake of both, in suc
sort that it may not appear to be you
Touches which cut and disjoin them. 
the Word Cut,  conceive what manifesti
separates and divides, and does not run
and blend it self with the neighbouring Co
lours; which is rarely practis  but upon the
Borders of Drapery.
XXI. WhEN your Pieces are finish’, ti
beighten them  little, gives them  fine Air
That is to say, to give, upon the Extremity
of the Lights, small Touches with  Colour




 lighter which must be lost and drewned
th the rest.

XXII. WlEN the Colours are dry upon
your Pallet, or in your Shells, in order to
 them, they must be diluted with Water.
rid when you perceive they want Gum,
ahiich is seen when they easily rub off the
land or the Velom, if you give  Touch
tith them upon either ( as  have said alrea-
)they must be temper’ with Gum-watera
 stead of pure Water, till they are in  good
ondition.
XXIII. ThERE are several forts of Grounds
 Pictures and Portraitures. Some are
holly dark, composed of Bistre, Umbers
id Cologn-Earth, with  little Black and
bite. Others more yellow; in which is
tixed  great deal of Oker Others grayer;
hich partake of Indigo. In order to paint
Ground, make  Wash of the Colour or
dixture you would have it, or according to
nat of the Picture or Portraiture you would
opy; that is to say,  verv light Lay, in
hich there is hardly any Thing but Water,
 order to soak the Velom. Then pass
nother Lay over that, somewhat thicker,
nd strike it on very smoothly with large
trokes, as quick as you can, not touching

wice in the same Place before it be dry;. be
ause the second Stroke carries off what has





been laid on at the first, especially when you
lean  little too hard upon the Pencil.
XXIV. Other dark Grounds are li
wise made of  Colour  little greenish; :
those are most in Use, and the properest
lay under all sorts ofFigures and ’ort raitu
because thev make the Carnation, or na
Parts ofa Picture, appear very fine; arel
on very easily, and there is no occasion
dot them, as one is often obliged to do
others, which are rarely made smooth 
even at the first; whereas in these one
dom fails of Success at the first Bout.
make them, you must mix Black, Du
Pink and White all together, more or lesa
each Colour, according as you would 
them darker or lighter You are to 
one Zay very light, and then  thicker,
Isaid of the first Grounds. You may :
make them of other Colours, if you plea
but these are the most common.
XXV. WhEN you paint  Holy Per
upon one of these Grounds, and would pa
 small Glory round the Head of your Figt
you must not lay the Colour tco thick
that Part, or you may even lay none at
especially where this Glory is to be 
bright; but lay for the first Time with .
and  little Oker mix’ together, of af
ficient Thickness; and in proportion as 



Place of the Head, put à little
and to make it lose it self, and
ith the Colour of the Ground,
free Stroke of the Pencil, fol-
ound of the Glory, sometimes
our of which it is made, and
ith that of the Ground, mixing
 or Oker with the last, when
dark to work with. And do
insensibly lost in another, and
 seen to disjoin them.
 fill an entire Ground with 
rightest Part is laid on with 
 White, adding more of the
ortion as you come nearer the
 Picture, And when the Oker
enough (for you must always
and darker ) add Gall-stone, af-
tle Carmine- and, lastly, Bistre.
ying, or dead-colouring, is to be
as possible, that is to say, let
ings lose themselves in one ano¬
Gap or Intersection. Then
 dot upon them with the same
rder to drown the Whole to-
 is pretty tedious, and  little
cially when there are Clouds
he Ground. Their Lights must
in proportion as you remove
gure, and finished, as the rest,
and rounding the Clouds- the




bright and obscure Parts of which must 
insensibly into one another.
XXVII. For  Day-sky, take Ultramar-
and  good deal of White, and mix thn
together. With this make  Lay, as sinoch
as you can, with  large Pencil and libei
Strokes, as for Grounds ; applying it paa
and paler as you descend towards the Hclf
zon; which must be done with Vermillion ,
Red Lead, and with White of the sae
Strength with that where the Sky ends,  less; making this Blew lose it the Red, which you bring down to  of the Earth, or Tops of House;
mixing towards the End, Gall-stone, anca
good deal of White, in such  manner tlt
the Mixture be still paler than the formy
without any visible Intersection or Partiij
between all these Colours of the Sky.
XXVIII. WHEN there are Clouds in :
Sky, ycu may spare the Places where the
are to be: that is to say, you need not le
en any Biezo there, but form them, if the
are reddisn, with Vermillion, Gall-stone al
White, with  little Indigo: and if they 
more upon  Black, put in  good deal
the last; painting the Lights of one and th
ther wich Masticot, Vermillion and Whit
more or less of any of these Colours, accort
ing to the Strength you would give then
or according to that of the Original you




in ding the Whole as you dot; for
ult Matter to lay them very fmooth
 painting. And if the Sky is not
igh, you must dot it allo.
your Pleafure to exempt the Places
uds, for you may lay them upon
ad of the Sky  heightening the
ts by putting  good deal of White,
ying the Shadows by using less.
 shortest Way.
 Night or stormy Sky is done
, Black and White, inixed toge-
ich is laid as for  Day-Sky. To
ire must be added Oker, Vermilli-
von-Red for the Clouds; the Lights
re to ve of Masticot, or Red Lead,
 White, now redder, now yel-
Discretion. And when it is à tem-
ky, andLightening appears in some
 it blue or red, it is to be done
ay-Sky. drowning and losing the
gether at the first-forming or dead-
, and at the finishing.














Of DRAPERIES.
To paint  blew Drapery,
Ultramarine near the 
upon your Pallet; and mik  Part of
with the other, till it makes  fine 
and has  Body. With this Mixture
must form the brightest Parts; and 
adding more Uitramarine, form such as
darker: and go on after this manner
you come to the deepest Plaits, and
thickest Shades, where you must lay
Uitramarine, And all this must be don
for  First-forming or Dead-colouring ;
is to say, laying the Colour on with
Strokes of the Pencil, yet as smooth as
can; losing the Lights of the Shadcws wi
Colour neither so pale as the Lights, no
dack as the Shades. Then dot with
same Colour as in the first-forming, 
small matter deeper; that the Dots-may
fairly seen. All the parts must be drou
one in another, and the Plaits appearw
out Intersection. When the Uliramarin
not dark enough to make the deeper 
dows, houv well soever it be gummied, 
à little Indigo with it to finish them.
when the Extremities of the Lights are
bright enough, heighten them with
and  very little Ultramarine.



XXXI.  Drapery of Carmine is done
 the same manner as the blue ; except,
at in the darkest Places there is to be 
ay of pure Vermillion, before you dead-co-
ur with Carmine, which must be applied
top; and in the strongest Shades, it must
 gumm’ very much. To deepen it the
lore, mix à little Bistre with it.
XXXII. THERE is likewise made another
ed Drapery, which is first drawn with
ermillion, mixing White with it to dead-co¬
ur the bright Places; laying it pure and
ninixed for such as are darker; and adding
armine for the grand Shades. Tis finish’
fterwards, like other Draperies, with the
same Colours. And when the Carmine with
ne Vermillion don’ darken enough, work
with the first alone, but only in the deepest
if the Shades.
XXXIII.  Drapery of Lake is made in
he same Manner with that of Carmine ;
nixing  good deal of White with it for the
right Places, and very little for those that
re dark. Tisfinished likewise with dotting ;
ut you have nothing to do with Vermillion
nit.
XXXIV. Violet-Draperies are likewise
done after this Manner; after making  Mix-
ure of Carmine and Ultramarine, putting




always White for the bright Parts. If yt.
would have your Violet be Columbine  there must be more Carmi
than Uitramarine. But if you would han
it blewer and deeper, put more Ultramari.
chan Carmine.
XXXV.  Drapery is made of  Flest
Colour, beginning with  Lay made of Whit
Vermillion, and very pale Lake; and makin
the Shades with the saine Colours, using le
White in them. This Drapery must be ver
pale and tender, because the Stuff of th
Colour is thin and light; and even the Shadt
of it ought not to be deep.
XXXVI. To make  yellow Drapery
put à Lay of Masticot over all; then one 
Gamboge uron that, excepting the brightei
Places, where the Masticot must be left en
tire. Then dead-colour with Oker mix'
with  little Gamboge and Masticot, puttin
more or less of the last, according to th
Strength of the Shades. And when these
Colcurs dont darken enough, add Gall-stone
And Gall-stene pure and unmix’ is used fo
the thickest Shides, mixing  little Bistr.
with it, if there be occasion to make then
still darker. You finish by dotting with the
same Colours you dead-colour’ with, anc
losing the Lights and the Shades in one an
other.





XXXVII. Ir you put Naples-Tellow, or
Dutch Pink, in lieu of Masticot and Gamboge
ju will make another sort of Yelloep.
XXXVIII. ThE Green Drapery is made
ra general Lay of Verditer ; with which
you find it too blue, mix Masticot for the
ights, and Gamboge for the Sbades. After-
ards add to this- mixture Lilly-Green or
Sap- Green to shadow with; and as the Shades
 thicker, put more of these last Greens,
id even work with them pure and uninix',
here they are to be extreamly dark. You
ish with the same Colours, à little darker.
By putting more Telloo, or more Blue
thele Colours, you may make different
rts of Greens, as you please.
XXXIX. To make  black Drapery, vou
ad-colour with Black and White, and fi-
sh with the same Colour, putting more
lack, as the Shades are thicker, and for
 darkest, mix Indigo with it, especially
hen you would have  he Drapery appear like
elvet. You may always give some Touches
ith  brighter Colour, to heighten the
ghts of any Drapery whatsoever.
XL.  white woolen Drapery is made
 Lay of White, in which there must be
very small matter of Oker, Orpiment or
all-stone, that it may look  little yellowish.





Then dead-colour, and finisn the Sha
with Blue,  little Black, White and Bist
putting  great deal of the last in the dark
XLI. The Light-Gray is begun
Black and White, and finish’ with the sa
Colour deeper.
XLII. FoR à brown Drapery, make   Bistre, White and  little Brown-
and shadow with this mixture, made  lis
darker.
XLIII. TiERE are other Draperies, 
led variable, because the Lights are of   Colour from the Shades. These ;
mostly used for the Vestments of Angels,
young and gay People, for Scarfs and ot
airy Attire, admitting of  great many Fol
and flowing at the Pleasure of the Wij
The most common are the Violet; of wh
they make two Sorts, one, where the Lig
are blue, and the other, where they are 
low.
XLIV. For the first, put  Lay of Ult.
marine and very pale White upon the Ligh
and shadow with Carmine, Ultramarine 
White, as for à Drapery wholly Violet-
that enly the grand Lights appear blue.
they must be dotted with Violet, in wh
there is  great deal of ’hite: and lost
sensibly in the Shades.




XLV. ThE other is done by putting upon
: Lights only, instead of Blue,  Lay of
asticot; working the rest as in the Drapery
Violet, excepting, that it must be dotted,
dthe light Partsblended with the sbadoty,
at is, the Tellow with the Violet, with 
de Gamboge.
XLVI. The Carmine-Red is done like
 last; that is, let the Lights be done with
asticot, and the Sbades wich Carmine, and
lose the one in the other, make Use of
Gamboge.
XLVII. THE Lake-Red is done like that
Carmine.
XLVIII. ThE Green is done as the Lake;
ways mixing Verditer with Lilly or Sap-
reen, to make the Sbades; which are not
dry dark.
XLIX. SEveraL other Sorts of Draperies
ay be made at Discretion, always taking
re to preserve the Union of the Colours,
 only in one fort of Cloth or so, but also
 Group of several Figures: avoiding as

uch as the Subject will allow, the putting
Blue near the Colour of Fire, of Green
ainst Black; and so of other Colours which
it and disjoin, and whose Union is not
nd enough.





. Several other Draperies are mas
of foul Colours, as Brown-Red, Bistre, in
digo, &. And all in the same mannt.
Likewise of other Colours, simple and cor-
pound: the Agreement between which,
always to be minded, that the Mixture ma
produce nothing harsh and disagreeable,
the Eye. No certain Rule can be laid dov.
for this. The Force and Effect of your .
lours are only to be known from Use ar
Experience, and you must work accordir
to that Knowledge.
LI. Linen Cloaths are done thus: After
drawing the Plaits or Folds, as is done in
Drapery, put à Lay of White over all: The
deag-colour, and finish the Shades with
Mixture of Ultramarine, Black and Wbite
using more or less of the last, according 
their Strength or Tenderness; and in th
greatest Deepnings put Bistre, mix’ with
little White giving only some Touches 
this Mixture, and even of pure Bistre upo
the Extremities of the greatest Shadows
where the Folds must be drawn, and los
with the rest.
LII. ThEy may be done in another man
ner, by making  general Lay of this Mix-
ture of Uitramarine, Black and very palt
White ; and dead-colour, as  said before.
with the same Colour, but  little deeper




ie Shades are dotted and finish’,
 Lights with pure White and
th the Deepnings of the Linnen.
ever fort you make them, when
shd, you must give  yellowish
piment and White to certain Pla-
it lightly on, and as it were in
that what is underneath may,
ling, plainly appear, as well the
he Dotting.
oz Linnen Cloaths are done by
 of White, mix’ with  little
form and finish the Shades with
 with White and Oker; and in
Sbades use pure Bistre. And be-
sh, give some Teints here and
vand White, and others of White-
rine, as well upon the Shades as
but let them be very bright ;
the whole together in dotting,
ok finely. As you sinish, heigh-
remities of the Lights with Mas-
ite. You may add to this Sort
as well as to the White, certain
ace to Space, as in Turkey-Man-
, small Stripes blue and red with
and Carmine; One of Red be-
of Blue very bright and clear
ghts, and deeper upon the Shades.
pretty often dress’ with Vails
by Popisp Painters ), and Scarfs
are put about Necks that are





bare ; because they become the Teint might
well.
LIV. Ir you would have both these Sort
of Linnen transparent, and the Stuff 
other thing that is beneath, appear throug
them, make the first Lay for them ver
light and clear, and mix in the Colour tu
shadow with,  little of that which is under
neath, especially towards the End of th
Shades; and only do the Extremities of the
Lights, for the Yellow, with Masticot ant
Wnite: and for the White, with pure White
They may be done in another Manner
especially when you wou’ have them allto-
gether as clear as Mustin, Lavn, or Gawze
To this End form and finish what is to be
beneath, as if nothing was to be put over it
Then mark out the light and clear Folds
with White or Masticot; and  Shadowy
with Bistre and White, or with Black, Blue:
and Wbite, according to the Colour you
would make them of ; making the rest some-
what fainter: Yet this is not necessary but
for the Parts that are not to be so clear.
LV. Crape is done the same Way ; ex-
cepting, that the Folds ofthe Shades and the
Zights, and the Borders too, are to be markd
out with little Filaments of Black upon what
is underneath; which is likewise to be
finished before hand.




LVI. WhEN you would make  Stuff like
 zeatered Tabby, make the Waves upon it
with  Colour  little lighter, or  little dar-
ker, in the Lights and the Shades.
LVII. THERE is  Manner of touching
Draperies, which distinguishies the Silken
from the Woolen. The last are more ter-
restrial and sensible ; the others more light
and fading. But it must be observed, that
this is an Effect, which depends partly upor
the Stuff, and partly upon the Colour; and
for employing these in  Manner suitable to
the Subyects and the Deepnings of Painting,
 will here touch upon their different Qua-
lities.
LVIII. We have no Colour, which par-
takes more of Light, nor which comes
nearer the Air, than White: which shews it
to be fickle and fleeting. It may, never-
theless, be held and brought to by some
neighbouring Colour, more heavy and sen-
sible ; or by mxing them together.
LIX. Blue is  most fleeting Colour: And
so we see, that the Sky and the remotest
Views of  Picture are of this Colour- but
it will become lighter and fickler, in Propor-
tion as it is mix  with White.





LX. PURE Black is the heaviest and most
terrestrial of all Colours; and the more of
it you mix with others, the nearer youbring
them to the Eye.
Nevertheless, the different Dispositions
of Black and White make also their Effects
different: For White often makes Black dis-
appear; and Black brings White more into
View as in the Reflection of Globes, or
other Figures to be made round, where
there are always Parts that sly, as it were
from the Eye, and deceive it by the Craft
of Art: And under the White are here
comprehended all the light Colours; as un-
der the Black, all the heavy Colours.
Uitramarine is, then, solt and light.
Oker is not so much so.
Masticot is very light; and so is Verditer.
Vermillion and Carmine come near this.
Quality.
Orptment and Gamboge not so near.
Lake holds  certain Mean, rather soft
than rough.
Dutch-Pink is an indifferent Colour, easily
taking the Quality of others. So it is made
terrestrial by mixing it with Colours that
are so, and on the contrary, the most light
and fleeting by joining it with White or Blue.
Brown-Red, Umber, Dark-Greens, and
Bistre, are the heaviest and most terrestrial,
next to Elack.



LXI. SKILFuL Painters, who under-
stand Perspective, and the Harmony of
Colours, always observe to place the dark
and sensible Colours on the Fore-Parts of
their Pictures; and the most light and fleet-
ing they use for the Distances and remote
Views. And as for the Union of Colours,
the different Mixtures that may be made of
them, will learn you the Friendship or
Antipathy they have to one another. And
upon this you must take your Measures for
placing them with such Agreement as shall
please the Eye.
LXII. For the doing of Lace, French-
Points, or other Things of that Nature, put
over all  Lay of Blue, Black and White, as
for Linen: Then heighten the Flower-work
with pure White: Afterwards make the
Sbades above with the first Colour, and fi-
nish them with the same. When they are
upon the Carnation, or naked Parts of 
Picture, or uron any thing else that you
would shew through another, finisn what is
beneath as if nothing was to be put over it:
and at Top, make the Points or Lace with
pure White, shadowing and finishing them
with the other Mixture.
LXIII. If you would paint  Fur; you
must begin with  kind of Drapery, done,
if it be dark, with Bistre and White, making







the Shadowings of the same Colour, with
less White. If the Fur be White, do it with
Blue, White and  little Bistre. And when
this Beginning or First-forming is done,
instead of dotting, draw small Strokes, turn-
ing, now in one Manner, now in another,
according to the Course and Flatting of the
Hair. Heighten the Ligbis of dark Furs
with Oker and White; and of the other with
White and  little Blue.
LXIV. For doing  Building, if it be of
Stone, take Indigo, Bistre and White, with
which make the Beginning or first Form of
it; and for shadowing it, put less of this
last; and more Bistre than Indigo, according
to the Colour of the Stone vou would paint.
To these you may likewise add  little Oker,
both for the forming and the finishing. But
to make it finer, you must give, here and
there, especially for old Fabricks, blue and
yellow Teints, some with Oker, others with
Uitramarine, nuxing always White with
them, whether before the First-forming,
provided they appear through the Draught,
or whether upon it; loosing and drowning
them wich the Rest when you finisn.
LXV. Wien the Building is of Wood,
as there are iany Sorts, it is done at Dis-
cretion; but the most ordinary Way is to
begin or first-form with Oker, Bistre and
White, and finish without White, or with




 ry little; and if the Shades are deep, with
are Bistre. In the other they add some-
 nes Vermillion, sometimes Green or Black -
 Word, just according to the Colour
they would give it; and they finish with
Dotting, as in Draperies and every thing
use.




Of CARNATIONS, or the Na-
ked Parts of Painting.

XVI. TRHERE are in Carnation so
many different Colourings,
that it would be  difficult
Thing to give general Rules upon so varia-
le  Subject. Nor are they minded, when
one has got, by Custom and Practice, some
Habit of working easily : And such as are
arrived to this Degree, employ themselves
in copying their Originals, or else they
work upon their Ideas, without knowing
how Insomuch that the most Skilful, who
do it with less Reflection and Pains than
others, would likewise be more put to it to
give an Account of their Maxims and
Knowledge in the Matter of Painting, if
they were to be asked what Colours they
made use of for making such and such  Co-
louring,  Teint here, and another there.




Nevertheless, as Beginners, for whom
design this little Work, want some Instruc
tion at the first,  will shew, in general
after what Manner several Carnations are .
be done.
LXVII. In the first Place, after havin
drawn your Figure with Carmine, and or-
dered your Piece, apply, for Women anc
Children, and generally for all tender
Colourings,  Lay of White, mixed witf
never so little of the Blue, made for Faces.
of which lhave told the Composition: But
let it hardly be seen.
LXVIII. AND for Men, instead of Blue.
they put in this first Lay  little Vermillion;
and when they are old,  little Oker is mix'
with it.
LXIX. AFTERWARds sollow all the Tra-
ces with Vermillion, Carmine and White,
mixed together; and begin all the Sbades
with this Mixture, adding White in Propor¬
tion as they are weaker: and putting but
little in the darkest, and none, in  manner,
in certain Places, where strong Touches
are to be given; for Instance, in the Corner
of the Eye; under the Nose; at the Ears;
under the Chin; in the Separations ef the
Fingers; in all the Joints; at the Corners of
the Nails; and generally in every Part;
where you would mark out Separations in
Shades



 ades that are obscure. Neither need you
yar to give to those Places all the Force and
strength they ought to have as soon as you
begin or first-formthem, because in working
top with Green, the Red you have put
there is always weakned.
LXX. AFTeR having begun, or first-
formed, or dead-coloured, with Red, make
Blue Teints with Ultramarine and  great
eal of White, upon the Parts which sly
om the Eye; that is to say, upon the Tem-
les; under and in the Corners ofthe Eyes;
 both Sides the Mouth, above and below,
little upon the Middle of the Forehead ;
etween the Nose and the Eyes; on the Side
 the Cheeks; on the Neck, and other Pla-
es where the Flesh has  know not what
blue Cast with it.
Yellowish Teints are likewise made with
Jker, or Orpiment, and  little Vermillion
mixt with White, under the Eye-brows; on
he Sides of the Nose towards the Bottom;
 little underneath the Cheeks, andupon the
other Parts which rise and come nearer the
Eye.


'Tis, especially, for these Teints, that the
natural Complexion is to be observed, in-
order to catch it ; for Painting being an
Imitation of Nature, the Perfection of the
Art consists in the Justness and Simplicity
of the Representation, especially in Face-
Painting.




LXXI. WHEN, therefore, you have done
your first Lay, your Dead-colouring, arha
your Teints, you must work upon the Shadot
dotting with Green for the Carnations, :
naked Parts; mixing, according to the Ruy
 have given for the Teints,  little Blue fe
the Parts which sly from the Eye, and 
the other Hand, making it à little yellowes
for those that are more sensible ; that is 
say, which rise, and come nearer the Eyt
And at the End of the Shades, on the Sics
of the Light, you must blend and lose you
Colour insensibly in the Ground of the Can
nation with Blue, and then with Red, accore
ing to the Places where you paint. If this
Mixture of Green does not work dark enougld
at first, pafs over the Shades several times 
now with Red, and now with Green alway,
dotting: And this do till they are as thet.
should be.
LXXII. Anp if you cannot, with these
Colours, give the Shades all the Force they
ought to have, finish, in the darkest, witf
Bistre mixt with Orpiment, Oker, or Ver-
million, and sometimes with pure Bistre,
according to the Colouring you would
make; but lightly, laying on your Colour
very clear.
LXXIII. You must dot upon the clear
and bright Places with  little Vermillion or



 with much White, and  very
of Oker in order to lose them
dowy, and to make the Teints
nsibly into one another taking
dot, or batch, to make vour
 the Turnings and Windings
Parts. For tho the Rule be
ys, this Dotting or Hatching
car à little more here, because
arts.
 Mixture might make  Co-
ed, if it was always to be used,
tewise in every Part, to blend
id the Shades, with Blue and 
ind much White, so mixed as to
 excepting, nevertheless, that
must not be put upon the
upon the Extremities of the
no more than the other Mix-
nese last, which must be left
Light, as certain Places of
the Nose, and of the Fore-
upon the Cheeks ; which, and
ught, nevertheless, to be red-
rest, as well as the Feet, the
he Hands, and the Fingers of
that these two last Mixtures
so pale, that the Work shall
ble, for they serve only to sof-
ite the Teints with one another,
ides with the Lights, and to
races. Care must likewise be
taken,



taken, that you work not too much wit
the Red Mixture upon the blue Teints, no
with the Blue upon the others: but chang
the Colour from Time to Time, when yo-
perceive it works too blue or too red, til
the Work be finished.
LXXIV. ThE White of the Eyes must be
shadowed with this same Blue, and  littlu
Flesh-Colour: and the Corners, on the Sidt
of the Nose, with Vermillion and White
giving them  little Touch of Carmine.
The Whole is softened with this Mixture of
Vermiilion, Carmine, White, and  very smal
Matter of Oker.
The Apples or Balls of the Eyes are done
with the Mixture of Ultramarine and White-
the last prevailing  little; adding  little
Bistre, if they are yellowish: or  little
Black, if they are gray. Make the little
black Circle in the Middle, called the Cbrys-
tal of the Eye, and shadow the Balls with
Indigo, Bistre, or Black, according to the
Colour they are of; giving to each  sinall
Touch of pure Vermillion round the Chrys-
tal: which must be lost with the rest at the
Finishing.
This gives Vivacity to the Eye.
The Kound or Circumference of the Eye
is done with Bistre and Carmine; that is to
say, the Slits or Partings and the Eye-lids,
when they are large and bold; especially
the upper ones; which must after wards be





soften’ with the Red or Blue Mixtures 
lave mentioned before, to the End they
nay be lost in one another, and nothing
seem intersected.
When this is done, give à little Touch of
ure White upon the Cbrystal, on the Side
of the Ligbts. This makes the Eye shine,
and gives Life to it.
LXXV ThE Mouth is dead-coloured
with Vermillion, mik  with White; and fi-
nish’ with Carmine, which is softened as
the rest. And when the Carmine does not
work dark enough, mik  little Bistre with
it. This is to be understood of tlie Corners
in the Separation of the Lips; and particu-
larly, of certain Mouths half open.
LXXVI. Tie Hands, and all the other
Parts of Carnation, are done in the same
mannér as the Faces; observing, that the
Ends of the Fingers be  little redder than
the rest. When your whole Work is form’
and dotted, mark the Separations of all the
Parts with little Touches of Carmine and
Orpiment mix’ together, as well in the
shadowy as the light Places; but  little
deeper and stronger in the First; and lase
them in the rest of the Carnation.
LXXVII. ThE Eye-brows and the
Beard are dead-colour , as are the Shades
of Carnations, and finished with Bistre, Oker,





or Black, according to the Colour they are
of; drawing thein by little Strokes the Way
they oughe to go; that is to say, give themf
all the Nature of Hair. The Lights of them
mustbe heightened with Oker and Bistre, a Vermillion, and much White.
LXXVIII. FoR the Hair of the Head;
make à Lay of Bistre, Oker and White, and
à little Vermillion. When it is very dark
colour’, use Black instead of Oker. After-
wards form the shadocoy Parts with the same
Colours, putting less White in them, and
finish with pure Bistre, or mix’ with Oaker
or Black, by small Strokes very fine, and
close to each other, waving and buckling
them according to the Curling of the Hair.
The light Parts must also be heighten’ by
little Strokes with Oker or Orpiment, White
and  littie Vermillion. After which, lose
the Lights and the Sbades in each other, by
working sometimes with  dark, and some-
tiines with  pale Colour.
And for the Hair about the Forehead,
thro which the Skin is seen, it must be first
formed with the Colour thereof, and that
of the Carnation, working and shadowing
with one and the other, as if vou designed
to paint none. Then form it, and finish
with Bistre. The Lights are to be heigh-
ten’ as the other.




Gray Hair is dead-colour’ with White,

Black and Bistre, and finished with the same
Colour, but deeper ; heightening the bright
and clear Parts of the Hair, as well as those
ofthe Eye-brows and the Beard, with Wbite
ind very pale Blue, after having form’
them, as the others, with the Colour of the
Fleshi, or Skin; and finisn with Bistre.
LXXIX. But the most important Thing
is to soften one  Work, to blend the Teints
in one another, as well as the Beard and the
Hair about the Forehead, with the other
Hair and the Carnation, taking especial
Care not to work rongh and dry; and that
the Traces, Turnings and Windings of the
Carnation, or naked Parts, be not inter-
sected.
You must likewise accustom yourself to
put Wbite in your Colours only in Propor¬
tion as you work lighter or darker: For the
Colour you use the second time must be
always  little stronger and deeper than the
first, unless it be for softening.
LXXX. DiFFERENT Colourings are ea-
sily made, by putting more or less of Red,
or Blue, or Yellow, or Bistre, whether for
the Dead-colouring, or for the Finishing.
That for Women ought to be blueish: That
for Children  little red; and both fresh and
florid. That for Men ought to be yellower;
especially when they are old.





LXXXI. To make  Cclouring of Death
there must be  first Lay of White and Or
piment, or very pale Oker Dead-colour wit
Vermi-lion, and Lake, instead of Carmine
and  good deal of White: and afterward
work over it with  green Mixture, in whicl
there is more Blue than any other Colour
to the end the Flesn may be livid and of :
Purple Colour. The Teints are done the
same Way as in another Colouring; bur
there must be  great many more blue than
yelloze ones, especially upon the Parts whick
fly from the Sight, and about the Eyes; anc
the last are only to be upon the Parts whick.
rise, and com- nearer the Eye. They are
made to die away one in another, according
to the ordinary Manner; sometimes with
very pale Blue, and scmetimes with Oker-
and White, and alittle Vermillion: softning
the Whole together. The Parts and Con-
tours must be rounded with the same Co-
lours.
The Mouth is to be, in  Manner, of 
 Violet. Tis dead-coloured, however,
with  little Vermillion, Oker and White,
but finished with Lake and Blue And to
give it the deep Strokes, they take Bistre and
Lake; with which they likewise do the same
to the Eyes, the Nose, and the Ears.
If it is à Crucifix, or some Martyr, upon
whom Blood is to be seen; after the finish-



ng the Carnation, form it with Vermillion,
and finish it with Carmine, making in the
Drops of Blood  littie bright, reflecting
park, to round them.
For the Crown of Thorns make  Lay of
vea-Green, and Masticot; shadow it witli
Sistre and Green: and heighten the clear
ind light Parts with Masticot.
LXXXII. Iron is formed, or first laid,
vith Indigo,  little Black and White; and
inished with pure Indigo, heightening it
vith White.
LXXXIII. FoR painting Fire and Flames,
he Lights are done with Masticot and or-
oiment; and for the Shades, they mix Ver-
nillion and Carmine.
LXXXIV.  Smoke is done with Black,
Indigo and White, and sometimes with
Bistre : One may likewise add Vermillion
or Oker, according to the Colour it is to be
of.
LXXXV. PEARLSare painted by putting
à Lay of White, and  little Blue. They
are shadowed and rounded with the same
Colour deeper:  small white Dot is made
almost in the Middle, on the Side of the
Light; and en the other Side, between the
Shadow and the Edge of the Pearl, they



give  Touch with Masticot, to make ti
Reftection; and under the Pearls is made
little Shadow of the Colour of the Groui
they are upon.
LXXXVI. DIAMONDS are done wins
pure Black: Then they heighten them wits
iittle Touches of White on the Side of th
Light,
It is the same Thing for any othel
Jewels you have  Mind to paint: Thet.
is nothing to be done but to change th
Colour.
LXXXVII. For making  Figure .
Gold, put à Lay of Shell-Gold, and shadov
it with Gall-stone.
Silver is done the same Way ; exceptin
that it must be shadow’ with Indigo.
LXXXVIII. THUS have  particulari-
set down several little Matters to help Be
ginners; for the Method of doing these
and the Colours that are used in them, wil
likewise help for such Things as  have no
mentioned, waiting for the Skill and Facii
lity which Time and Experience are used te
give to such as apply themselves to this Art
One great Means to acquire  Perfectior
in it, is to copy excellent Originals. We
enjoy with Pleasure and Tranquility
Labour and Pains of others. But  Man




nust copy  great Number before hie is
able to produce as fine Effects; and it is
better to be  good Copier than  bad Au-
thor.
The Instructions  have given for the
Mixtures and different Tinctures for the
colouring of Carnations and other Things,
may particularly serve for working after
Prints, where nothing is seen but Black
ind White: though they are not unprofita-
ple when one begins to copy after Pictures,
without Skill in the Management of Co-
lours, and without knowing their Force
and Effect. For there is this Differenc-
between Miniature and Painting in Oil,
that in the last, the Colours are taken upon
the Pallet, just as they appear in the Pic-
ture, where they are laid on at once,
insomuch that nothing is to be done but
to consider à little, what will make such 
Light, and what such  Shade. But it is
not thus in Miniature, where pretty often
the last Lay that is applied, does not keep
ts Colour, but takes another from the
First that has been wrought underneath-
or rather, one and the other compose à
Third, which has the desired Effect. And
hough, for Example, it be White, Green,
armine, Blue, Orpiment, Bistre, &. of
which this Colouring is composed, these
olours, nevertheless, do not produce it,
if you mix them together; for it is not






only by working, first with one, then witl
another, that the Thing is done. An
when  Man sees this Effect, without hav
ing seen how it is produced, he must, 
least, be  Conjurer to discover the Orde
and Manner of it, supposing that he hat
neither Book nor Master. For this Reasof
 applied myself to particularize so mant
little Instructions in this Matter; and  af
sure myself, that Experience will shew te
such as are in  Capacity to make use 
them, that tho’ they are small, they are no
less useful.











Of LANDSKIPS.
LXXXIX. 'TIS particularly for Land-
skips that the  Arti-
le is esteemed ; and the following, on the
Nature and different Qualities of Colcurs ;
because the Order and Distribution that are
made of them, will do much towards
shewing the remote and the near Views,
which deceive the Eye. And the greatest
Painters of Landskip have always observed
to place the most terrestrial and sensible
Colours upon the first Lines of their Land-
skip, reserving the lightest for the Dis-
tances.
But that  may not wander from my De-
sign, instead of general Precepts,  will
stop to give Beginners some particular In-
structions for Practice.
XC. In the first Place, after having or-
dered the Cconomy of your Landsiip as of
your other Pieces, you must form the near-
est Grounds or Lands, when they are to ap-
pear dark, with Sap or Lilly-Green, Bistre
and  little Verditer to give  Body to your





Colour: Then dot with this Mixture, but 
 little darker, adding sometimes  little
Black to it.
For such Pieces of Ground as the Light
falls upon, and which are therefore clear
and bright, make  Lay of Oker and White:
Then shadow and finish with Bistre. In
some they mix  littit Green, particularlys
for shadowing and finishing.
There are sometimes upon the Fore-
part certain reddish Lands; which are dead-
coloured with Brown Red, White and 
little Green: and finished with the same,
puttinga little more Green in them.
For the making of Grafs and Leaves
upon the Fore-ground, you must, when that
is finissed, form with Sea-Green or Verditer
and  little Wbite; and for thole that are vel-
lowisn, mix Masticot. Asterwards shadow
them with Lilly-Green, or Bistre and Gall-
stone, ifyou would have thei appear wither ’.
The Grounds or Lands at à little Dis-

tance, are formed with Verditer and sha-
dowed and finished with Sap-Green, adding
Bistre for some Touches here and there.
Such as are at  greater Distance, are
done with Sea-Green and  little Blue; and
shadowd with Verditer.
In  Word, the farther they go, the more
blueisp they are to be made; and the farthest
Distances ought to be of Ultramarine and
White; mixing in some Places small Touches
of Vermillion.




XCI. WaTeR is painted with Indigo and
White, and shadow’ with the same Colour,
but deeper: And to finish it, instead of dot-
ting, they do nothing but make Strokes and
Traces without crosling; giving them the
same Turn with the Waves, when there are
any. Sometimes  little Green must be
mixed in certain Places, and the light and
elear Parts heightened with pure White, par-
ticularly where the Water foams.
Rocks are dead-coloured like Buildings of
Stone; excepting, that  little Green is
mix’ for forming and shadowing them.
Blue and yellow Teints are made upon
them, and lost with the rest in finishing.
And when there are small Branches, with
Leaves, Moss, or Grass, when all is finisn’,
thev are to be raised at Top with Green
and Masticot. They may be made yellow,
green, and reddissi, for appearing dry, in
the same Manner as on the Ground. Rocks
are dotted as the rest; and the farther they
are off, the more grayisn they are made.
Castles, old Houses, and other Buildings
of Stone and Wood, are done in the Man-
ner  have mentioned before, speaking of
those Things, when they are upon the first
Lines. But when you would have them
appear at à Distance, you must mix Brocon-
Red and Vermillion, with much White; and
shadow very tenderly with this Mixture ;
and the farther they are off, the weaker are





the Strokes to be for the Separations. Iis
they are covered with Slate, it is to be mades
bluer than the rest.
XCII. TreEs are not done till the Sky
be finished: One may, nevertheless, spare,
the Places of them when they contain 
good Number: And however it be, such as
come near the Eye, are to be dead-colour’
with Verditer mixing sometimes Oker; and
shadowd with the same Colours, adding,
Lilly-Green. Afterwards you must work
Leaves upon them by dotting without
rossing: For this must be done with small
ongisn Dots, of  darker Colour, and pret-
 full of it; which miust be conducted on
he Side the Branches go, by little Tufts of
 little darker Colour. Then heighten the
Lights with Verditer or Sea-Green, and Mas-
icot, making Leaves in the same Manner:
And when there are dry Branches or Leaves,
hey are dead-coloured with Brozon-Red or
zall-stone, with White; and finished with
rall-stone, without White, or wich Bistre.
The Trunks of Trees are to be dead-co-
our’ with Oker, Wbite, and  little Green
or the light and clear Parts: and for the
lark, they mix Black, adding Bistre and
areen for shadowing one and the other.
lue and yellow Teints are likewise made
pon them, and little Touches given here and
here with White and Masticct, such as you
rdinarily see upon the Bark of Trees.




The Branches, which appear among the
Leaves, are done with Oker, Verditer and
White: or with Bistre and White, according
to the Light they are placed in They must
be shadowd with Bistre and Lilly-Green.
Trees, which are at  little Distance, are
dead-coloured with Verditer and Sea-Green ;
and are shadow’ and finished with the same
Colours, mix’ with Lilly-Green. When there
are some, which appear yellowish, lay with
Oker and Wbite, and finish with Gall-stone.
For such as are in the Distances and re-
mote Views, you must dead-colour with
Sea-Green:, with which, for finishing, you
must mix Uitramarine. Heighten the Lights
of one and the other with Masticot, by small
disjoined Leaves.
Tis the most difficult Part of Landstip;
OC
and, in manner, of Miniature, to leaf  Tre
well. To learn, and break one’ Hand to
it à little, the Way is to copy good ones;
or the manner of touching them is singular,
and cannot be acquired but by working
upon Trees themselves ; about which you
must observe to make little Boughs, which
must be leafed, especially such as are below
and towards the Sky.
And’generally, let your Landstips be co-
loured in  handsom Manner, and full of
Nature and Truth; for ’tis that which gives
them all their Beauty.


















Of FLOWERS.
XCIII. IT is an agreeable Thing to paint
Flowers, not only on account
of the Splendor of their different Colours,
but also by Reason of the little Time and
Pains that are bestowed in trimming them.
There is nothing but Delight in it; and, in
 manner, no Application. You maim and
bungle  Face, if you make one Eye higher.
or lower than another;  small Nose with 
large Mouth; and so of other Parts. But
the Fears of these Disproportions constrain
not the Mind at all, in Flower-Painting;
for unless they be very remarkable,
For this Reason
they spoil nothing.
most Persons of Quality who divert them-
selves with Painting, keep to Flowers.
Nevertheless you must apply yourself to
copy justly: And for this Part of Mini-

ature, as for the rest,  refer you to
Nature, for she is your best Model. Work,
then, after natural Flowers; and look for
the Teints and different Colours of them
upon your Pallet.  little use will make
you find them easily And to facilitate this
to you at the first,  shall, in the Continu-
ance



ance of my Design, shew the Manner of
Painting some; for natural Flowers are not
always to be had; and one is often obliged
to work after Prints, where nothing is seen
but Graving.
XCIV. Tisa general Rule, that Flowers
are designed and laid like other Figures ;
but the manner of formingand finishing them
is different: For they are first formed only
by large Strokes and Traces which you
must turn at the first the way the Small ones
are to go, with which you finish; this Turn-
ing aiding much thereto. And for finish-
ing them, instead of hatching or dotting,
you draw small Strokes very fine, and very
close to one another, without croffing ; rez
paffing several Timies, ’till your dark and
your clear Parts have all the Force you
would give them.
Of ROSES
XCV.  FTER making your first Sketch,

 draw with Carminethe Red-Rose;
ly  very pale Lay of Carmine and
and ap
White. Then form the Shades with the
same Colour, putting less Wbite in it: And
lastly, with pure Carmine, but very bright
and clear at the first; fortifying it more and
more, as you proceed in your Work, and
according to the Darkness of the Shades.
This is done by large Strokes. Then finish;






working upon it with the same Colour by
little Strokes, which you inust make go the
same Way with those of the Graving, if it
be  Print you copy; or the Way the
Leaves of the Rose turn, if you copy after
 Painting, or after Nature; losing the dark
in the clear Parts, and heightening the
greatest Lights, and the brightest or mest
lightsome Leaves, with Wbite and  little
Carmine. You must always make the Hearts
of Roses, and the Side of the Shadow,
darker than the Rest, and mix à little Indigo
for shadowing the first Leaves; particularly,
when the Roses are blown, to make them
seem faded.
The Seed is dead-coloured with Gamboge-
with which  little Sap-Green is mixed for
shadowing.
Roses streaked with several Colours,
ought to be paler than others, that the
Mixture of Colours may be better seen -
which are done with Carmine;  little dar-
ker in the Shades, and very clear in the
Lights; always hatching by Strokes.
For White Roses you must put à Zay of
White: and form and finish them as the
Red; but with Black, White and  little
Bistre; and make the Seed  little yellower.
Yellow Roses are done by putting in
every Part à Lay of Masticot and shadowing
them with Gamboge, Gall-stone, and Bistre;
heightening the clear and light Places with
Masticot and White.




The Styles, the Leaves, and the Buds of
all sorts of Roses, are formed with Verditer,
with which is mixed  little Masticot and
Gamboge and for shadowing them, they add
Sap-Green, putting less of the other Colours,
when the Shades are deep. The Qut-side
of the Leaves ought to be blewer than the
Inside: Wherefore it must be dead-colourd
with Sea-Green, and Sap-Green mix  with
that for shadowing, making the Veins or
Fibres on this Side clearer than the Ground;
and those on the other Side darker.
The Prickles, which are upon the Stiles
and Buds of Roses, are done with lirtle
Touches of Carmine, which are made to go
every way; and for those that are upon the
Stalks, they are formed with Verditer and
Carmine, and shadow’ with Carmine and
Bistre; making the Bottom of the Stalks
more reddisn than the Top; that is to say,
you must mik with the Green, Carmine and
pure Bistre.
Of TULIPS.
XCVI. AS there are an Infinity of Tulips,

different from one another, one
cannot pretend to mention the Colours with
which they are all done.  will only touch
upon the handsomest, called streaked: And
these Streaks are dead-coloured with very

clear Carmine in some Places, and with dar-
ker in others ; finishing with the same Co-





lour by little Strokes, which must be carriedj
the same Way with the Streaks. And ini
others is put  first Lay of Vermillion. Then
they form them by mixing Carmine, and
finish them wich pure Carmine.
In some they put Florence-Lake over the.
Vermillion, instead of Carmine.
Some are done with Lake and Carmine
mixed together, and with Lake alone, or
with White and Lake for the first forming ;
whether it be Rose-Pink, or Florence-Lake.
There are some of  Purple Colour,
which are formed with Ultramarine, Car-
mine or Lake, sometimes blewer and some-
times redder. The Manner of doing both
one and the other, is the same. There is no
Difference but in the Colours.
You must in certain Places, as-hetween
che Streaks of Vermillion, Carmine, or Lake,
sometimes put Blue, made of Ultramarine
and White, and sometimes  very bright
Purple, which is finished by Strokes as the
rest, and lost with the Streaks. There are
some likewise which have fallow Teints, that
are made with Lake, Bistre, and Oaker,
according as they are. But this is only in
sine and rare Tulips, and not in the common
ones.
For shadowing the Bottom of themi, they
ordinarily take Indigo and White for such
whose Streaks are of Carmine.
For such as are of Lake, they take Black
and White: with wnich, in some Bistre is
mix’;



mix’; and in others, Green. Some are
likewise to be shadow’ with Gamboge and
Umber, and always by Strokes and  races,
that turn as the Leaves turn.
Other Tulips are likewise done, call’ bor-
der’; that is to say, the Tulip is not streaked
but on the Edges of the Leaves, where
there is  Border.
It is White in the Purple.
Red in the Yellow.
Yellow in the Red.
And Red in the White.
The Purple is laid wich Uitramarine,
Carmine and White; shadowing and finishing
it with this Mixture. The Border is spar’;
that is to say, let only  light Lay of White
be put there; and let it be shadowed with
ve ry bright Indigo.
The Yellote is form’ with Gamboge, and
shadowed with the same Colour, mixing
Oker, and Umber or Bistre with it. The
Border is laid with Vermillion, and finished
with  very small Matter of Carmine.
The Red is forin’ with Vermillion, and
finished with the same Colour, mixing Car-
mine or Lake with it. The Bottom and the
Border are done with Gamboge: and for fi-
nishing, they add Gall-stone and Umber or
Bistre.
The White is shadowed with Black, Blue,
and White. Indian Ink is very proper for
this. The Shadowings of it are very tender.
lt produccs alone the Effect of Blue and




White, mixed with other Black. The
Border of this white Tulip is done with
Carmine.
In all these Sorts of Tulips, they leave 
Nerve or Sinew in the Middle of the Leaves
that are brighter than the rest: And the
Borders are drowned with the Bottom by
small Traces, turning crosswise; for they
must not appear cut and separated, as the
streaked or party-coloured.
They make them likewise of several other
Colours. When they happen to be such
whose Bottoms on the Inside are black, as it
were, they form and finisn them with
Indigo, as also the Seed about the Nozzle or
Staik. And if the Bottom is yellow, it is
form’ with Gamboge; and finisned by add-
ing Umber or Bistre.
The Leaves and the Stalks of Tulips are
ordinarily forin’ with Sea-Green: and sha-
dowed and finisned with Lilly-Green, by
large Traces all along the Leaves. Some
may likewise be done with Verditer, mixing
Masticot, with it, and shadowed with Sap-
Green, that the Green of the Shades may
be yello wer.
The EMONY, Or WIND-FLOWER.
XCVII.
THERE are several Sorts of
them as well double as single.
The last are ordinarily without Streaks. Some
are made of  Purple Colour, with Purple
and



shadowing them with the same
ne redder, others blewer; some-
ale, and sometimes very dark.
 forin’ with Lake and White
 with the same, putting less
 without any White at all.
re forin’ with Vermillion, and
ith the same Colour, adding
tewise white onee, and some of
olour. The last are laid with
nd one and the other shadow’
sometimes with Vermillion, and
ith very brown Lake, especial-
Seed, at the Bottom: which is
se of  blackisn Colour, that is
ndigo, or Black and Blue, mix¬
,  little Bistre: and always
very fine Strokes and Traces,
 Lights in the Shades.
 others that are brighter and
 Bottom, than any where else,
es they are perfectly white there,
rest of the Flower be dark.
 of all these Emonies is done
and Black, with  very little
shadowed with Indigo; and in
ised wich Masticot.
le Emontes are of several Co-
handsomest have their large
ked. Some are done, that is,
or party-coloured, wich Vermil-
 Carmine is added for the finish-
ing;



ing; shadowing the rest of the Leaves wit
Indigo, and fer the small Leaves within
à Lay is put of Vermillien and White, an
they are shadowed with Vermillion, mix
with Carmine, mixing here and there som
stronger Touches, especially in the Hear
of the Flower, next the great Leaves on tht
Side of the Shadow. They finish with Car
mine, by little Strokes and Traces, turning
the same way with the mixt, or Party-Co-
lours, and the Leaves.
They form and finish the Streaks or Party-
Colours of some others, as well as the
small Leaves, with pure Carmine: leaving
nevertheless, in the Middle of the last 
little Circle, in which is laid dark Purple;
which is lost with the Rest. And when
all is finish’, they give some Touches
with this same Colour round about the
sinall Leaves, especially on the Side of the
Shadow ; drowning them with the large
ones, the Remainder of which is shadow’
either with Indigo or Black.
In some, the small Leaves are done with
Lake or Purple, tho the Party-Colours
of the large ones be done with Ca-niine.
There are others, whose mixt Colours
are done with Carmine, in the Middle
of most of the large Leaves; putting in
some Places Vermillion underneath; and
losing these Colours with the Shadows of
the Bottom; which are done with Indigo
and White. The small Leaves are laid.




ith Masticot, and shadow’ with very
rk Carmine- on the Side of the Shade,
 with very clear on the Side of the
ight: leaving there, in  Manner, pure
sasticot; and giving only some attle
ouches with Orpiment and Carmine, to
parate the Leaves; which may be shadow’
metimes with  little very pale Green.
There are Double Emonies painted all
ed, and all Purple. The first are form’
ch Vermillion, and Carmine, in  Man-
, without White: and shadowd with
re Carmine, well gumin’, that they
ly be very dark.
Purple Emonies are laid wich Purple
 White, and finished with White.
In  Word, there are double Emonies,
there are single ones, of all Colours;
 they are done in the same Manner.
The Green of one and the other is
diter ; with which Masticot is mixd

Tis shadow’ and finisn’
forming.
The Styles of them
ch Sap-Green.
  little reddish: where fore they are
dowd with Carmine, mik' wich Bis-
and sometimes with Green, after hav¬
laid them wich Masticot.
The CARNATION and the PINK.

VIII.
TIS with Pinks and Carna-
tions as with Emonies and
ips; that is, there are some mixt-co-
rd, and others of one single Colour.




The first are streaked and diversifie
sometimes with Vermillion and Carmin
sometimes with pure Lake, or with Whiti
some Streaks very dark, and others ven
pale ; sometimes by little Streaks and .
verfsifications; and sometimes by large one
Their Bottoms are ordinarily shadow
with Indigo and White.
There are Pinks of  very pale Flesn
Colour, and streaked and diversified witil
another, à little deeper, made with Vermil
lion and Lake.
Others, which are of Lake and White
are shadowed and streaked without White.
Others all red ; which are done with Ver
miilli  and Carmine, as dark as pessible.
Others all of Lake.
And lastly, there are others, whereira
Nature or Fancy is the Rule.
The Green of one and the other is Sea-
Green, shadowd with Lilly- Green, or Sap-
Green.
The RED-LILLY.
XCIX. YTis laid with Red-Lead; formd
with Vermillion, and in the deep-
est of the Shades, with Carmine; and fi-
nish’ with the same Colour by Strokes and
Traces, turning as the Leaves turn. The
clear and light Parts are heighten’ with
Red-Lead and White. The Seed is done
with Vermillion and Carmine.



The Green Parts are done with Verditer
shadowd with Lilly or Sap-Green.
The DAY-LILLX.
THERE are three Sorts of them;

The Gridelin, à little red.
The Gride in, very pale.
And the White.
For the First they put à Lay of Lake
 White, and shadow and finish with the
ne Colour deeper: mixing  little Black
deaden it, especially in the darkest Places.
The second are laid with White, mixt
th  very little Lake and Vermillion, in
 manner; that these two last Colours
 hardly seen. Afterwards they shadow
th Black and  little Lake: working red-
 in the Middle of the Leaves, next the
ilks: which ought to be, as also the Seed,
the same Colour, particularly towards the
pp: and at the Bottom  little greener.
The Style of the Seed is laid with Mas-
, and shadow’ with Sap-Green.
The other Day-Lillies are done by put-
ga Lay of pure White, and shadowing
 finishing with Black and White.
The Stalks of these last, and the Greens
them all, are done with Sea-Green, and
dow’ with Sap-Green.




The HYACINTH, OT PURPLE-
FLOWER.
HERE are four Sorts of then
Cl. 
The Blue à little dark.
Others paler.
The Gridelin.
And the White.
The first are laid with Ultramarine 
White: and shadow’ and finish  with!
Wbite.
Others are laid and shadowed with 
Bluc.
The Gridelines are form’ with 
and White, and  very small Matter of
tramarine: and finish’ with the same (
lour  little deeper.
For the last, they put à Lay of Wh
then they shadow them with Black, wit
little White, and finish them all by Stro
and Traces, following the Turnings à
Windings of the Leaves.
The Green and the Stalks of such as:
blue, are done with Sea and Lilly-Gr
very dark, And in the Stalks of the Fi
may be mixed  little Carmine, to mi
them reddish.
The Stalks of the two others, as also 
Green, are form’ with Verditer and Ma
cot, and shadow’ with Sap-Green.



The PIONY.
II.  Lay of Venice-Lake and White

must be put on all Parts, pretty
ll'ong: Then shadow with less White, and
ith none at all in the darkest Places, After
hich finish with the same Colour by Traces,
rning them as for the Rose gumming it
zry much in the deepest of the Shades ;
lid raising the Lights and the Edges of the
post lightsome Leaves with White and 
tle Lake. Little Veins are likewise made,
thich go like the Strokes in hatching, but
 more visible.
The Green of this Flower is done with
tea-Green, and shadowed with Sap-Green.
COW-SLIPS.
III. THEY are of four or five Co-
lours.
There are some of  very pale Purple.
The Gridelin.
The White and the Yellow.
The Purple is done wich Ultramarine,
varmine and White: putting less White for
shadowing
Tne Gridelin is laid wich Venice Lake,
nd  very small Matter of Ultramarine,
vith much White; and shadowd with the
ame Colour deeper.
For the White,  Lay of White must be
put: and they must be shadow’ with Black
and



and White, and finish’, as the others, 
Traces, or Strokes.
The Heart of these Ccw-stips is done wit
Masticot in the shape of  Star, which
shadowd with Gamboge, making  litt
Circle in the middle with Sap-Green.
The Yellow are laid with Masticot, an
shadow’ with Gamboge and Umber.
The Styles, the Leaves, and the Budes
are formed with Verditer, mixt with  littl
Masticot ; and finisn’à with Sap-Green
making the Fibres or Veins, which appeag
upon the Leaves, with this same Colour
and heightening the Lights of the largefi
with Masticot.
The RENUNCULUS, Or CROW-FOOT.
CIV -
HERE are several Sorts off
them : The finestare the Orange-
colourd. For the first, they put  Lay of
Vermillion, with  very small Matter of
Gamboge, and add Carmine for shadowing;
finishing it with this last Colour, and  lit-
tle Gall-Stone. In the others may be put
Venice Lake, instead of Carmine, especially
in the Heart of the Flower.
The Orange-colour’ are laid with Gam¬
boge, and finisn’ with Gall-Stone, Vermillien,
and  little Carmine; leaving some little
yellow Streaks.




The Green of the Stalks is done with Ver-
ter and very pale Masticot; mixing Lilly-
een to shadow them.
That ofthe Leaves is à little darker.
The CROCUS.

THERE are of two Colours.
YelloW.

And Purple.
The Yellow are form’ with Masticot and
till-Stone, and shadowed with Gamboge and
rall-stone. After which, upon each Leaf,
 the outside, are made three Streaks, se-
rate from one another, with Bistre and
tre Lake ; which are loft, by little Traces,
the Bottom. The inside of the Leaves
left all Yellow.
The Purple are laid with Carmine, mixt
ith  little Ultramarine, and very pale
hite. They are formd and finish’ with
 White; making likewise, in some, pur-
 Stripes or Streaks, very dark, as in the
llow; and in others, only small Veins.
he Seed of both is Yellow ; and is done
ich Orpiment and Gall-Stone. For the
yles, they put à Lay of White and sha-
 with Black, mixt with  littie Green.
The Green of this Flower is form  with
very pale Verditer, and shadow’ with Sap-
Green




The IRIS.
CVI. THE Persian lris is done by pui

ting, for the inside Leaves,
Lay of White: and shadowing them wit
Indigo and Green together ; leaving à litt.
white Separation in the middle ofeach Lea:
And for those on the outside, they put in
che same Place  Lay of Masticot, whic
is shadowd with Gall-Stone and Orpiment
making little, dark and longisn Dots, ove
all the Leaf, at  little Distance from on
another. And at the End of each are mad
large Strains, with Bistre and Lake in somt
and in others with pure Indige, but veri
black. The Rest, and the outside of the
Leaves, are shadow’ with Black.
The Green is form’ with Sea-green, anc
very pale Masticot, and shadow’ with Sap.
green.
The Susian lris is laid wich Purple anc
White: putting  little more Carmine than
Uitramarine, And for the Shades, especi-
ally in the middle Leaves, they put lesa
White: and, on the contrary, more Ultra-
marine than Carmine; making the Veins 
this very Colour, and leaving in the mid-
dle of the inside Leaves  little yellow
SineW.
There are others, which have this verv
Sinew in the first Leaves ; the End of which
only is bluer than the Rest. Others are


hadow’ and finish  with the same Purple,
edder : They have also the middle Sitiew
 the outside Leaves, but white, and
hadow’ with Indigo.
There are likewise yelloep ones: which
ire done by putting  Lay of Masticot and
Orpiment ; shadowing th in wich Call-stone,
aanti making the Veins upon the Leaves with
Bistre.
The Green of one and the other is done
wich Sea-green, mixing à little Masticot for
the Styles. They are shadow’ with Sap-
green.

The JASMIN.
CVII. IT is done with  Lay of White,
and shadowed with Black and White;
and sor the outside of the Leaves they mix
 little Bistre; making the half of each, on
this side,  little reddisn with Carmine.
The TUBEROSE.
CVIII. FOR the doing of this, they make
  Lay of White, and shadow with
Black, with  little Bistre in some Places;
and sor the Outside of the Leaves, they mix
à little Carmine, to give them  reddish
Teint, particularly upon the Extremities.
The Seed is done with Masticot, and sha-
dow’ with Sap-green.
The Green of it is laid with Verditer
and shadowed with Sap-green.
And



The HELLEBORE.
CIX. 
THE Flower of Hel
done almost in the same
that is, let it be laid with White,
dowed with Black and Bistre, ma
outside of the Leaves  little rec
and there.
The Seed is laid with dark .
rais  with Masticot.
The Green of it is foul and 
is formed wich Verditer, Maf
Bistre , and finished with Sap-
Bistre.
The WHITE LILLY.

TIS laid with Wbite, and
CX.
with Black and White.
The Seed is done with Orpiment
stone.
And the Green is done as in the
The SNOW-DROP.

formed and finishe
CXI.
White Lilly. The See
with Masticot, and shadowd wi
stone.
And the Green is done with
Sap-Green.



The JONQUIL.

TIS laid with Masticot and
EXII.
Gall-stone, and finisned with
Gamboge and Gall-stone.
The Green is formed with Sea-Green, and
hadowed with Sap-Green.
The DAFFODIL.
CXIII.  LL Daffodils, the yellow, the
double, and the single, are done
oy putting à Lay of Masticot. They are
torm’ with Gamboge, and finished by add-
ing Umber and Bistre : excepting the
Bell in the Middle, which is done with
Orpiment and Gall-stone, and bordered, or
edged wich Vermillion or Carmine.
The White are laid with White, and
shadowed with Black and White: excepting
the Cup or Bell, which is done with Masti-
cot and Gamboge.
The Green is Sea-green, shadowed with
Sap-green.
The MARIGOLD.
CXIV. It is done by putting  Lay of
Masticot ; and then one of Gam¬
boge: shadowing it with this very Colour,
after Vermillion is miked with it. And for
sinishing, they add Gall-stone and  little Car-
anine.





The Green is done with Verditer, sl
dowed with Sap-green.
The Austrian ROSE.
CXV. POR making the Indian Rose, th
put à Lay of Masticot, and an
ther of Gamboge. Then they form it, mi
ing Gall-stone ; and finish it with the 
Colour, adding Bistre and  very small Ma
ter of Carmine in the deepest Shades.
The Indian PINK or French MARIGOL
CXVI. It is done by putting  Lay
 Gamboge; shadowing it with ti
Colour, after you have mixed  good de
of Carmine and Gall-stone with it ; ar
leaving about the Leaves  little vello
Border of Gamboge, very clear in the Light
and darker in the Shades.
The Seed is shadowed with Bistre.
The Green as well of the Rose as tI
Pink, is form’ with Verditer, and finishe
with Sap-green.
The SUN.-FLOWER.

IS formed with Masticot an
CXVH.
Gamboge, and finisned wit
Gall-stone and Bistre.
The Green is laid with Verditer an
Masticct; and shadowed with Sap-green.


The PASSION-FLOWER.
XXVIII.'TIS done as the Rose; and
the Green of the Leaves
likewise: But the Veins are done with 
darker Green.
POETICAL PINKS and SWEET.
WILLIAMS.
XIX. THEY are done by putting 
Lay of Lake and White; Tha-
dowing them with pure Lake, with  little
armine for the last: which are afterwards
lotted on all Parts with little round Dots,
eparate from one another- And the
Threads in the Middle are raised with
Wbite.
The Green of them is Sea-green, which
is finished with Sap-green.
The SCABIOUS.
CXX. THERE are two forts of Scabious,
the Red and the Purple. The
Leaves of the first are laid with Florence-
Lake, in which there is à little White; and
shadowed without White: And for the Mid-
dle, which is  great Boss or Husk, in
which the Seed lies, ’tis formed and finish’
with pure Lake, with  little Ultramarine or
Indigo, to make it darker. Then they make
little white longisn Dots over it, at  pretty





Distance from one another, clearer in th
Light than in the Shade, making them ge
every Way.
The other is done by putting  Lay 
very pale Purple, as well upon the Leaves
as the Bofss in the Middle ; shadowing both
with the same Colour,  little deeper Anc
instead of little White Touches for-the Seed;
they make them Purple: And about eacl
Grain they make out à little Circle, and this
over the whole Eoss or Husk in the Middle.
The Green is formed with Verditer and
Masticot, and shadowed with Sap-Green.
The SWORD OF DAY-LILLY.

IS laid with Florence-Lake and
CXXI.
very pale White; fermed and
finished with pure Lake, very clear and
bright in some Places, and very dark in
others; mixing even Bistre in the thickest
of the Shades.
The Green is Verditer, shadowed with
Sap-Green.
HEPATICA OT LIVER-WORT.
CXXII. THERE isRed and Blue. The
last is done by putting on all
Parts à Lay of Ultramarine White, and 
little Carmine or Lake; shadowing the inside
of the Leaves with this Mixture, but deep-
er ; excepting those in the first Rank; for
which, and for the outside of every one of
them,



them, they add Indigo and White, that tfe
Colour may be paler, and not so fine.
The Red is laid with Lake Columbine,
and very pale White; and finish’ with less
White.
The Green is done with Verditer, Masticot
and  little Bistre, and shadowed with Sap-
green, and  little Bistre, especially on the
outside of the Leaves.
The POMEGRANATE.
THE Flower of the Pomegra-
CXXIII.
nate is laid with Red-lead;
shadowed with Vermillion and Carmine; and
finished with this last Colour.
The Green is laid with Verditer and Mas-
ticot, and shadowed with Sap-green.
The Flower of the Indian BEAN.
CXXIV 
IS dene with  Lay of Le-
vant-lake and White; sna¬
dowing the middle Leaves with pure Lake,
and adding  little Ultramarine for the
others.
The Green is Verditer shadowed with
Sap-Green.
The COLUMBINE.
CXXV.
THERE are Columbines of seve-
ral Colours: The most com-
mon are the Purple, the Gridelin, and the
Red.




Red. For the Purple, they lay with Ultrâ
marine, Carmine, and White; and shadow
with this Mixture, deeper.
The Gridelin are done the same way
putting  great deal less Ultramarine thar
Carmine.
The Red are done with Lake and White
finishing with less White.
There are some mixt Flowers of thit
kind, of several Colours; which must be
form’ and finish’ as the others, but paler,
making the Mixtures of  little darker Co-
lour.
The LARK’ HEEL.
HERE are of different Co-
CXXVI.
lours, and of mixt Colours:
The most common are the Purple, the Gri-
delin, and the Red; which are done as the
Columbines.

VIOLETS and PANSIES.
CXXVI. 
VIOLETS and Pansies
are done the same way ; ex-
cepting, that in the last, the two middle
Leaves are blewer than the others; that is
the Borders or Edges; for the Inside of
them is yellow: and there little black Veins
are made, which take their Beginning from
the Heart of the Flower, and dye away to-
wards the Middle.





The MUSSIPULA, or CATCH-FLX.
CXXVIII.HERE are two Sorts of it;
the White and the Red :
The last is laid with Lake and White, with
 little Vermillion, and finished with pure
Lake. As for the Knot or Nozzle of the
Leaves, it is formed with White and  very
small Matter of Vermillion, mixing Bistre,
or Gall-stone, to finish it.
The Leaves of the White are laid with
White; adding Bistre and Masticot uponthe
Knots: which are shadowed with pure Bistre,
and the Leaves with Black and White.
The Green of all these Flowers is done
with Verditer and Masticot, and shadowed
with Sap-green.
The CROWN IMPERIAL.
CXXIX. THERE are of two Colours ;
the Yellow and the Red.
The First is done by putting  Lay of Orpe-
ment, and shadowing it with Gall-stone and
Orpiment, wich  littie Vermillion.
The other is laid with Orpiment and Ver-
million; and shaugwed with Gall-stone and
Vermillion, making the Beginnirig of the
Leaves next the Style, with Lake and Bistre,
very dark, and Veins with this Mixture,
both in one and the other, all along the
Leaves.





The Green is done with Verditer and
Masticot; and shadowed with Sap-green anc
Gamboge.
The SICLAMEN Or SOW-BREAD.
CXXXTHE Red is laid with Carmine.

 little Ultramarine, and much
Wbite; and finished with the same Colour,
deeper ; putting, in  manner, only Carmine.
in the Middle of the Leaves, next the
Heart; and in the rest add  little more
UItramarine.
The other is laid with Wbite, and shadow 
with Black.
The Stalks of one and the other ought to
be à little reddisni.
And the Green, Verditer and Sap-Green.
The GILLIFLOWER.

CXXXI. 
THERE are several Sorts of
Gillislowers; the White, the
Tellow, the Purple, the Red, and the Mixt,
of various Colours.
The White are laid with White, and sha-
dowed with Black, and with  little Indigo in
the Heart of the Leaves.
The Yellos, with Masticot, Gamboge and
Gall-stone.
The Purple are formed with Purple and
White ; and finished with less White; mak-
ing the Colour brighter in the Heart, and
even  little yellowish.
The Red with Lake and White; finishing
them with White.




The mixt-coloured are laid with White;
and the Mixtures are sometimes made with
Purple, in which there is much Ultramarine:
Others again, in which there is. more Car-
mine. Sometimes they are of Lake; and
soictimes of Carmine. Some are done with
Wbite; and others without White; shadow-
ing the rest of the Leaves with Indigo.
The Seed of all is formed with Verditer
and Masticot: and finished with Sap-green.
The Leaves and Styles are laid with the
same Green, mixing Sap-green to finisn
them.
 should never have done, were  to set
down here all the Flowers that may be pain-
ted. But  have mentioned enough, and
too many to give an Idea of others; and 
Dozen would have been sufficient, were one
always to work after Nature ; for then there
would be nothing to be done, but to paint
what one sees. But  thought, that as
Prints are most frequently copied, it would
be pleasing to find here the Colours, with
which different Fsowers are done. How-
ever, to finish as  have begun, every one
is ât Liberty to take and to leave what he
thinks proper.
CXXXII.  shall not add here any par-
ticular Instruction upon other Subjects. It
is not necessary And this little Treatise is
already larger than  designed it.  will
only say in general, that Fruits, Fishes,





Serpents, and all Sorts of Reptiles, are to.
be touebed in the same Manner as the Fi-
gures of Men are; that is, hatched or dot-
ted.
Birds and all other Animalsare done, like
Flowers, by Strokes, or Traces.
CXXXIII.Never make use for any of these
Things, of White-lead. Tis only proper
in Oil. It blackens like Ink, when only.
temper’ with Gum: especially if you set
your Work in  moist Place, or where Per-
fumes are. Ceruse of Venice is as fine, and
of as pure  White. Be not sparing in the
use of this, especially in forming or dead-
colouring; and let it enter into all your Mix-
tures, in order to give them  certain Body,
wliich will render your work glewish, and
make it appear soft, plump, and strong.
The Taste of Painters is, neverthelefs,
different in this Point. Some use à little of
it, and cthers nene at all. But the Manner
of the last is meagre and dry. Others use 
great deal; and, doubtless it is the best
Method, and most followed among skilful
Persons: For besides that it is speedy, She
may by the use of it, copy all Sorts of Pic-
tures: which would be almost impossible
otherwise; notwithstanding the contrary
Opinicn of seme, who say, that in Mimt-
ature we cannot give the Force and all the
’fferent Teints we see in Pieces in Oil.
Put this is not true ; at least of good Pain-




ers; and Effects prove it pretty plainly,
or we see Figures, Landskips, Pictures,
nd every thing else in Miniature, touched
 as grand, as true, and as noble  Manner
though more tender and delicate,) as they
re in Oil.
However,  know, that Painting in Oil
ias its Advantages; were they only these,
hat it exhibits more Work, and takes up less
ran  Tis better desended likewise against
he Injuries of Time, and the Right of
irth must be granted it, and the Glory of
Antiquity.
But Miniature likewisehas its Advantages;
nd without repeating such as  have men-
ioned already, ’tis neater and more com-
nodious. You may easily carry all your
mplements in your Pockets, and work
vhen and wherever you please, without
uch  Number of Preparations. You may
juit it and resume it when and as often as
ou will : which is not done in the other ;
 which one is rarely, to work dry.
But observe, that it is in one, and the -
her, as in  Play; in which the greatest or
cast Perfection of the Actors does not
onsist in playing high or low Parts- but
 playing extremely well the Parts they
indertake: For if He, who has the lowest
haracter, acquits himself better than ano-
her who acts the Hero, doubtless he merits
greater Applause.





Tis the same Thing in the Art of Paint
ing. Its Excellence does not depend upor
the Greatness of the Subject, but upon thes
Manner in which it is handled. Have yot
 Talent for one Thing, don’ throw you
self inconsiderately upon another; And 
you have received from Heaven some Sparl
of this delicate Fire, know wherefore it 
given you, and cherisn and improve it. Some
catch the Airs of  Face well: Others suc
ceed better in Landskips. Some work ir
litile, who cannot do it in large: Some art.
skill’ in Colours, who know little of Design
Others, lastly, have only  Genius for Flow-
ers. And even the Bassans got themselvet
 Fame for Animals; which they touched
in  very fine Manner, and better than any
thing else.
Wherefore let every one be content with
his own Genius, without affecting the Ta-
lent of another, and taking  Flight beyon-
his Strength; for it is very idie to force Na-
ture to give us what she has refused us: And
it concerns our Prudence, as well as Mo-
desty, not to take it in our Heads to shew
an Excellence we have not; for this were to
discover our Imperfections, and to labour
to our Shame. On the contrary, it is no
Disgrace to you, that you don’ possess alone
all the Parts, which have given Reputation
to great Painters. Every one of them had
his Perfection and his Weakness; and every
one of us ought to be content with his Por-







ion : The main Point is to cultivate it with
are.
And though this little Book will certainly
ontribute thereto; yet  present it you only
  Supplement to better Means. With-
ut doubt, one may learn more advanta-
eoussy under an excellent Master, from
vhom one might receive all the proper
ules and fine Maxims of the Art, and by
vhom one might see them put in Practice.
nd though the Contrivances for Drawing,
vhich  have set down at the Beginning,
re infallible, yet ’tis much better to get 
aculty in the true and genuine Art of it:
or if you have not, to lupply this Defect,
very peculiar Genius, and an extraordi¬
ary Justness of Eye and Hand, draw your
ieces as correctly as you may, ’twill be 
Iazard but they are spoil’ in the End, and
lave neither Proportion nor Beauty; be-
ause in the Application of the Colour, you
ery easily lose tne Scrokes and Traces, and
ot without great Difficulty can ycu reco-
er them, ifyou understand not something
of Drawing.  earnestly exhort, therefore,
ll Lovers of Painting, to learn to draee cor-
ectly, to copy indefatigably, and with the
greatest Exactness, good Originals ; in 
word to rise by easy and ordinary Steps to
the Perfection of this charming Art: the
Rules of which, like all others, are soon
learnt; but that is not enough. They must
be put in Execution. The Theory is useless,




without the Practice; and the Practi
without the Theory, is  blind Guide, whie
leads us out of the Way, instead of cor
ducting us whether we would go. But
understand well what one would do, and
do well what one understands, is the tr
Way to do and understand  great deal
Time; and of  good Scholar to become ;
excellent Master.
For what remains,  set not up for sul
 One. And yet  can asfure such Perso
as will take the Trouble to enter into tI
little School, with some Inclination at
Aptness to learn, that they will have  to repent it. For though they shou
stay in it with no Pleasure,  believe, at lear
they would not go out of it without son
considerable Advantage.












CHOICE
RECEIPTS

  
NSTRUCTIONS
FOR
The making and preparing of several
Fine CoLoURS, and other Things,
requisite for PAINTING in MINI-
ATURE.
The Secret of an italian for the making of
CARMINE and ULTRAMARINE.
Othing can excell the Colours
made after the following Me-
thods, nor is any Thing made
with greater Ease. They have

an inexpressible Brightness and
Vivacity never change, and are made at
 very little Cost. But tlie Proof will do
them more Credit than all  can say of em.

Tis sufficient that  lay down the Methods :
 begin then with






CARMINE.
STEEP  Pound of Brasil Wood of Fe
nambuca, of the Colour of Gold, fe
three or four Days, in an earthen Vessel 
Pot of white Wine-Vinegar. After havins
broken it well in  Mortar, boil it half 
Hour. Then pass or strain it through  ver
coarse Linnen Cloth, and set it again upoi
the Fire. Take another little Pot of Whit.
Wine-Vinegar, and in it steep or tempe
eight Ounces of Allum. Put this Allui, 
temperd, in the other Liquor, and stir 
about well with  Spattle. The Scuin 
Froth that rises, is your Carmine. Take it
off, as it rises, and let it dry. The same
may be done with Cochineal instead 
Brasil.
ULTRAMARINE.
TAKE ten Ounces of Linseed-Oil : Pu
it in an earthen Pot or Platter, witl
seven or eight Drops of common Water
and then set and keep it on the Fire till it be
gins to boil. To this put  Pound of white
Virgin’-Wax, broken in small Pieces. Wher
the Wax is melted, put in  Pound of Greek
Pitch-mixing with it four Ounces of pow
der  Mastick, which must be melted befort
in  Pot by it selfs with two Ounces of Tur-
gentine. Let the Whole boil for an Hour



and then let the Composition drop into cold
Water: and when it is of the Consistence of
Butter, it is done enough. But if you find
any hard callous Bits in it, tis  Sign
the Mastick is not melted enough; and
when you must put the Composition again
upon the Fire.
The whole being done enough, put La-
bis Lazuli in  Crucible upon the Fire till
it be as red as the Fire it self. Then throw
it into white Wine-Vinegar. Twill drink
up the Vinegar till it burst and reduce it self
to little Pieces ; which must be beat to
Powder. Then incorporate this Powder
with  little of the fore-mention’ Compo-
sition, the smallest Matter possible, and
keep it thus for about fifteen Days: After
which, fix  Board, bending  little down-
wards, upon the Edge of  Table. It will
be proper tohave  Channel or Furrow cut in
this Board. Onder the Board place  Glass
Receiver, and put your blue Paste on the
top of the Channel; and over the Paste fix
 Vessel of Water, to distil Drop by Drop
upon the Paste, and with the small End of
 sine polish’ Stick, assist the Water to di-
lute the Paste, by stirring and moving it 
little to and fro very genely. The first 
zury, which comes off Drop by Drop, is
the bluest. When it comes off not so fine
afterwards, you must change your Vessel to
receive the second Blue. After which, there
comes off  Third; which is likewise of




Use and must be kept. Let these three Sort
of Ultramarine dry. Then take and put
them separately in little Bags of white Leaf











For the making of Carmine and Ul-
tramarine, after different Ways; like-
wise fine Lakes, Columbines, Greens,
and other Colours, after several Me-
thods. All proper for Miniature.
CARMINE.
TAKE three Pints of Spring-Water,
which has not pass’ through Lead-
Pipes: Pour it into  glaz’ earthen Pot,
and set it on the Fire. When it is ready
to boils put in half or  quarter of an Ounce
of the Grain of Cohan or Dyer' Red, which
the Feather Dyers use, reduc’ to  fine
Powder. Then let it boil about three quar-
ters






rs of an Hour, or tiil the fourth Part of
ie Water be consum . But take Care it
  Coal-Fire. After which, strain this
ater through  Linnen Cloth into another
gla'id Vessel ; and heat it till it begins to
oil. Then add to it an Ounce of Cochineal,
nd  quarter of an Ounce of Arnatto, both
educ  to Powder serarately ; and set this
Mixture boil away to haif, or, in better
etter Terms, till it raises  black Scuin,
nd be very red ; for by means of Boiling it
akes  Colour. Take it off the Fire; and
strew in it half an Ounce or three Pinches
of pulveriz’ Roach-Allum, or of Roman
Allum, which is reddisn and better; and
half  quarter of an Hour after, strain it
through  Linnen-Cloth into  giaz’ Ves-
sel ; or else divide it in several little Dutch
or glaz’ Porringers; where let it settle for
twelve or fifteen Days, and you will see on
the Surface  mouldy Skin. which must be
taken off with  Sponge, and the Matter
underneath expos  to the Air. When the
Water at the Top is evaporated, dry the
Matter which rests at the Bottom; and
grind it upon  very hard and very smooth
Piece of Marble or Porphyry: and then
fift it through  very fine Searce.
Observe that the Quantity of these Ingre-
dients is not so fixed to the Proportion 
have laid do yn, but that you may put in
more or less of them at Discretion, accord-
ing to the Depth or Degree of the Colour



ou desire. If the Carmine is to be redde
hey put more Arnatto: if more of  Crims

on, they use more Cochineal. But all 
hem are to be pulveriz’ separately ; ani

he Grain of Cohan or Dyers Red is first 
boil alone, and the others all together all
bove.
ULTRAMARINE.
TAKE half  Pound of Lapis-Lazulis
 and put it upon red hot Coals; and
here let it stay till it be all over as red as tha
Coals themselves. Then quench it in very
strong Vinegar, and grind it upon  Por-
phyry, or any other Stone that’ very hard)
vith rectified Brandy. The more you grincl
, the finer will be your Ultramarine. Leu
 lie upon the Porphry, or in any Vessel
ill you have made the Pastel with which thiet
Lapis is to be incorporated.
For the making of this, take  quarter of
 Pound of Bee-wax,  quarter of  Pound
of Turpentine, the same Quantity of Rosin,
and the same of Linseed-Oil. Melt the
whole together over  slow Fire, and when
 begins to boil, pour it into  glaz’
Pot. This is the Paste of Ultramarine: of
which take  Quantity equal to that of the
Lapis, and knead it together upon the Por-
hyry or Marble. When they are well in-
corporated, leave them for one Night. And
afterwards, to bring out the Ultramarine,
which



which is in this Paste, pour clear Water
upon it, and knead it with your Hands, as
paste is kneaded, and the Uitramarine will
ime out ; for the receiving of which, place
Porringer, or other proper Vessel, under
bur Hands. Let it settle in this Water,
 you see the Ultra marine at the Eottemn of
ANOTHER.
TAKE four Ounces of Linseed-Oil ;four
 Ounces of new Bee-Wax, four Ounces
the Litharge of Silver, one Ounce of Ro-
, one Ounce of Mastic in Drops, four
unces of Burgundy-Pitch, two Drams of
Frankincense, and one Dram of Dragon’
blood. Beat small each of the dry Ingre-
ients in  Mortar, separately. Then heat
ie Linseed-Oil in an earthen Pan till it
mmers, then put in your other Ingredi-
nts one after another, letting the Dragon’
Blood be the last, and stirring the Whole
boût continually with  Stick. This your
aste will be done enough when it sticks to
our: Fingers like Glow ; at which time put
on your Lapis-Lazuli, having before-hand
made it red hot in  Coal-Fire, quench’
in White Wine-Vinegar, ground it upen
ne Marble after drving it, and sifted it
through one of the finest Searces, as  said
before. When they are well incorporated,
and have been let alone for Twenty four







Hours, take Spring-Water and no other
and with this Water kneading your Paf
well, you will see the first blue Tinctui
come cut, which is the finest and best. 
thus three times, always krieading wil
Spring Water. Finally, for the last Operatioi
take Speing-Water, and make it luke-warm
With this knead the Remainder of the Con
position, taking out the Afhes. Then pui
ting both into an Alembick, and distillin
them, you wili find at the Bottom the Gol
which was in the Lapis.
Some knead their Paste all at once in
Vessel full of Water luke-warm, into whic.
goes the Ultramarine: which they dry 
the Sun. They likewise leave the Lapi-
for the Space of  Month, incorporated wit
the Paste, before they draw anv Ultramarin
from it; and pur in the Paste, instead 
Linseed-Oil and Turpentine, Oil of Turpen
tine only ; and black Pitch, instead of Bur
gundy-Pitch For the Lapis, they heat 
quench it and grind it, in the Manner be
fore shewn.
FINE LAKE.
AKE  Pound of good Brasil, whic
 boil in three Pints of Lye, made wit
the Ashes of Vine-Twigs, till half the Ly
be consumed. Let it settle and strain it
Then boil again what you have strained
with fresh Brasil, with Cocbineal, and Terre
merita



nerita, there must be only an Ounce.
Mind, when vou take this Liquor off the
Fire again, that you put in an Ounce of
alein  Allum, beaten very small, and dis-
solve it by stirring it about with  Stick,
dding half  Dram of Arsenic. After-
vards, to give it à Body, take two Ounces
nf the Sound or Cuttle-Fisp-Bone, reduce it
to Powder, and throw it in. Let this dey
leisurely. Then grind it with  great deal
of Water: in which let it soak : Then strain
 through  Linnen-Cloth, After which,
make little Cakes of it; which let dry upon
Paste-board. Ifyou would have the Lake
edder, put in Zemon-Juice, and to make
it darker, add Oil of Tartar.
ANOTHER LAKE.
TAKE Shreds of Scarlet, and boil

them in Lye made with old Lees of
Wine, or with calein’ Tartar This Lye
has the Property of separating the Dye
from the Scarlet-shreds. When it has boil’
long enough, take it off, and put in Coche-
neat, powder  Mastic, and  little Roach-
Allum. Boil the whole again. Then strain
it through  fine Bag twice or thrice quite hot.
The first time the Bag must be squeez’ with
two Sticks from top to bottom. Then take out
the grofs Matter remaining in the Bag, and





wash it well. Strain the liquid Matter
which you pressed out with the Sticks
again through the Bag, and you will find or
the Sides of the Bag  Paste which spreac
upon Paste-board, or divide into little Por-
tions upon Paper, and let it dry.
LAKE COLUMBINE.
TAKE three Pints of the finest distillc
Vinegar: and  Pound of the finefts
Brasil of Fernambuca; which cut in smal
Pieces, and steep in the Vinegar for aboves
 Month at the least: The longer the better.
Afterwards seeth the Whole in Balneo Maria
till it boils up three or four Tinies. Then
let it settle  Day or two. After whichs
prepare  fourth Part of powder’ Allum,
and put it in  very clean earthen Pan; and’
strain the Liquor into the Pan upon the
Allum. Then let it settle for one Day.
Heat the whole again till the Liquor simmers,
and let it settle twenty four Hours. Then
prepare two Bones of the Sound or Cutile-
fisb, upon which pour your Liquor, which
ought to be  littie warm; and stir it about
with  Stick till it be cold. Afterwards let
it settle  Hours: Then strain it. Observe,
you must strain it with the Allum, before
you throw it upon the Bone of the Cuttle-fish.





No make  fine Purple-Colour, of the gross
Part, or Sediment of Lake-Columbine,
besides that made with Carmine, for Oil
and Water Colours.
TAKE the Sediment of Lake Columbine,
which falls to the Bottom of the Vial,
 which is the Bone of the Cuttle-fisb. Let
it dry, and grind it. There is nosine Lake
so lively. If you mix it with Lake, you
will give the Lake more Strength and Vi-
gour.
LILLY-GREEN.
TAKE the blewest Flowers of Lillies:
Separate the Tops of them, which
are silky, and save only them, (for the rest
is of no Use) and pull out the yellow Fibres.
Bruise in  Stone Mortar the Flowers you
have pick’; and when you have done that
well, throw three or four Spoonfuls of
Water upon them, more or less according
to your Quantity of Flowers. But you
inust first dissolve à little Allum, and  very
little Gum Arabic, in the Water. After-
wards grind the whole together very well.
Then strain it through  coarse Linnen-
cloth; and putting this Juice in Shells, dry
it in the Air.





ANOTHER WAY.
 AFTER you have picked and cleanse
 the Flowers, bruised and put Alumi
water to them, as  just now said, throvi
lpon them  little Quick-lime in Powder
in the manner they sugar  Sallet. It haf
the Property to change their Colour, anc
to purify them. Afterwards press out the
Juice into Shells.
ANOTHER and  better WAY.
RRUISE Allum and Grain of Avignon

and mix them together with Water.
Then boil the whole upon the Fire, or upon
hot Ashes, till the Water be yellow. Nexti
bruise the Lilly-Flowers in  Mortar, and
pour upon them  little of this yellowi
Water, according as you would make thef
Green lighter or darker. Afterwards strain
the Juice through  Bag or Cloth made of
Goat’ Hair, (for Linnen takes all the Co-
lour) and pour it into large Shells: which
set full in the Sun; for if they are placed in
the Shade, the Green becomes mouldy and
glewy.
ANOTHER.

TAKE Leaves of lris: Mince or chop
— them very small, and put them into
 Glass or Delft Vessel ; or, which is better,
into



into  Brass or Copper Pot, with powder 
illum and Quick-lime. Let the whole rot
together for ten or twelve Days; and then,
being rotten, press it into Shells; for, that
ae blue Colour may become green, it  that the Flowers putrify. The Green
ls darker and more lively, when only the
leaves are bruised, and pressed immediately,
without letting them rot, after having
strewed powdered Allum upon thent.
Another with VIOLET-FLOWERS.
GREEN, of the Leaves of March Vio-

lets is made in the same Way But you
must have  greater Quantity of them: And
this Green is darker than that of the Iris.
But observe, that instead of Lime, you may
put the Grain of Avignon, or Dyer’ Yellow
bruised with Allum. Tis much better than
Lime for changing the Blue into  Green.
Green may likewise be made with the
Flowers of Pansies in the same Manner.
SAP-GREEN,
TAKE small red Seeds of Amomum,
and fill  Hog’ Bladder with them,
putting in  little Allum. Let it hang up
in  Room some Time; and the Seed
corrupting, will change into this Sort of
Green.




 else take Buckthorn Berries: Beat them
in aMortar, and throw to them  little pow-
dered Allum. Then squeeze out the Juice.
and putting it in  Bladder, tie it close and
hang it up. This Green will harden in thei
Bladder.
DUTCH-PINK.
-
IS generally made with Spanisb-White
and the Grain of Avignon, or Dyer’
Yelloo. But it changes when made of those
Things. Tis better therefore to make it of
White-Lead, or Ceruse, which must be
ground very fine, and temper’ upon Por-
phyry, of which it must be taken with 
wooden Spattle, and let dry in the shady
part ofa Room. Afterwards take the Grain
of Avignon or Dyer  Tellow Beat it to
Powder in aMarble Mortar with  wooden
Pestle, and boil it with Water in  leaded
earthen Pot, till about  third or more is
consumed. Strain this Decoction through 
Linnen-Cloth; and put in it the Quantity of
two or three Hazel-nuts of Allum, to keep
it from changing its Colour. When it is
dissolv’, temper the White with this De-
coction; and bring it to the Form of  pretty
thick Pap; of which, kneading it well be-
tween your Hands, make little Balls or Cakes,
and put them to dry in  very airy Room.
When they are dry, dilute them again with
the same Decoction, and put them again to
dry :


 : And thus do three or four Times, ac-
zording as you would have the Pink light-
er or darker, letting it dry very well each
Time. Observe, that the Juice or Decoc-
tion inust be hot, when you temper the
Paste with it; and that another Decoction
must be made, when the first is turn’ and
corrupted, taking Care not to touch it with
lron or Steel, but to use  wooden Spattle.
The right Use of ALLUM.
-
HE best Way to use Ailum in Lilly-

Green, and other Compound-Colours,
which change without this mineral Salt, is
to beat it pretty smnall, and put it in  little
Water upon the Fire ; for otherwise it will
never dissolve weli. This Water you sprin-
kle on your Flowers, or Juices of Colours.
But the less Allum the better, because it
burns when there is too much.
To purisy VERMILLION.
 Innaber, or Vermillion, being made of

Mercury and Sulphur, it must be clean-
sed from the Impurities it has contracted
from these Minerals, which darken its Lus-
tre, and make it turn. Now this Purgation
is done in the following Manner.
Grind Cinnaber in Stone, with pure Water,
upon Porphyry: Then put it in  Glass or
Delft-Vessel; and let it dry. Afterwards put
Urine-
F to it; and mix them in such Manner,
that the Urine penetrate all the Cinnaber.
and cover it. Let the Whole settle, and
the Cinnaber being at the Bottom, turn out
the Urine, and add fresn to it, leaving it all
the Night; and continue to change the
Urine for four or five Days, till the Cinna-
ber be well purg’. After that, pour upon
the Cinnaber Whites of Eggs, well beaten
with fair Water, and so that the Water co-
ver the Whites. Mix the Whole together
with  Hazel-Stick, and let it settle. Change
the Liquor twice or thrice, as before; and
always keep the Vessel close stopt, to keep
out the Dust, which makes the Cinnaber
turn or change. And when you would make
Use of it, temper it with Gum-Water; for
that will not change it.
ANOTHER WAX.
GRIND the Cinnaber, already in Pow-
 der, upon Porphyry, with Children 
Urine, or with Brandy, and let it dry in
the Shade.
If you would take off its Darkness, and
make it of  brighter Red, infuse in Brandy,
or in Urine,  little Saffron; and with this
Liquor grind the Cinnaber.




 Direction for the making  very fine
BURNISHD GGLD.
THE Wood of the Frame, or of any

other Piece, which you would gild,
inust be extremely smooth; and to give it
 farther Polishing, rub it over with the
Ear of  Sea-Dog. Then smear it over twice
or thrice with Glew, made of the Clippings
of white Glove-Leather ; and put on nine
or ten Lays of White. When- it is quite dry,
sub it over with Shave-Grass, to make it
smoother and finer. Next, warm  little
Glew over the Fire with Water, in which
dip  Piece of very fine Linnen, first made
very clean, and pass it over the Whiter-
Then apply two or three Lays of Gold-Co-
lour ; and more, if it has not Colour enougha
When ’tis perfectly dry, rub it stoutly with
 dry Linnen-Cloth, till it glitters. Then
pass  large Pencil, dipt in the strongest.
Brandy that is to be had, over the Gold-Cc-
our; and let your Leaf-Gold be ready cut-
pon the Leather-Cushion to lay on as soon
 you have pass’ the Pencil over: and
when it is dry, polish it with  Dog’-
Tooth.
To make Glove-Glew.
TAKE  Pound of Glover’ Clippings:-
Put thein to steep in Water some.





Time: Then boil them in  Kettle with
twelve Quarts of Water, till the Water be
consum’ to two Quarts. Then strain ii
through  Linnen Cloth into  new earthen
Pan. To know whether the Glew be strong
enough, try, when it is quite cold, and has
got its Consistence, ifit be stiff and firm un-
der the Hand.
To make White for the Ground.
gm
HE Glew being made, take white
Chalk, and reduce it to Powder with
 Knife, or grind it upon  Marble. Melt
the Glew, and make it very hot. Then
take it off the Fire, and put  sufficient Quan-
tity of White in it to make it as thick as Pap.
Leave it to steep for half  Quarter of an
Hour; and then stir it about with  Bristle-
Brush.
Take some of this White, and put more
Giew to it, to make it brighter for the first
and second Lay; which must be applied by
beating with the End of the Brush.
Mind, that you let each Lay dry well
before you put on another. If ’tis Wood
you work on, you must put on  Dozen:
if it is thick Paper, six or seven are suffi-
cient.
This done, take Water: Dip  soft Brush
in it; and draining it with your Fingers,
rub your Work with it, to make it smoother.
When your Brushi is full of White, you must
wash



wash it again; and change the Water too
when it is too white.
You may likewise sometimes make Use of
 wet Linnen-Rag in lieu of the Brush.
Your Work being very even, let it dry -
and when it is so, rub it with Shave-Grass,
or à Bit of new Linnen-Cloth, to make it
soft and free.
To make  Ground on which to Gild and Sil-
ver in another Manner
TAKE  Quarter of  Pound of very
choice and fine Bole Armoniac, that
sticks upon the Tongue, and is greasy to
the Touch. Dissolve it in Water, and
then grind it; adding the Bigness of  Fil-
berd of Lead-Ore, and the Bigness of  Pea-
of Candle-Tallow: which prepare thus:
Melt it; then throw it into cold Water--
and finger it about in the Water, and it will
be fit for Use. The Bigness of  Pea is
enough for one Grinding.
As you grind, you may add  little Soap-
Sud to the Bole Armoniac. When this Com-
position is ground, put it in fair Water;
which change from time to time, in order
to preserve it.
When you would use it, temper it with
melted Glew, somewhat warm, and if the
Glew be as strong as that you have whiten’
with, add  third Part of Water; and mix-
it.




it with the Bole Armoniac, to the Consis-
tence of Cream. Then apply it with 
Pencil upon your Work, putting three or
four Lays, and letting each Lay dry very
well before you apply another. : When
it is all dry, before you gild or silver it, rub
it à little with  sost Linnen-Rag.
To lay on the Gold and Silver.
SET the Piece, you would gild or silver
over, in  reclining Posture, and wet
any one Place with  Pencil dipt in fair
Water Then lay on your Gold; having
cut it before upon  Leather-Cushion. It
must be taken up with Cotton, or  large
Pencil. When all is gilded, let it dry ; but
not in the Sun, or in the Wind: And when
it is dry enough, polish it with  Dog’
Tooth.
To know whether it be dry, pafs the
Tooth  little over some Places. If it does
not slide easily, but tears the Work off; it is
 Sign it is not dry.
But on the other Hand, take Care it be
not too dry : for this makes it harder to po-
lisn, and takes away from its Lustre. In
very hot Weather, three or four Hours are
sufficient to dry it. But sometimes it re-
quires  Day and  Night.




To deaden Gold.
MAKE  fine lively Red with Red-

Lead,  little Vermillion, and the:
White of an Egg well beaten. Grind all
together upon  Marble, and put some of
it in the deep Places with  very fine-
Pencil.
To dedden Silver
TAKE Ceruse, and grind it with Wa-
ter. Then temper it with Fish or

Glove-Glew. The first is the best. Tis
applied with  Pencil on the Placcs to be
deaden '.
To make Shell-Gold and Sbell-Silver
LAY Leaf-Gold, more or less, accord-
Ling to the Quantity you would make,
upon  very clean Marble. Grind it with
new or clear Honey till it be extremely soft
under the grinding Stone. Then put it in
 Glass of fair Water, and stir it about; and
change the Water till it remains clear. Get
 Penny-worth or so of strong Water. Put
your Gold in it, and let it steep there two
Days. Then take it out; and the strong
Water may serve again. The Method is
the same sor Silver.
When



When you would lay either of them of
you must temper them with Water,  littl
gummed; and to sleek and smooth them th
better, let it be Soap-Sud. Tis proper als
to put under the Gold  Wash of Gall-Stone

Twill appear the finer for it.
You inust lay but tle least Geld and Sil
ver that can be uron Pieces in Miniature
excepting for Fillets and Girdles; becaus
this looks affected, and gives them  gaud
theatrical Air.
SOME







SOME
GENERAL INSTRUCTIVE

LESSONS
FOR THE
ART of DRAWING.
THE ingenious Author of the
preceeding little but valuable
Treatise, has laid down several
Rules for delineating or copying

Pictures or Prints, by such as
could not draw, knowing very well that the
Performance of the former would be very
deficient without the Practice of the lattera
and he recommends it as the surest Way, to
excel in that charming Art of Painting in
Miniature, of which he has so freely and in-
genuously given such fulland plain Instructionsa
It is to be admired that most Persons from
their Infancy, have  Fondness for Pictures,
and Children love to busy themselves, with
draw




Drawing, Colouring, and handling  Pencil,
but this Fondness for the generality wears off
by Degrees, and is by most quite neglected :
The chief Reason of which, as  presume,
is the Trouble and Pains they apprehend
will attend the Acquisition thereof.
It is certain’that every one is not endued
with  Disposition or natural Inclination,
to that ingenious Art, nor can it be attain’
by Labour and Pains without  Genius.
But such as find them lelves disposed, should
by all means come to  Resolution to attempt
the Practice thereof.
Parents therefore would do well to watch
and observe diligently the Inclination of
their Children, and finding that by Instinct
they shew  natural Genius, and Capacity
for Ingenuity, when of their own Accord
they will take Delight in drawing, shadow-
ing and finishing any Thing they attempt
to copy, and seem to take  Pride in their
Performances. They should by all means
be encouraged, and be instructed by  good
Master, in the best Manner, in the funda-
mental Rules and Precepts requisite to be
known in the Progress and Practice of-
either Drawing, Designing, or Painting.
It frequently happens that  bright
Genius, an Artist born, has no Opportu-
nity to receive the Instructions of  Master,
or is by Distance in the Country de-
prived of the Conversation with Artists,




nd ingenious Practitioners; his only Way
then to furnishi himself with such Books
that may guide him in his Pursuit after that
knowledge he so fondly aims at; and for
the Benefit of such these Lessons are inten-
ded, not doubting they will meet with the
same Encouragement and Reception by the
ingenious, as the preceeding Work, viz.
The Art of Painting in Miniatare, has done,
so which fourth Edition  have added these
instructive Leslons, for the Art of Drawing,
	 briefly, plain and casy as possible.
II.
SUCH as intend to make themselves
compleat in the Art of Drawing, should
first learn the Principles of Geometry and
Perspective, and thereby inform their Minds
of true Symetry and Proportion; this being
 Subject to be met with in Books wrote by
skilful Artists for that Purpose,  shall for
Brevity Sake omit enlarging upon it.
The common Rules for Beginners are
commonly to draw the particular Members
of the Bodies of Men; and first of all: The
Face or Head is attempted by drawing

an Oval, or the Shape of an Egg, with the
several Dimensions of the Cross, by which
 Learner may understand the better to ex-
press the Turnings and Motions of the Face
in the different Attitudes, hereafter exem-
plifyed.





To this Oval for the Head or Face belong


the Eyes, Eye-brows, Nose, Mouth, anot
Ears; and to place them in their propek
Situations, the Cross is drawn for thal
Purpose.
After you have formed an Oval, draw 
Perpendicular down the Middle, this cross
again in the Middle with  diametrical
Line, which you divide in five equal Parts
each being the Breadth of one Eye. This
is called the ocularLine, on which you place
the Eyes, and is with the Perpendiculara
which goes from the Top of the Forehead,
through the Middle of the Nose, Mouth,
and Chin, called the Cross, upon which thef
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and Ears, are to bej
placed in their proper Situations, as you
may observe in Fig.  But for the better
Apprehension of such as are unacquainted
with the use of the Cross in the Oval, ors
with the many Variations of the same, as in
Turnings and Motions of the Head, an
Experiment has been found, to make the
use of the Crofs more plain and intelligible,
which is this: Have  Piece of Wood
turned in the Shape of an Egg, as in

Fig.  Then draw  Line from Point to
Point lengthways, through the Midst of the
Egg, as in Fig.  Divide this in two equal
Parts, by cutting  right Angle as you see
Fig.  having drawn the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, &. in their proper Place,
you may by the Position of the Egg, see the





Declination or Inclination of Faces, and
according to the Position of Fig.  you will
see it fronting. Turning the Lgg or Oval
 little from the left to the right, the straight
perpendicular of the Cross will change and
present itself in an Arch, as in Fig.  ac-
cording to which you project the Nose
beyond the round of the Oval, and place
the rest of the Members of the Face in their
proper Lines, as in Fig.  The same is
to be observed in turning the Figure of the
Oval the contrary Way, as in Fig.  Again,
the Oval inelining downward, the Cross
will appear as in Fig. And the Face
looking down as in Fig.  The Oval
being turned backwards, the Crofs will
change again, as in Fig  And  Face
drawn according to thole Lines will appear
like Fig.  After this manner you may
form  Variety of Faces, except those which
are sideways, which are commonly drawn
by means of  Perpendicular, as you see in
Fig.  upen which vou place the Forehead,
Nose, Mouth, and Chin, let them be in
what Disposition they will. See Fig.  are the necessary Rules for design-
ng or drawing  Face, which if well ob-
served and practised, will in  little Time
furnisn  Learner with lively Ideas to draw
Faces, with good Judgment, and give them
masterly Strokes and Touches, of which
otherwise, by meerly drawing or copying
after Prints, he would have been unacquaint-






HAVING advanced and mounted the
first Step, and the young Practitioner
is well grounded in drawing the Oval andj
Face, he may then exercise himself, to copyl
with great Care and Diligence, after goodf
Draughts and Prints. The former being
the most proper for such as intend to exer-
cise the Art of Painting, and the latter fori
such as propose to practice Etching or
Graving; beginning with such as are easy,
and going forwards to such as are more dif-
ficult, and having arrived to some Perfection
in this, he may adventure to copy after;
Paintings, and to contract large Pictures
into small, observing  due Proportion ; and
by diligent Practice he will accustom him-
self to guefs well, and acquire  free and
sure Hand in Designing.
Next to this  young Practitioner may
venture upon copying after Figures of Plail-
ter of Paris, which is more difficult than
either drawing after Prints or Paintings,
and shall be more fully treated of in its pro¬
per Place.
The best Patterns to draw or copy after,
is Life itself, or all natural Things: Here
an Artist has  large Field to range in, and
he need never be idle, but may always find
innume rable Subjects to improve his Talent;
which can not be better done than by Dili-
gence and Application.





Now come to the Practice of the Art of
Drawing itself, and first of drawing after
Draughts, Prinits, or Pictures: You must
arst of all observe to fix your Principal in 
proper Light, so as to see it distinct and
plain, placing it at  proper Distance accor-
ding to the Largeness of the Picture or
Draught vou design to copy, putting it
straight before you, and not flat, for then
you would see it foreshorten; the Paper
you draw upon fix, five or six double, on 
Board, holding that on your Knees, with
which you elevate it as high as you would
have it. Thus you will the better compare
your Draught with the Principal before you,
which otherwise in case your Draught lay
flat, you could not do so well. Thus being
fixed for to begin your Piece, guess firstthe
Middie of the Picture, or whatever you
intend to copy after, and make  Mark with
your Coal, in the Middle on your Paper-
From this Mark you will guels at the pro¬
per Distances of the Figures dispersed in the
Pieces, if there be more than one, and by
taking Heed of the capital Strokes with
free and slight Touches, you will soon see
whether the Position of your Figures be
just, leaving the small Breakings or Partings
to the next Drawing: and thus by Patience
and Practice you will not only readily, but




also judicioussy attain with Delight to you
Purpose.
Having made  rough Sketch, examin
whether the Disposition and Actions of
the Figures, answer those in the Princi
pal before you ; correct and amend suc
Parts as you see amiss, by adding or taking
off, ’till you find it answer you Purpose, and
having made thus  rough Sketch, you may
proceed, and draw it neater and better, ob
serving the various Turnings that represen
themselves, either in the Actions or Drapery
taking Heed not to make the first Sketch
worse or spoil it, by being about to make in
better, which may soon happen, if due Cari
is not taken in preserving that Disposition
you approved of before, and having thus
the second time, drawn your Sketch over
with Charcoal, examine and correct it after
the Principal, and suffer not  Fault to pass
without Correction; for it will be more for
your Honour to make one good Draught,
than an Hundred without Observation or
Judgment.
In this case it is proper for an Artist to
divert himself between Whiles, by Reading,
Mufick, or looking over of Prints; then
taking  fresn View of his Performance and
examining it, he may discover  Fault he
did not see before.





IN drawing after Figures of Plaister of
Paris, you must choose  proper Light.
The Room you draw in should be large and
iave  Light northwards, so high, that the
jhade which your Figure makes upon the
Bround, be equal, or little less than the
Height of your Figure you are to draw
after
You may also draw conveniently by the
Lamp, which some Artists prefer before
Day-light, because the Shades appear more
strong and sharp, for this Purpose they hang
 Lamp at  convenient Height, well pro-
vided with Oil and divers Wicks, and to
prevent the Light spreading itself too much,
but remain more constant, they put some
Oil Paper, through which the Light can-
not shine, behind it, and thereby it spreads
the stronger upon the Model they copy.
Set yourself from the Figure you are to
draw, three Times as far as it is high, in
such  Manner, that your Eye may in 
straight Line, behold the Model, hanging 
Plumb-line before it; and having drawn 
perpendicular Line on your Paper, you ob-
serve what comes either on the one Side or
other, to your View, and then make 
rough Sketch of the Position of the Figure
in the best Manner you are able. What 
have here said of drawing after Plaister of
Paris,




Paris, by the Lamp, is not to be observen
in General, for as it casts strong and hari
Shades, they are judged not so natural an
sweet as those caused by the Light of Day
and are therefore not approved of by th
Generality of experienc' Artists, And 
case they do draw by the Lamp, they pu
 Frame with Oil Paper, between the Mei
del and the Light, and thereby break tha
Harshness of the Shade. You must set alsi
 white or gray Paper behind the Model
that you may perceive the Reflexions the
better.
VI.
SUCH as would make  further Progres
and Improvement in Drawing, must ne
cessarily study Anatomy, especially as far 
it relates to the Muscles. An Artist having
the fundamental Knowledge in this Study
will soon apprehend the regular Motion .
the Members in the Human Body, wher
otherwise he will be in the dark, and noi
able to give any Reasen or Distinction why
this or that Muscle, is in either this or thai
Position, Swelling, or Contraction. The
Muscles which are the principal Cause of
the changeable Motions or Postures of the
whole Body are chiesly these:  Those Be-
hind the Hips.  Those of the Loins.  of the Back.  Those of the Throat.
 The Muscles of the Shoulder.  Those




of the Breast, beginning at the Nipples,
ind ending at the Small of the Belly, all
he Motions and Changes of which may be
observed from the Life, to which  refer the
Practitioner; but before he attempts this,
he will do well to draw first after anatomical
Figures, many of which are extant in Cop-
per-plate Prints, and then after such as are
cast in Plaister of Paris, by which Means
and the reading of anatomical Lectures upon
the Muscles, he soon will form  right
Judgment and Idea in drawing his Figures
to Perfection, and in their regular Postures
and Motions.
VII.
ATURE, or the Life, is compleat in

all Things, and to imitate the meanest
Production of Nature, requires à masterly
Hand. This may invite us to chuse her
for our Pattern and chief Object to draw
after. This cannot be better put in Execu-
tion, than for to chuse  Company of inge-
nious ycung Men, with whom  young
Beginner jointly may spend one or two
Days in  Week, under the Instruction of
an able Master, to draw after Life; that is
to say, after  naked, strong, and robust
Man, of broad Shoulders,  fair Breast,
very well muscled, thick Thighs, long
Legs, and of  proportionable Size. And
having put this your Model in the Posture





you have agreed on, and furnished thei
Room with  proper Light, such as has
been described under the nfth Article, yot
proceed to copying, every one to his besi
Skill, without despising one another’ Per-
formance; but rather instructing and encou-
raging each other with Modesty and gooc
Manners.
For standing Actions, the Person drawn
by, is commonly placed on the Ground;
but when sitting or lying, it will be proper
to have him placed on  Table at  conve-
nient Height.
VIII.
IT is customary for Beginners as well as

able Masters, to draw with Charcoal, it
being the easiest rubbed out again, in cafe
of  Fault. Others make use of Black-lead,
with which they draw the Outlines and after-
wards finish their Pieces either with Crayons
or other Things they are used todraw with-
but this is more fitter for experiene’ Mas-
ters than young Practitioners.
The several Ways made use of in finish-
ing  Draught, depends upon the Choice of
the Artists; some use Red Chalk; others
Black Chalk; others draw with  Pencil,
which is called wafhing, and is done with
several Sap-colours, as Indian Ink, Bistre, or
Chimney Soot, of Wood Smoke, ground In-
ground Red Chalk, and the like;





others again finish their Pieces with writing
Pens, which Way is the most tedious, and
not to be recomniended, but to such as in-
tend to practice Graving on Copper-plates.
Some use Pens made of Reeds, and many
great Masters have drawn Figures with them
in bold Strokes; some chuse Charcoal dipp’
in Linseed Oil, but this must be used quickly
and readily, and is only fit for large Things;
others make use of Tobacco-pipe Clay
wherewith they draw on blue or other co-
loured Paper, and heighten the Lights with
white Chalk. Of this Tebacco-pipe Clay
are also made Crayons or Pastils of various
Colours, with their different Shades, and
they are thus done: Take Tobacco-pipe
Clay, and witha little Water temper it with
what Colour you please; work it well toge-
ther, roll it into Pastils, and lay them on 
clean Paper to dry. Some will put Gum or
Size in the Water ; but then the Crayons
commonly prove hard and become useless.
These are the common Methods Practiti-
oners make use of in finishing their Draughts;
most of them chuse Paper; some indeed
prefer Parchment and other Things, but
white Paper has been approved of by most
Artists for sketching, hatching, and washing,
with all Sorts of Water-colours; Crayons
indeed are best managed on blue or any

other coloured Paper.






LEARNERS should, in drawing afterk
Draughts, follow the Manner of their
Principal, that in so doing they may bel
accustemed to it all their Life-time. If you)
hatch with  Pen, take Heed to avoid;
scratching; endeavour to make the Strokes,
free and bold, beginning from the fine or
sharp End to the broad : some flat and equal
Shades must be drawn with equal Hatches, 
let them be sine or coarse.
In drawing with Crayons hold your Pas-
tils straight forwards, and they will not so
soon become blunt, for turning them be-
 veen your Fingers, they will wear and yet
keep their Pcint continvally, so that you
may draw  whole Draught without scrape-
ing your Pastils.
Rousling is also practised by some, and
differs not much from hatching; only to
make it look close and blended one in ano-
ther, it must be dosled with some Cotton
fixed in  Goose Quill. When in this man¬
ner you begin to shadow your Draught, do
it first faint, smooth, and even, so as it may
appear as if washed wich  Pencil; then you
shade your Draught in the darkest Places,
with Hatchings in  graceful and masterly
Manner ; thus by hatching and dosling the
one upon the other, you will accustom your-




self to  masterly Hand in Drawing. This
sort of dosling or hatching is done with
either red or black Chalk. Instead of Cot-
ton some make use of  Hair Pencil, that is
inged blunit at  Candle.
As much as this Manner of Drawing is
admired by some,  cannot recommend it,
for it makes the Workmanship hard, stiff,
and occasions  Breaking in the slat Parts,
except it be in sinall and curious Piecas.
The Custom of great Masters has been to
use but one Thing in their Hands at once,
oy which they have compleated the 
Draughts, without using Cotton or the likz.
However if one designs to make something
curious and nice, the afbresaid maaner of
dosling will not be amiss, only  would not
have the Practitioner accustom himself to it
altogether. If one draws Counterseits,
especially upon coloured Paper, let him
smooth the Edges of the Heightenings with
the like coloured Paper roll’ up to  sharp
Point at one End; with this , ou may sweeten
or soften the Edges, so as to appear neither
too hard nor sharp.
There is  singular Manner some Artists
use of Washing, performed with  Pencil
dipt in Ink, or any other Sap-colour, and
so pencil’ on all Sorts of either white or
coloured Paper,they wash therewith in any
Draught the principal Shades, and afterwards
work over them slightly, with  Pen or
black Chalk. This is  geod masterly Man-





ner, and looks exceedingly well. In washing
you must observe to lay on first, the soit
and faint Shades, smoothing the Edges with
 clean Pencil, moistened  littie with your
Tongue; when this is dry, go over the
darker Shades with  deeper Colour; thus
you preceed with  third and fourth Shade,
till you see your Draught perfect, always
raking Heed not to make ycur Work too
hard at first; the faint Shades, especially on
coloured Paper, must be imperceptibly lost,
since the Heightening with White will help
you.
.

THERE are two Properties necessary to

be understood in the Art of Drawing,
the one is general, the other particular: All
Things composed consist of certain Parts,
which together carry on  Correspondence-
They make  general Mass or Lump, and
are by our Sight distinguissied either in
general or particular. If then vou draw
either after  Print, Picture, or Life, ob-
serve the general Form represented to you,
which consists of several Parts, examine
whether it be round, square, triangular,
lonc or short; and this is best observable
with an half shut Eye, without observing
the Parts as are contained in the General.
For Example, Suppose  Head compleatly
finished, the circumferent Strokes consti-
tutes



utes the general Mass; the Eyes, Nose,
Mouth, &. are the Particulars contained
in the General; the Question is, whether
this Face may be known by the Parts in
Particular, or all the Parts in the circumfe-
rent Strokes ?
 shall answer this with the following
Examples: Suppose two Faces be drawn
with something that may be easily wip’ off,
very like each other: wipe the circumferent
Stroke of one Face clean away, so that no-
thing remain but the sinall Parts, as the
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, &. and you will pre-
sently find, that the Likeness of the Faze is
gohe: or ifabout those particular Parts you
draw anocher circumferent Line, differing
from the former, you will behold another
Likeness in the Face, much differing from
what it had before. By this it appears.
plainly that the Parts themselves, do not
represent themselves in their Being, before
they are joined to their general Out-strokes.
As these particular Parts are observed in the
General of the Head, the same is to be taken
Notice of in the Arms, Hands, Legs, and
Feet: for although, in respect to the whole
Body, they are but Parts, yet in theinselves
they are general to the Parts they contain.
As the Arm has its Muscles, the Bending of
the Elbow. The Hands have their Fingers,
and Fingers again their Members, and so
on. In the saie Manner is the Knowledge
of Things hidden in the Generality of all,





for let  Man whom we know very well be
at some reasonable Distance, so that we can
not know him by some small Parts, as by
his Eyes, whether brown or gray, neither
his great or small Nose, his red or pale Face,
nor any other small Part of his Body, not-
withstanding we shall knowthis Man at this
Distance: By what Means) By means of
the General, for the-general Lump seen
by vou, even when his Back is turned upon
you, will make you presently know him.
XI.
 Now come to say something concerning
the Nature and Virtue of Lights and
Shades: There are no Things in Nature
which can be distinguished by us, in  lesser
or further Distance from us; nor can it be
expressed by the Art of Drawing, without
this Knowledge, for without Dark and
Light, nothing resembles what it ought to
do, for it is that, which gives  Being and Re¬
presentation to all Things. To prove this,
draw  Counterfeit upon  white Paper,
with black Chalk, when finished it is like
the Person, and judged to be well drawn;
here it may be asked, What Correspondence
has black Chalk, wherewith you made your
Shades, and the white Paper, by which the
Light is represented with the Original, that
is Life; To which  answer, It is not the




black Chalk, nor the white Paper, nor any
single Strokes drawn, but it is the Effect of-
the Lights and Shades in their proper Places,-
that represent Life itself to us, for it is im-
possible, that either  round Circle or Spot,
of  flat Colour, should represent  Globe,
except the Roundness, is given it by Light
and ShadoW.
XII.
YOUNG Practitioners or Learners,
should by all Means use themselves
to the best Manner of Drawing; that is, to
finish their Work, plain, smooth, neat, and’
easy, to blend the Shades and Lights, so as
to be lost the one in the other. This they
must endeavour by indefatigable Pains, and
although in the Beginning it will seem dif-
ficult, and their Performance displeasing ; yet
let not this discourage them from pursuing
their Aim, for none are born Masters, andhe
that never did do ill, cannot expect ever to-

do well; one Day brings on another, and
with it some Amendment, till you arrive to
Perfection, which will be  Reward for all
the Labour and Pains, you have taken
in the Acquisition of this charming Art.
XIII.
Picture or Drawing that wants Per-
 spective, is locked upen as irrational
and dead; wheresore  shall inform the





young Practitioner what it is, and how to
attain the Knowledge of that Science, so
necessary in Designing and Painting.
Perspective is that which causes all Things
contained in  Draught or Picture, to come
florward, or sink backward, and causes them
from the first to the last, to stand in their
due and proper Places; as also the Vacuum
or Emptineis between Body and Body, to
no from you, or come forward naturally to
the Eye, as though it were accessible. And
as  real Perspective shews the Distance
which every Arch or Pillar has, the one
after the other, as also the standing of Peo-
ple in their proper and singular Places; so
likewise in  Draught or Picture, by the
Diminution of Light and Dark, the Distance
must be observed agreeable to the appro¬
priated Declination; and every Draught or
Picture, whether after Nature or Plaister of
Paris, you must well observe what appeareth
forwards or backwards: and how one
Thing follows another. This is one of the
most difficult Studies belonging to the Art
of Drawing and Painting, wherefore 
Practitioner: ought to inforin himself in
Time, either by the Instruction of  Mas-
ter, or by reading of Books of Perspec-
tive.





XIV.
HAVING gone through the principal
  Properties belonging to the Art of
Drawing, it will now be requisite to sum
up what has been said, for making your
Work compleat and perfect.
 In your rough Sketch observe to bring
in  good Spirit, free and pleasing to the
first View.
 Correct the first rough Draught. in
the drawing it over again, and accustom
yourself in representing the Shadows and
Touches with the Coal, in order to be cer-
tain in the Position of your Figures.
 Having compleated your Design as far
as relates to the use of Charcoal, then draw
with either your Pen or Pencil, with dili-
gent Care, the Qut-lines, endeavouring to
keep or bring in, all the Beauties, Comeli-
ness, and Gentility of the Figures; taking.
particular Care and Diligence to obselve
and keep the Bendings and Motions of the

Body, and the easy displaying of the Folo-,
ings of  Garment, in their Comeliness
and genteel Disposition; for it often happens
that by  small Bending,  whole Part of 
Pigure is entirely spoil'. This is  Fault
Youth are much addicted to, by observing
those sinall Bendings too much, which they
commonly make toobig, and thereby de-
prive  Piece of that Beauty, which with 






little Precaution they might have preserved;
and this puts me in Mind to caution young
Practitioners not to rely so much on the
Particulars, but the General, as  have
observed already, in the Xth Article, for in
being too attentive in finishing, and obser-
ving the little and insignificant Parts, you
lose that which ought to make the most
Shew of  masterly Performance; therefore
let your chiefest Care be to observe and
finish the General Parts to Pe rfection, for
the small or particular ones, may be put in
afterwards with more Ease. This is an
Article highly necessary for young Practiti-
oners tobe instructed in; but to the Shame
of their Teachers, most of them are kept
ignorant in this Particular. Thus some
Painters will take Abundance of Pains to
draw  Face near at Hand with all its De-
formities, if it has any, as Pits of the Small
Pox, Scars, Spots, and the like, when
otherwise, at  convenient Distance, they
might have the General with the Particular,
in  more agreeable Appearance than it then
gepresents itsell, and that with less Pains
and Trouble; but this is the Case with many
Pretenders in the Art of Painting; that
they cannot draw  Portraiture to be any
ghing like, except they bring in all the
Marks, Wrinkles, &.
When vou draw with red or black Chalk,
take Heed your Strokes be not hard, or too
sharp, especially in the light Parts, in the

































































































strong shady Parts you may carry  bold.
stroke : always observe that in the shadow-
ing of your Piece, the Strokes lose and va-
rnish away, so that one might judge as if
you had finished your Piece, without draw-
ing the Circumference or out Lines, for
thus it will be agreeable to Nature, where
no Stroke can be seen; this you may ob-
serve in  Picture as well as in good Prints
or Drawings.
It will happen that in Drawing between
White and White, and against the Light,
 Stroke or Qut-line must be drawn, for to
express the Draught, and distinguish it from ,
the Ground, especially when drawn on
white Paper; but this you should endeavour
to shun as much as possible, and not do it
except Necessity compel you to it, and you
have no other Means left to avoid it; but
as  cannot here speak of all the Causes
incident to this Case,  will only exemplify
one for the better Apprehension of young
Practitioners, by the two Faces in the op-
posite Print.
The Face  as you plainly perceive, is
drawn compleat with an Out-line Stroke,
and the Face  only represents the Shadows
that are underneath the Nose, Mouth, &.
The Question is, whether an Error is com-
mitted in the Face , which might by the
Out-line of the Face  be amended.  for
my Part say no, but on the contrary  ob-
serve in the Face Ba singular Curiosity and




Beauty, where White against White makesy
 Termination without  circumferent
Stroke.
Apprehending well this Example, you
will improve it in your Drawings, and gain
thereby  singular and accomplished Man-
ner.
What  have said on this Head, is to be
observed with due Caution, for as  rough
Sketch only consists in circumferent Lines
or Strokes, nevertheless Dexterity gives it 
singular Beauty ; you may by this Rule ap-
prehend how to work on coloured Paper,
where by the Heightnings, you may do
much, and save many Strokes, you are
obliged to express on white Paper.
XV.
 Now come to the finishing Part; here
you must not childishily or apishly imi¬
tate Stroke for Stroke, but observe the In-
tent of the Master, in his Expressions, Dis-
positions, Shades and Lights in his Figures.
If vou draw  Face after  Picture, or
aster Life, observe the Passions and Phfi-
Ognomy thereof: Take Notice by what
Strokes, Touches, Turnings, Shades, or
otherwise, such  Face is made to look
sorrowful or merry, crying or laughing,
old or young, wild or modest, foul or
clean, homely or beautiful ; and by obser-
ving this, you will not only follow the same
Strokes



Strokes, Touches, and Shades, as near as
possible, to express the same Actions and
Passions, but also you will retain the same
in your Mind, and understand it with 
well grounied Knowledge.
When you begin to finish your Draught,
take Heed you inake not the Shades at first
so hard or deep as they must be when fi-
nissed ; you may easily bring them to be
darker, but net so to make them lighter.
Acquire  good Judgment in disposing your
Shades, so that they may fling Things either
backwards or forwards. For whatever vou
draw with, let it be Red Lead, Indian Ink,
Black Chalk, &. You must express one
extream Dark or Light, and therefore accus-
tom yourself’from your beginning to draw
to shadow very light and sweet, faint and
even, and bring in the Perspective of Dark-
ness as much as possible, and by observing
this, vou will find yourself seldom deceived
but gain Honour and Applause by your Per-
formance.
Be careful to keep your Draught in one
even and equal Condition, so that it may
not appear as if composed of dark and light
Spots- but let the Lights and Shades cor-
respond and agree together, the lesser dark
with the faint, and the faint with stronger
Lights, otherwise your Work will presently
incline to hardness and stiffness; which, if
you examine Life, you will never meet with
there.





When you draw on coloured Paper,
after  Print or Draught, observe the evenf
Likeness of Dark and Light, keeping the
great Parts of Lights and Shadows, and the
Imall intermixt Parts in the same Manner,
that the greater may always have the Pre-
dominancy over the less.
 shall conclude with advising voung
Practitioners to observe in all their Perfor-
mances  true Symetry and Proportion, es-
pecially in all the Parts of  human Figure.
Let them first well be Master of every Par-
ticular, for it is the   , or Alphabet,
which when well learned, is easily joined
together into Words; and he who can de-
lincate well, the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Ears,
&yc. will readily form  well proportioned
Face, and after he has used himself to draw
Hands, Arms, Legs, &. he will easily
cempile  whole Body.
There are indeed several eminent Pain-
ters, who have in their Writings endea-
voured to teach young Practitioners, the
Art of true Proportion and Symetry, by
Geometrical and Perspective Rules, how to
form an Oval out of  Circle,  Perpendicular
into  Square, according as the one or
other Object is representing itself to ones
Eyes; but as this Way of proceeding is ve-
ry tedious, and likely to deter young Be-
ginners,  fertil Genius will, like many
other great Masters, advance in his Perfor-
mances by more easier Steps, and form 




true Idea in his Conception of Nature
In relation to the true Symetry of the
Human Body, it is to be admtred, that
from the Dimension of  Toe or Finger,
the whole corporeal Substance may be de-
monstrated; so that three Sculptors in three
different Places, having agreed on the true
Measure of the Height, may work on one
Statue, and when the Limbs are brought
and fixed together, will make  perfect
Image according to Art.
 Man that is well proportioned is eight
times as high as his Head, that is, from the
Hair of his Forehcad to his Chin; his Face
is three Noses long, and his Foot is one
Fifth of his Length.
It would seem incredible to some People,
did their own Experience not convince and
satisfy their Curiosity, without any Cost or
Charge, that  Thread which reaches three
times about the End of the middle Finger,
should be just so long as totake in the Com-
pass of ones Wrist; and that six times of
that Length, is the Measure about ones
Waste, over the Navel: this may be easily
tried by winding  Thread six Times about
the Wrist, and then measuring the Waste.
 Thread which goes round ones Fore-
head, will also reach from the Chin behind
the Neck; and it is remarkable, that by ex-
tending ones Hands and Arms as far as one
can, the two Ends of the middle Fingers




will determine ones Height, and  Man
placed in that Posture, will describe  Qua-
drant, whole Centre is the Privy Parts.
Also if  Man extends his Hands and
Feet, in the Figure of  St. Andrew’ Cross,
and fixes one End of the Compass to the
Navel, and the other to the extream Parts, it
will take the urmiost Parts of the Hands and
Feet in the same Circie. The Length of
the Face and ones Hand are equal ; as are
the Height of the Ferehead, the Length of
the Nose, the Ears, the Thumb, and the-
Stace frem under the Nose to the Chin.
lt is cbservable, that all that is doubled,
is in true Order on each Side, and all that
is single in the Middle of the Body. If 
Man rests on one Leg,  Plumb Line must
fall frem over his Forehead, Nose and
Navel, to his Feet, if he sits, he makes
with his Knees and Back  direct Angle.
Here  cannot omit à Question, viz.
What were the proportionable Joints and
Features of the great Colossus at Rbodes, the
whole Height whereof was  Foot  does appear by this Height that the
Trunk was zo Foot wide, the Face  long, and his Nose and Thumbs each
 Foot long. From such like Observations
we may inform ourselves of many Things
in Antiquity, by comparing and calculat ing
the Dimensions of one Part to the other,
and thus find out the true Proportion.














The Usefulness and Use of
PRINTS.
RHAT which  now am about to

treat ur on is concerning Prints,

the Invention whereof is alll ’,
by all Lovers of Art and Inge-

nuity, to be one of the happiest
Productions of latter Ages.
Prints are in our Age arrivd to so high
 Degree of Perfection, and good Gravers
have given us so many on all sorts of Mat-
ters, tnat it may truly be said, they are the
Depositories of all that is fine and curious
in the World.
Their Origin was in the Year  and
arose from one Maso Finiguerra,  Gold-
smith of Florence, who grav' his Plate,
when casting some off in melted Sulphur,
he perceiv’ that what came out of the
Meuld was mark  with the same Prints as
his Plate, by the Black which the Sulphur
had taken from his Graving: He try  to do
as much on Silver Plates with wet Paper,
by rouling it sinnothly witha Rouler, which
also succeeded.
This Novelty tempted Baccio Baldini, 
Goldsmith of the same City, to try whether







he could do the same, and his Success oc-
casion’ him to engrave several Plates ¬
Sandro Boticello  Invention aud Design, ant
upon this Andrew Mantegna, who was 
Rome at that time, set about engraving some
of his own Pieces.
The Knowledge of this Invention getting
into Flanders, Martin of Antwerp, then :
famous Painter, engrav’ Abundance of
Plates of his cwn Invention, and sent se-
veral Prints into Italy, which were markd
thus, . . Vasari in the Life of Marce
Antonio,  Painter, gives an Account of the
greatest part ofhis Subjects, of which there

was one amongst the rest, (the Vision of St.
Antony) that pleasd Michael Angelo, then
very young, so well, for the Invention of
it, that he colour’ it. After Martin ol
Antwerp, Albert Durer began to appear,
and gave the World an infinite Number of
fine Prints, as well in Wood as in Copper,
all which he sent to Venice to be sold.
Marco Antonio, who happen’ at that
time to be there, was so ravish’ with the
Beauty of these Prints, that he copy ’ Six
and Thirty of them, which represented our
Saviour’ Passion, and these Copies were
receiv’ at Rome with so much the more
Admiration, by how much the more they
were finer than the Originals. At the same
time Hugo du Carpi, an Italian Painter of 
mean Capacity, but of  Wit apt for Inven-
tion, found out by means of several Plates




of Wood, the way how to make Prints re-
semble Designs of Claro Ofcuro, and some
Years after the Invention of Etching was
dicover’, which Parmegiano soon made use
of.
These first Prints drew the Admiration
of all that saw them for their Novelty, and
the skilful Painters who work’ for Glory,
were willing to use them to spread their
Works over the World. Raphael, among
others, employd the famous Marco Antonio
to engrave several of his Pictures and De-
signs, and those admirable Prints were so
renown’, that they carryd the Name of
Raphael through the World.  vast num-
ber of Gravers have made themselves famious,
since Marco Antonio, in Germany, Italy,
France, and the Low Countries, and have
publish’ as well by Graving as Etching, an
infinite number of Prints on all sorts of Sub-
jects, as well Histories, Fables, Embleins,
Devises, Medals, Animals, Landskips, Flow-
ers, Fruits, as in general all the visible
Productions of Art and Nature.
There is no body, of what Condition
or Profession soever, but may profit very
much by inspecting into Prints. Divines,
Philosophers, Soldiers, Travellers, Geo-
graphers, Painters, Sculptors, Architects,
Gravers, Lovers of the Fine Arts, all that
are curious in History or Antiquity, and in
short, all who having no particular Profes-




sion, Men of Honour and Fe
adorn their Minds with the Ki
those Things, that may rende
more worthy of Esteem.
It is not pretended that Pers
lig’ to see all the Prints that hav
lish’, to know how to profit by
infinite Number ofthem present
so many different Ideas to  
will rather confound than in
Those only, who are born with
 clear Genius, who have bee
some time, to the Sight of so ma
Things, can make them profitab
and see them all without Confus
Every Farticular Man may
Subjects that are most proper fc
may either refresn his Memory of
his Judgment, in which he sho
rected by the Inclination he has
of his own Goût and Profession.
As for Example, nothing is 
ble to Divines than Prints whic
the Sacred History of the Ol
Testament, and every thing whic
the Exercise, or the Persecution
mitive Christians. The Antique
lievo , which in ma: Places 
the Ceremony of the Heathen 
short, any thing that has relat
own, whether it be Sacred or 



For Philosophers: All the Demonstrative
Figures, which relate not only to the Ex-
periments of Phyfick, but all that may en-
crease their Knowledge in natural Things.
For those that are bred up to War: The
Plan and Elevation of fortity’ Cities, the
order of Battles, and Books of Fortification,
of which the demonstrative Figures are the
greatest Part.
For Travellers: The particular Views of
Palaces, of Cities, and considerable Places,
to prepare them for the Things they are to
see, or to preserve the Ideas of those they
have seen.
For Geographers. The Maps and Plans
necessary in their Prosession.
For Painters: Every Thing that may
strengthen them in their Art, as the Antique
Pieces, and those of Raphael and Caracci
for the good Geût, Correctness of Design,
the Dignity of Manner for the choice of the
Hairs of the Head, the Passions of the
Mind, and the Attitudes. Those of Correg-
gio for Grace and Delicacy of the Fxpres-
sions; those of Titian, Bassan, and the Lem-
bards for the Character of Truth, for the
simplé Expressions of Nature, and above all,
for the Geût of Landstips. Those of Ru-
bens, fer the Grandeur and Magnificence
of his Invention, and the Artifice of Claro
Oscuro. In short those that, tho’ they may





be defective in some particular part of them,
may yet have sometliing in thein singular
and extracrdinary, for the Painters may
draw  considerable Advantage from all the
different Manners of those that have gone
before them, who are, as so many Flowers,
fiom whence, like the Bees, they may suck
 luice, which incorporating with their
proper Substance, will bring forth such
Works as are useful and agreeable.
For Sculptors: Statutes, Basso Relievos,
Medals, and other Antique Works, those of
Raphael, Polidoro, and the whole Roman
School.
For Architects. The Books that concern
their Profession, and that are full of demon-
strative Figures of the Invention of their
Authors, or copy’ froin the Antique.
For Gravers :  Collection of Pieces of
different Manners, as well graved as etch’.
This Collection should also serve to shew
them the Progress of Graving, from Albert
Durer to the Gravers of our own Times,
which will include the Works of Marco
Antonio, Cornelius Cort, mne Caracci, Sade-
lers, Pontius, Bolsvert, Goltius, Muler, Vos-
terman, Vischer and  great many more
that  have not named, who had  particular
Character, and who by different Ways,
strove all of them to imitate either Nature,
when they did something of their own In-
vention, or Pictures of different Manners,
when



when they only aimed at the Faithfulness
of Imitation. In comparing thus the
Works of all these Masters, they may judge
which of them understood best the Manage-
ment of their Tools, of Light, and the
usefulness of Harmeny, as it relates to Claro
Ofcuro, which of them in their Operations
reconciled Delicacy and Force best, and in
their Productions were most senfible and
exact, that making  good Use of these
Lights, they may have the laudable Ambi-
tion to equal or surpass these skilful Masters.
For the Curious in History and Antiqui-
ty. Every Thing that has been engraven
belonging to sacred or profane History, the
Fable; antique Basso Relievos, the Trajan
andl Antonine Pillars, the Books of Medals
and Stones engraved, and several Prints
that may help them in the Knowledge of
those Things they would know, or to keerz
those they know already in their Memory.
In short, for those that to be more happy,
and more Gentleman-like, would form their
Goût by the Study of good Things, and
have  reasonable Tincture of the fine Arts,
nothing is more necessary than good Prints-
Their Sight, with  little Refiection, will
readily and agreeably infori them of every
Thing that may exercise their Reason, and
strengthen their Judgment. They may sill
their Memory with the most curious Things
of all Times, and all Countries, and in
learning the different Histories, learn the






several Manners of Painting: They will
judge readily, by the Facility with which
they may open  few Leaves, and so com-
pare the Productions of one Master with
those of another, and by this means, in spa¬
ring their Time, they will spare their Ex-
pence also; for it is almost impossible to put
the Pictures of as many Masters together in
 Room, as will suffice to form  perfect
Idea of the Work of each Master, and
when at  vast Charge,  Man has silled 
large Chamber with ’ictures of different
Manners, he cannot have above two or
three of each, which is not enough to ena-
ble him to make à nice Judgment of the
Character of the Painter, or the Extent of
his Capacity: whereas by means of Prints,
one may easily see the Works of-several
Masters on  Table, one may form an Idea
of them, judge by comparing them one
with another, know which to chuse, and by
practising it often, contract  Habit of 
good Taste, and  good Manner, especially
if we do it in the Company of any body,
that has Discernment in these Things, and
can distinguisn what is good, from whât is
but indifferent.
Such as have any Paffion for the fine Arts
take  regular Method in their Collections,
they do it by the Painters and their Disci-
ples. In the Roman School they place
Raphael, Michael Angelo, their Disciples,
and their Contemporaries. In that of




Venice, Giorgione, Titian, che Bassani, Paols
Veronese, Tintoret, and ocher Venetians. In
chat of Parma, Corregio, Parmegiano, anc
those that followed their Goit. In that of
Bologna, the Carracci, Guido Diminichino,
Albani, Lanfranco and Guerchino. In that
of Germany, Albert Durer, Holben, the lit-
tle Masters, William Baur, and others. In
chat of Flanders, Otho Venias, Rabens,
Vandike, and those that practised their
Rules. In the same Manner they put the
Masters of the French School, and those of
other Countries in their several Classes.
Others collect their Prints by the Gravers,
without Respect to the Painters. Others, by
other Fashiions, and indeed it is reasonable
that every one fhould have Liberty to do. in
this what seems to him to be usefal and
agreeable.
Tho’ one may at any Time, and in any
Age, benefit ones self by the Sight of Prints,
yet Youth is more proper for it, than any
other Part of Man’ Life, because Memory
is the Gift of Childhood, and while Persons
are young, they ought to make Use of it as 
Magazine, to lay up Things, that may
contribute towards forming their Judg-
merit.
If the Ancients had had the same Advan-
tage in this as we have, and if they had,
by means of the Prints, transmitted what
they had done, that was fine and curious,
to Posterity, we should have dist inctly
known



known Abundance of Things, of which we
have but confufed Ideas in History : we
should see the stately Monuments of Mem-
phis and Babylon, and the Temple of Jeru-
salem which Solomon built with so much
Magnificence ; we should make  Judgment
of the Building of Athens, Corinth, and
old Rome, with mare Grounds and with
more Certainty than we now can by the-
poor Remains that are left of them. Pau-
sanius, who lias made such an exact De-
scription of Greece, would have accompa-
nied his Discouries with demonstrative
Figures, which might have been handed
down to us, and we might have seen with
Pleasure, not only the Temples and Pala-
ces, as they were in their Perfection, but
we should also have inherited from the anci-
ent Workmen the Art of good building.
Tis for want of these Means that the Ma-
chines of Archimedes and the elder Hiero are
lost, and the Knowledge of Dioscorides’
Plants, as also, of several finimals, and of
 great many of the curious Productions
of Nature, which the Studies and Medita-
tions of the Ancients discovered: Bur not to
trouble ourselves any longer in grieving for
the Loss of Things which we can’ recover,
let us profit ourselves by those Prints that we
have amongst us.
FINIS.



