Stranger to thofe  RT  may
be immediately rendered capable of Deli-
hneating any View or Prospect with the ut-
moft Exacdnets; of Colouring any Print or
Drawing in the moft Beautiful Manner; and
of taking off MEDALS inftantly, by various
Ways,, never before made publick: Inter-
mix’ with feveral curious Receipts for the
Ofe of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, Cor.
WV   
INSTRUCTIONs for making Tranfparent
Colours of every Sort partly from fome Cu-
rious Perfonages in Holland, France, and Italy;
but chiefly from  Manuscript of the Great Mr.
BOYLE, particularly  Reccipt of that Gentle—
mans, for making  blue Colour equal to
Oltramarine.
The FOURTH EDrTroN.

     
Printed for . PEELE, at Locks-Head in Ameya
Corner, Pater-Nofter Row. MDCCNKY.
Price One Shilling.






 

IIE. following Papers
are the Effect of some
Fears Study and La-
bour, collected in my

Travels, and at length put toge-
ther, at the Instance of  noble
Friend, for his Instruction in the
Art of Drawing and Painting in
Water-colours.
Among other
Particulars which they contain.
are several Receipts for making
and preparing of Colours, from
 Manuscript of the late fa=
mous Mr Boyle, which bas ne-
ver yet appeared in Publick, and
was communicated to me by the
late





     

  iy 
. R 
Cd  Mnes

 Lord Carleton.  as.  bave



experienc’ what is related in
this Tract to be curious and ex-
trgerdinary,  make no Apology
for offering it to the View of the
World: And on my own part
shall think my Time well spent.
my Readers reapany Delight
or Advantage from what  Bere
rom my own Obsereg=
publist
tion; since  can affure them,
that it was calculated for the
Entertainment and Diversion of

those who have  Genins for juch
pleafant Amusements, as well
as for the Improvement of those
who have already made some
Progress in the delightful. res
  it
above mentioned.

Te

is

 






 
 



 
DR AINC, and PAINTINC
IN
 ATER-COLOUR .
 VII Vij Vij ij eix  
 vij xij Cij vI VIj VIj Vij SII
 
  te Jast  Tetw swiierid tee seid te Lite  itls& Tiied
CH  . 
Rules for Draeino any Object in its Out-
vines, as exact as the Liye or lrature.
    

  .  Sheet of the thinneff, or

 



 brown Paper, and brufh it


Ca
ny
 Oilof Turpentine, which

to
 immediately render it tranipa-

 and then put the Paper to dry
bng 
 
 


in the Air; when tis dry, ftrain it




upon  Frame, and hk it againtl any Object youde-
Sign to draw; as an Houfe, or Hill, or Tree, Esc.
then jutt before it, place  piece of Wood with an
Hole in it, fit for one Ryc to look through; and
as you meet any Out-lines of the Object you de-
fire, upon the tranfparent Paper trace them over
with  Pencil to will you be fure thatyou cannot
err for there will be nothing but juft Proportion,
and  true reprcfentation of Naturc.
To

 make this Htill of more Elegancy, obferve
the Tracing of your Draughts where the Shades
are, and mark them with your Pencil; for all
the Art in the World can never difpofe the
Shades fo regularly as one may touch by this
Method: But the Shades muft be done quick-
ly after the Out-lines are drawn, and not at
different Times, becaufe every Inftant the Sun
changes them.
IN this too obferve, that in certain Objects you.
will have fainter, flronger, and yet more dark
Shades; and in your Remarks of them take fuch
Memorandums, as may direct you how to finith
them, with Indian Ink, or other Colour, when
you lit down to compleat your Work.
THE beft Way that  know, is to prepare three
Shells or Gallipots of Indian Ink mix’ with
common Water, before you attempt to trace out
your Object, viz. one of  very faint Black, the
next of  middling Black, and the other of an in-
tenfe Black. Number them    from the
lighteffto the darkeft; and as you make your Ob-
servations of the Shades on your Object, mark
upon your Draught the fame Numbers as they
happen to appear, fo that afterwards you may
finith with Certainty.
 GATN, it is neceffary in the Drawing of any
thing after this Manner, to obferve, that the
Lines on the fhady Side should be thick or bold,
and thofe on the lighter Sides should be thinner
or finer, in proportion to the Light that falls up-
on them.  for Fxample. In the darkeff Part
 Line may be of this Thickness; & in the next
dark Partfomewhat thinner iland ink the other thust
unlefs in things at  greatf Diftance, hardly to
be underftood, or to faint, as hardly to be per-
 mere Shadow as it werc.
ceived, thus 
 OM 



So ME have been guilty of  great Fault,
though they have taken the Out-lines very exact,
to make all their Lines of an equal Thicknels.
Is an Object be reprefented, well fuppofe two
Milesoff, and the Drawing be as frong in that
Part of the Picture, as if it was next the Kye,
or not ten or twenty Feet from the Draughtf-
man, it would not appear pleafant or natural
to the Eyc. We muft not express  Man with
Buttons on his Coat at two Miles Diffance, no
nore than we muft have them omitted in  Per-
fon fo near the Rye as ten or twenty Feet;
Though this has inadvertently been done by fome
who have paffed for great Men. And the Shades
in thofe diftant Appearances muft be in propors
tion to the Strength of the Objects, as they ap-
pear to us, . . imperfect. Three or four well-
directed Touches of the Pencil, on the Shady Side,
will reprefent  Figure at the Diffance we can
difcern it, as lively as fome hundreds will of the

Same Figure near the Eyc.
Bor the tranfparent Paper  (peak of, is of
another Ufc; for, if we lay it upon any Picture;
or Print, in  loofe Sheet, you will fee all the
Lines through it, and may then draw or copy it
You will then, if
with the greateft Pleafure.
the Print or Picture be done by  good Mafter,
fee which Lines are ftrong, and which are tender
and foft Imitate them.
THERE is yet another Way to take Views and
Landicapes, which fome prefer to the trantpa-
rent Paper; that is, either with white or black
Tiffany, or Lawn, ftraind upon  Frame, and
us’ in the Jame Manner as the Paper; Cxcept=
ing that the Black-Lead Pencil is ufed to the
Paper on the white Tiflany, and on the Lawn,
we ufe Charcoal finely pointed, and very foff
piit
  on the black Tiffany we ufe white Chalk of
the tendereft fort.
or ooo 
eretif
 fote of Cooeldelles  hee  lolel Cence oile (ellele    Cle

   . II.
Hore to bring these Drawings to Use; and
to copy from Prints, Paintings, &.
 we make  Drawing upon tranfparent Pa-
per, to take  Drawing from it regularly,

get  piece of Paper of the Jame Size, and rub
on ope fide of it fome Powder of Black-Lead,
till tis well and equally black’, and fo well
rubbed, that  Touch of  Finger will hardly be
tinged with it.
THEN take the Drawing you have made, or
Print, and lay the black’ Paper under it, with
the black Side downwards, upon  piece of white
Paper, and pin the three together in two or three
Places, take then  Pin or Needle  little blunt
at the Point, and trace it over the Out-lines of
your Picture; which, with  little preffing, will
direct the black’ Paper to impress the undermoff
white Paper, to as to receive every Stroke you
draw.
WH   this is done, you muft with your
Black-Lead Pencil correct what Errors you find,
and Hlightly clean the Draught new made with
Lorme Htale Bread Crumbs. The Black-Lead Penr
cil is fo hard to be found tolerable, that  know
not above one Place, where we can get one that
will do the Service we require. If we find  good
piece of Lead in the beginning, when we have ufed
an Inch or two, the reft generally proves hard;
gritty; and full of Knots.
 HE
 beft  have met with are at the Joyners
Arms in Broad St. Giles', or Holborn, juft turn-
ing out of Drary-Lane; at that Place one may
have them of foft or hard Lead, and ufe them
till they are reduced to two or three Inches.
Tis  great Pleafure to  Draughtiman to work
with  good Pencil, and as great  Plague to have
 bad one.
So the Camels Hair Brufhes are generally
very bad ; they are indeed cheap enough to buy
them in common but if one would have the bett,
which should be full of Hair, the Price ought to
be accordingly, as they can be made to hold
 Quantity of Colour, and be brought to fine
Points Tis better to give Six-pence or  Shil-
fing for  Pencil, than to have  Dozen for  Groat.
As for the Draughts drawn on Tiffany or
Lawn, lay them only on Paper, . . that which
is drawn with Charcoal upon white Paper, and
that drawn with Chalk on black or bluc Paper;
then, giving each of them  Knock or two with an
Hammer, the Charcoal or the Chalk will fall
through them, upon the Papers, directly in the
Lines they were drawn, and give you the true
Reprefentation of the Object you drew from the
Life. Upon the black Paper you will fee it in
White Lines, and to the contrary.

THEN frengthen thefe Shadows of Drawings
with your Black-Lead Pencil, or Chalk, or red
Oker, on the Spects of Paper, where they have
made the Marks; otherwife, the Lines would ea-
fily be rubbed out. But take carc, as  have
obferved before, that this Amendment be made
fuddenly, for thefe tender Draughts are foon va-
nithed, if one does not take care to frengthen
them immediately. Begin firt at the bottom of
the Drawing,
ANO-
 Way is to take  thin piece of Paper,
and hold it againft  Glais-Window, principally
at fuch  Window as is fath’; for the Interrup-
tions of the Lead in the fmaller glazed Windows,
will hinder part of this Prospect, the Point is,
draw what you fee from the Glats, and then the
Black-Lead Paper is to be ufed, as directed before.
THERE is another Way Hill, which may be
more eafy to the Hand or Arm of  Perfon not
accuftomed to drawing upon  Paper or Lawn
placed upright, which is by the Ufe of  portable
Camera Ofcard; though to help the firft, one may
hold  Baguerte, or fuch  Stick in the Left-
hand, as the Oil-Painters ufe to reft the Right-
hand upon or have fome other Reft made for
the Right-hand, as may be fcrewed up and down
at ones pleafure. But there is this Difference
still between drawing  piece of Perspective, or
View, on  tranfparent Paper or Lawn placed up-
right againft any Object, that fuch  Piece will
take in more of the View or Object, and from 
greater Distance than the portable Camera Ofcura
will However, as the portable Camerd will at
firft be moft eafy to the Arm for the Beginner,
by Reafon the Objects appear upon an Horizontal
Plane, fuch as  Table, the Hand will have 
proper Reff, and more readily follow the Lines
reprefented on the Plane with that Exactnels.
Indeed fuch  portable Camerd, as  mention, is
of fome Expence, and to fuch as can afford it,
they may have them to any Price, from thirty
Shillings to five Pounds  picce, according as they
bespeak them, at Nr. John Fowler', Mathematical
Inftrument-maker in Swithins-Alley, near the
Royal-Exchange.
Whar will make the Difference in the Prices,
will be the Largencts of the Sizes of the Glaffes,
which lye horizontally, and receive the Objects
 we are to trace out with our Pencil: The
smaller of thefe Glaffes may be perhaps four Inches
Square, and the larger fitteen Inches. On fuch
Glaffes you will meet the exact Reprefentation
(Lmaller or larger, according to the Bigness of the
Machines) of the Objects we point or direct them
to, each one adorned with the natural Colours
agreeable to the Point of Diftance, ffronger nearer
the Rye, and gradually declining, as the Objects
are more remote from it: The Shades of the fe-
veral Colours are in this Way exprefied in  very
lively Manner.  few Leffons, with good Confi-
deration, will be of good Information, not only to
 Beginner, but to  Mafter of the Pencil.
Bor Hill, to advance the Knowledge and Ufe
of this portable Camera,  Tuppofe, that inftead
of the Glaffes, which receive the Objects  speak
of, there should be placed Frames of tranfparent
Paper, to receive the Objects we have  mind to
take, upon which one may ufe the Pencil Hill
with greater Freedom. One may have  Do-
zen or two with each Camerd; or one Frame will
ferve for as many Papers as we pleafe to Itrain upon
it, if one has Patience to pafte them on.
THERE is another Way of drawing Objects
in the Camerd Ofcura Way, which is by making
 Room as dark as may be, only leaving an Hole
in one of the Window-fhutters, as low as poffible,
to receive an Ox-Ryc Glafs, as they call it; which
is fold by the Mathematical Inftrument-makers.
Thisturns in  Socket, fo as to direct every Ob-
jeCt, within  certain Reach, to  Sheet of Paper,
placed at  proper Diflance within, the Room, to
receive thofe Objects, upon which Paper, you
may draw them in great Perfection, but they
all appear revers’, or the wrong End upwards:
However, they are in as cxact Proportion and
Bcauty, as thofe reprefented in the former. In
this
 Cale; tis not however more difficult to draw;
or father copy the Objects, though they are re-
vers’, than to draw or copy the feveral Things
which we fee upright, on the Frames of trant-
parent Paper, Lawh, or Tiffanv. for to trace
Lines, will be as eafily done one Way as the other
And though the Objects, falling on the Sheet of
Paper, will, when we are drawing them, be re-
vers’, tis but turning the Sheet of Paper upfide
down when they are done, and our Drawing will
be right to the Eyc.
WH   we thew this by way of Curiofity, to
thofe who are unacquainted with the Reafons why
the Images reprefented on the Sheet of Paper
appear uptide down, it would not have fo delir-
able an Effect, as if they could be viewed in their
natural Situation. But to obviate this Difficulty;
let the Sheet of Paper, which is to receive the
Objects, be placed againft the back of  Chair;
and let them look on the feveral Objects, repre-
fented on the Paper, over the back of the Chaif,
which will fet them upright to the Ryc. This
Way in bringing them to rights, is thought on by
very few, though at the firft Proof every one will
wonder that he did not find it fooner.
TiI vs far is shewed, how any one may copy
or Piece of Painting;
either  Print, Drawing,
or even make an exact Reprefentation from the
Life. But  muft yet add, concerning the Taw
King-off of Prints or Drawings,  Method or two
which are eafy and diverting, not before men-
tioned. One is, prick with  Pin any Out-
lines of  Print or Drawing one has  mind
to copy, and then, laying the faid Picture on 
Sheet of Paper, take  Powder-puff, or  Tuit
of Cotton, dipping it now and then in Charcoal-
duft, or red Chalk-duft, and beat it over the
prick’ Lines, through the Picture, renewing it
with


 Duft frequently by dipping, and then you
will have full Directions marked on your Cloth,
or Paper, fufficient to finith  juft Drawing.
. . Such  prick’ piece of Work will give
many hundred Proofs of its Ufc. Though it poil
the Print or Picture, it laves  vaft deal of Trouble
to the Painter on the drawing part.
 NO THE  Way there is to make an Impref
fion from the Print, which shall give  juft Copy
of it: This is of great Ofc, when we want to car-
ry every Stroke of the Engraver along with us.
It will indeed fully the Print  little, though very
little, if you are careful; and this Method will
perhaps coft you two Minutes Tine,, when the
drawing of it with every Stroke the Engraver has
made, would keep you bufy  Month.
Fok this take fome foft Soap, either white, or
of the green fort, but, for my part,  always ufed
the green Soap; mix this with Water near an
equal Quantity, till tis near the Confiffence of 
Jelly: Rub fome of this Mixture on the Print,
and gently wet the Paper, you would have to re-
ceive the Impreftion from it, with  wet Spunge;
then lay it on the Print, and cover all with two
or three other pieces of dry Paper, and rub it very
hard all over with any Thing that is finooth and
polifhed, and the wetted Paper will have upon it
the reverfe of the Print you rubbed it upon, with
every diftinct Line in the Original, if you have
been careful to rub it equally.
CHAP





( Cafe, tis not however more difficult to draw;
of father copy the Objects, though they are re-
vers’, than to draw or copy the feveral Things
which we fee upright, on the Frames of trant
parent Paper, Lawh, or Tiffany; for to trace
Lines, will be as cafily done one Way as the other
And though the Objects, falling on the Sheer of
Paper, will, when we are drawing them, be re-
vers’, tis but turning the Sheet of Paper upfide
down when they are done, and our Drawing will
be right to the Ryc.
WH   we thew this by way of Curiofity, to
thofe who are unacquainted with the Reafons why
the Images reprefented on the Sheet of Paper
appear uplide down, it would not have fo delir-
able an Effect, as if they could be viewed in their
natural Situation. But to obviate this Difficulty,
let the Sheet of Paper, which is to receive the
Objects, be placed against the back of  Chair;
and let them look on the feveral Objects, repre-
fented on the Paper, over the back of the Chaif,
which will fet them upright to the Ryc. This
Way in bringing them to rights, is thought on by
very few, though at the firft Proof every one will
wonder that he did not find it fooner.
  vs far is thewed, how any one may cop
either  Print, Drawing, or Piece of Painting;
or even make an exact Reprefentation from the
Life. But  muft yet add, concerning the Ta
King-off of Prints or Drawings,  Method or two
which are eafy and diverting, not before men-
tioned. One is, prick with  Pin any Out-
lines of  Print or Drawing one has  mind
to copy, and then, laying the faid Picture on 
Sheet of Paper, take  Powder-puff, or  Tuft
of Cotton, dipping it now and then in Charcoal-
duft, or red Chalk-duft, and beat it over the
prick’ Lines, through the Picture, renewing it
with


 Duft frequently by dipping, and then you
will have full Directions marked on your Cloth,
or Paper, fufficient to finith  juft Drawing.
. . Such  prick’ piece of Work will give
many hundred Proofs of its Ofc. Though it tpoil
the Print or Picture, it faves  vaft deal of Trouble
to the Painter on the drawing part.
 NO THE  Way there is to make an Impref-
fion from the Print, which shall give  juft Copy
of it: This is of great Ufc, when we want to car-
ry every Stroke of the Engraver along with us.
It will indeed fully the Print  little, though very
little, if you are careful; and this Method will
perhaps coft you two Minutes Time,, when the
drawing of it with every Stroke the Engraver has
made, would keep you bufy  Month.
FoR this take fome foft Soap, either white, or
of the green fort; but, for my part,  alwaysufed
the green Soap, mix this with Water near an
equal Quantity, till tis near the Confiffence of 
felly. Rub fome of this Mixture on the Print,
and gently wet the Paper, you would have to re-
ceive the Impreftion from it, with  wet Spunge;
then lay it on the Print, and cover all with two
of three other picces of dry Paper, and rub it very
hard all over with any Thing that is fmooth and
polifhed, and the wetted Paper will have upon it
the reverfe of the Printyon rubbed it upon, with
every diffinct Line in the Original, if you have
been careful to rub it equally.

CHAD


 

To
 te   ec in ee lil    Chila
  AP. III.
Secrets for Copying of Drawings, &. con-
tinned.
To take  Drawing with sixt Ink.
  Way is to take  thin Sheet of Paper,
 and rub it all over with freth Butter, as
equally as poftible then dry it well by the Fire
and rub the butter’ Side with Carmine, till tis
all equally colour’, or elfe rub it over with Lamp-
black, or Black-lead-powder, or with blue Bice
finely grounds take care in the rubbing on any
of thefe that the Colour will not come off by 
very flight Touch of the Finger, and they are
then fit for your Work.
WHEN you have chofen  Print, or Defign, that
you would copy, lay the cclourd Side of your
butter’ Paper upon  Piece of clean Paper, and
your Print upon the butter’ Paper, and then with
 fine Pen or Needle, blunted  very little at the
Point, trace the Out-lines of your Drawing carc-
fully, and you will have  good Copy of it upon
your white Paper, which may be touch’ up af-
terwards by Crayons of the like Colour.
 red Ink for making an Impression of  Print.
ON  may likewife ufe the following Mcthod
for taking off or making  Copy from any Print;
which is, to mix fome Vermillion, finely ground,
with Linfeed-oyl, but to liquid that it will run or
llow in  Pen; with this trace the Lines of your
Print, and as foon as all is done, then with 
Stange and Warer wet the backfide of the Print,
and turn the printed fide down upon  piece of
White


 Paper, fo as to lye finooth, then lay over
that  piece of dry Paper, and prefs it hard in
every part, and the lower white Paper will receive
the Impreffion. But if you have  Linnen-prels;
 better to put your Papers between two of the
wooden Leaves, and skrew the Press as tight as
may be, for you will then have  fine Impreftion.
Taking Draughts with red loofe Ink.
Tow may likewife take fome Vermillion finely
ground, and mix it with fair Water in  Gallipot,
with fome Cotton, and it will run very freely in
the Pen, to that one may make the fineft Strokes
we defire; then, with this Mixture draw over all
the Strokes of your Print, imitating both the finer
and ftronger Lines. When all is done, then with
 Spunge dipt in Gum-water, with  clean white
Paper, and while it is wet, turn the Print upon
it, and prefting it well, take off the Print, and all
the Strokes will remain on the clean Paper, and as
foon as tis dry the Vermillion will be fixt to it.
THTs fort of Ink is what  famous Writing-
mafterufed, when he had  Book of Writing cn
graving for him he writ with this, and, having
his Copper-plate covered with white Bees-wax, or
white Ground, he turn’ the written fide down
on the waxt side of the Plate, and rubbing it very
equally, the Impreffion will be upon the Wax.
Taking Draughts with blue loofe Ink.
Tow may likewife make fuch  fort of Ink of
blue Bice and common Water, which will run
very finely in  Pen, and ferve for the fame Ufc as
the above ink.
To take off  Drawing in  standing red Colour
by Tracing.
   Vermiltion finely ground, and mix it
with  little freth Butter, then rub  clcan Sheet
Of
 Paper with it on one fide, till it will bear 
Hlight Touch of the Finger, without leaving the
Paper too freely; then ufe this coloured Paper, by
laying the colour’ fide upon  clean Paper, and
upon the colcur’ Paper lay on your Print, and
frace every Line you think proper, as directed
before in Tracing, but be fure you pin the three
Papers together at the Corners to prevent their
llipping; for if any one should flip, your Work
will be fpoil’, or fome one or other may inadver-
tently take up the Print when you have half traced
it, and then tis impoffible you can ever place it
right again, to that your Labour will be all loft.
This Impreffion made by Tracing will hold with-
out rubbing. In Tracing, the Ouills taken from
 Swallow’ Wing are very good, after they are
thoroughly dry.
Ir one has Carmine enough by one, we might
mix it with  litrle fresh Butter, and colour 
Paper with it as before directed, and then your
Drawing will be of  more beautiful Colour; or,
it we would have the Drawing blue, we may
colour  Paper with blue Bice and Butter.
 speedy Way of Printing the Leaf of any Tree or
Herb, as exact as Nature itself.
TAKE the Leaf of any Plant you defire, and
rub the Veins on the Back-fide  little, with  picce
of Ivory, or  Dog' Tooth, to bruife them 
little, then rub it genrly with  piece of Woollen,
dipt Hlightly in Oyl of Linfeed; when you have
done this every where on your Leaf, put the oyld
side on  piece of white Paper, and preffing it
cqually in every part, the Paper will remain 
perfect Imprettion of it, which may be afterwards
goloured  Yis foon doue, and is afeful to fuch as
would remember Plants.
Another



Anotber Way of Printing the Leaves of Plants, so
that the Impression sball appear as black as if
it had been done in  Printing-press.
TAKE any Leaf, and when there is no Wet
upon it, take fuch  Ball as they ufe at the Printers
for laying the ink upon the Letters; and when
your Ball is equally covered with Printer' Ink,
Rtrike it gently four or five times on the back of the
Leaf, till all the Veins are black’ with the Ink;
then lay your Leaf on  Trencher or fmall Board,
with the black fide upwards, and then wet  piece
of white Paper to be fomewhat more then moift,
and lay it on your Leaf, and upon that lay  finooth
Trencher, prefting it very hard, but not fo much
as to break the fine Fibres of the Leaf; by this
Means you will have  fine Impreffion.
Bu  it would be still more cafily done, if you
could get  piece of Wood, made like  Cylinder,
about  Foot long, and an Inch and half Dia-
meter, and cover the middle part of it about fix
or eight Inches long, with Woollen-cloth rolled
three or four times about.
WI TH this Rollerroll the white Paper thatlyes
upon your Leaf backwards and forwards four or
five times, and you will have  very curious Im-
preffion.
THE Neceffaries for this Work are  Gallipot
of Printers Ink,  couple of finall Balls, fuch as the
Printers ufc, to lay the Iak equally on the Leaf,
and the Roller  mention. But where Printers Ink
cannot be got, then take the following Mcthod.
To take the Impreffion of any Leaf, as certain as
the former Way, only afing such Things as may
be bad in any part of England.
WHEN you have no Printers Ink, rub the back
of  Lcaf, as before mentiened, with Linseed ogt
varnt, and then, drewing fome Powder of black
Leal


 or for want of that, fome Charcoal or Small-
coal Duft, or the Powder of burnt Cork, equally,
upon  finooth Board juft to cover it, ftroke it over
Imoothly with the Blade of  Knife, and when the
back of the Leaf is oyl’, clap it upon the Board,
and then putting your white Paper upon the black’
Side of the Leat, either prefs it or roll it as before.
Bur if none of thefe Ingredients should be
found, Vermillion may always be found at an Apo-
thecarys and, mixing this with freth Butter, to
the Confiffence of Printersink, cover your printing
Balls with it, and dab them upon the back of the
Leaf, and to take off your Impreffion as aforefaid.
NV. . The Reafon why the back of the Leaf is
the proper fide to make the Impreffion from, is,
becaute the Ribs or Veffels rife on that side above
the flethy part of it; and therefore, when they are
colour’ with any of thefe Inks, will give an Im-
preffion but in the Front, Fore-fide of  Leaf,
the flethy Parts rife, and thefe fine Fibres are funk
below them.
Memorandum. Where Vermillion is uted, blue
Bice may be ufed either with Butter, or with Oyl,
as follows.
 fine red or blue Printers Ink, for making im-
pressions of this fort.
GRIND either Vermillion, or bluc Bice, with
some burnt Linfeed-oyl, and ufe it as you would
do the other printing ink, the blue  should chufe
for this Work, becaufe, if we should colour the
Leaf, the biue would be an agreeable Colour to
the green forts.
The Method of Taking-off the Leaves of Plants in
Plaifter of Pavis, so that they may afterwards
be cast in any Mctal.
 HO SE Perfons who caft in Metal, have frea
quent Occation to ufc Leaves of feveral Sorts to.
cinbelliff


 their Works, which are generally made
from Models done by the Hland, which take up
 great deal of Time, and at laft are impertect
but the following Way, which  learnt from 
Gentleman in Itaty, is much cafier.
WHE  you have gathered the Leaf, you de-
fire to take an Impreftion from, lay it between the
Leaves of  Book till it will lye flat, then upon 
Lmooth Board with frong Gum-water (made of
Gum Arabic) fix the Fore-fide or Front of the
Leafto the Board; when this is done, raife about it
 little Wall of courfe Paffe, half an Inch high; or
if you can conveniently furround your piece of
Wood with Pafte-board or Card paper fo clofe, that
it will hold  Liquid for fome time, then oyl the
back of your Leaf, as is recommended in the Chap-
ter for Cafting of Medals, and pour on Waterand
Plaiffer of Paris as is there directed, which when
 will give you an exact Impreftion of every
Vein of the Leaf, and from which you may eafily
make  Mould to caftin, as your Fancy directs you.
The Manner of making the Impreffions of any But-
terfly, in  Minate in all their Colours.
WH EN you have taken  Butterfly, Kill it
without fpoiling the Wings, and contrive to (pread
them in  flying Manner as regularly as may be
then take  piece of white Paper, and with  small
Bruth or Pencil wath  part of the Paper with Crum-
water,  little thicker than ordinary, fothat it may
dry at an cafy rate then lay your Butterfly on the
Paper, and when tis well fixt, cut away the Body
clofe to the Wings, and throw that away, then lay
the Paperon  linooth Board with the Flyupwards,
and on thatanother Paper, upon which puta fmooth
 and  great Weight upon that or eife
put your whole Preparation into  Screw-prefs, and
lcrew it down very hard, letting it fo remain for
 Hour; then take off your Butterffy’ Wings, and
their perfect Impreffion, with all their beautiful
Coloursmark’ diffinctly, will remain on the Paper.
 have done feveral this Way, which antwers very
well. and to explain the Reafon why it can be fo,
you muft underftand, that all the fine Colours ob-
served on  Butterfly' Wings, are properly Fea=
thers, which ftick to the Gum to fatt, that, when
the Gumis dry, they leave the Wing.
WHE  you have done this, draw between
the Wings of your Impreftion the Body of your
Butterfly, and colour your Drawing of that Body
afterthe Life.
   tor   tl  for essert

   . IV.

off Medals instantly, by various
Of Taking
Ways not known.
 may be ufeful to some People to learn another
Way of preferving to themfelves good Speci-

mens, and fine Defigns of Medals, that is, fuch as
may ferve to draw from at any time and many
Chollands of thofe Specimens may be taken in one
Dav, at  trifling Expence.
ONE Method is, to take Ichthyocolla, . . Hin-
glafs, which is fold at the Druggifts, and is call’
likewife Fith-glue, it is made up in Rolls twifted
in the Form of  Figure of eight. This being
broked to pieces, take about an Ounce, and dif-
folve it in Water enough to cover it, over the Fire,
stirring it gently till all is diffolved; then, with 
Camel' Hair-bruth, froke fome of this Glue over
the Medals you want to take off; after the Mc-
dalsare laid as horizontally as poffibie, and when
all the Surface is covered, let them lie till the Glue
is hardened; and then with the Point of  fine
Needle,


 or Pin, raife the Edge of the Glue from
each Medal, and the whole Impreffion in Glue
will fly off as hard as Horn, with all the fine
Sharpnets of the Medal, as if it was ftruck. This
Gilue may be made of any Colour we pleafe, by
mixing the Colour we want in the Water we melt
the Glue in. Five hundred of thefe Impreffions
in Glue will not weigh above half an Ounce, if
each Medal be an Inch Diameter. Thefe muft be
dry’dimmediately, not in an hot Sun, nor in 
damp Place, but regularly.
Ir we ufe the Ifinglats without any Colourmix’
with the Water, we may, when we take our Copies
from the Medals, breathe gently on the concave
side of them; which in fome Meafure will moiften
our Medal, and then lay it upon  piece of the
thickeff Sort of Leaf-gold, which will stick to it,
and, by thining through the Ifinglafs, will appear
like  Gold Medal; and if we would imitate
 Copper Medal, we should mix Carmine with the
Water we diffolve our Linglats in.
WHE   prefcribe Water for this End, it is
becaufe it will do well, and may be had any
where; but Brandy or Spirits of Wine, will give
Glue  much greater Strength, fo as to be less
subject to fofren by damp Air. When  mention
this, tis from an Experiment  made for preferving
the natural Colour of Flowers feveral Vears, which
ndy be ufeful to the Curious, who ufe this Glue
 any Occation, and is as follows.
To preserve the Leaves of Tulips. Make fome
Card-paper into the Figure of Dripping-pans, and,
with  ffrong Mixture of Cum-Arabick and Water,
fix them to the Card; then pour on gently warm
some of the Iinglatsprepared with Brandy, or Spi-
rits, till the Leaf is quite covered, and in an Hour
or two the Liquor will become hard, and, by Kcep-
ing the Air from the Flower, will preferve it in all
its



 Colours for feveral Years. The fame may be
done with the Bloffoms of the Auricula, which will
preferveall their Coloursas if they were painted.
 SHALL, now mention the Manner of taking off
Medals of the largeff fort, which will still preferve
to us the Delincations of man
curious Pieces, and
Valuable Defigns. For this Ufe, with . Tuft of
fine Cotton  little greafed with Sallad=oyl, rub.
the Medals gently over, and melt forme Stone
Brimftone, enough to cover the Medal half an Incty
thick, then put an Hoop of fiff Paper round the
Fdge of the Medal, and when the Brimffone is
melted, and not too hot, pour, it on the Medal,
and as foon as it is fixed and hardned, if you untic
the Hoop; the Imprettion on the Brimftone comes
clean from the Medal; which will produce  fharp
and correct Mould to caft another from in Plaifter
But this should not be ufed on Silver
Of Paris,
Medals; becaufe it will change their Colour.
If the Medals are Silver, nfe the same Method
of binding them round with Paper, and oyling
hem, mix  little Plaifter of Paris with Water,
and fill the Hoop with it, then immediately fill
the Cafe in  prinkling Manner with the same
Plaifter till it hardens; and when it is dry take it
from the Mcdal.
Bor from the Moulds caft in Brimffone, which
are concave, we again caft fuch Medals in Plaifter
of Parisas are convex, oyling the Mould as before,
and uting the Plaiffer of Paris as above directed;
fo you may take off any Medal, or fine Bass-relie
with  great deal of Exactness, even fo as to form
Ricdals from them in any fort of Metal. Bur
there is no one that  know fo curious in the Ma-
pagement of this Affair, as Mr. Pingo, in Newr
Strect-Square, ncar Shoe-Lane, London,
CHERE is  Wicthod of taking off Impreffions
In Pluider of Paris from Copper-plates, by oyling
  minute Degree the Plates, and then binding
them about either with Cardspaper, or other Pafte=
board, and pouring on fome of the finelt Plaifter
of Paris and Water you can get; and finithing
the Work with Plaifter, till it becomes dry; and
hardens; you will then have  fine Impreftion, if
one may. to call it, of the Lines of the Place, in
the Plaifter, which will ferve to draw from, when


you have occation.
WE may add Htill the Manner of taking off any
fine Engravings from the Tops of Snuff-Boxes, of
Watch-cafes, which is only holding them over the
Smoak of  Candle, till they are quite black; then
wipe off the black with the foft part of the Palm
of the Hand, and lay on the Engraving  piece
of white Paper  little weited with  Spunge, and
over that  thin piece of Flannel, or  piece of
brown Paper held hard down over the engraved
Part, and being hard rubbed, the Paper next the
 will receive  fine Impreftion, as if it had
been pafted through  Rolling:prefs.
WE may yet recommend another Method of
taking off Medals in great Perfection, which is by
getting thin pieces of Lead, and placing the Mcdal
horizontally on the top of  firm Poft, or any fleddy
place; lay over the Lead  flat piece of harder Me-
tal, and over that place  piece of  round turn’
Stick, fuch as is uted in the Staff of  Broom, fawn
off about five of fix Inches in length, and, holding
that tight with your lefe Hand on the Lead and
flat piece of Mctal, frike the top of the Stick 
fmart Blow with  large Tiammer, and the Lead
will be perfectly impretted with the lmage of the
Medal; this Blow muft be done at once, to ren-
:derthe Impreffion perfect: Rven this may be done
on any Impreffion made on Scaling-wax.
WE may likewife take off  Medal, by laying
over it  piece of thin Sheet Block-tin, otherwife
called
)  Foyle, which is fold at the same Places where
the Plaifter of Paris is to be had; or at fome Pew-
tcrers Shops, and rubbing it hard upon the Mc-
dal, it will give us  very good Likeness of what-
ever Medal we rub it upon. The Block-fin Sheet
 mean, is fuch as is laid on the Backs of Glaffes,
when they are to be filver’, to render them
Looking-glaffes.
WE may alfo take Impreffions from Medals
with Putty, fuch as the Glaziers ufe, although the
Medals or Bass-reliess are under-wrought.
ANOTHER Way of taking off Medals is to pro-
vide the Scraps of Shavings of white Paper, which
you may have at the Book-binders; you muft boil
them well in common Water till they are tender,
then bruife them well in  Mortar till they come
like  Pafte, and boil them again in Spring-water,
with  little Crum-Arabick; and, letting this mix-
ture fettle  while, pourthe Water from it through
 Sieve or Linnen-cloth, and what remains is ex-
traordinary good, to either prefs into any Mould,
or upon any Medal, and when the Pafte is dry it
will come off very fharp.
SoME Medals that are under-wrought cannot be
taken off this Way therefore in such Cafes, we
muft take common Glue with Water, melt it, and
when we have fixt  Hoop of Pafte-board round the
Edge of our Medal, pour on the Glue hot, having
firft oyl’ the Medal with  Lump of greaty Cotton.
WHEN the Glue is dry and hard, we must take
off the Hoop, and the Glue will fly from the
Edges of the Medal; and it will then eafily come
off, being subject to bend and give way, which

the other Things before mentioned will not do.
We should mind to make our Glue flrong enough,
and pour it on one third of an Inch thick.
WHE  we have taken the Impreffion by this
Means, we muft hoop round our Mould of Glue
with


 Card-paper or Pafte-board, as before; and
oyl it, fo that no Bubbles or Blifters may be feen,
that is to fay, juft make it greaty ; then we may
caft fome Plaifter of Paris in it, and we shall have
 good Copy of the Medal: When this is dry the
Gilue will fiy off, or may be broken off, and we
shall have  good Pattern to caft from.
We may likewife make  Putty of Linfeed-oyl
and fine ground Starch, which, being well work’'
together into  Pafte, will take  good Impreffion
from any Medal. This is much better than the
common Putty.
WHEN we have thefe Moulds, we may caft in
them good Medals in Bees-wax; but they will
come off much fharper if the Mould be in Brim-
Rtone, than if it be in Plaifter of Paris. But when
we do this, our Wax should be as well blanch’dor
whitened, as one would ufe for Wax-candles; it
is however necefiary to greafe the Mould before
we pour in our Wax, as  have directed before.
HOwEVER, tho'  recommend white Wax as
preferable to the other,  would not chufe to have
the Copy of the Medal white, for the darker Co-
lours thew the Figures much better.
Ir we would have our Copy of  red Colour, we
muft mix Vermillion with our Wax when tis
melting; or if blue, put into our melted Wax
Some Stone-blue well beaten or ground.
 foon as our Wax Medals are cold enough
to take off, we should lay fome Leaf-gold upon
them, and with  piece of Cotton prefs it down
gently, without rubbing it backwards or forwards,
and that will gild our Medal.
WHEN we have caft Medals in Plaifter of Paris,
to make them look like Steel or Metal, we muft rub
them over with  Picce of Cotton dipt flightly in
Oyl, and then put on them fome Powder of black
Lead, and rub them well with  Brush, fuch as is
 forthe Teeth, till the whole is equally covers
ed; and they will have  fine Gloss upon them.
.  we may make the Plaiffer of Paris Mes
dals of the Colour of Box, by bolling them in Lin-
feed Oyl; and it will harden them, fo as to bear
the Brush to be cleaned if any Duft gets at them.
IF we would have our Plailter of Paris Medals
of  yellow or golden Colour, we muft take  little
Pearl-ash, and boil it in  Pint of Water, till it
makes  ftrong Lixivium; then put in about half
 quarter of  Pint of French Berries, and boil
them till the Liquor is of  very strong yellow,
and ufe this Liquor with our Plaifter of Paris in-
sead of Common Water.
Ix we would have our Plaifter of Paris Mcdals be
of  blue Colour, we muft boil fome Lacmus or Lit.
mus in River-water, ill the Water is as blue as
we think proper; and muft ufe this Water with
our Plaiffer, when we caft  Medal, to render it
of  fine Colour.
Ir we would have our Plaifter Medals of  red
Colour, we should boil  little Rafpings of Brafil-
wood in pale ftale Beer, and when it is ftrain’. off,
ufe it as common Water with the Plaiffer.
THAVEot, yet try’, whether the fine tranipa-
rent Cum made of Verdegreafe will mix with
Plaifter of Paris, but  have good Reafon to judge
that it will; and as it is cheap enough,  fuppote
it would not be unworthy any one' Tryal.
 HAVE often thought, that by thefe Means one
might cafily collect agset of all the Coins of our
Nation, and to diftribute them as one should, in the
feveral King' Reigns, they would make no dife
agreeable Furniture, being plac’ in proper Order;
the Gold by themfelves of each King'sReign, with
his Figure and the Reverfe by one anether, and
under it the Value of the Coin; then the Silver in
their proper Order; and the Brass, or Copper, or
Pewter,





 (for fuch we have had) and even the Lea
ther Coins should not efcape our Notice.
OR, to improve this, if we had Time to spare
and good Oppertunity; we might have the Re-
Temblance of the Coins of every Country. and by
writing the Value of each of them, fuch  Col-
lection would be of ufe to Travellers, as well as to
Hifforians.
THE eafieff Way of doing this would be with
the Ichthyocolla or Fifh-glue; and to for the Gold
Coins ufe Leaf-gold, as, before directed; for the
Silver, Leaffilver; and for the Copper, Leaf-
copper, which is made in Germany: Or elfe for
Silver we should make our Medals with Foyle, as
before directed; and for the Leather Coinsmix 
little Fullers Earth with the Water or Spirit, be-
fore we melt the Fith-glue or Iinglass in it.
So far  have given Inftructions how we may ei-
ther make Drawings from the Life; or copy what-
ever we think proper from Prints, Paintings, Me-
dals,  tho' we knew nothing of Drawing before.
 PI EI) VII SII VII SII
 VI  snoy ej vj  hrSaDrytixi   tlie   teistertaetatone slteteeiste se    se    
   . .
vints in the
Of Colours for illuminating of 
best Manner; or of Painting in Water-
Colours.
YOLOURS are to be diffinguished in the fof-
 lowing Manner; we muft firft take White,
the next Vellow; the next Orange, and then pro-
ceed to the Red, after that the Purple, then to the
Blue, and after that to the Black. Obferve, White
and Blackare the Extremes of Colour; then in the
 Place, aellow is the leffer point of Colourto-
wards the White, and the next to that is the
Green, and after that the Blue.  speak of this,
becaufe
"


 every one who has  mind to know the
Manner of Colouring of Prints, or painting in Mi
niature may profit by it.
 sHALL begin then with regard to Colouring
of Prints. If the Paper be pure white, ufe no
Colour upon it, unless in the shaded Parts; and
then in painting of Flowers, if they tend towards
 reddith Colour, ufe  faint Colour of Carmine
with Gum-water, upon the Shades only; if blueifh,
afe  little faint Indigo in Cum-water, flightly
pass’ over the Shades, eafily touching upon the
Lights; where there is  yellow Tinge, either
wfe  faint Tincture of Gamboge, or of French Ber-
ries, which will be defcribed among the Yellows;
or if the White have  purplith Caft, ufe  thin
Lake on the fhady Side, fuffering the Colour only
to thine  little into the Light, it will give  Lu-
fre to the Whites; and if  greenith Caft should
be there, ufe either  faint Colour, hardly to be
difcern’, of the fap Green, or in proportion, of
the fap Green mix’ with the Verdegreafe Green.
. . All thefe Coloursmention  to shade the
Whites, may be found in the following Directions.
  ono 
 AAMUUUAUUJUNTYOVMUYYTF
 
 Colonce  fote Cate) Cote Cohe Cose Coed Coc  () Cote) Colon  
HlC  
   . VI.
Of Waires for Painting in Miniature.

IIE beft White that is pretended to be fold
in the Water-colour manner, is the Flake-

white, which is better than the White-lead ground:
This, if it is pure, far exceds the White-lead in
 for the White-lead is apt toturn blackith,
especially if you ufe it with hard Water.
Bur the beft White that  Know, is made of
Pearl, or the finer Parts of Oyfter-shells, made
into an impalpabic Powder, that is, fo foft as to
fcel





 like Grounds of Starch, or Powder for the
Hair, when we touch it with the Fingers; this is
called by fome of the Colour-men Pearl-white, but
tis hard to be found. If we have occafion to ufe
it, this white will mix well with any Colour but
if we ufe White-lead, let it be firft rectified with
white Wine Vinegar, which will caufe  Fermen-
tation, and foon make the white fettle, then pour
off the Vinegar, and wath it with common Water.
that is, put the Powder into  lass of Water, Hir
it about, and prefently pour off the Water, while
it is whice, into fome clean Receiver; and when the
white Parts are fettled, pour off the Water from
thence, and they will be extremely fine.  mention
this, that every one may make their Colours of the
fineff Sort. It may be perhaps  little Trouble; but
who would not ufe fuch pains to be fuperior to any
Thing that has been before in the fame Way ?
WHEN the White we speak of is fertled, add toif
as much Crum-water as is neceftary to bind it, or
give it  Glaze; but take Notice that  would not
have any white ufed in colouring of Prints, but
only with dry Colours, when we paint in Miniature.
Ir is remarkable that White-lead will change
black, if the Water we ufe with it comes from Iron
or Clay: When  fayblack,  mean that in  Month
or two you will find the Places where it lies the
thickeff, tinged with black, and when tis mix’' with
any other Colour, it will foon change, or alter it.
Fo this Reafon,  have try’ divers forts of
White, among others, the Powder of Egg-shells,
of the brighteft Colour, and well clean’ and
wallr’, is very good to be ground with Gum-water,
or elfe put about  twentieth part of clear white
Sugar candied to grind with it in Water; reduce
this as fine as poffible, that is to the state of what
we call an impalpable Powder, and ufe it.  Gen-
fleman, whom  have given this Reccipt to, tells me,
that



 it is ftillmore to the purpofe to pour it on some
rectify’ Spirits of Wine, which, he fays, will clear
it from the Drofs; but  have not try’ the Experi-
ment  fuppofe, that when the Spirit of Wine has
done its Work, it muft be pour’ off, and then the
Parts left behind muft be mix’ with Gum-water
again; but that Egg-shell powder is of great Ser-
vice as  white in Water-colours,  Know very
well; and that alfo itfelf, an Oyfter-shell powder,
well rectify’ and mix’ with the white of an Egs
well beaten, will make an extraordinary Nixture

with other Colours, and correct them from chang
ing or altering their Qualities.
WHT    am peaking of white for illumi-
hating of Prints, as  have already obferved, that
the clear white of the Paper is proper to be left
uncolourd ; fo if it happens, that the Paper is
given to fink, as it is called, or to fpread any
Water-colour we lay upon it more than is necef-
Jary, then the Way to correct it is as follows.
We muft fix the Paper in fuch  Station, as may
only receive the Colour we lay on to glaze juft as
far as we defign’ it; then take fome Starch boild
and prepared in Water, of  middle Strength,
and with  large Painting-bruth froke it over
the back of the Print, and, when it is well dry’
in the Air or Sun, put the Print in  Book, with
 Weight upon it, to rectify the Crumplings
which it may receive by wetting of it; fo will
any Print be made to receive Water-colours as
one would have them be diftributed, and none of
them will then run farther than we intended.
THERE is an Earth brought fometimes from
Cbing of  very foft Nature, and very white,
which  find is better in Water-colours than
any of the reft but tis very fcarce.
   .


 CUj )jp))  NIDUP IAAI ApI
 the te te te the ttie  seitiee he she itiee ttiehe tbd tiee hiee tid
  AP. VII.
Of VEL    .

HERE are fome Objects which have the
 Appearance of Gold fhining through the
Colour of Green, Red, or Blue; fuch as fome
fort of Flies and Bectles, and fuch as the Can
tharides, which latt Sort every one may buy at
the Druggiffs. This Gold Tranfparency is very
well imitated, by laying on the Drawing fome
Leaf-gold on the shaded Part,  little giving in to
the light side of the Print, the Way of laying
on of Leaf-gold, is to wath the Part where the
Gold is to be with firong Gum-water, and foon
after that pur the Gold on as fmooth and even as
poffible, preffing it down clofe with Cotton. But
take care that, when you lay on the Gum-water,
you do not exceed the Limits you would have
the Gold appear to shinc. In this Cafe the Gold
is only to thine through the tranfparent Colour,
which is to be laid upon it.
Now it muft be underffood, that the Leaf-
gold will not regularly receive Water-colours,
to that to render it fubfervient to our purpoic, we
muft, with  little thin Liquor of Ox-gall in 
Painting-bruth of Camel’ Flair, stroke it over, and
then it will receive any Colour we have  mind
to paint upon it, and hold it. So you may have
Gold Greens, GGold Reds, and Purples, Blues,
or what you pleafc. The Greens may be, firft the
Verdigrcafe Green, which  thall defcribe here-
after or the Sap Green, or Lake, or Carmine,
if they are good ; or for Purples, Lake and fine
Indigo, or Carmine and Indigo, and for the Blues,
Indigo
. on the dark fide, and on the light fide 
little flroke of Ultramarine Blue, just to thine
into the Light, and it will have  wonderful Effect.
. . One may find upon Rofe-trees in June
and July,  Beetle of  green Gold-colour, which
will ferve te govern this Kind of Painting. 
for Gold of itfelf,  would not advife it to be
ufed, unless we polifh it, and then you may take
the following Method.
We fee in many Manufcripts fine Gold Let
ters, which rife above the Surface of the Volume
or Paper; thefe have raifed the Admiration of
the Curious, and the Manner of making them is
but little known  the Compofition, which raifes
them above the Paper, is made, as  am well
informed, of Vermillion and the white of an Egg,
whisk’ or beaten up to that Confiftence, as  an Oyl, work’ together like  kind of
Pafte, and with  Stamp hx’ to the Paper with

Gum-Arabick; on this Figure of  Letter wash,
with  Camels Hair Pencil, fome ftrong Cum-
water, taking care that the rum does not reach
more than the Out-lines, then lay on the Leaf=
gold clofe with some Cotton, and as foon as it

 dry, rub it with fome dry Cotton, and then
polish it with  Dog' Tooth this will make it
appear as if it was really caft in Gold.
THERE is yet another Way of working thefc
Things in Gold; and that is, by ufing the Gold
which is prepared in Shells, but it must be purc
Gold, and not fuch as is brought from some Pla-
ces in Cermany, which will change Green in  few
Days time.
BEFORE you ufc this Gold, cover the fhady
parts with Vermillion; and then, after your Gold
is well rectified with Spirits of Wine, lay it on
with Gum-water, which will mix with it very
well, and when it is dry, polith it with  Dogs
Tooth.


  chufe when  lay on this Powder-gold,
to leave the Lights vacant of it, and it makes 
much brighter Appearance, than if one was to
cover the Object all over,
Bor if one was to cover by Accident the
whole Piece with Gold, there is no better Way
to fet it off, than by tracing over the fhady Parts
with Gall-fones or which is much preferable,
the Yellow, which  shall give the Compofition
of below, made of French Berries,  mean that
which is the deepeft in Colour,  little Minium
brightens it very much; but fee how  rectify
the Minium, amongit the REns, and polith the
Gold before you ufe any Minium to it.
SINCE  have mentioned Gold,  am next to
speak of the Vellows, as they fall gradually in
their Courfe of Strength.
THE firft is  Kind of Straw-colour, and is
made of Flower of Brimstone, which in itfelf
is fine enough to mix with Cum-water; and the
Manner of Preparing Gum-water, fince  have
not yet mentioned it,  shall infert at the end of
this Treatife of Colours.
 COMMON Way of illuminating of Prints, is
by giving the Tincture of Gamboge for  Yel-
low, and this may be of two or three forts, either
fainter or lronger the laft to be  Shade to the
firft, and that to be shaded with the Preparation
of French Berries, which  shall prefently mention.
THE great Mr. Bogle has left fome Papers be-
hind him that were never publifhed, which my
Lord Carleton gave me, and  shall infert occafi-
With regard to yellow
onally in this Ireatife.
Colours, he fays, that if the Roots of Barberries
are cut, and put in  Liivium made flrong with
Water and Pearl-afhes, there will be  fine yellow
Colour produced from it, which  have tried, and
fucceeds very well.
ANO-


 Way Mr. Boyle propofes, to make
 tranfparent Vellow, which is, to take the Root
of the Mulberry, which affords  very yellowish
uice, to wath it well from the Earth in common
Water, and boil it in the Lixivium  (peak of, made
with Pearl-afhes and Water from this we may
take out  ftrong Tincture, much deeper than
the former; but the Roots of the Mulberries are
much harder to be had than thofe of the Barber-
ries, for Mulberry-trees are very fcarce, and the
Barberries are in almoff every Hedge in Esex,
about Littlebury especially.
WirH regard to the Barberry-root,  think
it would be worth while to plant them on purpofe,
for the Advantage that one might make from
them by Dying, the Fruit, in my Opinion, be-
ing of little or no Signification, but the Root
and the Wood,  think, will nearly antwer the
Jame End, in producing  fine Yellow.
KELLow Oker will make another good pale
Yellow; but for illuminating of Prints, it is 
Colour rather of too much body; however being
well ground with Gum-water, it is of ufc after it
has been well wath’.
ANOTHER good Yellow may be made from
the Plant call’ Celandine, infuting it in Water,
and prefting it gently, and then boiling the Li-
quor with  little Allum; this Yellow will be 
little inclining to Green.
Bur the Yellow which  like the beft, and
may be ufed in feveral Capacities of Lights and
Strength, is that made of French Berrics, pre-
pared as follows.
TAKE of French Berries an Ounce whole, and
boil them in  Pint of the Lixivium made of
Pearl-ashes and Water, till the Liquor will give
 fine Tinge of Vellow to  bit of Paper dipp’
in it; then pour it off from the Berries, and when
t cool, put it in  Bottle for Ofe. But if we
only put French Berries to infufe in common Wa-
ter, they will produce  good Vellow, but then
it will not be durable
THEN again, add half  Pint of the same Lix
ivium to the Berries, and half an Ounce of fresh
Berries, and boil them, till the Liquor is as deep
as Gall-ftone; which will ferve to shade all the
Yellows you can ufe of any fort. You may boil
this even to produce  brown Colour; and with
 little Ox-gall, it will ferve to shade any Leaf-
gold that has been laid on Paper, as directed be-
fore, and is much preferable to Gall-ftone in imi-
tating any Gold-colour. It anfwers well upon 
Tincture of Gamboge, or any of the former
Fellows.
NEx  to this is the Tincture of Saffron,
which, with common Water only, affords  bright
reddith Yellow, fuch as one would have (to cover
the thadow’ parts of  Print) for an Orange or
Beldk Gold-colour; however, there is nothing
more High, when we ufe Saffron, than when we
infufe it in rectified Spirits of Wine; but then the
Colour flies, unless we load it with Crum-Arabick,
as  have try’.
As for  deep Yellow with  body, Dutch
Pink comes the neareft to the aforefaid itrong
Yellow made of French Berries, in point of Co-
four and of  lighter Vellow is the Engliffs Pink,
which is ftill made of French Berries, and in  bo-
dy likewife.
 CANNOT help obferving, that one may ex-

tract  good yellow Colour, for illuminating
 of
Prints, from the freth Roots of Ginger, if one can
Sct
 

 By beld is meant the boiling of pure Gold in Liquors,
which will take away the Vellow of it, and bring it to be of
 reddith or higher Colour.





 nothing elfe;  fpeak this, becaufe fometimes
one wants  good Vellow, and any one may find
this any where, if Gamboge can' be had; and it
makes  fine Green, with the tranfparent Verdes
greafe  shall hereafter mention. . . This laft
Hint  took from Mr. Boyle' Papers.
Ir is again to be remark’, that the Engliffs
and Dutch Vellow Pinks are made with French
Berries ground to  fine Powder and boiled.
owh fpr oft flor eth atl    rs   

VIII.
   .
Of ORANCE COLOUR.
 Orange-colour, which is ufeful to wath
fine Prints with, confifts in laying on 

Teint of Gamboge, and over that, fome of the
Minium or Red-Lead, fuch as  shall defcribe,
to be wash’, and render’ fine and fit for Ufc,
for, as it is bought at the shops, it is not by any
means fine enough to paint with, and especially
will change or turn black after  few Weeks, if.
it be not refin’; but if it be well prepared, will
be very lafting and beautiful: But we muft take
of it, two
this by the Way, that in the refining
Ounces will not produce above  Grains of good
Colour, to fland the Teff of the Painters.  shall
prefently defcribe the Method of Preparing it:
This Colour may be mix’ with Camboge, upon
 white Dutch Tile to render it of the lcint we
defire, either foft or tlronger or one may glaze
the Gamboge, and ftrengthen it with Tincture of
Saftion, to make it glare into  ftrong Orange.
CHAP.





  amemananuomnimfiggige
Pilck ( CbiCkiloki Cld Cote) (oe. Coed Cotd Coe Cole Cohe. (hor (oAi Cote. Cohel (de. Cole. Colelled
   . IX.
Of MINTUM, or the brightest Red-lead,
and bore to prepare it.
TWHI  Minium, or Red-lead, is as heavy
 and frong  Colour as moft we have; but
is the moff delightful one, when well prepared,
that is, when tis well wath’ and clean’ of its
more weighty Parts, which occafion it to turn
black. My Way of doing it, as the great Mr.
Bogle directs, is to put  or  Ounces of it in
 Quart of Rain-water; then fir it, and pour
off the Water immediately,, and let it fettle to
the bottom of every Cup or Glafs you pour it
in; then pour off that Water, and in  Day'
time you will have the Colour dry, and as fine as
you- can with; put then  little piece of Gum=
Arabick to each Glafs or Cup, and as much Was
ter as will moiften each of them; Ufe any of
thefe afterwards with the Cum-water, as shall be
hereafter directed; but if the Gum, you should
happen to put in at firft, may be firong enough
to glaze it,, then ufe only common Water; in 
Word, as your Colour is lefs gum’ or Over-
gum’, ue lefs or more Gum-water; for of itfelf
tis  dead Colour.
WHEN you ufc this Colour, touch it gently
on the Yellow we have mentioned into the light
Side, and if it wants  Shade, there may be 
little Vermillion put upon it; but Vermillion is
too heavy to paint with, when we illuminate
Prints, becaufe it hides the Shades of the Engra-
ver however, fornctimes they had better be hid-
 den then preferved: For my part,  generally
Shade this Red-lead or Minium with Carnine,
which


 gives it  fine Effect, and renders it equal
to the brighteff red Flower  ever faw, leaving
Kill the Lights uncoloured, only dathing  little
way into the Lights with the Minium.
VERMILLrON  muft advife to be left out
of the Queftion, unless it is well wath’, as 
have directed the Minium to be, and then chieffy
for dry painting, One may think then, that after
 have advifed the Vermillion to be abandoned,
it should be quite left out of my Table of Co-
lours but  peak at that Time to fuch Perfons
as can ufe it moderately, and with Judgment;
for all heavy Colours will drown the Shades or
Strokes of the Engraver.
WHEN the Carmine has shaded the Miniurh,
or Red-lead, it may be fhaded again with
Lake in the ftrongeft Part, to bring it to  deeper
Red.
Ir may be  Wonder to fome, that when 
Ipeak of Orange-colours,  should mention fome
of thefe deep Sorts, tending to Purples; but 
nention them as Shades, and without which
the Orange of Red could not appear with any
Brightness.
lis of lipe of thee  pe pp   pp  thess    Allp p . .  Td pt to Allp Athipe op thss  Sliss 
NOt

 EOEEERREREERESSS TArerEererETUEerEStESTEStESS

 HAP. .
Of  ED .
SEGT.  Of SCARLET.
II . we have pafted the Orange, we
next come to the Scarlet, which may be
reprefented on  Plane with Minium,  little
mix’ with Vermillion, but if you have Occa-
Lion


 to paint  Flower of  Scarlet-colour on 
Print, let your Lights, as well as Shades, be co-
vered thin with Minium, and the shaded Parts
glazed with Carmine, which will produce an ad-
mirable Scarlet, fuch as we fee in the Flower of
the Scarlet Martagon.
SEG.. . Of CRYMSON.
ROMN the Scarlet we next come to Crimfon,
which is reprefented with Carmine; but 
muft inform the Perfon who is to ufe it, that
there are feveral Sorts of it, fome darker, and
some much coarfer than others, and therefore it
should never be bought by Candle-light, unlets.
of fuch ps one can well truft for between the
very beft and the worf Sort, there is about ten
Shillings difference in an Ounce, or indeed all
the Money an Ounce will coft, for the bad will
spoil all our Work. The beft that  have met
with was at Mr. Goupee', the great Fan-Painter
in King-freet, Covent-Garden;  have had tome
very good likewife, at the Colonr-shop, the Sign
of the Bell, againt Arundel-street in the Strand,
SECT. III. Of LARE.
FTER this Crimfon, comes next the Lake,
which shades and heightens the Carmine,

but it is to be obferv’, that in the laying of Cars
mine upon  Print, let your Lights be touch’
only with  very thin Teint of it, hardly to be
difcerned; then juft on that part of the Light
which enters upon the Shade lay it on ftrong, and
cover the Shade with it; and after that, on the
Rronger part of the Shade lay fome Lake. The
beft Lake  have met with, is at the great Colour=
thop at the White-bart in Long-acre, near Jamess=
Strect,
F Covent-Garden, ready prepared in Shells
for Water-colours.
SE CT. IV Of transparent CRTMSON.
 TT we may make  liquid Colour, not

 much inferior to Carmine itfelf, with the
 of Bratil-wood, fold at the Dry-falters
Rafpings
and particularly at the great Colour-fhop at Hol-
Corn-briage which  mention, becaute  have
been fome time without knowing where to find
it, for few Colour-fhops Know what it is, and
Lovers of Painting in this Way, are now and
then impatient to have fuch Things, and unac-
quainted where to find them out.
To make this tranfparent Colour, we may take
an Ounce of the Rafpings of Brafil-wood, and
boil it in ewelve Ounces of pale Htale Beer, and 
little Allum, till the Colour of the Liquor is as
Hrong as you pleafe, which you may difcover,
by dipping into it  Slip of white Paper, and
when the Colour is as you would have it, and
is cold, pass it through  Linnen-cloth, and
put the clear Liquor into  Bottle for Ufc.
This is one of the Reccipts  had from  Ma-
nuscript of the great Mr. Boyle.
AwD if we have  mind to bring this Colour
to  Body, take Ox-blood, and dry it, till we
can reduce it to Powder, which, being mix’ with
it, will give us  Colour, which  think will be
little lefs in Value than  middling Sort of Car-
minc. And, as  Gentleman of Learning and
good Understanding in thefe Matters informs me,
the Blool of an Ox or Cow fo dry’, will make
 good Body for any Colour.
SECT.


  ir 
. CRIMSON from Mr Boyle.
SECT.
AKE the Fruit of the Berrybearing Spinach;
 is Known to every Gardner about
London, press them, and you will have  beautis
fulred-colour’ Juice from them; boil this, and
put about  fourth part of Allum to it when
you pour it into the Veffel where tis to cool, and
then it makes as fine  Colour as any others that
are noted, and it is of little Expence, for it will
grow any where and in one Bunch of the Fruit
thereare Seeds enough to fow two of three Rods
of Ground.
-
THE red Bect-root, back’ with  little ftrong
Vinegar, produces an elegant red Colour, equal
  Lincture of Carmine, then pour it on Al-
lam, and when tis cool tis fit for Ufe, where
Carmine should be ufed in wathing of Prints: For
it is  fine tranfparent red.
SECT. VI. Of INDIAN-RED.
FI
KXT to thefe Colours, Indian-red, though
it is  Colour of  Body, is helpful for 
back Ground, for Flowers at  Diftance, being
uted thereby with Gum-water. But  shall have
Occafion to give an Example of it by and by.
 RAVE lately feen an Earth brought from
the Ie of Wight, of amuch finer Colour than the
Indianred; which  and fome others, have
try’, and find to mix extreamly well with Crum-
water tho' as it is of  vifcous Nature, it requires
less Gumthan moft other Colours. And as it is
naturally fit for Ofe without Grinding, and is
vifcous, fo it will afturedly mix as well with Oyl
as with Water. This was difcovered by Edward
Lises








( Efqz to which Gentleman we owe many
more extraordinary Things of Value.
THERE is one Thing very extraordinary in this
Earth, fimple as tis, that if we rub  Deal-board
with it, it renders it exactly of the Colour of
Mohogany-wood, and stains it to deep, and with
to much Strength, that it is very hard to get it
out without wathing.
And dry as this Earth
was when  receiv’ it,  cannot get it out of
some Papers, which by Accident were mix’' in
my Pocket with it; fo that  am perfuaded it
will prove of extraordinary Ufe, when its Virtues
come to be Known.
SECT. VII. Of transparent PURPLE.
NTER this we may make  tranfparent
Purple, either more red, or nearer the blue

Colour, as we shall fee Occafion, by ufing the
Jame Menftruum as was prefcribed in the former,
 of pale stale Beer one Pint, in which boil
one Pint of rafped Brafil-wood, and half an Ounce
of Log-wood or Campechy-wood, till the Liquor
is heighten’ to the Colour you defire which
you muft try, by dipping  piece of Paper into
 If you then find it too red, add  Quarter of
an Ounce of Log-wood to the Brafil-wood, and
you will find it much nearer the Purple than the
former; and fo one may humour any Degree of
Purple, as you put more or lefs Log-wood to the
former Composition, and fix the Colour with 
little Allum. This will produce fuch clear Pur-
ples, as no Mixture of folid Reds and Blues can
produce, and the Reccipt has been for  long
tine Kept  Scerct.
MADA Mariand of Amfterdam, who has been
to famous for her Painting in Miniature, and
her excellent Manner of illaminating Prints, told
IIIC,


 that the beft Purple  could afe, might be
compofed between the Carmine and Indige;
which to itrengthen on the red Side one may add
Lake between the lighter and darker Part; which
 have in many Cafes found to be good, and of
Significancy. And fo Lake, when it is ufed in the
Same Way on the foregoing Purple, or the liquid
Crimfon, produces  very fine Effect. One may
vary the Colour of the Purple either redder,
by putting more Carmine, or bluer by ufing more
Indigo, which, being mixed on  white Dutch
Tile, will thew itfelf
offer respr  er alter  
to refer reffor rett rife regor reffor 


   . XI.
Of BIvE.

SECT. . Of the ULTRAMARINE.
TIIIE firft and beft bright Blue we have, is
the Ultramarine Blue, which gives  Spirit
to all Paintings where Blues are ufed; but it is
very dear, if we have the beft, even worth, or at
leaft fold at fix Pounds an Ounce; it is made from
the Lapis Lazuli, divefted of its Gold, and ground
and made into an impalpable Powder. This Con
lour however, as it is of  very high Price, will
make good its Value in Painting, as the leaft
Touch of it is enough to illuminate  Flower.
In uting it, leave the white or light part of the
Flower uncoloured, excepting that on the Edge
of the light next the shaded Parts, colour it with
Ultramarine; and,  little into the shaded Part of
the Print, add  faint Tincture of Indigo, the
Indigo covering  little the Verge on the shady
side



 of the Uitramarine, fo will your Flowerj
E if it be  bright Blue, appear extreamly.
beautiful.
. . This is  Colour of Body, and will laft
aslong as one would defire, and even preferve
any Colour you can mix with it.
To ufe it fingly, there is nothing more darling;
as appeared in the Cafe of colouring Iron-gates;
which many Years ago was executed at the En-
france of Devonsbive-house in Picadilly. This
Colour was laid upon the Iron-work, at the Ex
pence of many hundred Pounds, and remain’ in
great Beauty Till they were taken down, and the
Kntrance of that Palace altered which thews that
this Colour will not change, though it fuffers all
Kinds of Weather; for tis computed that they
had been expoted upwards of fixty Vears. But
the beft Colour of this fort is, rarely to be met
with, unlets it be at Mr. Coupee', the great Fan-
Shop in King-street, near Covent-Garden, where is
the beft  ever faw.
SECT. . Of the PRUSSLAN BEvE.

DT
THTHIE Pruffian Blue is the next to the Ultras
 marine for Beauty, if it is used in Oyl; tho'
 imagine it will not hold to well as the fore-
going, confidering it has not the Body of Ultra-
marine. This Colour, however, is attempted to
be ground in Water; but there is fuch an oily
Quality in it, that it does not mix Kindly with
Water, and at the beft will change, as it is now
prepared in the common Way. It has been at-
tempted to make  blue Ink; which indeed held
the Colour for  Month or two, but then turn’
to  muddy Yellow; to when you put your
Pencil with Gum-water into  Shell. of this Blue,
you will find where the Water preads, the Blue
will


 change yellowish, till the Body of the Bluc
is well firr’ up. And when we have done our
beft with this Colour in Water, it will only ferve
to shade Ultramarine with but in Oyl it ferves
very well for the prefent to fill the Place of Ultra
Mmarine.
SECT. II. Of BLvE BIsE.


IHIE next Colour to the foregoing for Bright-
nets, is that which we callblne Bife; which
tho it is  Colour of body, will flow pretty well
in the Pencil; especially if it be well wathed, as
 have directed the Whites and the Miniumte
be done.
SEC.. IV Of SANDERS BIvE.
 this Colour the Sanders Blne is of

very good UIc, and may ferve as  Shade
 Ultramarine, or the blue Bife, where the
Shades are not required to be extremely deep, and
is of itfelf  pleafant Blue, to be laid between the
Lights and Shades of fuch  Flower as is of 
Mazarine Bluc, as tis called.
SEGT.  Of LACMUS OF LITMUS
. VE.
NOTHER Bluc, which is  beautiful Co-

lour, and will run in  Pen as free as Ink,

is made of Lacmus, or as fome call it Litmus,
which may be met with at moft Druggifts. This
Colour however is never met with prepared for
Water-colours; and therefore  shall fet down
the following Mcthod of preparing it according
 Nirs. Mgrians, for it affords  bright Colour
which has extraordinary Effects.
TAKE of Lacmus one Opnce, and boil it in
about  Pint of Small-beer Wort, till the Colour
is as frong as you defire, then pour off the Liquor
into  Gallipot, and let it cool for Ufe. it will
foon become  felly, and by Degrees grow hard.
This Colour, however, is to be opened again, and
made liquid by Water, to as to be ufed as Ink;
and as it is rendered thinner or thicker, fo will
be paler or darker. By what  find of this Lac=
mus, it is not only  beautiful but an holding Co-
lour for  have fome Defigns  coloured with it
in the Year  which sill preferve themfelves
in as much beanty as they had at the first; and 
have feen fome in Holland, which were faid to
be done with it forty Years before, which  Vear
or two ago look’ Hill as freth as one would des
fire the firft Day one ufed it. This Colour, how.
ever, if it be touch’ with Aqua-fortis, immedis
ately changes to  fine Crimfon, little inferior to
Carmine, and then finks quite through the Paper
To as not to be got out.
So that when we ufe this Colour as Blnc,
it is beft to preferve it from Aqua-fortis, or
Tuch ftrong Acids. It is  good Shade for Ultra=
marine, of blue Bife, where the ftrongest Shades
should not be extremely deep; and for colouring
of Prints it is very good, as it is  tranfparent Cos
lour, and goes  great Way.
SECT. Vj. OFINDICo.
VNDIGO is the next Colour  shall speak of,
 it certainly makes the ftrongeff Spade for
Blues of any other, and is  foft and warm Co-

four, when it is well ground and wath’ with Crum-
water, by means of  Stone and Maller, As one
happens


 to want the Ufe of this; put inore Gums
water to it, if you would have it of the lighteft
Caft; of lets; as you would have it darker; but
before you touch your Print with it; try its

Strength upon  white Dutch Tile; for it runs
warmly in the Pencil, and may chance to be too
frong for your Defign, which you should always
think of, when  flowing Colour, is to be laid over
 dark Shade of  Print; which Shade will much
aggravate its Blacknefs; and even make it appeak
quite Black:

SECT. VIL.  fine BEvE from Mr.
BOyL .


  the blue Leaves of Rhue, and beat
them  little in  Stone-mortar with 
wooden Peftel; then put them in Water; Juice
and all, for fourteen Days; or more; wathing
them every Day till they are rotten, and at latt
beat them and the Water together; till they are

in  Pulp, and let them dry in the Sun. This will
produce as good  Blue as Indigo, and be much
foffer; but to keep it  long while; when you.
beat it the laftt Time, add  little Powder of
Crum-Arabick. You may put more or lefs of the
Gum, as you defign to make it more free of te-
S  fine Blue for
nacious in the Working.
Shading; and has  good Body, and runs warnt
in the Pencil.
SECT Viil. Of Mir. BotlEs transpas
rent BLUE; equal to Ultramarine.

 the next Place;  have  Colour to defcribe,
which  took from the great Mr. Boyle' Mas
nutcripts given me by my Lord Carleton; and
proves
   beautiful Blue, and what  admite  the more is, becaute the chief of the Ingre-
dients it is compofed of, may be cafily had du-
ring four of the Summer Months, that is, the
Cyanus or blue Cornbottle-fower, which abounds
in almoff every Cornfield; Children may gather
it, without hurting any Thing; about the Skirts
or Verges of the Corn-field. This Flower has
two Blues in it, one of  pale Colour in the larger
outward Leaves, and the other  deeper Blue, which
lies in the middle of the Flower both thefe will
do, if they are feparated from the Buttons or Ca-
fes they grow in; but the deep Blue of the Micd-
die produces much the beft Colour, as one may
try, by rubbing it while it is fresh, to hard upon
 piece of good writing Paper, as to press out
the Juice, and it will yield an excellent Colour,
which will not fade, as the Experience of two of
three Years has shewed me. This part of the
Flower is therefore the principal, and what is to
be depended upon, therefore the fame Day that
People gather the Flowers, or the next at the lateff,
employ. fome Children to pick that part clean
from the reft; and when you have  good Quan-
tity, prets what Juice you can from it; and by
adding to that  little Allum, you will have 
latting tranfparent Blue, of as bright  staining
Colour as you would defire; and in my Opinion,
it is not inferior in Beauty to UUltramarine But
for the other Parts of the Flower, which are paler,
 muft obferve, that when  had  Buthel of them
gathered, and had not an Opportunity of preffing
them immediately, they changed white; to that
 cannot commend them, left the Allum should
not fix them, but as for the middle of the Flow-
er, it is certainly as good  Bluc as can be defir-
nd, and is durable.
Is


 IF any one should object, that Twill be trous
blefone to make it; let him confider only what
Pains there is in gathering and curing of Saffron,
which fometimes is fold at thirty shillings the
Pound, and feldom brings three Pounds per Pound:
But  Blue, if it comes up to the Colour of UI-
tramarine, is worth four or five Pounds per Ounce,
especially when it stains to well as this does; there-
fore  should think it worth while, when any one
has made this Experiment, as  have done, to have
 piece of Ground on purpofe for this UOfe, where
ho other Thing but this Corn-bottle, or Cyanus
should be fown. And as this Flower is plentiful
enough in the Fields between Twittenham and Te-
dington; in Middlefex, to there may be seed enough
gathered of it, in  Quarter of an Hour; by one
Hand, to fow an hundred acres. There is like=
wife abundance of it in the large Corn-fields in
Cambridgesbire. But how valuable are many
Things that we daily trample under Foot; if
we knew their Virtues; we should ufe them, pros
vided we could bring them to  proper Markets
But let that be as it will; gather the Flowers
about the beginning of Tune, or in July or Hus
guft, and fome you may find in May; thefe are
for your immediate Work to make the Colour of;
and muft be difpatched as Saffron is done, or it

will lofe its Perfections. And as  happen to
mention Saffron, which  very well know the
Management of, by drying it on Kilns,  do not
fee why thefe Chives of Flowers may not be cured
in the same Manner; they would certainly produce
 much greater body of Colour, and   incture
might be drawn from them with more cafe, than if
we were to pressthem raw or freth from the Field.
THE Way then that  would have them dry’
like Saffron, is, to provide in the first place fuch 
Kiln as is ufed for curing Saffron; within: which,
make





  fimall Charcoal-fire, which comins
Nicates an Hieat to the top of the Kiln, which is
covered with an Hair Cloth; and upon that; lay
on four or five Streets of white Paper,  mean fuch
as we ule fof curing of Saffron; then lay on the
Paper  parcel of the picked Flowers, till you
have the thickness of two or three luches, laying
clofe and flat with  knife; and prinkle it. with.
some thin Cum-water then cover the Cake of
Flowers with two or three more Sheets of Papery
and lay upon them  Board with  little Werght.
upon it for  few Minutes; then take off the
Board, and, taking hold of all the Papers with
both Hands, turn your Cake of Flowers upon.
the Kiln; and when tis rightly placed, take off
the upper Papers, and fprinkle the Cake again
with tome thin Gum-water, and with  Knife fet=
tle your Cake of Flowers, and lay on again your
 and Board; with  Weight upon it for 
Minute of two; and then turn your Papers again
and again, till the Flower-cake becomes united;
and of the thickness of  Cake of Saffron in this

 you will find the Flowers grow darker.

ty. time they are turned; till at length the Cake.
Willlook of  deep Blue tending to Black. From
whence we cafily draw fuch  Tincture as  fpeak
Off.
DURINc this Operation, great care muft be
taken of the Fire, that it does not fcorch the
Flowers let it be gentle and as constant as may
be, which will be  fure Way to bring your
Flower-cake to  good Colour.
 wovts advite in this Cafe; that whoever
attempts this, they should fee the Management of
Saffron; or read Accounts that are publiffied of
the curingit.
Ir any one is defirous of feeing the curing of
Saffron, with the Manner of the Kilns, the boff
Artiffs


 that way, are about Chesterford and Littles.
bury in Effex; though  think it can be of no
great Morent, fince there is publiffed  large
Account of its Preparation, in Mr. BRADLEY 
Montbly Treatife of Husbandry and Gardenings
and in the prefent Cafe of the Blue,  have made
the neceffary Alcerations, and  think given what
is fufficient for fuch as are acquainted already with
the curing of Flowers by Kiln-drying.
Bur  come now to fpeak of the Culture of
this valuable Flower for  muft now to call it;
fince  am well affured of its Perfections.
EvERy Knob or Head of Seed muft be open’
before we fow it, for each Head contains  great
number of Seeds, the Preparation of the Ground
for the Reception of this Seed, need not be more
troublefome or expenfive than common Plough-
ing requires which being done, fow the Seed
which will come up
either at the Knd of Auguft.
foon enough to ftand the
Winter, and blofforn
early the May following; or effe fow it. at the
End of Mareh, and it will begin flowering the
WWhen the Ground is freffy
following June.
plow’ at either of thefe Seafons, fow the Seed,
and harrow it in with Buthes, and it will prefently.
come up.
IN the Choice of the Seed  should obferve,
that it be gathered opply in fuch Fields where wc.
are fure there grow no Corn-bottles of any other
Colour but Blue; and then one may expect all
the Plants which rife from fuch Seed to produce
blue Flowers, but if they should be gathered itn
fuch Places, where there are Varieties of them,
we muft expect various Sorts, as White, Red, or
Purple, although we are fure we gather the Seed
from fuch as were truly of the blue Sort; for ac-
cording to the Dectrine of the Generation of
Plants, which has been explained to the World in
 Sicat


 great mary Inftances, if there is  red Flower
of the fame Tribe with this growing near it, the
difference of Colour will be fo intermix’ between
Both, that the Seed of both will bring  variety
from the Principal, depending of the Colours of
both. And thus  conclude what  have to fay.
of Bines; as for the Smalt, tis much too heavy
 Colour to be ufed for illuminating of Prints.
MOr  iRngrmn
nna
 (]  Col  Cole) (oto) (ohe) Cole. Colol Colol: Coted Co. Cole fets. Coe Cote) (col ( oss Cate. Cole Chey
CH AP. KII
Of BLACK.
TVHIE. proper Black for Water-colours, is
what they call Ivory-black, which if it be
pure and well ground, is of ufe in miniature
Painting; but very feldom; and indeed ought
not to be ufed in colouring of Prints, if they are
good, for tis too heavy  Colour, and hides the
beautiful Strokes of the Engraver, unless done
with very great care. If it is neceffary however
to ufe Black by way of darkening  Print, rather
chufe  strong Tincture of good Indian ink, than
the Lvory-black, but to colour Pieces in Minia-
ture, ufe the Ivory-black prepared as follows.
LET your burnt Ivory. be well ground in

Crum-water, and then beat the White of an Eg
 well till you find  kind of oily Liquor fet-
tles to the bottom; this Liquormix with as much
of the Lvory-black as you think neceftary to make
it run freely in the Pencil, and it will afford an
extraordinary Gloss; and if the Object is fhining,
fuch as the Wings of fome Bectles, mix with fome
of it  little White upon  Dutch glazed Tile,
cillyou find it light enough to relieve the Shadej
and


 their make another lighter Mixture of the
ame; which being ufed on the brighter Part of
the Subject, will produce the Effect you defire.

ooniea> as ao <  < 
 Co) Ce (to) (os Col Cote Cote Coor? (oe) Co) (. Cder sof Cdellde) Cdel Cec. Coe? too Cotey
   . KIII
Of.GREE NS.


The  rogress of Greens from Tellore to Blue:

HI  VE already given an Account of the
Progress of Colour from White, through the
Vellows to the Orange; the Reds, Purples and
Blues, to the Blacks; and shall now treat of the
Greens in their feveral Orders, from the Yellows
to the Blues.
GKEENS are allow’ by all to depend upon the
Fellow and the Blue, and by the help of one and
the other Colour, may be framed any green Co=
lour we pleafe.
THE Gamboge is one of our firft Vellows;
which; with the Preparation of Verdigreafe,  shall
infert; may be made to produce five or fix Sorts
of Green, according as the Gamboge abounds, or
is in lets Quantity if it abounds; one mgy make
 tolerable Oak reen with it; and being Htill
more mix’ with the Verdigreafe Green; it will be
 Grats Green.
Bur the Vellow that  pfefer before all others;
is that which is made of French Befries defcribed
above, which  have obferved is of different Cas
pacities, as the Liquor it is boyled in is more or
lefs ftain’ with it when it is very thin, it makes
 Good Glaze all over the Verdigreafe, ald; as it
sOries nearer to Durch Pitik of Gall-ftone, coims
mands
 almoft any Colour we want, being agree-
ably mix’ with the tranfparent Verdigreafe, and
Hill is tran(parent.
So the Yellow drawn from the Roots of Bar-
berries, and thofe drawn from the Roots of the
Mulberry-tree, will produce in great meafure the
like Effect, being mix’ with the tranfparent Ver-
digrealc.
As for the Verdigreafe itfelf, it produces  fine
blucish Green, flows eafy in the Pencil, and may
even ferve as an Ink to write with.
+
THE preparing of this Colour is yet very little
Known, and  shall therefore inform my Reader
how to do it.
TAKE of common Verdigreafe three Ounces,
break it  little, and boil it gently in  Pint of
White-wine Vinegar, firring it continually; when
you perceive it to boil, add  little Tartar broken,
and Keep your Mixture ftirring till you find the
clear Liquer of fuch  Colour as you would with;
that is, of  fine tranfparent Green, with  blue
Calt, which you may do by dipping in  Stick,
and touching  piece of Paper with it.
WHEN you have  Colour to your Mind, pour
it through  Linnen-cloth into an open Veffel,
and fet it to cool; when it is quite cold, keep it
in  clofe Veffel for Ofe, pouring out  little at 
time as you want it; for when it is expoted to the
Air,; it will foon dry, but. is reducible again by
common Water.
WHEN we prepare this liquid Colour, do not
ufe the diftilled Verdigreafe, for it will notanfwer
the end we: propofe.

  Hrs Liquid should be touched upon part of
the Lights and Shades of  Print, and the Shades
afterwards coloured with Sap-green.
... IN the making this Green, take care you
make it trong enough, for it is not to be frength-

IICd


 afterwards, without the trouble of boiling
afresh, but may at any time be rendered as faint
as we pleafe, by mixing common Water with it.
SAP-GREEN is  Colour like that of an. Oak-
leaf; if it is ufed thin with common Water, for
this as well as the former wants no Crum, but it
will, if we ufe it frong, produce as dark  Green
as any we can imagine. We may try our Colour
firft on  white Dutch Tile, and by thinning it
with Water, render it of what Strength we picafe,
and brighten it very much, with adding to it 
little of the Liquid Verdigreafc.
Sap-treen is made two Ways, Viz.
Firf, TAkE the Flowers of the blue Flag-Iris,
or Flower-de-Luce, and prefs them while there is
any Juice to be got from them, boil this gently
in  glazed Pipkin, till it grows thick, adding 
little Allum to it, and it will make  very ufeful
and lafting Green.
.. In the boyling of any Juice,  of the
Colours heretofore mentioned, ufe an earthen
glazed Pipkin, for if you boil them in Veffels of
Metal, they will fometimes change from the De-
Sign we intend.
Secondly, ANOTHER Way there is of produ-
cing  Sap-green, for wathing or illuminating of
Prints, which is to take the Juice of Buckthorn-
berries; and tho' that Juice fimply will yield on-
ly  dark Purple, of  very bafe Hue, yet, by
adding Tartar to it, it will turn to  good Sap-
green, and may be brought to  good Contiffence
by boiling.
EYTHER of thefe Colours, will mik with
the liquid Verdigreafe above mentioned, as well
as make  delicate Shade for it.

THERE is yet one Green more, which is af-
mired by fome, and carries  good Body with
 with  Degree of Tranfparency, as  make it;
tho' as it is commonly yied; it is  full-bodied.
Colour, fit only for Miniature painting: For this.
end they mix Dutch Pink with Indigg, to what
Degree of Colour they pleafe, but in the Place
of Dutch Pink, my high Preparation of French
Berries with Indigo; Ithink much to be preferr’,
as this anfwers all the Intent of Dutch Pink, and
Carries  Tranfparency with it, which the Dutch
Pink has not. And thus have  given fuch an
Account of the Paffage of Greens from the Vel-
low to the darkeft Blue; as  think neceffary, for
the Inftruction of thofe whe delight in illumings
King of Prints and Painting in Water-colours.
 

Ex      > / / 
 


F Mcheneeieie MEMEnSEuSSuELuEESE
 HA.. XIV
Rurious Directions for Drawing with
Grayons.
   Manner of Drawing with Crayons is
 much more expeditions, where we would
 the Objects we are to take in Colours,
than Painting in Water-colours; for, before we
ife them to strike the Colours we intend, only  Out-line need he made, either with Chalk,
Charcoal, or Red-oker, of the Subicet we would
reprcfent.
We may bring thefe Drawings to 
delicate Sofincts and fine Expreftion, but then
they muft be always kept in Books,, or under
Cilaffes in Frames, where they may not rub; for
 Touch of  rude Finger, unacquainted with
the Performance, may change the Shades or Lights,
and fo altey the fine Defign of the Work.
BvT


 we muft firft provide an indifferent coarfe
Paper, of the Colour of whited brown Paper, for
the Colour of the Paper being  little: dark, gives
 better Opportunity of thewing the light or white
Strokes of our Crayons, and will give  good Res

lief to the tender Parts of our Work.
AGAIN, the little Roughness of such Paper will
make the Crayons of every Colour express thems
felves much ftronger, than if we were to draw with


them upon Lmooth Paper.
THESE Crayons of every Sort of Colour, you.
will have occafion for, are made in Paftils, and
fold by moft of the moft noted Colour-men in
London;  few will ferve you at firft to try your
Hand, and in taking of Sketches of Prospects are
very ufeful, when you are once Wafter of Draw-
ing enough to take the Out-lines; for  little Box
of them will ferve to mark the Colours which
you will remark in the different Parts of your
Prospect; without the Trouble of Water and
Gum-Water, which muft be had if we ufe Water=
colours, and would be troublefome to get for your
Ofe in the Fields, where you should take thefe
Prospects from.
THESE Crayons being of fo eaty  Ufe, may
encouage us to colour our Prospects after the
Life, where we shall difcover the different Co-
lours of the feveral Fields which are very different
from one another, according as they happen to be
cropp’, or fituared, and then the Woods which
are in View commonly confift of Variety of Trees,
which have every one of them their different Co-
lour, which at once we may fee in our Crayons,
and mark it as it happens to be upon our Draw-
ing. But if our Wood should prove all of one
Sort of Tree, we shall fill find  great Variety
of Colours in the Trees produced by their dific-
rent Situation, and if we match our Crayons
well


 with the Colours of our Trees, and other.
Parts of the Prospect, we shall learn by it what
is  natural Reprefentation of Things.
Bur to do this effectually, if you cannot fur-
nith  Draught in Colour at once, take the fame
Hour the next Day to do it in, becaute as the
Sun happens to be at one Point, at one Hour of
the Day, to the next Day it will be about the
same Point at the fame Hour; and if you was to
miss that Time, the Shades of all your Objects
will be altered, and your Colours would be vary’:
S you fhould likewife take either the Mornings
or Evenings for this Purpofe, for then you will
have ftrong Shades and ftrong Lights, which will
give  pleafing Variety to your Picture. Memo-
randum; If you have  bright Morning or Even
ing, when you begin, finith your Work when the
Hours of your Drawing are as bright as they were
at firft, if you can.
Fok want of fuch Obfervations many one, who
is  good Draughts-man fpoils  fine Drawing,
he will fometimes place his Greens improperly, and
give Strengths where only little Touches should
be afed. And fome who are Beginners in thefe
Affairs, will encourage  favourite Colour, and

neglect the proper ornamental Colcurs.
 THINK  have not feen finer Prospects, to teach
us this rt, than what are on both lides Guifford—
downs, Box-bill, Leitb-hill, Richmond-bill, and
about High-eickham, where one has fine Vales,
beautiful Hills, and delightful Woods. In the
Spring and Autumn, to look on the Woods, you
may almoft perceive every Colour in our Collecti-
on; fome Trees will open with  yellowifh Caft,
others with  sharp blucifh Green, fome Brown,
and others of  reddith Colour, and to in the dy-
ing away of the Leaves in Autumn, or towards the
Fall of the Leaf, you will fee as much Variety.
AND


 you will find then the Fields, and all the
changeable Parts of the Country, of different Cos
lours; about half  fcore Drawings in Crayons of
thefe Sorts, will enliven your Imagination, and
teach you the Art of Colouring in the moft
Natural, and confequently the moft beautiful
Manner.
Bur if you defign principally to draw Land.
Icapes in this Manner,  advife to make your Out-
lines, with Charcoal or Black-lead, very gently
touch’, but Black-lead is the beft.
WHEN in this Way of Drawing, one has an
Object where  light Colour and  shaded Co-
lour should fall naturally into one another, then,
when you have marked your Paper with both, take
 dry short haird Pencil, and bruth it gently be-
tween both, tillyou have mixed them to eafily to-
gether, that you cannot difcern where the Lights
and the Shades feparate, or where the Light and
the Shade part from one another, but this is pro=
perly for the larger Drawings, which are to appear
foft and tender.
Ir one wants  Pencil, of the Sort  peak of,
take  Piece of feft whited brown Paper, and roll
it, or twift it up till tis of the Bigness of  Ca-
mels Flair-pencil, of the Size we generally ufe in
Water-colours, and when you have rubbed the
pointed End gently on  rough piece of clean
Board, of  piece of rough brown Paper, Twill
serve inftead of  Pencil to & fcumble your Work
of make one Colour flow into another.
THE   remains how only to tell you how
you ought, in this particular Way of Drawing,
to cut or Point your Crayons; take  fine Pen-
Knife, and inftead of Drawing it down from the
Body of the Crayon towards the Point, as one
does



  tter tt 

Scumbling is rubbing in gently one Colour into another.


 in pointing  Black-lead Pencil, begitn at the
Point and draw your Knife upwards; in fuch 
Manner as to leave your Crayon of the fame Fi=
gare you would require  Black-lead Pencil to be
of when twas sharpened; for thefe Crayons are
hardly two Inches long; and are brittle enough :
Befides if they have any Knots in them; they: will
be very apt to break:
ONE may-obferve too, before we conclude this
Chapter of Drawing and Colouring with Crapons,
that all thefe appear immediately of the Colour
Chhe would express; whereas the Colours to be us’
with Water will be much deeper or darker when
the Water is put to them, than they will prove
when they are dry, which may confound  Begin-
her, and occation him to make his Colourlighter,
but when this comes to dry he will fee his Error.
Arip  pp A AEp Ap A  AX     
  sit tht tit ats is  terel rerersteftremerefl

   . XV.
The Use and Nature of Dry Colours.
 )LUE. Bife is the moft excellent Blue next

. to Wltramarine, which is too good to wash
vithal, and therefore  leave it out here, and put
in bluc Bife; which will very well ferve infiead
of it; and indeed you may leave out both, and
ule Smalt inftead of them; but that it will not
work fo well as Bife; no Bife is too good to wfc
pon all Occafions, but only when you intend to
beffow fome Coff and Pains upon  Piece, other
wife you may wfe no other Blue in your Work
than blus Verditer; with which you may make 
precty good Shiff, without any other Bluc,  incan
in any ordinary Work,

As IN



 INbrGo is  dark Blae; and is rufed princes,
bally to shadow with upon your other Blue. Ins
 and yellow Berries inikxed together make .
Hark Green to shadow other Greens within the
Larkelt Places.
 BLUE Verditer is  very bright pleafant Blue;

and the cafieft to work with in Water: It is fome=
what inclining to  Green, and being mixed with.
yellow Berries it makes  good Green; This Blne
 moftuted.
 VERDIGREASE is  good Green; bfit fubs
ieCt to decay : when it is dry upon the Paper it
Sir
will be of  lighter Colour than it is when you
lay it firft on; therefore; to preferve it from that
Fault; piut fome Sap-gree amongtt it to diffolve

in it; and it will make it keep its Colour: This
Colour is of  poifonous Nature, and therefore.
you muft be careful how you ufe it; that it come
fot near your Mouth. There is diffilled Verdis
 to be bought at the Colour-shops, that; is
Ty
 far better Green than the other, but it is fome-
What dear, and the other will ferve inftead of its
VERDITER-Green is  light Green; feldom
tifed in any Thing but in colouring of Landfcapes;
thofe Places that should thew  far off; and it is


Good for fuch  Purpofe, becaute it is fomewhat.
Inclining to  blue, but you may make  shift to
-
oany thing well enough without it for  little
blue Verditer mix’' with Copper-green and  little
White, will make juft fuch another Colour.
 SAp-Green is  dark dirty Green; and
never ufed but to fhaddow other reens in the
Harkeff Places; or eife to lay upon fome dark
Ground behind  Picture; which requires to be
coloured with  dark Green but you may make
 shift well enough without this Green, for Indigg.
and yellow Berries make juft fuch another Colour.
 CoEL





 COPPER-Green, is an excellent tranfparent
Grech, of  fhining Nature if it be thickned in
the Sun, or upon  foftly Fire, and it is molt ufed
of any Green in wathing of Prints, especially in co-
louring of the Grafs-ground, or Trees, for it is 
nott perfect Grals-green.
. VERMTLLtON is the perfecteff Scarlet-co-
lour, you need not grind it, nor wath it, it is fine
enough of itfelf, only temper it with your Finger
in  Gallipot, or Oyfter-thell, with Gum-water,
and it will be ready for Ufe; if you put  little
yellow Berries amongtt it, it will make it, the
Brighter Colour, this is principally ufed for Gar-
thents.
   KE is an excellent Crimfoh-colour;
with it you may fhadow Vermillion, or your yel-
low Garments in the darkeft Places; with it you
thay make  Sky-colour, being mixed only with
white  with it you make Fleth-colour, fometimes
tix’ together with white and  little Red-fead;
it is of an excellent Colour itfelf to colour Gar-
ments, or the like. Indian Lake is the best Lake,
but too good to be ufed to wath Prints with, an=
lets you intend to beftow great Curiofity upon
your Work but the best fort of ordinary Lake
will ferve well enough for ordinary Ofes, but that
alto will be fomewhat coftly.
THEKREFORE inflead thereof you may afe red

Ink thickened upon the Fire, and it will ferve
very well for your Purpofe, and beiter than Lake,

unless it be very good.
NoTE, if you would make  light Sky-colour
of yourred Ink, or if you would mix it among
your Fiefh-colour; you muft not thicken it,; you
should rather chufe to shadow your Vermillion
with Spaniffi-brown, than thick red Ink, which
will ferve well for that Purpofe, and is much
 but it is not altogether fo bright 
Colour and clear.
 RED-LEAD is the neareft to an Orange-
colour, and putting  little yellow Berries into
Tome of it, will make  perfect Orange-colour;
but if you mean to make Flefh-colour of it, you.
muft put no yellow, but only when you would
make an Orange-colour. This Colour is ufed for
the colouring of Buildings, or High-ways in
Landicape, being mix’ with  little white. Alfo
it is the only bright Colour to fhadow yellow
Garments with, to make them thew like change-
able Taffety. it is good alfo to colour any light
round in  Picture, taking only the thin Water
of it, and fo for feveral other Ufes as you shall
Lee occafion for it.
II. TELLow Berries are moft ufed in wathing
of all other Colours; their Colour is bright and
tranfparent, fit for all Vfes, and is fufficient with-
out the Ufc of any other Vellow.
 SAFTRON is  deep Yellow, if you let it
sland  pretty while; it is good principally to
Shadow yellow Berries with, instead of Red-lead;
and it is fomewhat  brighter Shadow but you
may make fhift well enough without this Colour,
for Red-lead and yellow Berries make juft fuch
another Colour.
 Lichr Mafficoat is  light Yellow, just
Like yellow Berries and white, and therefore you
may make shift well enough without it, only for
you  Labour to mix your yellow Berries
Saving
with white, when you have Occation for  light
Yellow, which you may fometimes make ufe of to
colour  light Ground in  Picture, and then
shadow it with the Water of burnt Umber or
Red-lead, that is, the thinneft Part of the Con
lour.
 IS.



 IS. CERUSE is the best Whites if it be
good and finely ground ready to your Hland,
as you may have it at some Colour-shops, or for
yant of it buy Whice-lead pick’ to your Ifand;
either of thefe will ferve well enough, for either
of them, being mingled with another Colour,
sake it lighter, and the more you put, the lighter
they will be, as you shall find in the uling of
Them.
 SPANISH-Brown is  dirty brown Colour,
yet of great Ufc, not to colour any Garment with,
unlefs it be an old Mans-gown, but to Thadow
Vermillion, or to lay upon any dark Ground be=
hind  Pictyre, or to shadow yellow Berries in the
darkeff Places, when you want Lake, of thick
red Ink.
 Ir is the beff and brighteft Golour when
it is burnt in the Fire till it be red hot; tho', if
you would coloug any Hars, Horfe, Dog, or the
like, you muft not burn it; but for other Ofes it
is beft when it is burnt, for inftance, to colour
any wooden Poft, Bodies of Trees, of any Thing
Elie of Wood, of any dark Ground in  Picture:
It is not to be afed about any Garments, unlets
you would colour many old Man' Gowns, or Caps,
standing together, becaute they muft not be all. of
one Colour of Black, therefore for Diftinction and
Waricties fake, you. may ufe Umber upburnt for
some of them.
 PRINTERs Black is moft ufed, becaute if
is eafieft to be had, and ferves very well in walh-
ing, Note, you muff never put any Black amongft
your Colours to make them dark, for it will make
them dirty, neither spould you fhadow any Colour
with Black, unless it be Spanifh-brown, when
You would colour an old Man’ Gown, that re=
yifes to be done of  fad Colour; for whaffoc-
et  et 
VEF



 is shadowed with Black will took dirty
, and
not bright, fair and beautiful.
 Ivoxy buint, or for want of that, Bone
burnt, is the blackeft Black, and it is thus made;
take Lyory, or for want of it, fome white Bone,
and put it into the Fire till is be thoroughly
burned, then take it out and let if cool, and to
flit it in the middle, and take out the blackeft of
it in the middle and grind it for your Ife.
ffor ffor after odt  ell    reffis  
taS 
CH AP. EVE
with Di=
Of  portaple Cale for Colourss
llum, and other
Cu.
rections for makin

Waters.
EFORE, however;  conclude this Treas
ad tife of Colours, let me advife fuch Perfons,
who are curious in making Obfervations of the
Colours of Flowers, to have always in their Pock-
et  small Cafe with Colours in it, about the Big-
nness of  Snuff-box, made of Ivory, about half
an Inch thick, in which should be fcooped feveral
Concaves about half an Inch Diameter each, and
as deep as the Ivory would bear, without going
through: Thefe Cavities may be placed as near
one another as poffible, and filled with Colours
of feveral Sorts; and as for the Liquid Colours,
they will dry by being exposed to the Air, to that
one may have them altogether in  few Days dry
enough to be carried in the Pocket;  shall fup-
pofe the piece of Ivory disposed in the following
Manner, viz.













 .




 
AN. the foregoing rigure one may oblerve the
Difpofition of the feveral Cavities for the Colours
 the Dnbets    and on one ade
 littie Cale for rencils, and another for indran-
ink, Cum-Arabick bowdered with white Sugar-
candy, or for any thing elfe an rtiff may have
Occation for in the painting Way.
Iw fuch  Cafewou may have thirty two forts
of Colonr under verveafy Command, befides other
NNeccilaries. anen asa Cover to tris, iet there bo
 piece of plain lvory to open with an Hinge, that
may ferve as  Pallet, and all this will lie in  very
Narrow Compass; nav, even though one was to
add another vicce of lyory of half an Inch thick,
 open below that of the Colours, to include 
Small pair of Compaltes,  Port-crayon, and fome
other luch ufeful Materials for Drawing.
How to make Gum-water
 THERE remains now, only to mention the Way
how to prepare Gum, Allum, and other Watersin
the beft Manner. To make Cum-water, take of
the whiteft Gum-Arabick one Ounce, of clear
white Sugazcandied half an Ounce, diffolve thefe
in  Quart of clear Water, and add to it, if. you
will,  little Coloquintida. When your Gum-
water is thus prepared, pats it cafily through 
fine Sieve, or  piece of Muflin, and keep it in 
Bottle fo stopped, that ho Dirt may get in; and

as you want to ufe it; pourout  little at  Time,
for if this proves dircy or foul, it will spoil the
Brightness of your Colours. The ufe of the Cos
loquintida is only to keep the Flies from spoiling
your Work, if it should be expofed.

To make Allum-water
Bort four Ounces of Allum in  Quart of Rain
of River-water till the Allum is diffolved, and let
it tland twenty four Hours.
Ufe of Allum-water.
WyTH this Water wath the Prines you defign
to colour, which will fix the Paper fo, that the
Colours will not fink or run in it when you lay
them, on, and will help likewife to brighten your
Colours.
Ir your Paper is very thin and loofe, then let
your Paver be washed with the above Water four
or five Times, letting it dry between every Time,
and your Paper muft always dry before youlay any
of your Colours, upon it.
But you muffobferve, that if you defign to var-
hith your Prints after they arc colour’, then wath
the


 Prifits all over equally with whice Starch before
you colour them, and when that is drv las on

 
your Colours.
To make Lime:water:
LYME-water is made by taking fome untlackt
Lime, and covering it an Inch with Water, and
To letting it remain for twelve Hours; ponf off
the cleat, and keep it for fc.
. . With this Water you may change your
Sap-green into Blue.

Water made with Fearl-asbes:
TAKE about half an Ounce of Pearlcathes; and
Keep them twelve Hours in Rain or River-waterg
then pour off the clear; and that Water is excel=
lent to life with Brafil-wood; in order to enlivert
Its red Colour.
Size for Water-colours.
TAKE the Cuttings of whice Glover' Leatherg
boil them in common Water till the Liquor will
Jflly; you may prepare any Colotr with this Size
when it is warm, and it should always be ufed
War.
+
THE Ufe of it is, that none of your Colours
should fhine by Candle-fight, as they would do
If they were to be mixt with Gum-water; there-
exe the Scenes of Play-houfes are painted in Sizes

 
she II IPE..



CHAP.
Pasiz
. DULES for Drawing any Object in its

 Out-lines, as exatt as the Lifeor Nature  How to bring these Drawingsto Ife; and
to copy from Prints, Esc.
 Secrets for Copying of Drawings, Ec.
continued
 take  Drawing with sixt Ink.
ib.
Ared ink for making an impression of  Print
ib.
Taking Draughts withred loofe: ink

 Draughts with biue loofe ink.
ib.
To take off  Drawing in  standing red

Colour by Tracing
ib.
 speedy Way of Exintingthe Leaf of any Tree
 Hlerb, as exact as Nature itself
Anotber Way of Printingibe Leaves of Plants.
so that the Impreftion shall appear as black
as if it bad: been done in  Printing-prets
 take the Imprettion of any Leat, as certain
as the former Way, only using such things
as may be bad in any Part of England
 red or blue Printers ink, for makinm
 of this fort
The Method of Taking-off the Leaves of
Plams in Plaifter of Paris, so that they
ib.
may afterwards be cat in any Nctal
The Manner of making the imprettions of any
Burterdy in  Minate in all their Colours  Taking-off Medals instantly, bv
 Ways not known
. Of Colours for illuminating of Prints in
the best Manner or of Painting in Wa-
 Of Whices for Painting in Miniature
 Of Yellows
 Of Orange-Colour
Is. Of Minium, or the brighteft Red Lead,
and bow to prepare it
./




 .DE .
Pas.
OHIAP.


 Of Reds

 . Of Scarlet
 II. Of Crmfon

ID.
III. Of Lake
 Of tranfparent Crimfon
 Crimion from MMIr. Boyle
 Of Indian-Red
 Of tranfparent Purple

 Of Blue
ib.
SEeT. . Of the Ultramarine
 Of the Pruffian Blue
III. Of Biue Bite
 IV. Of Sanders Blue
ib.
. Of Laemus, or Litmus Blue
 Of Indigo
  fine Blue from Mr. Boyle
VIII. Of Ar. Boyle' tranfparent Blue
 to Ultramarine
XII. Of Back
 Of Greens
 Progress of Greens from Fellow to
Blue
ib.
Sap-Green made two Ways
 Curious Directions for Drawing with
Crajons
 The Use and Nature of Dry Colours
XVI. Of  portable Cafe for Colours, with Di-
rections for making Gum, Allum, and
 Watcrs
 Plan of the portable Cafc

 to make Cum-Water
ib.
To make Ailum-water and the Useof it
 make Lime-water
ib.
Water made with Pearl-athes
Size for Water-Colours
    Dc






 published.
By the same Author
HE METHIODof LEARNINC to DRAw
in PERSPECTIVE made eafy and fully
explained.
As alfo, the rt of Painting upon
Glafs, and Drawing in Crayons, with Reccipts
for making them after the French and Italian
Manner. Likewife,  new and curious Method
of Japaning, either upon Glafs, Wood, or any
Metal, to as to imitate China and to make
black or gilt Japan-Ware, as Beautiful and Light
as any brought from the Eaft-Indies, with pro-
per Directions for making the hardeft and moft
tranfparent Varnifhes. And particularly the Way
to calt Amber in any Shape. Chiefty from the
MSS. of the great Mr. BOYLE. The THIED
EDrTiONN.
LONDON Printed for . PEELE, at Lockes
Head in Amen-Corner, Pater—Nofter-Row,