




THE
ARTIST VADE
MECUM;
BEING THE

Whole ART of DRAWING


Taught in  NEW WORK
Elegantly engraved on One Hundred Folio Copper Plates ;
CONTAINING
Great Variety of Examples in every Branch of that noble Art :

Parts of the Face, Heads, Hands, Feet, Academy, Antiques;
  
Groupes of Figures, Beasts, Birds, Insects, Flowers, Fruit, Shells, Ornaments, Build-
ings, Landscapes, &. &. &.
Collected from the Works of the greatest Masters.
To which is prefixed,
An ESSAY on DRAWING;
WITH
INTRODUCroRY RUlEs for the Use of LEARNERS;
IN WHICH
The First Principles of that useful and noble Art are explained in such
Manner that it may be attained in  short Time without  Master.

LONDON;
Printed and Published according to Act of Parliament:
And Sold by . SAYER, at the Golden-Buck, in Fleet-Street. MDCCLXII.
 THE
Art of DRAWING,
&.
DRAWING is the Art of representing by Lines and Shades,
the Figure of any thing seen in Nature, or whatever form

we conceive in Idea; it is the noblest Operation of human
Ingenuity, and may certainly be reckoned among the Qualifica-
tions, which are the Characteristic of  Gentieman. The Study
of it ought to be encouraged in every Youth, whatever Station of
Life he may be placed in; for besides it’ great Use to all Persons
concerned in the way of Art, it must be extremely agreeable to
 Gentleman to Sketch  fine Building, beautiful Prospect, Piece
of Art, or uncommon Appearance in Nature. Besides Drawing
enables us to see things, in  plainer and clearer Manner, and
remember their Form, Shape, and other Circumstances much
better than can possibly be done without  Knowledge in this
Art. In all Ages it has been carefully cultivated by the most
polite Nations; and the great Men who have excelled in it, have
been honoured by the Protection of those Kings and Prin-
ces who had  Taste for the Liberal Arts. It sets before us the
most magnificent Buildings, the most delightful Gardens, the
Beauties of Art, or the Productions of Nature, in so strong and
just  Light, that one might imagine one’ self on the Spot;
and this in  Language understood by all Mankind.
The Implements for Drawing, are smooth-grained Charcoal,
Black-Lead Pencils, red, black, and white Chalk,  Porte-Crayon,
Hair Pencils, Crow-Quill Pens, Indian Ink,  Ruler, and  Pair of
Compasses- Charcoal is proper to fketch with, as any Strokes
made with it may be brushed out with  Feather if wrong, and
the Black Lead Pencil gives the correct Qut-Line; Red Chalk is
proper to draw large or Academy Figures with, and Black Chalk.
the same, especially on colour’ Paper, where the Lights put in






with white Chalk has  beautiful Effect.--lt is best to begin
drawing from some of the least complex Examples as they are
placed in this Collection. Every thing should be drawn at first
with Strokes just visible, and afterwards corrected by altering.
what is amiss made as like the Original as possible. In this
Manner à Learner should draw the several Features, in different
Positions well, before he attempts an Entire Head or Face: for
he cannot do the whole together, until he is Master of the Parts.
This done, draw Faces and Heads, from some in Qut-lines only,
sketch the Qut-line and sinish from the same shaded. Before 
proceed in this Particular,  will here give the most approved Pro-
portions of  Face and Head, and the better to understand ity
shall describe one viewed in front; in which Position it’ Qut-
line makes nearly the Shape of an Egg divided by Lines, as in the
Examples. The upper Division for the Hair, then to the Topx
and next to the Bottom of the Nose, the lower one to the Chin.
This last Part is subdivided equally into three; the uppermost is
the Distance between the Nose and Mouth. The Breadth is di-
vided into five equal Parts, of which one is the Eye, anothen
the Distance between the Eyes, from the Qutside of the Eye to
the Side of the Face is another Part, the Mouth is  little more
than one, the Nose  little less. The Eye, in front, is divided into-
three, one of which is the Pupil or Sight; the Ear is the Length
of the Nose.
One of the greatest Beauties in drawing  Face, and which
is absolutely necessary to it; is to place the features truly in their
Places; that is, the Middle of the Forehead, the Nose and the
Mouth, exactly under one another in  Line, and the Eyes on 
Line, properly crossing that on which the Forehead, Nose, and
Mouth are placed: lf you would see how these Lines curve in
the several Attitudes the Head may be put into, there is  very
ingenious Method of doing it, by getting  ’icce of Box or other
smooth-grained Wood, turned in the Shape of an Egg, make 
streight Line on this Piece of Wood from the Middle of the Top
to the Middle of the Bottom; then make crofs Strokes on it at
the







the proper Distances (as before directed in speaking of the Pro-
portions of the Head, fof the Eyes, Nose, &. and by setting this
Piece of Wood in Variety of different Attitudes, you will soe
how the Lines curve on those Occasions, and according to those
Curves you must place and turn the several Features. By this
means,  think you will easily understand this Rule for placing
the Features properly, which is one of the most difficult Points,
and at the same Time so absolutely necessary, that it is imposii-
ble to do any Head well without it: And next proceed to Hands,
Feet, &. and for due Proportions of which, see the Examples:
After you draw these Parts well and with Ease, try an entire
Figure, of which  shall here give you the most approved Mea-
sures and Proportions-The Antients commonly allowed Eight
Heads to their figures, but we ordinarily divide the figures into-
Ten Faces ; that is to say, from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot, viz. from the Crown to the Forehead, one
Third of  Face. The Face begins at the Root of the lowest
Hairs upon the Forehcad, and ends at the Bottom of the Chin-—
The Face is divided into three proportionable Parts; the first
contains the Forehead, the second the Nose, and the third the
Mouth and the Chin; thence to the Pit betwixt the Collar-bones,
two Lengths of  Nose; to the Bottom of the Breasts, one
Face; to the Navel, ane Face; to the Genitories, one Face;
to the upper Part of the Knee, two Faces; the Knee contains
half  Face; to the Ankle, two Faces, to the Sole of the Foot
half  Face.  Man  Arms stretched out, is, from the longest
singer of his right Hand to that of his left, as broad as he is
long; from one Side of the Breasts to the other, two Faces:
The Bone of the Arm, called Humerus, is two Faces; from
Shoulder to Elbow, thence to the Roôt of the Little-finger, the
Bone called Cubitus, with Part of the Hand, contains two Faces;
from the Box of the Shoulder-blade, to the Pit betwixt the Col-
lar-bones, one Face; the Sole of the Foot is the Sixth Part of
the figure; the Hand is the Length of  Face; the Thumb 
Nose, &. Those measures are general, but liable to Exceptions,
Varying




varying from the Quality of Persons and Movement of the Mus-
cles. Be careful to make  just Symmetry and harmonious Cor-
respondence in the whole figure, not one Leg or Arm bigger
or longer than the other, not the shrivelled face of old Age with
the plump Lips of Youth, the Body of  Bacchus with the
Limbs of an Apollo; or the Shoulders of an Hercules with the
aist of  Fribble. It is proper here to take Notice of how
great Advantage to  Person who would draw  Human fi-
gure well, it is to understand something of the Anatomy of
it;  mean so much of it as relates to the Bones and the
Muscles ; and, as appears externally : More than this would.
be to him mere Matter of Curiosity ; but thus much is worth
the Pains of every one to become Master of, who is ambi-
tious of knowing the foundation of the Art; for it will be 
Means of giving Grace, Strength, and Beauty to his Figures,
and he will be able to express the proper Parts of the Limbs,
which principally operate in every Action; not blindly, and by
Chance, but with Truth and Certainty ; which is esteemed by
every one, who is best able to judge, one of the greatest Beau-
ties in  Figure : There is  proper Work for this Purpose, en-
nidle  Compendious Treatise of Anatomy, adapted to the Arts
of Painting and Design; in which so much only as is necessary
to the Painter, with  concise Explanation of it, is collected to-
gether from the more minute Parts, which are necessary to the
Surgeon or Anatomist; sold by . Sayer, at the Golden- Buck,
in Fleet-Street.
In Drapery, cloath your Figure properly and elegantly, and
neither with some Moderns, by massy folds, lose Sight of your
original Intention, nor by servilely copying the Ancients, imi-
tate wet Linen; and it will be  great Help to proportion, if
whatever is intended for Cloathing be sketched naked; of which
preserve as much as possible, yet carefully avoiding the above
Extremes.
Next in Course, tho first in Art, is the Expression of the se-
yeral Passions of the Soul, which is the most difficult and beau-





tiful Parts of this Art. . Le Brun, who has treated this Sub-
ject with great Success, says, that Passion is . Motion of the-
Soul, which makes it follow what it thinks good, and fly from
that which it thinks hurtful; and what causes any Passion in the
Soul, produces particular Actions in the Body ; in the Face it
more particularly shews what it feels, which for that Reason is called.
the Mirror of the Soul : The most capital Subjects extant ofthis-
Kind are . Le Brun' Expressions of the Passions of the Soul,
where the principal Passions are beautifully expressed by that
great Master, in Heads almost as large as the Life, with an Ab-
stract of his Discourse on each of them : These Heads, besides-
their Usefulnefs in this Particular, are likewise some of the best-
Examples to draw after, either in red or black Chalk, that are-
to be met with : Sold by . Sayer, at the Golden Buck, in Fleet-
Street.
The Qut-line conquered, our Advice, touching Eight andi
Shadow, might almost be spared ; so shall only say, in the:
Examples before you, cover not the Light too much at first, for
that will throw  Gloom over your Drawing, and cannot easily
be effaced : On the contrary, if your Lights are too open, your
may advance on them with Shade at Pleasure. In Composition-
so dispose your Objects, that both Light and Shade may fall in
Mass, and be careful that your Principal be placed to Advan-
tage when you copy Nature (the noblest School for Art) : Ob-
serve the Operation of Light, which considered. and observed-
from its Fountain, will alone instruct, being unerring in it’ Pro-
grefs, and rendering the Beings most conspicuous nearest-to our-
View.
Thus far relates to the human Figure and it’ immediate Apa
pendages, which are the most difficult and important Subjects of
this Art. There are, however, other Parts which merit the Re--
gard of the Learner. The drawing Flowers,- Fruits, Birds,,
Beasts, and the like, might be the Subject of some of your firsti
Attempts, not only as it is  more pleasing Employment,-but as-
it is an easier Task than the Drawing of Faces, Hands, Feet, and:
other-



other Parts of the human Body, which require not only more
Care, but greater Exactness and more Judgment. There are but
sew particular Rules for your Instruction on this Head ; you
have Variety of Examples in this Collection, which copy with
great Care and Exactness, and be sure to make  correct Qut-
line before you begin to shade. Drawing of Landscapes, Build-
ings, &. for  Gentleman, is the most entertaining and useful
in the whole Art : To be able on the Spot (as is before observed)
to take the Sketch of  fine Building, or beautiful Prospect of
any curious Production of Art, or uncommon Appearance in
Nature, or whatever else may present itself to view on our. Jour-
nies or Travels, in our own or foreign Countries, may-be thus
brought home and preserved for, our future Use, either in Busi-
ness or Conversation; and is the best Method of bringing to
Mind again those Beauties that have once charmed us. Trees or
Houses, though of the same Size, will appear otherwise, accord-
ing to their Nearness or Distance ; those at  Distance appearing
less than those on the fore Ground, and those that are farther
off yet less. This Proportion you must be careful to represent
accordingly, because it is that which principally gives the Ap-
pearance of Distance, and is one of the grcatest Beauties in 
View or Landscape, as may be seen by the Examples annexed,
and are best inculcated by the Appearance of Objects according
to their Situation in Nature.
The foregoing Rules are necessary to be known, and will rea-
dily advance  Student ; therefore he who intends the imitative
Arts for his Profession, should well attend to them--But the
Gentleman who means no further from his Pursuit than an Ac-
complishment, may be less solicitous in the Discipline of Rule ;
since though he become no great Proficient,  Taste only will
enable him to judge properly of the Works of such eminent Mas-
ters who have or may hereafter improve the GRAPhic Arts.


