

THE

DRAWING SCHOOL
FOR
LITTLE MASTERS ANDMISSES:
CONTAINING
The most easy. and concise Rules
FOR
LEARNING TO DRAW,
Without the Assistance of  TEACHER.
Emibellistied with  great Variety of FiGuRES
curiously defigned.
To which are added,
The whole Art of KITE MAKING;
  
The AUTHOR’ new Discoveries in the preparation of water-colours
By Master MICHAEL ANGELO,
LONDON;
Printed for . CARNAN, at Number  St Pauls Church Yard.





























TO
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
PRINCE EDWARD,
THIS
DRAWING. SCHOOL,
WITH ALL
DUE SUBMISSION AND RESPECT,
HUMBLY INSCRIBED TO HIM,
As 
PATRON OF THE ARTS,,
BX
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS’
Most obedient and
Devoted Servant,
MICHAEL ANGELO.



















THE
PREFACE
TO THE
SECOND EDITION.
AFTER having perused almost every
Book hitherto published for the Instruc-
tion of young People in the Art of Drawing,
 have found them calculated only for those
who were advanced above the Period of
Childhood. . Many of them contain nothing
but Designs, without the least Directions how
to proceed ; and even in those that have  Terms of Art, and geometrical Propor-
tions, as tend rather to deter. Youth from
the Study of this Science, than encourage
them in the Purfuit of it.
There are, it is true, Books of Drawings
sold at every Print Shop for Six-pence each;
but, if the Purchsser expects to find in any
one of them all the different Parts of the hu-
man Body, he will be much mistaken. The
first he lays his.Hands on may confist of Land





PREFACE TO THE
scapes ; the second of Birds, and in the third
he may find  Leg or an Arm, and perhaps 
Body complete. Should he express his Desire
to have one containing every Limb separate,
he will be told, that such an one cannot be
had under Five or Six Sbillings.
Ihave here attempted, with no small' Share
of Care and Application, to form such  Piece,
as  apprehend will be of singular Service to
those who wishi to become Proficients in Draw-
ing, at  very trifling Expence; and  will
venture to asfert, that whoever shall make
themselves perfect Masters of what it contains,
will find no great Difficulty in imitating what-
ever they may afterwards meet with in much
more expensive Works.  have not only given
the different Parts of the human Body, but
have likewise introduced twelve Birds in dif-
ferent Attitudes, and given some Directions
for the Preparation of Water-colours.
The first Principles of Drawing cannot be
taught too early, and  am fully convinced,
that young Children might be brought to 
tolerable Knowledge of it long before that
Age, in which they are generally first put to it.
Children are naturally fond of Pictures, and




SECOND EDITION.
it is no uncommon Thing to sée them, before
they are taught how to hold  Pen. drawing
Houses and Steeples, Dogs and Horses, &.
Was this Disposition, which seems natural
 to the Generality of Children, properly en-
couraged,and made rather  Matter of Amuse-
ment than  Tafk, we should probably see

many Prodigies at seven or eight Years of
Age ; and Time might make them Artists
equal to those of Italy.
The human Figure, and particularly the
Face, is the most difficult Study; but, when
the young Pupil has made himself  perfect
Master of this, he will find no great Difficulty
in any Thing else. For this Reason,  have
given Copies of various Faces, from the moff
easy, gradually encreasing to those which are
difficult.
 would advise such Parents, as may chuse
to put this little Work into the Hands of
their Children, not to impose these Lessons on
them as  Task, but merely as an Amuse-
ment ; not to treat them with Severity, if
they do not properly attend to them, but to
encourage them by trifling Rewards (such as
are great in the Eyes of Children) when they
make



PREFACE, &.

make any remarkable Improvements. Tho'
they may not understand Drawing themselves,
yet surely there can be but few, if any, who
cannot tell when the Designs here given are
properly imitated.
 have added the whole Art of Kite Mak-
ing, being induced to give it  Place here by
the Manner in which it is written. Though
it is an Amusement of Children only, yet
even their Amusements should be thought of ;
and, though every little Artist may think
himself perfectly acquainted with this Matter,
yet it is possible, on reading this Treatise,
he may change his Opinion, and find himself
totally unacquainted with the Essentials of
Kite-Making.
Of this Second Edition nothing more seems
necessary to be said, than that we have re-
vised the Whole, and given some neW Draw-
ings, instead of those in the former Edition.





DRAWING SCHOOL.
LESSON .
My young Pupils must not expect to be
come perfect Artists in  Day,  Week,
or  Month, No Science is to be acquired
but by Time and Industry, and it would be
 Kind of Cowardice in any one to be dis-
heartened at the first or second Trial, merely
because they did not succeed in their Expec-
tations.  have seen many little Folks, when
 pretty Drawing has been shewn them, ex-
press the most eager Desire to be able to pro-
duce the like, which undoubtedly they might
in Time have done would they have had Pa-
tience ; but, not being able to arrive at the
desired Ability on the first Trial, they have
given the Whole over as impracticable. It is
not such Pupils  want, as they will only tend
to bring my Work into Disgrace, and deter
others from consulting it.
To you, who are my patient little Pupils,






The DRAWING SCHOOL
 now address myself, and shall proceed to set
you forward in your Work, and will not leave
you till  have taught you the true Rules of
Proportion ; for on this depends the whole
Beauty of your Drawings.
Your first Attempt should be to draw  hu-
man Figure ; for, when you can do that per-
fectly well, you will be able to copy almost
any Thing; but in this you must begin by
Degrees. You must provide vourself with
sine Pens, Paper that is ftout and smooth, and
good Black-lead Pencils. It will be Time
enough to think of hair Pencils, India Ink
and Colours, when you have made  tolerable
Progress in this Art. Instead of loose Paper,
many make Ufe of  common Copy Book,
such as is generally used for writing in at
School; and this is preferable to loose Paper,
because the young Artist will thereby have an
Opportunity of preserving all his Operations
from the Beginning, and may, whenever he
pleases, compare former Attempts with the
present, and thereby see how much he im-
proves.
His first Attempt should be of the easiest
Kind, such as the following.









For Little MaSTERs and MiSSES.  

This is  Mouth, and Part of  Nose.
Attempt this-first with your Pencil ; but do
not despair, if what you do should be hut
little like it, even after several Trials ; for
Time and Industry will certainly conquer all
Things. Be sure strictly to follow this Rule,
never to begin another Figure till you can
draw the former perfectly well.
When vou find you can imitate this pretty
well with your Pencil, you may then draw
it with your Pen, comparing your own Draw-
ing with the Copy, and not leaving it till you
come very near to it.
This will be sufficient for the first Lesson.
LESSON II
IF my young Pupils have gone throt their
 first Lesson in  Week,  think they have
made sufficient Haste in their Progrefs ; for 
slow Beginning generally makes  quick End.
ing, But to proceed : As you have now




The DRAWING SCHOOL

learned to draw the Mouth, and the lower Part
of the Nose, it is necessary you should add 
Chin to them, otherwise the Nose and Mouth
would be of little Use, as every young Artist
well knows. However, here is  Chin added
to the former Nose and Mouth.
 little Practice will bring you to form this
Chin very properly, as there are no compli-
cated Strokes therein ; and thus you will have
learned the lower Part of  Face. After this
you may proceed to the Eye.

To draw the Eye properly requires somo
Time and Attention, and the young Artist
must not expect to do it perfectly tull after
many Trials. He must first make the Ball of
the Eye, then the curved strong Line over it
and



For Little MaSteRs and MiSSES.
and the Semicircle under it: After that the
other Lines and Shadings above and below it.
In larger Figures, the Eye will require to be
made moch fuller, and ornamented with many
other Shadings ; but the Artist, who is once
become expert at drawing this, will soon find
it easy to draw any other that shall fall in his
Way.


The Ear is no less difficult to draw than the
Eye, and requires equal Care and Attentior.
Draw the outer Part first, and do this seyeral
Times, before you attempt to meddlétiwith 
the Inside. When you find you can imitafé
the Outside tolerably well, and that after re-
peated Trials, you may then proceed to fi-
nish it; but do not be in Haste to get out of
this Lesson into  new one. 'It would be ad-
viseable, before, you proceed any farther, to
go over again what you have already done.






LESSON III
AVING now learned to make the
 Nose, Mouth, Eyes, and Ears, the next
Thing to be attempted is to form  Face ac-
cording to the Rules of Proportion, without
 sufficient Knowledge of which it will be in
vain for the young Artist to proceed any fur-
ther with Hopes of Applause.

First draw the Oval, which must be well
proportioned like the above. When you have
made one to your Mind, draw  Line quite
across,




across, exactly in the Center, and another at
an equal Distance between the former and the
Chin. After this, draw  Line from the
Top of the Oval to the Bottom. On the
center Line draw the Eyes, and  little above
them place the Eyebrows.  very little above

 the lower Line is the Place for the lower Ex-
 tremity of the Nose, or Nostrils ; below that
Line is placed the Mouth, and at the Bottom
of the Oval is made  Stroke for the Chin.
Thus will the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, &. be
placed according to thé Rules of Proportion.
When you have thus finished the Face, you
may then draw the Ornaments round the
Head, and the two Lines at Bottom, which
form the Neck and Part of the Shoulder.
When you are fully convinced that you can
do this properly, you may then take one Step
further, and attempt the following.













This is nothing more than the former
more perfectly finished, in which the Eyes,
Nose, and Mouth, are distinctly represented.
It will be prudent at first to attempt this only
with the Black lead Pencil, as the Pupil may
then rub out with  Bit of Bread such Strokes
as appear to him erroneous. After he thinks
he can draw it tolerably well, he may try his
Skill with his Pen ; but let him remember to
draw the Lines, which are to direct him where
to place the Eyes, Nose, &. with his Pencil
only, that he may rub them out when the Ink
of his Drawing is dry, and thereby give his





Head the more graceful Appearance. When
he can do this Head to Perfection, he may
congratulate himself on having arrived to
some tolerable Degree of Knowledge in the
Art.
LESSON IV.
THE young Pupil has hitherto been em-
ployed in learning to draw the Front or
full Face : He must now proceed to draw the
Face looking Sideways, which is called  Pro-
file. He may first Attempt the following very
casy one.
He must begin this at the Nose, and pro-
ceed downwards. If he has taken Pains in
learning the preceding Lessons, he will find
no Difficulty in this; but may soon proceed to
the following.






This is something more expreffive than the
last, and consequently requires  little more
Attention. Here the young Student mustob¬
serve, that the lower Extremity of the Nofe
is made much different from the last, and that
the Lips appear thicker, and accompanied
with more Strokes. All this he must carefully
observe, and endeavour to imitate them as
near as possible.





As it is undoubtedly necessary for the
Learner to learn Faces in all Directions, here
is one looking the opposite Way ; and, not
having been used to it, he will at first find it
à little difficult. If he uses himself at first
to draw Faces in one Direction only, he will
find it à difficult Matter to break himself of
it, and will thereby remain only half an Ar-
tist. But Time and Practice will make them
equally familiar.
We have already mentioned. in what Man-
ner the Learner is to koow in what Part of
the Head he is to place the Eyes, &. it may
not now be improper to acquaint him how the
Eyes are to be directed upwards or downwards.







Here the Learner will'observe, that the
Eyes are placed higher in the Head than be¬
fore directed: and that, instead of streight,
curved Lines are used, which incline upwards.
My Pupils will see by the Figure what Effect




This, you perceive, is the Reverse of tha
former: The Eyes are brought rather
lowers






than usual, and the curved Lines incline down-
wards, which make the Figure as though look-
ing at something beneath it. Patience, and
 good deal of Practice, will in Time make
these Things familiar.
LESSON 

THIS Lesson will not be very difficult,
provided the young Artist has properly
attended to the preceding, since they are ra-
ther Copies to improve him by Practice, than
as containing any Thing materially new,
though they may be necessary in-order to pre-
pare him for the difficult Tafks, which he will
meet with in the next Lesson.









This is  pretty little bald-pated Fellow
who has perhaps torn all the Hair off his
Head by running it into  Busn after some
Bird’ Nest. However, be that as it will,
first draw the Outlines, observing not to give
him less Hair than he has, and to imitate the
few Strokes resembling it as nearly as possiUie:
Be careful likewise to observe the Form and
Situation of the Ear. Then proceed to the
Eyes, Nose, and Mouth, and carefully finiss
the Whole.




It is difficult to say, whether this little Fel-
low’ Head wants combing, or whether he is
naturally what we call shock-headed. It is no





Matter which; but this is certain, that the
young Artist will find this. Head of Hair 
little more difficuit to imitate than the last.

He must observe nicely the Strokes in every

Part, and be carefal that he does not over-
look the Ear, which seems almost buried in
 the Hair.




This little Gentleman is looking down at
something, and it is possible that it may be
athis Book. You have already been directed
how to give the proper Turn to the Eye, in
order to direct the Look of the Figure down-
wards. You must likewise observe, that this
is rather  Front Face, than  Profile, though
the Head is so much inclined one Way, as to

 leave only one Ear exposed to View.









You observe that this Head is in  different
Situation from either of the other three ; for
here is onlyone Eyé seen, and that almost
obscured by  Lock of Hair. He is  little
sulky looking Fellow; but never mind that:
Do him all the Justice you can, in drawing
his very Likeness. Do not overlook the small
Part of the Ear, which is left open to view,
and be particularly attentive to the Nose,
Mouth, and Chin.





LESSON VI.
Hope my young Pupils have been very at-
tentive to the preceding Lessons, other-
wise they will cut but  poor Figure in this,
which is by far the most difficult they have
yet had, and which, to execute properly, will
require all their Experience, Care, and At-
tention.






This, as well as the two following, is an
Antique, in which the different Paffions of the
Mind are expressed. It will be adviseable for
the young Pupil to draw this with his Pencil
several Times before he attempts it with his
Pen, as he will find Occasion to remove many
of his Strokes, or at least to amend them.
Let him first begin with the Forehead, Nose,
Mouth, Chin, and Eye, and by no Means
attempt to draw any other Part of the Head
till he can imitate these to  Nicety, by mak-
ing his Features the same as those of the Co-
py. When he can do this perfectly well, he
may proceed to draw the Ear, thé Hair, the
Neck and Shoulders, and complete all by ad-
ding to it any Strokes that may appear to be
wanting.







The young Pupil will easily perceive, that
this is  more difficult Copy than the former,
as every Feature is much more bold and ex-
preffive. He must spare neither Time nor
Attention to draw every Stroke exact, and not
pretend to proceed till he can nearly equal the
Copy. Let him first draw the Eyes, Nose,
and Mouth, and then the Side of the Face ;
after this he may proceed to the Ear, then
the Hair, and finisn with the Neck.









As  kind of Reward to mylittle Artè
for the Pains he has taken in the twe preced
ing Drawings,  have heig given ifim  ver
pretty Head of  Nun, whichtiie will not find
so difficult as the former perhaps were. Led
him begin first with the Face, then draw the
Veil, and finisn with the Neck. It will be
well worth the Pupil’ while to continue som
Time in this Lesson; for, when he can drau
these three Heads to Perfection, he may then





poast of having acquired no small Skill in the
useful and diverting Science of Drawing, and
every Thing that follows will become 
Pleasure rather than  Toil.
LESSON VII.
AVING giyen the necessary Instruc-
tions and Examples for drawing Heads
and Faces, we shall now proceed to the Arme
and Hands, which the voung Pupil will not
find very difficult. As the Position of the
Hands and Arms are frequently very different,
and more difficult in some Positions than in
others,  shall here give  few Copies of
some particular ones, which are perhaps all
that need to be done on this Head.







Here the Hand is resting on the Edge df
something, by which Means you see only the
Thumb, the Fore-Finger, and the second
bent, the rest being concealed from the View-
Be careful to imitate the Arm, as well as thei
Hand, as nearly as possible.


The Fore-Finger is here represented al
pointing to or counting out Money on  Ta¬
bie. The Fore-Finger and the Thumb only
are seen, because the other Fingers are sup-
posed to be bent into the Palm of the Hand.
Begin this and the former Figure at the Topsa
of the Arm, and proceed downwards to the
Extremities of the Fingers.












Here the Back of the Hand is turned to-
wards you. The second Finger is supposed
to be holding something between that and the
Thumb; consequently, according to Nature,
the third Finger must be à little bent, and the
first and little Finger be extended.







The Hand is here extended, and the third
Finger is bent downwards for some particular
Purpose. Be careful to observe, that this Si-
tuation of the Hand makes  material Altera-
tion in the Lines of the Arm.










Here the Hand is represented as, holding  or  Ball. In this Position, you shew
only the Thumb, the Finger supporting the
other Side of the Globe.

This Hand is grasping  Staff; and it is
probable, that the young Pupil will find it
more difficult to imitate than either of the
others in this Lesson. . However, there is no-
thing in it to despair of, since  little Care
and Attention will soon accomplish it.





LESSON VIII.
FROM the Hands and Arms we shall
 now proceed to the Body, and in the
next Lesson shall conclude the Parts of the
human Figure, with the Legs and Feet.





out either Head or Arms ; but this will be
no great Loss, as by this Time you can make
her  very pretty Head, and give her Hands






and Arms in what Position you like. You
must begin this at the Neck and Shoulders,
then proceed downwards, and at last finish it
by drawing around it the loose slowing Gar-
ment. As this is the only Body  shall troa¬
ble my young Pupils with,  hope they will
not be in too much Haste to pass it over, hut
give it all the Attention it requires, and not
quit it till they can draw it to the utmost Ex-
actness. The different Positions in which the
human Body may be placed are so various,
that they can by no Means find  Place in so
concise and circumfcribed  Work as this :
Nor indeed is it neceslary, since the little
Artist, if he makes himself perfectly Master
of the Contents of this small Volume, will
be able to take off almost any Figure that shall
fall in his Way, at the first or second Trial.
LESSON IX.
WE come now to the last Part of the

human Figure, the Thigh, Knee,
Lég, and Foot, in the Execution of which
the Student will sind no great Difficulty.





This is  Thigh,  Knee, and Part of 
Leg, which fs so plain and easy, as to require
no particular Direction. When he finds he
can do this perfectly well, he may proceed to
the Foot.








This Foot is cut off at that Part of the Leg,
where it fhould join to the preceding; so that,
if the young Student joins them together, he
will then have the Limb complete. As the
Legs and Feet, like the Arms and the Body,
may be placed in different Positions, the
young Artist must observe, that he views this
Foot Sideways ; and let him be very carefol
in imitating the Lines which form the upper
’art of the Foot, the Heel, and particularly

the Toes.






This is  right Foot, placed in  different
Form to the preceding, the Toes being rather
contracted than extended.
To give. the various Positions of the Foot
would be endless, and in some Degree im
possible: Even. the large st Works have not at-
tempted it, and  cannot. However,  shall
not quit this Lesson with out giving one more
curious Example.








This is the Leg and Foot of an Angel,  Being, on Wing, with the back Part
of the Leg and Foot turned to the View 
the Spectator. There are many other Poss
tions of this Limb, as  have just observed
but these are sufficient for the prefent Purposed





LESSON .
HAVING now taught the young Pupil
how to draw the different Parts of the
human Body, it is necessary he should know
how to put them properly together, which
can be learned only from Practice. The fol-
lowing Figure may perhaps take him up  lit¬
tle Time, and that something more than he
first expected, to imitate exactly ; but let.
him not be disheartened, nor give over till he
conquers.
In the Appendix the youag Pupil will see
the Use of the Line, which runs from the
Head to the Foot of this Figure, as well as
of the Numbers    &. and , the Lines
which inclose them. On his first Attempts,
 would advise him to pay no Regard to them,
but to let them alone till he thinks he is able
to proceed further.
































When he can draw this Figure perfectly
well, and has attended properly to what has
been advanced in the Course of these ten Les-
fons,  may venture to apprehend he will not
think much of the trifling Expence of thia
little Volume, which has taught him so much
without the Assistance of  Master, whose
Premium is generally very extravagant. But
let me not forget my fair Pupils, who are per-
haps under more Obligations to me than the
young ’Gentlemen, who, having other Stu-
dies of  more laborious Nature to pursue,
have not so much Time as young Ladies to
amuse themselves in this delightful Field of
Pleasure. When  speak of young Ladies,
as wishing them to employ  small Portion of
that Time, which they throw away at the
Toilette and the Glafs, to the more rational
Amusements of Drawings,  may perhaps fall
under the Censure of some little Female, who,
before she can well speak plain, is taught to
rail against every Thing, but,the Invention
of some new Cosmetic, or the Discovery of
some delicate Paint, which cannot be disco-
vered from Nature itself.-Alasl it is to the
false Mode of Education, and not to the Fair
Sex





Sex themselves, that they are so much ex-
posed to the just Censures of the sensible and
judicious Part of Mankind.
APPENDIX.
AS  apprehend  may with some Degree
of Reason suppose, that my young

Pupils have by this Time acquired  Know-
ledge of the Art of Drawing, superior to some
who have studied it in Schools for  much
Children, but give them  hort Abstract of
ghe ingenious Mr. Russel’ Elements, as far as
Gentleman wrote for the Instruction of Pupils
of  more advanced Age, as is evident from
his Recommendation of the Study of Ana-
tomy, in order to enable the Artist to imitate
every Muscle of the human Body with more
Accuracy : My Design is, to entice Children
to the Practice of Drawing, at an Age before
any such Thing is generally thought of, and
to make this not so much  Matter of Com





palsion as of Amusement. After thus fairly
acknowledging my Intentions, am confident,
that the ingenious Author of the Elements
will not accuse me of any unfair or illiberal
Freedom taken with his valuable Produc-
tion.
Some Artists reject the Use of Drawings or
: Prints for the Student’ Imitation. " It is
(say they)  servile Method of proceeding,
because it cramps the Ideas, and hence
Genins suffers too great  Confinement.
Notwithstanding this, the usual Practice is to

copy after Prints and Drawings at first; and
 imagine Experience has determined the Ad¬
vantages accruing from this Method.
To set the Drawings of the most eminent
Artists before  young Beginner, at his first
Commencement, must be highly beneficial,
as it undoubtedly will prevent that Rude-
ness and Inaccuracy, against which the most
exact cannot be too much guarded. How
much more then ought the young Student to
observe this Caution ; Some Geniuses require
Restriction, and, when this happens to be the
Case, the placing of accurate Works before
them must hold them in  Kind of Subjection,







from which alone Correctness is tobe expect-
ed. Exact Copies are absolutely necessary at
first: This will imperceptibly produce  Ha-
bit of Correctness, till, by Degrees, the Stu-
dent will make himself Master of those grand
Essentials to Perfections, Truth, Boldness,
and Freedom.
Truth will be acquired by this accustomed
Correctness, Boldness and Freedom will fol¬
low after as the certain Consequence, and on
these the Excellence of the Performance muft
depend.
Copying the Drawing of good Masters has
also another considerable Advantage, which
is teaching  good Method of Execution,
whereby many laborious and fruitless Efforts
will be prevented. The young Student should 
always have it in Remembrance, that his
chief Aim ought to be the making of  cor-
rect Drawing, and of attaining  Truth of
Outline, since this is more effentially neceffa-
ry, than  Smartness of Touch, or  pleasing
Execution.
When the young Pupil has made himself
Master of  good Degree of Exactness, by
copying after Prints or Drawings, let him be
provided








provided with some good Head, cast after the
Antique; and this should be one, in which
the Features are strongly marked, and boldly
determined, such as the Hercules, Jupiter,
or Niobe, as he will find the-Strength of
 either of these more easy of Imitation, than
the Refinement and Delicacy of the Antinous,
or Venus of Medicis ; though the latter, after
 Time, will be his favourite and most valua-
ble Study.
The Nose being the Center, most Artists
begin their particular Shapes with that Fea-
ture, and from thence proceed to the Eyes
and Mouth; but let the Student sketch the
Outlines very lightly, that any Mistake may
the more easily be altered. His greatest At-
tention must be paid to the producing his
Drawing correct, and the Lines of the Fea-
tures parallel to one another, and each at 
proper Distance. If the Students fails here,
all his Labour in the finishing will be to no

Purpose.
When he has made himself Master of the
Knowledge of the Face, he may proceed to

the whole Figure, studying with much Assi-
duity the Casts after the Antique, those al-







most perfect Standards of Grace, Majesty,
and Beauty.
Rules, in tlie Opinion of some People, are
the Fetters of Genius ; but  great Man very sa
judicioussy observed lately, that et they are
Fetters only to Men of no Genius, ’ which
is undoubtedly true ; for, when they are pro¬
perly used by Men of Abilities, they affist
Genius, and not impede it. On this Account,
 shall proceed to give the Meafures of  fine-
ly proportioned human Figure, with which
it is necessary the Student should make him-
self acquainted, previous to his Studies after
the Life.
The best Way to measure the human Figure
is by Faces, ten of which (from the lowest
Hairs on the Forehead to the Bottom of the
Chin) is the best proportioned Height. The
Face is divided into three equal Parts : ist.
the Forehead ; zd. the Nose ; and,  the
Mouth and Chin. From the Chin to the
Collar Bones is twice the Length of the Nose.
From the Collar Bones to the lowest Part of
the Breast, the Length of the whole Face.
From the Bottom of the Breast to the Navel,
one Face and half  Nose. From the Navel







to the Secrets, one Face. From the Secrets
to the Knee-Pan, two Faces. From the Knee-
 Pan to the Ancle, two Faces. From the An¬
 cle to the Sole of the Foot,  Nose and 
Half. When the Arms are extended hori¬

zontally, their Length, from the Extremity of
the longest Finger on one Hand to the other,
should measure the same as the Height of the

Figure from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot. From the Shoulder to the
 
Elbow, the Length of two Faces. From the
Root of the little Finger to the Elbow, two
Faces. From the Box of the Shoulder Blade
to the Pit of the Collar, one Face. The Foot
is the lixth Part of  Man’ Height, and the
Hand should measure as much in Length as
the Face. The Thumb is  third Part of 
Face in Length. The Shoulder, that the
Face is most turned over, is raised higher than
the other. The Shoulder bearing  heavy
Burthen will be raised considerably higher than
the other. The Hip, on which the Body
chiefly rests, will likewise be raised higher
than the other.






 very easy Method of drawing any Pic-
ture, is to cover it with Squares in the follow-
ing Manner.







When you have thus squared your Copy.
do the same by the Paper on which you intend
to imitate the Figure ; but for this Purpose
use only the Black-lead Pencil, observing to
make the Squares in both exactly the same in
Number and Dimension.
With your Pen
then draw the same Lines in each Square on







your Paper as vou find in your Copy. When
finished, rub out the Black-lead Lines with
 Piece of Bread, and your Drawing will ap-
pear in the greatest Perfection. If you are de-
firous of making your Drawing less than the
Original, you have nothing more to do, than
to make your Squarès on your Paper às small
as you would have them ; but to observe to
make them the same in Number, as you will
here see.
 shall here only add the Figures of twelve
Birds in different Attitudes, which, tho’ not
difficult, if the Pupil has properly attended
to his former-Lessons, may afford some Mat-
ter of Improvement as well as Amusement.















































If the young Pupil is defirous of imitating
Nature throughout her various Productions,
he may consult Dr. Brooke  Natural History,
in which he will find  very curious Collec-
tion of Beasts, Birds, Fisnes, Insects, &. exe-
ecuted in  masterly Manner.





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































OF THE
PREPARATION
OF
COLOURS, &.
BEFORE any young Artist attempts to
colour either his Drawings or Stars, it
will be absolutely necessary he should have
some Idea of the Nature and Properties of
Colours, that he may know how to prepare
them. After depriving myself of  whole
Month’ Holidays, which other Boys would
have spent in Idleness or Play,  am enabled
to give the youthful and industruous Artist
some valuable Directions. To this Month’
Labour,  have added my own Observations,
as they occurred to me in the Progress of my
colouring some Hundred of Stars and Pic
tures, in those leisure Hours, which  School
always affords the Youth, who is ambitious to
excel.
The first Thing to be considered is Gum-
Water: To make which, take an Ounce of





Of the PREPaRATiON
the whitest Gum Arabic, and half an Ounce
of clear White Sugar Candy. Dissolve these
in  Quart of Water, and add to it, if you
think proper,  little Coloquintida. The
Use of this last ingredient is only to keep the
Flies from spoiling vour Work, if it should
be exposed abroad in the Air; for, where
this is used, Flies will not come near it.
When your Gum-Water is thus prepared, pass
it through  fine Sieve, or à Piece of Muslin,
and keep it in  Bottle so stopped, that no à
Dirt may get in. Pour but  little of it ont :
at  Time, when you want to use it ; for,
should it get dirty or foul, it would spoil the 
Brightness of your Colours.
Alum-Water is  useful Article; for with
this you may wasn the Drawings or Stars 
you intend to paint, which will so six the Pa¬
per, that the Colours will not sink in when
you lay them on, but will rather tend to
brighten them. It is made in the following :
Manner: Boil four Ounces of Alum in 
Quart of Rain or River Water till the Alum 
is dissolved, and let it stand twenty-four :
Hours; after which strain it off for Use. It  proper here to remind you, that, if your
Paper





Paper is very thin and loose, let it be washied
with the above Water four or five Times, ob-
serving to let it dry every Time, and that it
be perfectly so, before you attempt to lay any
of your Colours upon it.
Let us now proceed to enquire into the Na-
ture of the various Colours used in painting
of Stars and Drawings As to White,  have
already observed, that it is by no Means to be
left in Stars intended for Kites, as every Por-
tion should be silled up with some other Co-
lour, than that of which the general Body is
composed ; and, in Drawings, where it is
sometimes necessary, the Colour of the Paper
will always answer the End, especially if it
is well glazed, without any other Assistance.
Of YELLOWS.
The first of this Kind is  Straw Colour,
and is made of Flour of Brimstone, which
of itfelf is sine enough to mix with Gum-
Water. Yellow Cker will make another
good pale Yellow ; but, in illuminating of
Prints, it is  Colour of rather too much Bo-
dy to be used for that Purpose, anlefs it is
well ground with Gum Water. For  deep







Yellow, Dutch Pink is generally used, as is
English Pink for  lighter Shade. With re-
spect to colouring of Stars, Gamboge is al-
ways to be preferred, as it is  most beautiful
Colour, and of  strong Body.
Of Reds. The best Colour of this Class, for painting
of Stars, is Vermilion ; but this is too heavy
to be used on Drawings or Prints. Crimson
is represented by Carmine; but great Cau-
tion should be used in buying it, which should
never be done by Candle-light, as it will then
be impossible to discover what is truly of the
right Colour, there being  great deal of it
of so different  Shade from the real Crimson,
as to be worth nothing.  transparent Pur-
lour, as shall appear necessary for painting
different Prints or Drawings, may be made
in the following Manner. Take  Pint of
Stale Beer, in which boil one Pint of rasped
Brazil Wood, and half an Ounce of Cam-
peachy or Logwood, till the Liquor is height-
ened to the Colour you desire, which you
must try by dipping  Piece of Paper into it.








ff you then find it too red, add  Quarter of
an Ounce of Logwood to the Brazil Wood,
and you will find it musch nearer to the Pur-
ple than the former. In like Manner’you
may humour any Degree of Purple, as you
put more or less Logwood to the former Com-
pofition; after which six the Colour with 
little Alum. This will produce such clear
Purples, as no Mixtures of solid Reds and
Blues possibly can, though Purples are fre-
queatly made by uniting those two Colours.
Of BLUES.
The first and best bright Blue we have is
Uitramarine, which gives  Spirit to all
Paintings in which it is used ; but the Price
of it is so high, that it is never used for Stars,
and seldom even in many of the best Prints.
Prussian Blue is the next in Beauty to. Uitra-
marine; but it will not long retain its Colour
when mixed with Gum Water, and therefore
improper for our Purpose. The next Colour
to the former for Brightness, is that which we
call Blue Bise, which, though it is  Colour
of Body, will flow pretty well in the Pencil,
if it be well washed, which must be done in








the following Manner. Put three or four-
Ounces of it into  Quart of Rain water :
Then stir it, and pour off the Water imme-
diately. Let it settle to the Bottom of every
Cup or Glass you pour it into ; after which
pour off the Water, and in  Day’ Time
you will have the Colour dry, and as fine as
you can wish. Indigo makes  fine Blae,
when it is ground and washed with Gum-Wa-
ter, by Means of  Stone and Mullet. If
you use it for Stars, you cannot have it too
strong; but  mean not fo strong as to prevent
it running freely from the Pencil, and lying
smooth on the Paper without appearing in
Lumps. If you use it for the Colouring of
Prints, you may lighten or darken it to your
Mind; by ufing  greater or less Quantity of
Gum-Water therewith; but, before you
touch your Drawing or Print with it, try its
Strength upon  white Dutch Tile ; for it
runs freely in the Pencil, and may be too
strong for your Design, which you should
always be aware of, when  flowing Colour is
to be laid ower the dark Shade of  Print, as
it will mach aggravate its Blackness, and even
make it appear quite black.






Of BLAck.
 have already observed, that Black is by
no Means to, be admitted among the Colours
for the Use of Stars :  fhall therefore only
speak of it for the Purpose of Prints, in even
oussy admitted, it being so heavy  Colour, as
to hide the beautiful Strokes of the Engraver,
unless done with. great Care.  am here
speaking of what they call lvory Black, which
must be pure and well ground. Many prefer
 strong Tincture of good Indian Ink, while
others make use of lvory Black, prepared in
the following Manner. Let your burnt lvory
be well ground in Gum-Water, and then
beat the White of an Egg very well, till you
sind  kind of oily Liquor settles to the Bot-
tom. Mix the Liquor with as much of the
extraordinary Gloss. If the Object is shin-
ing, such as the Wings of some Beetles, mix
some of it with  little White upon  Dutch
glazed Tile, till you find it light enough to
relieve the Shade. Then make another






lighter Shade, which, being used on the
brighter Part of the Subject, will produce
the Effect you desire.
Of GREENS.
Greens are by all allowed to depend apon
the Yellow and the Blue, and, by the Help
of the one or the other Colour, may be form-
ed any Green we please. The Gamboge is
one of our first Vellows, which, with the Pres
paration of Verdigrease, may be made to
produce five or six Sorts of Greens, according
as the Gamboge abounds, or is less in Quan
tity.. If the Gamboge abounds, it will form
 tolerable Oak Green; and, being ftill mons
mixed with the Verdigrease Green, it will
form  Grass Green. As. for the Verdigmase
itself, it produces  fine blueisn Green, flows
easily in the Pencil, and may even serve as an
Ink to write with. As the Method of pre-
paring this Colour is not much known to the
Generality of young Artists,  fhall here in¬
form them in what Manner it is to be done.
Take three Ounces of common Verdi-
grease, break it à little, and boil it gently in
 Pint of White Wine Vinegar, observing to






stir it continually. When you perceive it to
boil, add  iittie Tartar-broken, and keep
your Mixture stirring till you find the clear
Liquor of such  Colour as you would wishi ;
that is, of  fine transparent Green, with 
blue Cast. The State of the Colour may be
known by dipping in  Stick, and touching
 Piece of Paper with it.
When you have  Colour to your Mind,
pour it through  Linen Cloth into an open
Vessel, and set it to cool. When it is quite
cold, keepit in  close Vessel for Use, pour-
ing out à little at aTime as you want it; for,
when it is expoled to the Air; it will soon
dry, but is reducible again by common
Water.
When you prepare this liquid Colour, do
not use the distilled Verdigrease, for it will
not answer the End you propose. Take Care
you make it strong enough; for it is not to
be strengthened afterwards, without the Trou-
ble of boiling afresh, though it may at any
Time be made as faint as you please by add-
ing common Water thereto.
Sap-Green is  Colour like that of an Oak
Leaf, if it be used thin with common Water;






for this, as well as the former, wants no
Gum ; However, if it is used strong, it pro¬
duces  very dark Green. You may try
your Colour first on  white DutchTile, and,
by thinning it with Water, reduce it as you
please ; but you may brighten it very much,
by adding to it  little of the liquid Verdi-
grease.
Sap-Green is made in the following Man¬
ner. Take the Flowers of the blue Flag lris.
or Flower-de-luce, and press them while thert
is any Juice to be got from them. Boil this
Juice in  glazed Pipkin, till it grows thick,
adding  little Alum to it, when it will make
 very useful and lasting Green.
Remember, in the Boiling of any Juice,
&. in order to make Colours, to uie an
earthen glazed Pipkin ; for, if you boil. them
in Vessels of Metal, you will sometimes be
much disappointed in your Expectations.
There is another Method of prodacing  which is gained by taking the
uice of Buckhorn Berries ; and, though
that Juice simply will yield only  dark Pur-
ple, of  very base Hue, yet, by adding Tar-
tar to it, it will turn to  good Sap-Green,






and may be brought to  good Consistence by
boiling.
These are the principal Discoveries  have
made in the Preparation of Colours, and
which, as  before observed, have deprived
me of the sportive Enjoyments of many 
Holiday. However, it may be necessary
here to observe, that  would not advise those
young Artists, who make Use of Colours on-
ly for Stars, or now and then to ornament 
Print or Drawing, to be at the Trouble and
Expence of preparing their own Colours,
since it will be much cheaper for them to buv
them in Shells at the Colour Shops, which
are fit for immediate Use, with the Assistance
of their own Gum-Water only.  defign
these Instructions only for those, who dip
deeply into the Science, and who cannot be
contented with  superficial Knowledge of any
To every one, these Cautions seem to be
necessary : Take Care to have as many Pencil
Brushies as Colours, if you intend to be nice;
and always observe to wash the Colours well
out of them, by dipping them in Water, and
squeezing them well with-your Fingers till no






Colour is seen to proceed from them, before
you lay them buy after Use, otherwise they
will get hard and be no longer serviceable.
 do not presume to offer this to young
Artists as  complete Treatise, comprehend-
ing every Thing that can be said on the Sab-
ject ; bat thus much  will venture to say, if
they follow the Directions here given, they
may possibly find it more useful to them, be-
ing both concise and cheap, and collected
from natural Experiments, than many ochen
Books of ten Times the Price.
CONCLUSION.
EFORE  take Leave of my little Pupils,
Ishall lay before them  few Passages of
History, from which they may form Designs
for capital Pieces of Drawings. If my little
Disciples should be at  Loss how to plan 
Picture from these authenticated Scrapes, it
will be no Wonder; but, after they have
gone through this Work with Assiduity and
Patience, and imitated such historical Draw-
ings as may have fallen into their Hands,they
will then find this to be no difficult, rather 






pleasing Task ; and  have with the more
Pleasure embraced this Opportunity, as no¬
thing of the Kind has ever yet appeared in
the most extensive Works of this Nature. In
the mean Time they may read them, perhaps
to Advantage, merely as Matters of Enter-
tainment and Improvement.
. The Athenians being at War with the
Peloponnefians, the Oracle had promised the
Victory to the Athenians, if their King should
Peloponnesian. The
fall by the Hand of 
Enemy, being informed what the Oracle had
declared, gave  general Charge to their Sol¬
diers not to kill Codrus, who was then king
of the Atbenians. Codrus, however, one Even-
ing advanced beyond the Trenches in the Ha-
bit of  Wood Gatherer, and began to cut
several Boughs. Some Peloponnefiaas, hap-
pening to be engaged in the same Office, met
him.
Coming immediately to Blows, he
wounded several of them with his Bill; but,
being overpowered, he fell under,: their
Strokes. The Prophecy being thus fulfilled,
the Atbeaians, inspired with additional Strength
and Courage, marched to Battle without He¬
fitation, and sent  Herald to demand the Bo-






dy of their King. The. Peloponnefians, un-
derstanding what had happened, fled ; and
the victorious Atbenians decreed heroic Ho-
nours to the Memory of Codrus, who had vo-
luntarily facrificed his Life for the Good of
his Country.
In order to design this Picture, as well as
the following, in  proper Manner,  would
advise the Artist not to confine himself too
much in the Size of his Paper, and never
make it less than  Quarter of  Sheet. To
draw historical Pieces in Miniature is the
Work only of an experienced Artist. This
Design should consist of Codrus engaging the
Wood-Cutters, and sinking under their Blows.
The most difficult Matter here will be to re-
present the natural Attitude of the Body in
such Circumstances. For this Purpose, let
two of his Intimates make  sham Fight, (but
take Care they do not fight in Earnest) and
from them copy the desired Position. When
the principal Figures are finished, he may
then draw the Representation of  Wood,
and embellisn it with Beasts, Birds, &.
 Aristides and Themistocles, differing wide-
ly in their political Principles, were violent
Enemies.






Enemies. Upon the Invanon of the Perfians,
taking Hold of each other, and going out of
the City, they put down their Hands, with
their Fingers twisted together, into one Place,
and at once cried out, et Here we lay down
ee our Enmity till we finisn the War against
ee the Perfians. Having thus spoken, they
took up their Hands again, and untwisted
their Fingers, as if something had been there
deposited. Then silling up the Pit, they re-
turned to the City, and continued in Har-
mony during the whole War. This Unani-
mity of the Generals chiefly contributed to
the Overthrow of the Enemy.
Great Care must here be taken in repre-
senting the stooping Posture of the two Ge-
nerals. To preserve the due Proportions of
Nature in such  Posture requires great Care,
Skill, and Judgment.
 Polemon, the Atbenian, was  very de-
bauched young Man. One Day, agreeable
to  Resolution he had before taken, having
intoxicated hiinself with much Liquor, he
crowned his Head with Flowers, and then
staggered into the School of the Philosopher
Yenocratus, who was then arguing in Defence







of Temperance. The more the unthinking
Youth endeavoured to interrapt his Discourse,
the more strenuoussy the Philosopher pursued
it ; till at last Polemon, being obliged to hear
it, became so sensible of his Error, that from
that Moment he began to reform, and made
 firm Resolution to live better for the future.
He succeeded so well in his Endeavours, that
in  little Time he became the first Disciple of
Xenocratus, whom he afterwards succeeded.
The principal Figure here is that of 
drunken Man, crowned with Flowers. The
Face should be in full Front, that you may
give him such  silly Countenance as is pecu-
liar to People much intoxicated with Liquor.
His disordered Dress, and tottering Position,
should be expressive of his Situation. The
other Parts of the Design contain nothing
difficult.
 Philip, King of Macedon, falling to the
Ground by Accident, and seeing the Extent
of his Body marked in the Dust, cried out,
ee Good Gods, what  little Space does 
ee Man fill in this Universe.  is nothing very difficult in this De¬
sign. Take Care, however, that you place





the King in  proper Attitude, and fill his
Face with Surprise. Mind that the Sun is
placed in such  Part of the Piece, as may
cast the Shadow properly, which last cannot
be done to  Nicety without much Care and
Attention.
 Ptolemeus, the Théban, was so accus-
tomed to send no one away empty-handed
that came to afk his Charity, that when 
poor Soldier in Distress came to implore his
Assistance, the General, having nothing else
to give, pulled off- his Shoes, and presented
them to the distressed Man, saying, ee My
ee Friend, take these, and make the moft you
ce can of them ; for  would rather go bare-
ee footed, than you should starve.
Little need be said on this Design. In the
Countenance of the Soldier, while he is re-
ceiving the Shoes from the General, must be
painted Sorrow and Distress, while the Looks
of the General must be expressive of Benevo-
lence and Humanity.
 After the bloody Battle of Pedewardin,
which the Germans gained over the Turks,
among the Prisoners was  Janissary, who
much lamented the Loss of his Turban. The
German






German Soldier who had picked it up, hap-
pened to be near him, and hearing him ex-
press his hopeless Wishies to have it restored,
very generously returned it to him, at the
same Time thus addressed him in the Turkisn
Languagez ee You are  Soldier, and so am
ee  We ought to treat each other as Bro-
et thers. The Janissary, full of Joy at this
unexpected Mark of Generosity, and being
unwilling to shew less Marks of Grandeur of
Soul, received the Turban with one Hand,
and with the other presented his Musket to the
German, saying, es lf we are Brothers, 
« have no Need of this Instrument of Death,
ee which, but  little while fince, was employ¬
cé ed against my Enemies, and might have
 been fatal to you.
The young Artist will here be at no Loss
to find Matter to cover his Paper. Men in
Arms, Turks and Germans, may fill every
Part of it but the Center, in which must be
represented the Turk receiving his Turban
from the German with one Hand, and surren-
dering his Arms with the other.
Take Care
to infuse into their Countenances the different
Passions arising froi their different Situations.







 Brutus and Cassius, after having made
some Conquests, met at Sardis, where they
agreed to march against Anthony and young
Caesar. Here one Evening, Brutus, as he
was sitting pensive, and revolving the Trans-
actions of his Life, the Memory of Caesar
occurred to him, now perhaps not as  Trai-
tor,  Tyrant, or Usurper, but as one he
loved and murdered, an Apparition appeared
to him, (as he imagined) which told him he
was his evil Genius, and would meet him at
Pbilippi ; to which Brutus calmly answered,
°  will meet thee there.
Here is  copious Field, in which the young
Artist may exert every Power of his Genius.
Brutus and the Apparition afford two capital
Figures. Brutus must be drawn reclining on
 Couch, half raised, leaning on one Hand,
with the other lifted up in Surprise. The
most difficult Part of the Work will be to sill
his Face with that Horror, which the Artist
himself would be supposed naturally to repre-
sent in the same Sitaation. If he has seen the
Tragedy of Hamlet, in which the Ghost ad-
dresses the young Prince, let him take that for
his Pattern on this Occasion; or rather, let






him imitate some good Drawing of this
Kind.
 Pyrrbus, King of Epirus, after being
defeated by the Romans; retired to Tarentum,
and was slain at Argos,  City of Greece,
by  large Stone thrown on his Head, from
Son he was on the Point of killing in the
Attack.
This will form  very pretty Pictare, and
fill up every Part of the Paper : The Repre-
sentation of  Castle may be made to cover
one Half of it. Under the Castle must be
drawn the Figure of Pyrrbus, clad in Ar-
mour, and sinking under the Blow of  fall-
ing Stone on his Head. Near him, the Fi-
gure of  warlike Youth, with whom he is
supposed to have been fighting, and who-
stands astonished at the sudden Fate of Pyr-
rhus. Over the Countenance of the King
must be thrown the Appearance of Insensibili¬
ty, arising from the Blow he is supposed to
have received ; but an Air of Majesty and Dig-
nity should he preserved. On the top of the
Castle, directly over the Head of Pyrrhus,
you must place the Figure of  Woman, in
an





an Attitude that will shew it was from her
Hand the Stone fell, and in whose Counte-
nance you may perceive the different Paffions
of Joy and Terror. The rest of the Ground
may be occupied by the Efforts of contending
Soldiers ; but take Care you do not incumber
the Living by placing too many dead Men at
their Feet.
Let not the more aged and experienced
Reader imagine, that  am not aware of the
Objections that will be made to my CONCLu-
Si et that it is infinitely above the Capa-
cities of Children, and therein differing from
the former Part of my Plan. To such 
shall be sport in my Answer: The Genius
and Capacities of Children are seldom put to
the Stretch, and, if they in due Time per-
form the usual Tasks imposed on them at
School, nothing more is required of them :
But, if you hit upon the Mode of making
them consider as an Amusement what you re-
gard as an essential 'Point, Wonders may be
often produced. Here Genius will have its
full Scope, unfettered of the tedious Rules laid
down by some self-interested Teachers; and,




among  thousand of my infant Readers 
should be instrumental in producing only ten
Artists, Ishall be satisfied that my Labour
has not been in vain. It is by no Means to
be expected, that the most expert among them
should give all that Expression  have here re-
commended to the different Faces in the pre-
ceding Hints fof Designs; but, let even the
dullest of my little Pupils remember this fure,
certain, and infallible Rule, that there is no-
thing in human Life, however impracticable
it may at first View appear, that may not be
foreed to give Way to uxwearied Diligence, Ap-
plication, and Resolution.







