
ARTISTS ASSISTANT
 
DR  WIN .
ETCHING,
PER SPECIVE,  ENGRAVING,
MEZZOTINTO SCRAPING,
PAIN TING on Glass, in CRAYONS,
in WATER-CoLOURs,
And on SILk  and SAT TINS.
CON   IN IN 
The Eafieft and moft Comprehenfive






FOR
The ATT  INME NT of thofe truly
USEFUL and POLTTE AR TS.
Methodically digeed,
And adapted to the Capacities of VOUNC BECINNERS.
IL  USTR  TEv WV   
Suitable Ex  MPL Es engraved on Four
COPPER PL   ES.

   pe
The FITII EDITLON, with Additions.

Printed for the AUrHok, . KIrcHIN, Engraver
and Printfeller, at Ne.  Holbern-Hill.
as the Act directs,  Jane      .
 has ever been the Misfortune of thofe who
 have profeffed to lay down Rules for the Ar-
tanment of any Art or Science, to leave them
enveloped with Difficulries, which, if not ut=
terly infuperable, arleaft difcourage the Learner
from proceeding in  Study which he can have
little Hopes will ever reward his Purfuit.
From hence we may reafonably infer, that
the faid Profeffors were totally unacquainted, if
not with the Theory, ar leaft with the practical
Part of what they underrook to reach others;
and that the Inftructions they have given were
founded rather upon  bare Suppofition of their
Efficacy, than upon the furer Bafis of long and
repeated Experience, which alone could have
enfured their Success, and from which, with all
due Deference to the Judicious, (whole Sanction
we shall at all Times be ambitious to deferve)
we may venture to anfwer for the Practicability
of our Own.
To obviate every Objection, and to remove
all thofe Difficulties which had to long blocked
up the Path of Science, and retarded, if not
wholly impeded the Pupil, in his Progress to the
Temple of Fame, was the chief View in com-
piling the fubfequent little Trearifc.
Over
AA       .
Over and above the Improvements made in
illuftrating the feveral Arts hicherto to imper-
fectly and unintelligibly explained, we have
incroduced Directions for Scraping in Mezzo-
Tinto, which in this Edition, are Hill farther en-
larged, and which, as they have neverbeen before
attempted in any Books of this kind, we flatter
ourfelves will be the more acceptable; eIpe-
cially when it shall appear from the Rules laid
down for the Performance of this Art, that it
is to eafy to be attained, that  tolerable Profi-
ciency in Drawing will enable any one to un-
dertake it with all imaginable Prospect of Suc-
CCIS.
The Reader will alfo find, in this Impreffion,
the Addition of very ufeful Problems, in the
Article of Perspective, illuftrared by  new
Plate.
As this Book is chiefly intended for the Ufe
of young Practitioners, we have purpofely
avoided all abstrufe Exprestions and obfolete
Terms, contenting ourfelves with fuch  familiar
Stile as we judged moft likely to inform thofe
Minds we would with to improve. Vet, as the
Ideas of an Artiltare not wholly to be conveyed
without fome neceffary Terms peculiar to each
Branch, we have taken Care to explain fuch as
could not be omitted without  manifeft Injury
to the Work, by familiar Words of  lynony-
mous Tendency, wherever they occur; to that
we apprehend we have not left the leaft Stumb-
ling- Block for the Reader to encounter.
IN.


 


CHI   .
Page  DRAW ING.
II
TEneral Rules for Draw- Of Imitation of Life,

 Of Dropery,
 ings

 Copying of Draughts, to Of Landskip,
- Enlarging and Contrat. Of Light and Shade,

 Of History,
 TE AP. II.
OF PERSPECTIVE,-
 of the Terms To find the Proportion of
used in Perspective,  Objects above the Hori-
 raife  Perpendicular,   The same exemplified in Ob-
Another Way,
jects below the Horizon,
To draw  Parallel Line, ib.
To divide  given Line into
 To draw  direct View, ib.
two equal Parts,
To raife  Perpendicular at To drow an oblique View,  End of  Line,  To draw  Fiew with acci-
dental Points, - ib.
To turn  Circle through
three given Points, ib. To find the Center for the
ib.
To draw an Oval,
Roof of  House, -  Nicthod for an Oual, To form  Square from 
Line givrn,-- ib.
iI draw  square Pavement, To form  Parallelogram from
 given Line, - ib.
 II  . III.
OF ETCHING,  -  for leving the Directions for Eiching,  Of Bitme or Rutinr-in the
Dirclions for Tracing,  Work with Syna Fortis,     .
CH   IV
OF ENGRAVING,
Page  whetting and tempering Of holding the Graver  Graver.
 Directions for Engraving,    . 
OF MEZ for laying the Mexzotinto Ground, - ibid.
Directions for whetting the Grounding-Tool, -   for scraping the Picture,
CH   VI.
OF PAINTING UPON GLASS,  proper for Painting upon Gless,
 of rying the Colours,
    VII.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS,  for using them,
ib.
CH  . VIII.
OF PAINTING WATER-COLOURS,  of the simple Colours, To make Liquid Silver,
 To make the Glair of Eggs, ib.
Directions for mixed Colours, To recover Liquid Sitver

 Ruf,
Directions for using them,
 To keep the Colours from
To make Crum. Water.
 IPay,
 To make Sixe for Candle-
To keep the Flies from your

light Pieces,

 To recover Colours when de-
To make Liquid Gold, . cayed,
  . Ix.
Of PAINTINC On BILk and SaTTIN.
 Nen
   

   
had
THE
ARTISTS ASSISTANT, Ec.
ITSY
CCILIKIEKEKIEIEIENSEAE 
CH   
OF DR   IN .
  WIN  is the Art of reprefenting by
 Outlines and Shadows the various Productions
of Narure and Art, and of enlarging and con-
tracting Objects in the moft exact Proportion.
This Art recalls to our Memory Things long fince
paft, and refeues from Oblivion the Deeds of our moft
illuftrious Anceffors, at the fame Time that it revives
their Image in our Mind, by preferving their Fea-
tures for many Grenerations. In  Word, it may be
said to be the filent, but moft expreffive language of
Nature, which (peaks to the Eye, is underffood by
all Nations, and conveys an Idea where even Words
Themfelves would prove deficient.
After giving some general Directions for the At-
tainment of this truly polite and rational Amufement.
which is the Bafis on which all the reft of the Arts
depend,


  
depend, we shall confider it more particularly under
the following Hleacs, and lay down the moft copious
and intelligible Ruies for each respectively, viz.
Copying of Drangh:,
Drapery,
Enlarging and Contratring,
Landsky.
Imitation of Life,
Light ard Thalow,
Ififory.
The Implements neceffary for Drawing are, 
Ruler, Compatfes. Charces,  Black-lead Pem il,
Penknife. Porte-Crayons, Black, Whire, and Red
Chalk, Cravons, Indim Ink, Crow-(Quill Pens, Ca-
mels Hair Pencils, Fitchery Paper of Leveral Sorts,
and Porte-Folios.
GENERAL RULES for DRWIG.
RyIIE firft Thing to be obferved is the Choice of
 proper Originals; and here we would recom-
mend Le Clerc' Principles of Drawing as the caficft
and beft calculated for the Inftruction of Beginners.
This may be had, Price   at the Star, Hfolborn
Hill, Nc.  provided this, begin with the Outlines of
the feveral Features, as Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, Ears,
C as they occur in the Book. Practife thefe often
over, till you are quite Mafter of them; then proceed
to  Profile or Side-Face, after that to an Oval or Full
Face; always remembering that each of thefe muft
he perfectly attained before you venture to proceed
further.
When you can copy  Face correctly, the next
Thing is, to draw the feveral Limbs or Parts of the
Body, as the Hands, Arms, Feet, Leys, coc. then
go on to the Body itfelf; which being done, you
will




 Part   . be able to undertake  whole Figure, obferving
carefully the exact Proportions and Bearings of one
Part with respect to the other.
The Learner ought to be particularly cautious that
he do not attempt  whole Figure before he has made
himself Mafter of the feveral Parts; for this is begin-
ning the Work at the wrong End, and is indeed the
same Thing, as if  Man should attempt to climb to
the Top of  Houfe without the Help of the Stairs.
As for Beafts, Birds, Fruit, Plants, Coc. we deem
it ufeless to give Directions for drawing them, as it is
well known, that he who has to far improved his Ideas
as to be able to draw  Human Figure correctly, will
find it no Difficulty to perform every other Branch of
this Art.
Sketch or draw all your Outlines faintly, with 
Piece of foft Charcoal (which may be known by the
Pith in the Middle) cut to  Point like  Pencil; and
when you fee any thing amiss, whifk it out with 
Handkerchief or Feather, correct your Errors with 
Black-Lead Pencil, and compare your Work with the
Original, till every Part of them perfectly correspond.
This done, finith your Ourlines with Black-Lead or
Indian Ink. This Advice, properly attended to, will
fave you an infinite deal of Trouble, in drawing over
and over again, to your no fmall Difcouragement.
If you prefer Indian Ink, rub it with Water upon
 Marble ((old for that Purpofe at the Star, Holborn
Hill) and with  Crow-Quill Pen perfect your Our-
lines; then rub our the Marks of the Pencil with
Bread.—Keep three or four different Shades of Ink
in the Hollows of your Stone, to diffinguith your
Diffances, referving one of the Holes for Water.
When you are thoroughly verfed in the Outlines,
your next Bufiness will be to learn to fhadow: But of
thus hereafter, under the Article of Light and Sbade.
Be



 
Be not too hafty at firft fetting out, which will but
impede your Progrefs, and hinder your Improvement;
whereas, by beffowing  little more Time, you will
attain Perfection fooner than you can well imagine,
and Expedition will come of itfelf as you become more
experienced.
Of CoPYiNC of DRAUGHTS.
 you would copy  Print or Drawing
✓
exactly of the fame Size, rub the Back of it
with the Duft of Red Chalk or Black Lead; lay this
upon your Paper, and pin it down at the four Cor
ners; then with  blunt Point trace the Ourlines and
Breadths of the Shadows; which done, having care-
fully examined it, to fee that nothing be omitted, take
it off, and finith it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another Way to make an exact Copy, and at the
Jame Time to preferve the Original, is, to lay  Piece
of tranfparent Paper upon it, and draw the Outlines
thereon with  Black-lead Pencil; then between that
and the Paper you intend to draw upon, place  Piece
of thin Poft-Paper, reddened or blackened at the Back;
after which, proceed to trace and finith it according
to the foregoing Rule.
Ifyou would reverfe your Original, you need only
turn the tranfparent Paper, with the Drawino you
have made upon it, downwards upon the Poft-Paper,
and trace it as above directed.
The tranfparent Paper may be had at Nc.  Hol-
Forn- Iill.
Of ENLARCINC and CoNTRACTING.
IVIDE your Original with  Pair of Compaffes
) into any Number of Squares, and rule them
across with  Black-lead Pencil from Side to Side, and
from Top to Bottom.
Then,






 )
Then, having your Paper of the Size you intend,
sivide it into the fame Number of Squares, either
 bigger or lefs, as you would enlarge or contract it.
Place your Original before you, and draw Square
by Square the feveral Parts; obferving to make the

Part you are drawing fall into the fame Part of the
 as it does in your Original. To prevent Mif-
takes, number the Squares, both of the Original and
Copy, as in Fig. . and  of the Drawing-Plate.
Then outline it with Indian Ink, rub our the Marks
of the Pencil with Bread, and shade it at Pleafure.
Of IMITATION of LIFE.
 ET the Perfon you draw after be of  proporti-
As onable Size, and well-fhaped; place him in the
cafieft and moft natural Arritude; then fkerch faintly
with your Charcoal the Head, or any of the Limbs
teparately; which having carefully done, proceed to
finith with your Pencil.
When you have fufficiently practifed the feveral
Parts or Limbs, you may draw the whole Figure, in
whatever Atticude you think proper to place it; be-
ginning with the eafieff, and proceeding by Degrees
to the more difficult Poftures, as Time and Expe-
fience shall enable you.
Be fure to finith your Outline to correctly, (mark-
ing all the Mufcles as they occur) that, even before
you give it any Shadow, it may have fome Refem-
blance of the Perfon.
The true Proportion which one Part of  Human
Figure bears to another, may be feen in Fig.  will ferve as  Standard to eamine your
Drawing by; except where the Figure is to be fore-
thortened, in which cafe Nature will be the beft
Guide.
In
    drawing of  Likeness, Care muft be taken to
express the Paftions in the moft lively Manner; which
is to be done, by obferving the peculiar Caft and Dif-
pofition of every Feature with the exacteff Nicety.
And as this is, of all the Parts of Drawing, by far
the moft difficult, it will require  more than ordi-
nary Attention, and should be laft attempted.
Of DRAPER .
RAPERY is the Art of Cloathing your Figures
 with Elegance and Propriety.
When your naked Figure is outlined, firft draw
the Outlines of the Drapery lightly, then the greater
Folds, and afterwards the lefier, obferving never to
let them crofs each other.
Particular Regard is to be had to the Quality of the
Drapery; as the Folds of Stuff or Woollen Cloth are
more abrupt and harth, and thofe of Silk more flow-
ing and eafy. Linen, Cambrick, Gauze, (or. as
their Subftance is lighter than either, require  ffill
greater Delicacy in expreffing the waving of the
Folds, by the Faintnets of their Shadows.
The Drapery should not flick too clofe to the
Body, but muft feem to flow round it as it were; yet
in fuch  Manner, as that the Motion of the Figure
may be free and eaty.  great Lightness and Motion
of the Drapery should only be ufed, when the Fi-
gures are fupposed to be in much Agitation, or Cx-
poted to the Wind; but in  calm Place, and free
from violent Action, their Drapery should be large
and flowing, in order to give them  more graceful
Appearance.
Let the loofe Parts of the Drapery blown by the
Wind all fow one Way; and draw that Part which
 clofeft to the Body, before you draw thofe which
Ry off.
Suit your Garments to the Body, and make them
bend with it : The clofer the Garment Sticks to the
Body, the narrower and fmaller muft be the Folds;
and if it fits quite clofe, there will be no Folds at all,
but muft only have  faint Shadow, to reprefent the
Part of the Body which lies under it.
By obferving diligently in what Manner the Dra-
pery flows upon any Perfon flanding or fitting before
you for that Purpofe, you will fee in what Manner
to difpofe your Folds and Shadows, according to the
unerring Rule of Nature.
Of LAN     .
 ANDSKI Preprefents the Face of the Country
  it appears to our View, with all the various
Objects analogous thereto; as Towns, Caffles,
Churches, Houfes, Trees, Hills, Cattle, Rivers,
Rocks, Ruins, E careful to augment or leffen every Object ac-
cording to its Diftance, making the moft remote
Objects fainter and lets diftinet, as they appear to the
Eye, and enlarging them proportionably as they ad-
Vance nearer.
Shew the Sky cloudy or clear, as Occafion re-
quires; and if you introduce the Sun, let it be rifing
or fetting; either of which Reprefentations will give
an additional Grace to your Picture, as they repre-
fent Nature in its livelieff and moft agreeable Ap-
pearance.
Adapt every Part of your Landikip to the Seafon
of the Year, and the Time of the Day you intend it
to reprefent; and difpofe your Lights and Shades with
confiffent Propriety.
Laftly,
   
Laftly, We would recommend it to Practitioners in
this noble Art, to rife early in  fine Morning, that
they may have  better Idea of the Harmony and
Beauty of the Works of the Great Creator, which
would wonderfully replenith their Minds, as to Co-
four and Effect.
Of LiGHT and SHADE.
+IHE true Distribution of Light and Shade in 
 Picture is abfolutely neceffary to be known;
as it not only determines the proper Diffance of one
Object from another, without which the Whole
would be an undiffinquithable Mats of Confulion,

but it gives likewife to each respestive Object its
Subffance, Roundness, and Effect.
Shadowing is performed with the Pen or Pencil;
 of which great judgment is required.
Having made your Ourlines correct, the firft Thing
is to observe from which Side of the Original the
Light comes in; which, if natural, is either from
the Right-Hand or left; for whenever the Light ap-
pears in the Middle of  Picture, and teems to alare
more than ordinary, it is cauted by  Candle, 
Lamp, or fome other luminous Body, and is called
an artificial Light.
Lay on your light Tints firff, difpoting them as
you fee they are done in the Original; and then pro-
ceed to the deeper ones, till you come to the darkeft
Parts of all : For you may ar any Time darken your
Shadows when you cannot lighten them.
Let all your Shadows in the Came Piece fall on the
same Side; that is, if the Right-fide of  Mlans Face
be dark, to muft be the Right-fide of his Body, Arm,
Leg, Thigh, C But if the light Side be darkened
  




a the Opposition of some other Body intercepting the
Light, it muft receive  contrary Shadow.
Make your Shadows fainter as they grow towards
the Light, breaking them gradually, that they may
not appear too fudden or harfh.
If you fhade with Black Lead, or with Crayons,
you may blend your Shadows, and foften them one
into another as you require, with  Stump made of
Paper or Glove-Leather rolled and tied hard, and
cut almoft to the Point, with which you may alfo
weaken your Shades where they are too ftrong.
When one Part of the Body projects over or before
another, the Part projecting muft receive  ftronger
Light: Thofe Parts that bend inward muft be made
to much the darker, and thadowed deepeft next the
Light.
Two equal Lights muft never be made in the fame
Picture: The ftrongeft Light should fall upon the
Middle of the Piece, (where the principal Figures
ought to fland) diminithing gradually towards the
Extremities.
By frequently examining into Nature, you will
have an Opportunity of improving your Ideas of Light
and Shade, and will be enabled to form  proper
Judgment of the Effect which the different Rays or
Degrees of Light will produce in  Picture; for which
Reafon you should never let slip an Opportunity of
remarking the various Appearances you meet with.
Of HISTORY.
wr fIlS Branch of Drawing prefents to our View
 Things paft, prefent, and future.
An Hlifforical Picture muft describe the Tranfaction
reprefented, in  Manner fo clear and confpicuous,
as to convey an Idea of it to our Minds, as fully as
could
   be done by  verbal Description And Care
muft be taken to prefeve fuch an Analogy or Con-
nection between the Figures, that not one may feem
to be introduced but for fome End or Purpofe. And
as, in Dramatic Writing, it is effential to make every
Perfon speak confiftent with the Part he reprefents, to
here it will be equally neceffary to obferve the fame
Propriety of Character, and make every Figure look
the Sentiment it is intended to express.
For the Cheice of Subjects, the Practitioner is left
to his Difcretion. Books will furnish him with
Abundance. But there will be no need to ranfack
the venerable Rubbish of Greek or Roman Anuquity,
while there is to fair an Opportunity of doing Juftice
to the Merit of our gallant Countrymen and Fellow-
Subjects, by recording the heroic Actions they have
atchieved in the Courfe of the late War; which, as
they reffect the higheft Honour on this Kingdom in
general, it will be meritorious to perpetuate, by fuch
 laudable Tribute of GGratitude to their Memory.
CH  .


  oprt pacts ariseae Rogsec Roc Kor hee Loc Len. &Kec Koc Kae oohiae  ar il apits, not  ten
  sa seped   fst  Sof St  dos do fest  Seof chs    of . Idon Spdetd
   . II.
OF PERSPECTIVE.
DERSPECTIVE is the Art of delineating Ob-
jects (as they appear in Nature upon  plain

Surface) according to their Diftance and Height
perpendicular to the Horizon, between the Object
and the Eye.
This Art is of great Confequence to thofe who
would excel in Drawing, Erching, Engraving, Car-
ving in Bas-relief, or Painting; for being well un-
derftood, the Arriff will be enabled to know when to
adhere to the ffrict Rules, and when to depart from
them with Propricty.
ExPLANATION of the TERMs used in PERSPECTIVE.
 )    or Fundamental Line, is the Bottom-Line
of the Drawing on which the Perfon is suppofed
to fland, with his Face towards the Point of Sight.
 Perpendicular is  Line drawn upright with re-
spect to any Part of the Bafe.
 Parallel Lines are Lines equidiftant from each
other as the Horizon to the Bafe.
 Horizon is the moft diffant Part of  Plane,
where the Clouds, feeming to rouch the Earth, limit
the Sight. The horizontal Line gives the Height of
the Eye; for we cannot fee any thing above the Ho-
rizon which does not exceed this lleight: Ver the
Summit


 
Summit of  Mountain may be above the Horizon,
though its Foot be far beneath it.
 Point of Sight is that Part[ of the horizontal Line
where all the Vifual Rays center in  Point.
 Visual Rays are Beams of Light conveying the
Likencls of any Object to the Kye or Sight, and the
Knowledge thereof to the Mind or Underftanding.
 Points of Distance are suppofed Points fer off on
the horizental Line, at equal Distances on each Side
the Point of Sight.
 Diagonal Lines are thofe drawn from the Points
of Diftance to the Extremities of the Bafe Line.
 Abridgment of the Square, is the Line where the
Diagonals interfect or cross the vifual Rays, and muft
 run parallel to the Bafc. It is only made where
the Sight is limited by  Perpendicular, as the far-
ther End of  Church, Hall, Room, C "Cup-
pofing  Perfon to fland thereon,  parallel Li.
 the Point of Sight will teem to pass through
the Eyes, and will confequently thew what Height
that Perfon ought to be.
The Nine foregoing Definrions are illuffrared in
Fiz. . of the Perfpective Plate.
 Point of direct View. This is nothing more
than the Front View of  Houfe, Church, Coc. or,
in other Words,  Ceomerrical Elevation raited from
 Plan or Ground-Plot, and comprehending an equal
Space on both Sides of the Point of Sight. See Fig.
XIV.
 Point of oblique Fiew, is when we fee the Ob-
jeet lideways or aftant. Example Suppofe  Perton
was to draw  View of  Canal, with fome remark.
able Building he is defirous to thew more diffinet,
he muft place himself (on the Bafe or Fundamental
Line) oppofite to that Building, that the Ray of Light
may be more oblique; by which means the admired
Building will be lets fore-fhortened, and appear to
greater Advantige, the Points of Sight being Hill
before


 him, though not in the Middle of the Picture;
See Fis. xV
 Accidental Points are thofe where Objects end in
the horizental Line, but neither in the Points of Sight
or Diffance; and ferve for Streets, Houfes, Chairs,
Roads, C which take different Directions. As for
Example: Suppofe  Streetyleading to the Point of
Sight, and from it two others branch, the one on the
Right-Hland, the other on the Left, and take  dif-
ferent Direction; thefe two laft Streets make what
we call accidental Points, terminating in fome Part of
the horizental Line, on each Side of the Point of
Sight. See Fig. XVl. The same is to be obferved
in  Grove, Park,  where the Walk you are in
directs immediarely to the Point of Sight, and the
Avenues branching out on either Side terminate alfo
inpifferent Parts of the Horizon.
Ichnograpby is the Pian or Ground-Plot of any Ob-
jecrthat is to be raifed in Perspective.
Scenography is the rt of bringing any Thing raited
in Perspective from an Ichnogiaphic Plan to its due
Proportion, according to the Diffance in which it is
placed; that all Objects may be diminifhed according
to their Diffance in  Picture, in the Jame Degree as
they are diminithed by Dilfance in  natural Prospect.
 Scenographic View may be either direct, as in
Fig. KIv. or oblique, as in Fig. XV.
  the Art of Perspective is conftructed upon Geo-
£ merrical Principles, it will be neceitary, pre-
vious to the Rules themfelves, to learn the following
introductory Operations.
 From  Point in  given Line   to raise  Perpen-
dicutar. See Fis.  with the Ruler the riven Line Ab; then (et
one Foot of your Compaties in  and extending
them to rather more than flalf the Length of the lant
 .





 



 , sweep the Arch cd; and with the same Extent
of Compaffes fet one Point in , and fweep the Arch
ofs then without altering the Compafies, fet one
Foot in , and defcribe the Arch bi; next rule
through the Points cg, to interfect the Arch bi in  draw the Line from  to , which is the Perpen-
dicular required.
 Another Way. See Fiz.  the Point  take the equal Diftances  Band
AC on each Side of it; then ftretch the Compafies to
any Diftance greater than   or AC, and with one
Foot of them in  fweep the Arch de; then, with
the fame Extent of the Compaffes, fet one Point in ,
sweep the Arch yg; and thefe two Arches will inter-
fect each other in the Point , from which  Line
drawn to the Point  is the Perpendicular required.
 To draw one Line parallel (or equidiftant) to anotber
given Line AB. See Fig. IV.
Extend your Compaffes to the Diftance of the Pa-
rallel you require; then with one Foot in any Point
of the given Line, as in , describe the Arch de.
Again, without altering the Compaffes, fix one Foot
in any other Point, as in , and fweep the Archgh;
then rule the Line  , touching the outward Parts of
the two Arches, and that will be the Parallel to the
given Linc.
 To biseet or divide  given Line   into two equal
Parts. See Fis. 
Take with your Compaffes any Diftance greater
than Half the given Line; then, with one Foot of
them in , fweep the Arch cc; and with the fame
Diffance, fetring one Foot in , (weep the rch dd;
and thefe Arches will interfect each other in the Points
 which joined by  Perpendicular, will interfect
AB in the middle Point:.
 Upon


  Upon the End  of  given Line AB to raife  Per=
pendicular. See Fig. VI.
Place one Foot of the Compaffes in , and extend
them to any Point  without the given Line; then
fet one Foot of them in  and turn the Circle de and
, and through de draw the Diameter dce, meeting
the Circle in , join  , and that Right Line is the
Perpendicular required.
 To turn the Circle through any three given Points not in
 Right Line. See Fig. Vil.
Fix three Points at any Diltance you think proper,
as at   and , and join them by the Right Lines
  and Bl; then by Fig. . bifeet the Line Ap
with the Line de; which done, bifect the Line BC
with the Line fo; and from the Center , where
thefe Lines meer, extend your Compafies to , and
describe the Circle ABC .
 To draw an Oval. See Fig. Vill.
Draw  given Line AB, which divide into four
equal Parts; fet one Foot of the Compaffes at , and
from that Center defcribe  Circle se; with the same
Extent of Compaffes place one Foot in the Center ,
and turn the Circle ff; then, with one Foor Kill in
, extend your Compafies, and turn the Archgg;
and with the fame Exrent, placing one Foot in ,
describe the Arch bb; join the Interfections with 
Perpendicular from  to  next, place one Foot of
the Compaties in  Tweep the Arch LL, and without
altering them, fet one Foot in  and defcribe the
Arch MM.
 Another Method for an Oval. See Fig. Ix.
Draw  given Line AD, and with the Compaffes
extended, placing one Foot in , with the other turn
the Circlecs; then, without altering your Compaffes,
O the Line   in the suppofed Point  fweep the
Circle  and through the Points ge, where the
two Circles interfect, draw the Perpendicular bi;
then fix your Compaffes with one Foot in , and ex-
send them to as to describe the Arch & to the lower
Extremities of the Circles; then, with the fame Ex-
rent, with one Foot in , fweep the Arch  to join
the upper Extremities.
By thefe Examples it will appear, that an Oval of
any Form or Size may be conftructed at Pleafure, only
taking Care always to fix the Compaffes equidiftant
from the given Line AD in the Perpendicular  ExAMPLES In PERSPECTIVE.
 To draw  Square Pavement in Perspective. See
Fig. . and Xl.
 your Piece of Pavement to confift of  Pieces of Marble, each  Foot Square. Your
firff Bufiness is, to draw an ichnographical Plan or
Ground-Plot of it, which is thus performed. Having
made an exact Square of the Size you intend your
Flan, divide the Bafe and Horizon into eight equal
Parts, and from every Divifion in the Bafe to its oppo-
Jite Point in the Horizon, rule perpendicular Linesj
then divide the Sides into the Jame Number, ruling
parallel Lines acrots from Point to Point: So will your
Pavement be divided into  Square Feet; becaute
the eight Feet in Length, multiplied by the fame in
Breadth, give the Number of Square Fect or Pieces of
Rlarble contained in the Whole then rule Diagonals
from Corner to Corner; and thus will your Ground-
Plot appear as in Fig. .
Now to lay this in Perfpective, draw another
Square to your intended Size, and divide the Bate
Lne   into eight equal Parrs, as before; then fix
your Point of Sight  in the Middle of the Horizon
DE.


 
DE, and from the same Point rule Lines to every Di-
vition in the Bafe  ; after which, rule diagonal
Lines from  to , and from  to , antwerable to
thofe in the Ground Plot, and your Square will be
reduced to the Triangle ABC; then from the Point
 where the Disgonal   interfects the Line  ,
to the oppofite Incerfection , where the Diagonal
  croffes the Line  , rule  parallel Line, which
is the Abridgment of the Square.
Then through the Poines where the Diasonals crots
the reft of the Lines which go from the Bate to the
Point of Sight, rule parallel Lines, and your (quare
Pavement will be laid in Perfpective, as in Fig. .
 To find the leight and Proportion of any Objects, as
they appear above the Horizon on  supposed Plane.
Lee Fig. Xll.
Firft rule your Horizontal Line NO, and fix your
Point of Sight, as at ; then mark the Place of your
neareft Pillar, by making  Dot for the Bafe or Bot-
tom, as at ; and another for the Summit or Top,
as at : Rule  Line from  to the Point of Sight
NI, and another from  to , and thefe two Lines
will give the Height of any Number of Pillars. As
for Example: Suppofe you would have  PillaratC,
fix your Dot for the Bafe, and rule from thence 
parallel Line to meet the Diagonal   at ; then
rule the Perpendicular DE to the Diagonal BMI;
which Perpendicular is the Height of your Figure re-
quired at . Or, if you would place Pillars ar Fand
, observe the fame Method, ruling the Parallels FCr
and IK, and the Perpendiculars ( fI and XL. will
give their Heights at the Diftances required.
To find the Diameter or Thickness of Pillars at
any particular Diltances, you are allo to be guided by
that neareft the Bafc. For Inftance Suppofe your
acareft Pillar   to be ten Feet high, and one Foot
  Diameter divide it from Top to Bottom into ten
equal Parts, and fet off one of them upon the Bafe of
the Pillar: then rule  Line from the Point of Sight 
to the Diameter , and you will have the Thickness
of all your Pillars on their respective Parallels or
Bafes.
 The same Rule exemplified in Objects below the Ho-
rizon. See Fig. Kill.
If you would know the Heights of  Number of
Figures below the Horizon, rule your horizontal line
DR, and fix your Point of Sight, as at . then
place your neareft Figure, or mark the Dots for the
Head and Feet, by the Points  and , which an-
swers the same Purpofe; and rule from thefe Dots to
the Point of Sight the Lines  Pand BP: and if you
would find the Height of  Figure to be drawn atc,
rule from thence the Paralleled to the Diaconal BP,
and the Perpendicular de will give the Height re-
quired. The same Directions will thew the Hleight
of  Figure at any other Dillance you have  Mind to
place it, as at , , and , by ruling the Parallelsyg,
 and mn; and from each of thefe their respective
Perpendiculars & ,  and no; which Perpendicu-
lars will thew the Heights of the Figures at , ,
and .
 To draw  direct View. See Fig. XIV.
To illuftrate this Example, fuppofe you were to
draw the Intide of  Church, as reprefented in this
Figure Firff take your Station at the Point , in
the Center of the Bate Line BC; from which you
have  Front View of the whole Body of the Church,
with all the Pillars, toc on each Side : then six your
Horizon at any Height you think proper, as at DE:
hifeet it by the Perpendicular  : and where thefe
Twe Lines interfect, is the Point of Sight . (This
Perpendicular will pats through the Centers of all the
Arches


 )
Arches in the Dome or Cupola: which Centers may
be found by any three given Points, as in Fig. VIf.
Next divide your Bafe Line into any given Number
of Feet; and the vifual Lines, ruled from thefe Di-
vifions to the Point of Sight, will reduce all your
Objects to their juft Proportion, by fetting off their
Height upon  Perpendicular raited at their respective
Dillances. The Bale, in the Example here given,
is divided into twelve equal Parts of five Feet each;
from which (suppoting your Front Column to be
 Feet high) take feven Divifions from the Bafe
Line of your Drawing, and fet them off upon the
Perpendicular GHl; then, ((uppoting this Column to
he five Feet thick at the Bafe,) fet off one of thofe
Divifions upon the Parallel Ik, which is the Breadth
required. So that by proportioning this Scale to any
Diftance by the foregoing Directions, you may not
only find the Dimentions of all your Columns, but
alfo of every diftinet Part of them, as well as of all
the Doors, Windows, and other Objects that occur.
For Inftance: Having found the Hleight and Breadth
of your firft or heareff Column , draw from the
Top and Bottom of the faid Column to the Point of
Sight the Lines HF and KF; after which, rule the
Line   from the Bafe of the Colamn to the Point
of Sight, and you have the Height and Breadth of all
the reft of the Columns, as has been already thewn in
Fis. Xil.
By ruling Lines from the Points ,  , , erc.
to the Point of Sight, you will fee that all the Sum-
mits and Bafes of your Columns, Doors, Windows,
C muft tend immediately to that Point; and by
Lines drawn from the Points      o Side, to the correspondent Points on the oppo-
fite Side, may be feen all the Parts of your Builain,
lying upon the Jame Parallel.
 To


  To draw an oblique View. See Fis. XV.
Firff, draw your horizontal Line AB; then, if
your favourite Object be on the Left Hand, as at ,
place yourfelf on the Right Hand upon the Bafe Line,
 at ; then from that Station erect  Perpendicu-
lar DE, which will pats through the Horizon at the
Point of Sight ; to which rule the Diagonals  
and HF, which will thew the Roof and Bafe of your
principal Building , and will alfo, as before di-
recled, ferve as  Standard for all the reft.
Obferve alfo, either in direct or oblique Views,
whether the Prospect before you make  Curve; for
if it does, you muft be careful to make the same
Curve in your Drawing.
 To draw  perspective View, wherein are accidental
Points. See Fig. XVI.
Rule your horizontal Line al, and on one Part of
it fix your Point of Sight, as at ; from which rule
the Diagonals cd and ce on the one Side, and efand
 on the other; which will thew the Roofs and Bafes
of all the Houfes in the Street directly facing you;
(luppoting yourfelf placed at  in the Center of the
Bafe Line:) Then fix your accidental Points  and 
upon the horizontal Line, and rule from them to the
Angles  and  (where the Streets on each Side
take  different Direction, towards the accidental
Points  and ) and the Lines gi and gk give the
Roofs and Bafes of all the Buildings on one Side, as
  and mb do on the other.
Accidental Points feldom intervene where the
Dittance is (mall, as in Noblemen' Seats, Groves,
Canals, . which may be drawn by the ftriet Rules
of Perspective : but where the Prospect is extenfive
and varied, including Mlountains, Bridges, Caftles,
Rivers, Precipices, Woods, Cities, erc. it will re-
quire fuch an infinits Namber of accidental Points,
that


Fi
 it will be better to do them as Nature shall
dictate, and your ripened Judgment approve.
 To find the Center for the Reof of  House, in an
oblique Vicw. Fiz. ., See Plate IV.
Suppofe from the Point of Sight , the vifual
Lines  Band AC be drawn, BC being one Per-
Pendicular given, and DE the other, rule the Dia-
gonals from  to , and from  to , and the Per-
pendicular  , raifed through the Point of their
Interfection, will thew the true Center of the Roof,
as will appear by ruling the Lines   and  .
For want of being acquainted with this necelfary
Rule, many who have been well verfed in other Parts
of Perfpective, have fpoiled the Look of their Pic-
ture, by drawing the Roofs of their Houfes out of
their true Perpendicular.
 To form  Square from  Line given.
See Fig. II.
Firft rule your Bafe Line to any Length you pleafer
as from  to ; then raife Perpendiculars (as in
Fig. II. Plate  from  to , and from  to ;
next meafure with Compaffes from  to , fetting
one Point in , turn the rch EF; then with the
same Extent of Compafies, fet one Foot in , and
describe the Arch Gfl: laftly, rule from  to ,
touching the outward Parts of the Arches where they
interfect the Perpendiculars, and you will find the
required Square.
 To form  Parallelogram from  given Line.
See Fig.  rule  given Lune the Length required, as at
 ; next raile  Perpendicular at , another at ,
(as in Fig. II. Plaie  and on them fet off the pro-
per fleights, as   and BD; join  Dwith  Line,
and you have the Parallelogram completc.
CHAP
C 
      
     

CH  . III.
        .
+TCHING is  Method of working on Copper,

Has wherein the Lines or Strokes, inflead of being
cut with  Graver, are eaten with Aqua Fortis.
This Art, being executed with greater Eafe and
Freedom than Engraving, reprefents curious Subjects
better, and more agreeable to Nature, as Landskips,
Ruins, and fmall, faint, or remote Objects, Build-
ings, CSc.
The principal Materials for this Art are the Plate,
hard and foft Ground, (the firft for Winter, and the
other for Summer,)  Dabber, Turpentine-Varnifh,
Lamp-Black, foft Wax, and Aqua-Fortis, or Spirits
of Nitre.
The Tools are, an Oil-Rubber,  Burnither, 
Scraper,  Hand-Vice, Erching-Boards, Etching-
Needles, an Oil-Stone, and  Parallel Ruler.
The Plate may be had of any Size, and well po-
lithed, fit for Ufe, of Mr. Willow, in Shee-Lane,
flolbourn; Nirs. Torond, in Little St. Andrew’ Street,
Seven Dials; Nr. Cave, in Weft-Smithfield.
The Ground may be had at No.  Holborn-Ffill.
Directions for laying the Ground.
      provided yourfelf with  Plate of the
 Size of the Print or Drawing you intend to
copy, rub it well with an Oil-Rubber made of Swan-
thin-Flannel, till all the Marks of the Charcoal ufed
  polifhing it, entirely difappear; then, wiping off
the direy Oil with  Linen Rag, dip your Finger in
some clean Oil, and touch it over every Part of the
Plate; after which, with your Burnifher polifh the
Plate, till you can fee your Face in it And in cafe
any Sand-Hloles or Flaws appear, the Scraper will affift
you in taking them out. The Marks left by the
Scraper are to be taken out with the Burnither, till
nothing appear. Having fixed your Hand-Vice at
one End of the Plate, with  Rag and Whiting clear
the Plate carefully from reafe; then heat it over 
Charcoal-Fire, or lighted Paper, till it will melt the
Ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and dabbed
all over with the Dabber, till it is perfectly fmooth
and even; then warm the Plate again, and holding
it up with the Ground downwards, finoak it all over
with  large Candle, taking Care that the Snuff of it
do not touch the Ground, and waving the Candle
continually over every Part, to that the Ground may
not be burnt by heating it more in one Place than
another. If the Plate be large, you may bind four
Penny-Candles together.
Directions for Tracing.
HE firft Thing to be done, (while the Plate is

cooling, after the Ground is laid) is to rub the
Back of your Print or Drawing all over with  Bit of
Rag or Cotton, dipt in the Scrapings of red or white
Chalk, and thake off the loofe Duff, or wipe it off
genly with  clean Rag. Place the Red Side upon
the Plate, making it faft at each Corner with  little
Bit of foft Wax. Lay your Etchino-Board under
your Hand, to prevent bruifing the Ground; then
with  blunt Etching-Needle trace lightly the Our-
lines and Breadths of the Shadows, till the Marks of

their


 appear upon the Ground, which you muft take
Care not to penetrate by tracing too hard.
As great Nicety is required in this Part of your
Work, it will be neceffary now and then to lift up
one Corner of your Original, and examine whether
every Part be traced before you take it off, as it will
be extremely difficult to lay it down again in its for-
mer Pofition.
Directions for Etching.
AVIN  carefully traced your Original, take
I ir off, and lay  Silk or Linen Handkerchief
next the Plate, and over that your Etching-Board;
then proceed to the Erching; for which obterve the
following Directions, which are adapted to every par-
ticular Branch, as Landlkips, Shipping, Portraits,
Hiffory, Architecture, Eoc.
Diftances in Landskips, or the faint Parts of any
other Picture, are the firft to be done; and thefe are
to be worked clofer, and with  tharper-pointed
Needle: The darker Parts muft be erched wider, and
with  blunter Needle; but, to prevent Miftakes, the
Needles may be marked, according to their different
Degrees, and the Ufes for which they are intended.
As for the very fainteff Parts of all, they are to be
left for the Graver, or dry Point; of which here-
alter.
in Building, and all Architecture in general, ufe
 Parallel Ruler, rill frequent Practice enables you to
do them well enough without.
The Needles may, when neceffary, he wheired
upon your Oil.Stone keeping them turning in your
Hand, to as to whet them equally all round.
The
il. Stone will be farther afeful in wheiting the Scra-
per, which is to be rubbed ffar upon the Stone, and
with


  
with  fteady Hand, keeping Oil conftantly upon the
Stone.
Of Biting or Eating-in the Work with Aqua-Fortis.
Ir  RS  examine your Work carefully, to fee that
nothing be omitted; and if any Scratches appear
upon the Ground, or Miftakes be committed in the
Erching, they are to be stopped out, which is done by
covering them with  Mixture of Lamp-Black and
Purpentine-Varnish, laid on thinly with  Hair-
Pencil, which, when dry, will refift the Aqua-Fortis,
Bur it will be beft to ftop out thefe, as they occur to
you in the Courfe of yeur Work, for by this Means
they will be lefs liable to efcape your Notice; and
when the Varnith is dry, you may erch over it again,
if required.
The next Thing is, to enclofe the Work with 
Rim or Border of foft green, or other coloured Wax,
about ffalf an Inch high, bending the Wax in the
Form of  Spout at one Corner, to pour off the Aqua-
Fortis : And that it may not run out at any other
Part, take Care to lay your Waxfo clofe to the Plate,
that no Vacancies be left.
Your Aqua-Fortis muft be fingle; and if too ftrong,
as will be feen in the Biting, take it off, and mix it
with  little Water, thaking them together in  Bot-
tle; and when it is too weak, it may be ffrengthened
by mixing it in  Bottle with  little double Aqua-
Fortis. The Bortle which contains the Aqua-Fortis
should have  large Mouth, and  Clats Stopple.
Let the Aqua-Fortis lie on the Plate  fhart Time,
wiping off the Bubbles, as they arife, with  Feather,
which may remain upon the Place while it is biting

after which, take it off, and wath the Plate with Wa-
fer ; then let it dry, and by fcraping off Part of the
Ground



 from the fainteff Part of the Work, try if it
be bit enough; and if not, flop out the Part you
have tried with the Lamp-Black and Varnish; and
when that is dry, pour on the Aqua-Fortis again.
When the faint Parts of your Workare bit enough,
stop them out, and proceed to bite the ftronger Parts,
stopping them out as Occafion requires, till the
whole Work is fufficiently bir: Then warm the Plate,
and take off the foft Wax; after which, heat the
Plate till the Ground melts, pour on  little Oil, and
wipe the whole off with  Rag. When the Ground
is taken off, rub the Work well with the Oil-Rub-
ber, and wipe the Plate clean; then proceed to finifh
it with the Graver, according to the following Di-
fections.
CHAP.

CH AP. IV.
        IN .
+GAHE Tools neceffary for Engravino are, the
Oil-Rubber, Burnifher, Scraper, Oil-Stone,

Needles, and Ruler, already mentiond to be
ufed in Etching; alfo Gravers, Compaffes, and 
Sand-Bag.
Gravers are of two Sorts, (quare and lozenge:
Three of each Sort should be provided. The firft is
uted in cutting the broader Strokes, the other for the
fainter and more delicate; and both Sorts may be had
at No.  Holborn-Hill. No Graver should exceed
the Length of Five Inches and  Half, the Hlandle
included, excepting for ffrait Lines.
The Sand- Bag, or Cuthion, is ufed to lay the Plate
on, for the Conveniency of turning it about, and
may be had at the White Lion, in Fofter-Lane; as may
likewife the Oil-Stone, which muft be of the Turkey
Sort.
Of Whetting and Tempering the Graver
 great Pains are required to whet the Graver
£ icely, particularly the Belly of it, Care mutt
be taken to lay the two Angles of the Graver, which
are to be held next the Plate, fat upon the Stone,
and rub them fleadily till they are polished like  Mir-
ror, and till the Belly rifes gradually above the Piote,
to as that, when you lay the Graver fat upon it, yan
  juft perceive the Light under the Point; other.
wife it will dig into the Copper, and it will be im-
poffible to keep  Point, or execute the Work with
Freedom. In order to this, keep your Right Arm
xlofe to your Side, and place the Fore-Finger of your
Left Hand upon that Part of the Graver which lies
uppermoft on the Stone. When this is done, in
order to whet the Face, place the flat Part of the
Handle in the Hollow of your Hand, with the Belly
of the Graver upwards, upon  moderate Slope, and
rub the Extremity or Face upon the Stone, till it has
an exceeding fharp Point, which you may try upon
your Thumb-Nail. The Oil-Stone, while in Ufe,
muft never he kept without Oil.
When the Graver is too hard, as is ufually the
Cafe when firft bought, and may be known by the
frequent breaking of the Point, the Method of tem-
pering the Steel is as follows.
Heat  Poker red-hot, and hold the Graver upon it
within Half an Inch of the Point, waving it to and
fro till the Steel changes to  light Straw Colour;
then put the Point into Oil to cool: Or, hold the
Graver clofe to the Flame of  Candle, till it be of
the same Colour, and cool it in the Tallow: But be
careful either Way not to hold it too long, for then
it will be too foft; and in this Cafe the Point, which
will then turn blue, muft be broken off, and wherted
afreth, and tempered again, if required. But be not
too hafty in tempering; for Cometimes  little whet-
ting will bring it to  good Condition.
Of Holding the Graver.
IT off that Part of the Handle which is upon
 the same Line with the Belly, or tharp Edge of
The Graver, making that Side ffat, that it may be no
DUftruction.
Lold


 the Handle in the Hollow of your Hend; and
extending your Fore-Finger towards the Point, let it
jeft upon the Back of the Graver, that you may guide
it Hac, and parallel with the Plate.
Take Care that your Fingers do not interpofe he-
tween the Plate and the Graver; for they will pre-
vent you from carrying the GGraver level with the
Plate, and from cutting your Strokes to clean as they
ought to be.
Directions for Engraving.
  the Table or Board you work at be firm and
 eady; upon which place your Sand-Bag with
the Plate upon it; and holding the Graver as above
directed, proceed to Bufiness in the following Man-
Rer.
For ftrait Strokes, hold your Plate firm upon the
Sand-Bag with your Left Hand, moving your Night
Hand forwards; leaning lighter where the Stroke
should be fine, and harder where you would have it
broader.
For circular or crooked Strokes, hold the Graver
Redfaft, moving your Hand, or the Plate, as you fee
convenient.
Learn to carry your Hand with fuch  Slight, that
you may end your Stroke as finely as you began it;
and if you have Occafion to make one Part deeper or
blacker than another, do it by Degrees. And that
you may do it with greater Exactucts, take Care that
your Strokes be not too clofe, nor too wide.
In the Courfe of your Work, fcrape off the Barb
or Roughness which arifes, with the Belly of your
Graver; but be careful, in doing this, not to feratch
the Plate. And that you may fee your Work pro-
perly as you go on, rub it with the Oil-Rubber, and
Wipe


 the Plate clean, which will take off the Glare of
the Copper, and thew what you have done to the beft
Advantage.
Any Miftakes or Scratches in the Plate may be
rubbed out with the Burnifher, and the Part levelled
with the Scraper, polifhing it again afterwards lightly
with the Burnifher.
Hlaving thus attained the Ufe of the Graver, ac-
cording to the foregoing Rules, you will be able to
finith the Piece you had etched, by graving up the
feveral Parts to the Colour of the Original; begin-
ning, as in the Etching, with the fainter Parts, and
advancing gradually with the flronger, till the whole
is complered.
The dry Point (to called becaute not ufed till the
Ground is taken off the Plate) is principally em-
ployed in the extreme light Parts of Water, Sky,
Drapery, Archifecture, C your firft Practice, copy
tuch Prints as are
openly shaded; the more finifhed ones being too diffi-
cult, till you have gained farther
Experience.
Great Choice of Prints of every
Kind, fit for young
Beginners, may be had where this Book is publifhed.
. . To prevent any Obftruction from too great
 Degree of Light, we would recommend the le of
 Safh, made of tran(parent or Fan-Paper pafted on  and placed floping at  convenient Diftance
between your Work and the Light. This will not
only preferve the Sight, but, when the Sun thines,
cannot poffibly be difpented with.
CH AP.


  
tacts pacten ho Loe Kea Kop hoe fae far Rec kef Redgitsaa te apols  ails pacte paitin
   dey dlefde of ste sdr  dl of sleased lof Seof wh  Sros do Ses os. Se feli    se fed
  AP. .
OF MEZLOTINTO-SCRAPING.
&AHIS Art, which is of late Date, is recom-
mended to the Practice of the ingenious Reader,
for the amazing Eafe with which it is exe-
cuted, especially by thofe who have any Notion of
Drawing.
Mezzotinto Prints are thofe which have no Hlatch-
ing or Strokes of the Graver, but whofe Lights and
 Shades are blended together, and appear like  Draw-

ing of Indian ink.
The Tools ufed in this Art are,
The Copper-Plate, Oil-Stone, Grounding-Tools,

 Scrapers, Burnifher and Needles; all which, except-
fing the Plate and Oil-Stone, may be had at No.  for Laying the MexZotinto-Ground.
   off upon the Bottom of the Plate the
IVl Diftance you intend to leave for the Writing,
Coat of Arms,  then, laying your Plate with 
Piece of Swantkin-Flannel under it upon your Table,
hold the Crounding-Tool in your Hand perpendicu-
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually rock-
ing your Hand in  Right Lane from End to End, till
you have wholly covered the Plare in one Direelion.
Next, crots the Strokes from Side to Side, afterwards
fron


 Corner to Corner, working the Tooleach Time
all over the Plate, in every Direction, almoff like the
Points of  Compass; taking all poffible Care not to
let the Tool cut (in one Direction) twice in  Place.
This done, the Place will be full, or, in other Words,
all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear complerely black.
Having laid the Ground, take the Strapings of
Black Chalk, and with  Piece of Rag rub it over
the Plare; or you may, with two or three Candles,
Imoke it, as before directed for Etching.
Now, take your Print or Drawing, and having
rubbed the Back with Red-Chalk Duft, mixed with
White Lake, proceed to trace it, as directed, Page for Whetting the Grounding-Tool.
  Tooth of the Tool should break, it may be

perceived in the Working by  particular Streak
or Cap, which will appear in the Ground in  firait
Line; in which Cafe the Tool muft be whetted on
the Back, holding it floping, and in  circular Man-
ner, like the Bottom of the Tool.
Directions for Scraping the Pitture.
+     blunt Needle, and mark the Outlines

only; then with  Scraper fcrape off the Lights
it every Part of the Plate, as clean and (mooth as pof=
fible, in proportion to the Strength of the Lights in
your Picture, taking Care not to hurt your Ourlines.
And that you may the better fee what you do, with
the Thumb and Fore-Finger of the Lctt-Hand hold
 Piece of tranfparent Paper, flopings juft over your
Right-Hland, and you will foon be  Judge of the dif-
ferent


 Tints of the Work you are doing; fcraping off
more or lefs of the Ground, as the different Strengths
of Light and Tints require.
The fe of the Burnifher, is to foften or rub down
the extreme light Parts after the Scraper is done with,
fuch as the Tip of the Nofe, Forehead, Linen, Coc.
which might otherwife, when proved, appear rather
milty than clear.
Another Method ufed by Mezzotinto-Scrapers, is
to etch the Ourlines of the Original, as alfo of the
Folds in Drapery, marking the Breadth of the Shadows
by Dots, which having bit of  proper Colour with
Aqua Fortis, according to the Directions given Page
 and  take off the Ground ufed in etching,
and having laid the Me as in Page
 proceed to fcrape the Picture as above.
Four or five Days before you think the Plate will
be ready for proving, Notice muft be given to the
Rolling-Prefs
Printer, (the propereft Perfon to Pring
Me is Mr. Morgan, Printer, Ffeet-Street,)
to wet fome French Paper, as no other will do for
this Work, and as that Time is neceffary for it tee
hie in Wet. When the Proof is dry, rouch it with
Whice Chalk where it should be lighter, and with
Black Chalk where it should be darker; and when
the Print is retouched, proceed as before for the Lights;
and for the Shades ufe  finall rounding-Tool,  as you judge neceffary to bring it to the proper
Colour; and when you have done as much as you
think expedient, prove it again, and fo proceed to
prove and touch, till it is entirely to your Mind.
When the Plate tarnithes in the Part where you are at
Work,  lirtle Vinegar and Salt kept by you in  Vial
will take it off, wiping ir dry with  clean Rag.
Avoid as much as poffible over-[craping any Part
before the firft Proving, as by this Caution the Work
will appear the more elegant.
  AP.


 
ReCllid  Pse  HHC PPSSaCEAE prars & lastGdEsKasd 
CH   VI.
OF PAINTING UPoN GLAS .
AINTING upon GlAss is an Art which had
generally appeared difficult; yet there is no Re-
prefentation can be more elegant than that of 
Picture done well in this Manner for it gives all the
Sofrnets that can be defired in  Picture, and is eaty
to Work; as there are no Outlines to draw, nor any
Shade to make, but the Colours are pat on without
the Trouble of either.
The Pictures are thofe done in Merzotinto; for
their Shades being rubbed down on the Glafs, the
feveral Lines which reprefent the Chady Part of any
common Print, are by this Means blended together,
and appear as foft and united as in any Drawing of
Indian Ink.
Provide fuch Mezzotintos as you like; cut off the
Margin; then get  Piece of fine Crown-Glass, the
Size of your Print, (as ffat and free from Knots or
Scratches as poflible); clean the Glafs, and lay fome
Wenice Turpentine, quite thin and finooth, on one
Side thereof, with  Bruth of Hag' Hair. Lay the
Print fat in Water, and let it remain on the Surface
till it links; tis then enough Take it carefully out,
and dab it berween fome Papers, that no Water may
be feen, yet to as to he damp.
Next, lay the damp Print, with its Face upper-
moft, upon  fat Table; then, holding the Glafs
over it, without touching the Turpenrine till it is
Cxactly


 
eactly even with the Print, let it fall gently on it.
Press the Glass down carefully with your Fingers in
feveral Parts, to that the Turpentine may ftick to the
Print; after which, take it up; then holding the
Glass towards you, prets the Print with your Fingers,
from the Center towards the Edges, till there be no
Bliffers remaining.
When this is done, wet the Back of your Print
with  Spunge, till the Paper will rub off with your
Fingers; then rub it gently, and the white Paper will
roll off, leaving the Impreffion only upon the Glats:
Then let it dry, and with  Camels-Hair Pencil, dipt
in Oil of Turpenrine, wet it all over, and it will be
perfectly tranfpareht, and fit for painting.
Colours proper for Painting upon Glass.
IHE feveral Sorts of Colours ground in Oil for
this Purpofe, and ried up in little Bladders, may
be had of Mr. Dicker, oppofite Newport-Market, and
Mr. Drake, or Mr. Sendys, in Long-Acre, whofe Buti-
ness it is (diftinct from that of other Colourmen) to
prepare the finer Colours for Limners.
Reds.
Whites.
Rofe Pink.
Flake White.
Vermilion.
Spodium.
Red Lead.
Indian Red.
Blacks
Native Cinnabar.
Lamp-Black.
Ivory-Black.
Fellows.
Browns.
English Pink.
Mafticot.
Spanish Brown.
Umber.
English Oker.
Spruce



 Blues
Spruce Oker.
Smalt.
Dutch Pink.
Indico.
Orpiment.
Greens.
Virdigreafe.
Blriess
Terra Vert.
Blue-Bice.
Verditer.
Pruffian Blue.
The Ultramarine (for Blue), and the Carmine (for
Red), are rather to be bought in Powders, as in that
Cafe they are lefs apt to dry, or be loff: And as the
leaft Touch of thefe will give the Picture  Caft, mix
up what you want for prefent Ufe with  Drop or two
of Nut-Oil upon your Pallet, with your Pallet-Knife.
The Pallets may be had at the Colour-Shops above
mentioned: The Pallet-Knives are fold at Mr. Bur-
chell’, Curler, in Long-Acre.
To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick  at the Bottom of each, and prefs it till you have
enough upon your Pallet for prefent Ufe; becaufe the
Colours are apt to dry and skin over.
Then lay  Sheet of White Paper on the Table,
and taking the Picture in your Left-Hland, with the
Turpentine Side next vou, hold it floping (the Bottom
refting on the White Paper), and all the Outlines and
Tints of the Print will be feen on the Glats; and no-
thing remains but to lay on the Colours proper for
the different Parts, as follows:
The Method of Using the Colours.
  the Lights and Shades of your Picture open, lay
& & the lighter Colours firft on the lighter Parts of
your Print, and the darker over the shaded Parts; and
having once laid on the brighter Colours, it is not
material if the darker Sorts are laid  little over them;
for


  the firft Colour will hide thofe laid on afterwards.
As for Example.
  DS.
Lay on firft the Red Lead, and fhade with Lake or
Carmine.
 EL   Ww .
The lighteft Fellow laid on firft, may be shaded
with Duich Pink.
BL   .
Blue-Bice or Ultramarine, ufed for the Lights,
may be shaded with Indico.
GR    .
Lay on Verdigreafe firft, and then  Mixture of
that and Duich Pink. This Green may be lightened
by an Addition of Dutch Pink.
When any of thefe Colours are too ffrong, they
may be lightened to any Degree, by mixing White
with them upon your Pallet; or you may darken them
as much as you pleafe, by mixing them with  deeper
Shade of the Jame Colour.
The Colours muft not be laid on too thick; but if
troublefome, thin them before you ufe them, with 
little Turpentine-Oil.
Take Care to have  Pencil fer each Colour; and
never ufe that which you have ufed for reen with
any other Colour, without firft wathing it well with
Turpentine-Oil, as that Colour is apt to appear pre-
dominant when the Colours are dry.
Wath all the Pencils after ufing in Turpentine-
Oil.
Your Glafs, when painted, muft lland three or four
Days free from Duft, before it be framed.
All Sorts of Me and other Prints proper for
painting on Glafs, may be had at the Place where this
Book is publifhed.
    



 
SIIITS FI

fo

  Ms  MMs CMs CMS   ns EC 
   . VIl.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS.
YR AYONS are to be had in Boxes, every Co-
lour partitioned off feparately, to prevent mix-

ing.
The beft are thofe of Surtzerland.
The different Colours are White, Black, Fellow,
Orange, Red, Purple, Blue, Green, and Brown; and
each of thefe have their feveral Shades, excepting the
two firft.
Directions for using them.
WHE Paper to be ufed on this Occafion is rough

Venice Paper, of  whited-brown Colour, and
the stiffer the better. That Sort called Cape-Paper is
found to be the beft, becaufe upon that the Colours
beft diftribute themfelves. By this Method Figures
may be drawn in their proper Colours as they appear
to the Kye, becaute the Colours may be matched
with the Crayons, and the Crayons being dry, will
not alter their Colour; but the Colours, when wet,
appear decper than when they are dry, which is apt
to deceive  young Beginner.
Another Way to make the neceffary Preparations,
is to take fome of the thickeff and (mootheft light Blue
or other Paper, and get  Straining-Frame from  or Carpenter', on which frain fome
Coarfe


 
Coarfe Scoich or Irish Cloth, drawing and faftening it
with fmall Tacks round the Edges, till it be quite
Imooth; after which, with  Spunge and fair Wa-
ter gently wet the Blue Paper, and then with  Bruth
or Rag pafte the Paper all over, and lay it carefully
on the Cloth, exactly even with the Straining-
Frame after which take it up, and laying White
Paper on the Table, place the Blue Paper down-
wards; with one Hand keep the Straining-Frame
Hleady, and with the other rub the Cloth clofe to the
Paper : Do this very carefully; and taking it up, lay
it on the Table with the Blue Paper upwards, and 
Piece of Paper under your Hand, and rub it clofe to
the Straining-Frame, without touching any other
Part; then let it fland to dry. after which, fet it on
an Eafal, (which may be had at the Colour-Shops)
and proceed as follows:
Make the firft Sketch or Rough-draught with Char-
coal; then with Black, Whire, or Red Chalk, cor-
rect what you fee amifs. The Outline being thus
completed, rub in your Crayons according to their
proper Colours, and then with your Finger or Fitch
foften and blend them together.
   
D   top ar thrs Jge Kagisan Rege  on Kep li aat on Mahnat  Jeg Lige Lone Lor Keakgo ha

 se pde fdb sdt sdt sdle sdt of Sisde ydl fdl  de fut . St pde  dl sedl . dt . dl sdeaps
 II   VIII.
OF PAINTING IN WATER-COLOURS.
TGAHE Materials neceffary for this Art are Gun,
Colours, Hair-Pencils, Fitches,  Pallet and

Pen-Knife.
The Colours in general are White, Black, Brown,
Red, Yellow, Blue, and Green.
The Leveral
Species of each are as follow:
Whites.
Cinnabar-Lake.
Cerufe.
Minium.
Flake White.
Indian .ake.
Spanish White.
Indian Red.
Spodium.
Red Ink.
White Lead.
Red Lead.
Confiant White.
Vermilion.

Blacks.
Fellows.
Burnt Cherry-Stones.
English Oker.
lvory-Black.
Gall-Stone.
Lamp-Black.
Gamboge.
Keating' Black.
Mafficot, dark and light.
Oker de Luce.
Browns.
Orpiment.
Spanish Brown.
Duich Pink, darkandlight.
Spanish Liquorice,
Romon Oker.
Umber.
Saffron.
Biftre.
Blnes.
Reds.
Bice.
Burnt Oker.
Verditer.
Carmine.
Sanders Bluc.
Blues.


 Blue, dark and
Green Pink.
light.
Sap-Green.
Indico.
Verdigreafe.
Litmofe.
Verditer.
Smalt.
Ditramarine.
Moft of thefe Colours may be had ready prepared
in Shells, or Lumps, as alfo the Hair-Pencils, at
Ne.  Holborn-Hill. If you ufe the latter,  Grind-
Stone and Muller muft be provided, which are to be
of Pebble, and may be had at any Stone-Cutter'.
Directions for making the following mixed Colours.
HITE and Lamp-Black; or
Ass Colour

Indico and Black; or Cherry-
Stone and White, shaded with
Ivory Black.
 with  little Spanish
Bay Colour.
Brown and Black.
Indian Lake and Native Cinnabar.
Bright Red.
Lake and White, shaded with Lake.
Carnation.
Red Lead and Water of Mafticot,
Changeable Silk.
shaded with Sap-Green.
White, light Mafficot; or Lake and
Cloud Colour
White shaded with Blue Verditer;
or Blue Verditer alone.
Cinnabar-Lake and White, fhaded
Crimson.
with Lake.
Vermilion and Orpiment; or Red
Flame Colour.
Lead and Mafficot, heightened
with White.
Flefh
  Colour
French Green.
Glass Grey.
Hair Colour.
Lead Colour
Light Blue.
Light Green.
Lyon Tawney.
Murry.
Orange.
Orange Tawney.
Pearl Colour
Popinjay Green.
Purple.
Rusct.
Scarlet.


  
White, with  little Lake, and Red
Lead; add Yellow Oker for  Complexion.
Light Pink and Dutch Bice, shaded
with Green Pink.
Gerufe with  little Blue of any
Kind.
Mafficot, Umber, Fellow Oker,
Cerufe, Oker-de-Luce, and Cher-
ry-Stone Black.
Indico and White.
Blue Bice, heightened with Cerufe
or Spodium.
Pink and Smalt, with White, if
Need require.
Red Lead and Mafticot, fhaded with
Umber.
Cinnsbar-Lake and White Lead.
Red Lead and  little fine Mafticot,
Shaded wth Gall-fone and Lake.
Cinnabar, light Pink and  little
Mafticor, thaded with Gall-ffone
and Lake.
Carmine, with  little White, fhaded
with Lake.
Green and Mafficot; or Pink and  Indico, shaded with Indico.
Indico, Spanish Brown and White;
or Blue Bice with Red and White
Lead; or Blue Bice and Lake.
Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Red Lead and Lake, with or without
Vermilion, of Carmine and Indian
Lake, or Native Cinnabar and
Red Lead shaded with Indian
Lake.
Sed-


  Pink and White, shaded with
Sea Green.
Green Pink.
Light Mafticot and White, for the
Sky-Colour.
loweft and lighteft Parts; Red
Ink and White for the next; Blue
Bice and White for  third De-
gree; and Blue Bice alone for the
higheft Parts of all. Thefe are to
he all foftened into one another at
the Edges, to as not to appear
Barth.
ue Bice and Venice Cerufe; or
)
Sky-Colour for
Ultramarine and White, fhaded
Drapery.
with Indico.
ellow Mefticot, and  very little
 Colour
Cinnabar, shaded with dark Pink.
Indico, White and Cinnabar Lake;
Violet Colour.
or fine Dutch Bice and Lake, shaded
with Indico; or Litmofe, Smalt,
and Blue Bice; the latter moft
predominant.
Blue and White, shaded with Blue,
Water.
and heightened with White.
Directions for Ufing the Celours.
OUR Pencils muft be faft in their Cuills, and
✓
tharp-pointed after you have drawn them through
your Mouth.
Before you begin, have all your Colours ready
before you, and  Pallet for the Conveniency of mixing
them;  Paper to lay under your Hand, and to keep
your Work clean, as well as to try your Colours
upon; alfo  large Bruth called  Fitch, to wipe off
the Duft when your Colours are dry.
.ay


 your Colours on but thinly at firft, decpening
and mellowing them by Degrees as you fee Occafion.
The quicker you lay them on, the evener and cleaner
your Drawing will appear.
Take Care to preserve all your Colours from Duft;
and before you fe them, wipe your Shells and Pallet
every Time with  Fitch.
When you have done your Work, or would lay it
afide, he careful to wath out your Pencils in warm
Water.
For Face-Painting, mix up  little light Carnation
or Fleth-Colour, with Cum-Water in  Shell by
itfelf. If it be for  fair Complexion, mix Vermilion
and White Flake together; and for  fwarthy one,
add to the former  little Mafticot or English Oker, or
both.
Let your Fleth-Colour be always lighter than the
Complexion you would paint; for by working on it,
you may bring it to its true Colour.
in  large Shell, or upon your Pallet, lay your dif-
ferent Shades of Fleth-Colour, at  convenient Dif-
fance from each other; and always have ready  fuffi-
cient Quantity of White to lighten your Shadows.
For the Checks and Lips ufe  Mlixture of Lake
and Red Lead, or Carmine, as Occafion requires;
and for blue Tints, (as under the Eyes, and in Veins)
Indico or Ultramarine and White.
For grey faint Shadows, ufe White, English Oker,
Somerimes Mafficot. For deep Shadows, White,
English Oker, Umber; for dark Shadows, Lake
and Pink, which make  good flethy Shadow.
In colouring Landlkips, at firft only lay dead Co-
lours fmooth all over the Piece, leaving no Part un-
covered; and be not over-curious in this Part of the
Performance, but rather ufe  mafterly Freedom;
and the Work, though feemingly rough to the Eyc,
will have  good Effect when placed at  Diffance.
Let


 
Let not the Roughness of the Colour difcourage
you; for it is eafily to be foftened by Degrees with
the other Shadows, obferving only to (weeten and
heighten them according as the Light falls.
In Come Places lay on ftrong Touches, and in thofe
Places bring your Work up together to an equal
Roundnefs and Strength; tempering and (weetening
your Colours with  Charper Pencil than the firft, that
no Lumps or harth Edges be left, but that all your
Shadows may hie difperted, foft and finooth, gliding
gently, as it were, into one another.
You are not to finith any Part before the other,
but work up all the Parts gradually alike, till you fee
nothing wanting to complete your Picture.
Having laid your dead Colours, begin firft with
the lighteft Parts, as the Sky, Sun-beams, Coc. then
the yellowith beams (which are to be done with Maf-
cicot and White); next the Bluenets of the Sky (with
Uitramarine or Smalt alone). For Purple Clouds
only, mix Lake and White, making your Colours
deeper as they go upwards fron the Horizon, except
in tempeftuous Skies. The Tops of diftant Moun-
tains muft be worked to faint, that they may seem to
lofe themfelves in Air.
Bring your Colours forwards as your Diffance de-
creafes; painting your firft Ground next the Hori-
 downwards of  bluith Sea Green, and as you
advance forwards, of  reddith or darker Green, till
you come to the Fore-(rround itfelf, which, as it is
to be the darkeft Part of all, do with dark Green,
shaded with  dark Brown or Vellow; which Rule of
Shadow will alfo ferve for the Trees on each respec-
live Ground.
All diftant Objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the Eye, as has been already obferved under
the rticle of Ligbt and Sbode.
In


 
In colouring Trees, Boughs, and Branches, touch
in all the dark Shades firff, raifing the lighter Leaves
above the darkerby adding Mafticotto the dark Creen,
which may be made with Bice, Pink, and Indico,
for the uppermoft of all, which are to be done laft;
touch lightly the Extremities of the Leaves with 
little Green, Mafficot, and White, and fet off the
darkeff Shadows with Sap-Green and Indico.
Thefe Rules are adapted to general Appearances;
But the Learner may deviate from them as Nature
shall dictate.
With Regard to Drapery, Fruit, Flowers, and
other Branches of Painting, the beft Observations
are to be taken from the Objects themfelves, or the
moft curious and exact Reprefentations of them.
RECEIPYs for those who Paint in Water-Colours.
To make Gum-Water
VISSOVE one Ounce of pure white Gum-
 Arabic, and half an Ounce of Double-refined
Sugar, in  Quart of Spring—Water; ftrain it through
 fine Sieve or  Piece of Muflin, and bottle it off
for Ofe, keeping it free from Duft.
Another Way.
Take some um-Arabic of the whiteff Sort, bruife
it, and tie it up in  Piece of Woollen Cloth, and
keep it in Spring-Water in  Glafs or Earthen Veffel,
sill it be diffolved. If it be too fiff, add more Wa-
ter; and if too thin, more Gum.
With this Water you may temper moft of your
Colours ; ufing fuch  Quantity, that being touched
when dry, the Colour will not come off. If the Co-
lour thines, there is too much Cum in it.
T  
To keep the Flies from your Work.
When you have made your Gum—Water according
to either of the foregoing Directions, add thereto 
little Coloquintida, which will preferve your Work,
when expofed, from being spoiled by the Flies.
To make Liquid Gold for Vellum-Painting, Fans, ac.
Grind the fineft Leaf-Gold with Hrong Gum-Wa-
ter very fine, adding as you grind it more Crum-Water
as you fee neceffary. When you have ground it as
fine as you can, wath it in  large Shell; then tem-
per it with  little Mercury-Sublimate, bind it in the
Shell with  little diffolved Gum, thake and (pread it
equally all over the Shell, and ufe it with fair Water
only.
To make Liquid Silver for the same Purpose.
The Process for this is the fame with that of Li-
quid Gold, only obferving in the ufing it to temper
it with Glair of Eggs inffead of Water.
To make the Glair of Errs.
 the Whites, and beat them with  Spoon till
they rife all in  Foam; let them fland all Night, and
they will be clarified into good Clair.
To recover Liquid Silver that has contracded Rus.
If your Silver, by Length of Time, or damp Wea-
ther, become rufty, cover that Parr of your Work
with Juice of Garlick, which will effectually recover
it.
To keep the Golours from sinking.
Boil four Ounces of Roch-Allum in  Pint of
Spring-Water, till it is thoroughly difielyed; then
filter it through brown Paper, and kcep it for (Ic.
Ltfore


 
Before you lay on your Colours, take  Spunge,
and wet the Back of your Paper with this Water
while it is hot. This will not only prevent the Co-
lours from finking, but will likewife give them an
additional Beaury and Luftre, and preferve them from
fading. If your Paper is not good, it muft be wathed
three or four Times with this Water, drying it every
Time.
If your Prints are to be varnifhed, wath them all
over with White Starch before you begin to lay on
your Colours.
To make Sixe for painting Scenes, and other Candle-light
Pieces.
Steep  Quarter of  Pound of the Cuttings of
white Glove-Leather in Water for fome Time; then
take them out, and boil them in three Quarts of
Water till it waftes to  Pint, and ftrain it through 
Cloth into an Earthen Pan. When the Size is cold,
if it feel firm under your Hand, it is ftrong enough.
You may prepare any Colours in this Size while it
is warm, and it will take off the Glair which would
appear upon them by Candle-Light, if mixed with
Gum-Water.
To recover Colours when decayed.
Take Rofemary-Water double-diftilled, or pure
Spirit of Rofemary, and with  few Drops of it, tem-
per your Colours, which, however dead and faded,
will recover their Bloom and Brilliance.
This Water or Spirit will prevent the Bubbles in
White and Umber, which are troublefome in grind-
ing.
  AP.


 thr hr its an whor is tr ar ats hs ats   ats. Att  alo ats atr 
TATUCSJICUACOGRzRGEECρDCUUGADEASTOSCUSSUS
CICBCUEUCT
               
 
   . Ix.
Method of Painting on SILE Or SATTIN.
AIR ST make an Outline accordingto your Fancy,
 then lay on  Wath of Kinglass, with great Care,
which will remove the Glair and Sleckiness of
the Silk, being neceffary to make your Colours work
freely; melt the Hinglats in clear Water, fo as not
to be very glatinous, otherwife it would fpoil your Co-
lours and difcolour your Silk. Obferve your Lights are
to be made by  small Tint (mixt with Flake White)
of the Colour of the intended Flower, juft fufficient
to make  Degree from the Colour of the Silk: For
Inffance, if  Blue Flower,  very fmall Quantity of
Bice or Verditer mixt with the White, ufing less of
the White in proportion as the Shades grow darker;
Indico may be ufed alone in the darkeff Shades. Take
care never to lay your Colours on the Silk thick, as
then they will be apt to crack; to prevent which it
may be proper to mix  little Whire Sugar-Candy
with the Gum-Water. If your Flower is to deep as
not to admit of  pure Whice, in any Part, lay on 
priming of White, which being thoroughty dry, pro-
ceed to the ground Colour of the Flower, advancing
gradually with the Shades, as before directed.
    .


