



  
 ASSISTANT
IN
PAINTING on Giass,
DRAWINC,
PERSPECTIVE,
in CRAYONS, in Wa.
ETCHINC.
TER-CoLOvk , and
ENGRAVING.
on SIlks and SA .
MET INS.
SCRAPING.
CONTAININ 
The Eafieft and moft Comprehenfive RTLES
For the Attainment of thofe truly UsEryl and
POLITE AR  ,
Mechodically digelled,
And adapted to the Capacities of VouNC BEGINNERS.
ILLUSTR ATED WITH
Suitable ExaPLEs engraved on COPPER.

The FOURTH EDITION, Improved.




     .
Printed for . SAvEs and . BENNET, Map, Chart, Print-Sellers,
and Ciobe-Makers, No.  Fleet-freet, as the Ad direds.
MDCCLKENVI.

     .
 has ever been the Misforcune of those who
have profeffed to lay down Rules for the
Affainment of any Aft of Scieace, to leave
theim enveloped with Difficulties, which, if not
utterly infuperable, at leaff difcourage the Learner
from proceeding in  Study which he can have
Rrele Hopes will ever reward his Purfuit.
From hence we may realonably infer, that
the said Profeffors were focally unacquainted, it
not with the Theory, at leaft with the Praltical
Part of whar they undertook to reach others;
and that the inftructions they have given were
founded rather upon  bare Suppofition of their
Efficacy, than upon the furer Bafis of long and
repeared Experience, which alone could have
enfured
their Success, and from which, with
Deference to the Judicious (whofe
all due
Sanction we shall at all Times be ambicious to
deserve)
we may veature to anfwer for the
Practicabiliy of our own.
To obviste every Objection, and to remove
all thofe Difficulries which had to long blocked
up the Parh of Science, and recarded, if not
wholly impeded the Pupil, in his Progrets to the
Temple of Fame, was the chief View in com-
piling the subfequent lirtle Treacife.
Over
       
Over and above the improvements made in
 the feveral Arts hitherto to imper-
fectly and unintelligihly explained, we have
introduced Directions for Scraping, in Metzo-
tinlo, which, in this Edirion, are Hill farther en-
larged, and which, as they have never been be-
fore attempted in any Books of this Kind, we
Hatter ourfelves will be the more acceptable;
ospecially when it shall appear from the Rules
laid down for the Performance of this Art, that.

it is to eafy to be artained, that  tolerable Pro,
ficiency in Drawing will enable any one to un-
dertake it wih all imaginable Prospect of Suc
CCIs.

Tae Reader will alfo find, in this Impreffiony

the Addition of  very ufeful Problem, in the
rricde of Perspective, illuffrared by  new
Plate.
As this Book is chieffy intended for the Ufe
of young Practitioners, we have purpotely
avoided all abfirufe Expreftions and obfolete
Terms, concenting ourfelves with fuch  familiar
Style as we judged moft likely to inform thofe
Rinds we would with to improve Ver, as the
Ideas of an Artiff are not wholly to be conveyed
withour some neceffary Terms peculiar to each
Branch, we have taken Care to explain fuch as
could not be omitted without  manifelt Injury.
to the Work, by familiar Words of  fynoni=
mous Tendency, where-ever they occur; to that
we apprehend we have not left the leaft Stum.
bling-Block for the Reader to encounter.
INDEX.






  
 



      
    ts  
i .AP. Es.  DRAWING.


. General Rules for Drawing,.

Of Copying of Draughts,
 Enlarging and Cintretfing.

 Imitation of Life,
Of Drapery,
 Landscape,
 Light and Shade,
 History
as
 II
OF PERSPECTIVE,
 of the Terms used in Perspective,
 raife  Perpendicular,
 Way,
 draw  Parallel Line,
 divice  given Line into tws equal Parts,
 raife  Perpendicular at the End of  Line,
 turn  Circle through three grven Points,
Joid.
To draw an Oval.

Ihid.
Anotber Methed for an Oval,
 draw  square Pavemint,
Ibid.
T    .
Page
To food the Proportion of Objetts above the Horizen,
 same exemplified in Objects below the Horizon,
 draw  dirett Virw,
Bid.
To drow an obliqus Viru,
 drow  Viow with accidental Points
Bid.
To find the Center for the Reof of  House,
 III.
Of ETCHING.
 for laying the Ground,
Ibid.
Direttions for Tracing,
 for Elcbing,
 Biting, or eating in the Work with Aqua Fortis,   . IV.
OF ENGRAVINC,
Of wbetting and tempering the Graver,

 belding ibe Grover,
 for Engraving,
 .
Of MET for loying the Mctzstints-Greand.
 for whitting the Grounding-Isel,
 for Screping the Pillure,
Bid.
CHAP. VI.
Of PAINTING upor GlASS
 proper for Painting upon Glass,
 of using the Colours,
    
CHAP. VII.
Page
Of PAINTING In CRAYONS,
 for using them;
Bid.
   . VIII.
OF PAINTING in WATER-COLOURS,
 of the simple Colours,
Bid.
Direltions for mixed Colours,
 for ufing them,
 make Gum-Water,
 Way.
Bid.
To keep the Flies from your Work,
To make Liguid Gold,
Bbid.
To make Liguid Silver,
 make the Glare of Ezgss
Bid.
To recover Liguid Silver from Ruff,
 keep the Colours from sinking,
Iid.
To make Sixe for Candle-Light Pieces,
 recover Colours when decayed,
 IX.
Of PANTING On SIlks, SATTINS, .  
  

 HI 
ARTISTS ASSISTANT, &.
fofeefcf fo forfuf foof foesfolufessofessess efsessess
CHAP. .
OF DR  WIN .
  WIN  is the Art of reprefenting by
Outlines and Shadows the various Productions
of Nature and Aff, and of enlarging and con-
alling Objects in the moff exall Proportion.
This Art recalls to our Memory Things long fince
paft, and refcues from Oblivion the Deeds of our illu-
frious Anceffors, at the fame Time that it revives their
Image in our Mind, by preterving their Features for
many Generations. In  Word, it may be said to be
the filent, but moft expreffive Language of Nature,
which speaks to the Eye, is underffood by all Nations,
and conveys an Idea where even Words themfelyes
would prove deficient.
After giving some General Direclions for the Attain.
meat of this truly polite and rational Amufement, which
is the Bafis on which all the reff of the Arts depend, we
shall confider it more particularly under the following
Heads, and lay down the moft copious and inselligible
Rules for each refpellively, viz.
Copying of Draughts,
Dropery,
Enlarging and Contratting,
Landicape,
Imilation of Lifes
Light and Shadew,
Rissory,
The


 Implements neceffary for Drawing are; 
Ruler, Compaffes, Charcoal,  Blick Lead Pencil,
Penknife, Perte-Crayons, Black, White, and Red
Chalk, Crayons, Indian ink, Crow-Quill Pens, Ca-
mel' Hair Pencils, Firches, Paper of Several Sorts,
and Porte-Folios.
General Rales for Drawing.
Io HE firft Thing to be observed is the Choice of
proper Originals; and here we would recom-
mend Le Chres Principles of Drawing as the eafieft
and beft calculated for the Inftruction of Beginners.
This may be had, Price   at the Publifhers of
this Work.
Having provided this, begin with the Ouclines of
the feveral Features, as Eyes, Nofe, Mouch, Ears,
 as they occur in the Book, Pratife thefe often
over, till you are quice Maffer of them; then proceed
to  Profile or Side-Fage,, after they to an Oval or Full
Face; always remembering that each of thefe muft
be perfectly attained before you venture to proceed
further.
When you can copy  Face correcily, the next
Thing is, to draw the feveral Limbs or Parts of the
Body, as the Hands, Arms, Feet, Legs, E then
go on to the Body itfelf; which having done, you
will be able to undertake  whole Figure, obferving
carefully the exact Proportions and Bearings of offe
Part with refied to the other.
The Learner ought to be particularly, cautious that
he do not attempt  whole Figure before he has made
himfelf Mafter of the feveral Parts: for this is begihn-
ning the Work at the wrong End, and is indeed the
same Thing as if  Man should astempt to climb to
the Top of  Houfe without the Hels of the Staits.
A do 

 for Bealts, Birds, Fruit, Plants, &. we deem
it afeless to give Directions for drawing them, as it is
well known, that he who has to far improved his Ideas
 to be able io draw  Human Figure correctly, will
find it no Difficulty to perform every other Branch of
this Art.
Sketch or draw all your Outlines faintly, with 
Piece of foff Charcoal (which may be known by the
Pich in the Middle) cut to  Point like  Pencil; and
when you fee any Thing amiss, whilk it out with 
Handkerchief or Feather, corred your Erfors with 
Black-Lead Pencil, and compare your Work with the
Original, till every Part of them perfectly correspond.
This done, finith your Outlines with Black Lead of
Indian Ink. This Advice, properly aftended to, will
fave: you an infinite deal of Trouble, in drawing over
and over again, to your no (mall Difcouragement.
If you prefer Indian ink, rub it with Water upon
 Marble, and with  Crow-Quill Penperfest your Out.
lines: then rub out the Marks of the Pencil with
Bread.-Keep three or four different Shades of Ink
in the Hollows of your Stone, to diffinguith your
Diffances, referving one of the Holes for Water.
When you are thoroughly verfed in the Outlines,
your next Eufiness will be to learn to thadow: But of
this hereafter, under the Articles of Light and pade.
Be nottoohafly at firff fetring out, which will but
impede your Progress, and hinder your Improvement;
wheress, by beflowing  litle more Time, you will
attain Perfection fooner than you can well imagine,
and Expedition will come of itfelf as you becoms
more experienced,
B Copying of Draughts:
 you would copy  Print or Drawing
exactly of the fame ze, rub the Back of it
with the Duff of Red Chalk or Black Lead; lay this
upon your Paper, and pin if down at the four Cor-
ners; then with  blunt Point trace the Ouclines and
Breadths of the Shadows; which done, having care-
fully examined it, to fee that nothing be omitted, take
if off, and finith it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another Way t make an exalt Copy, and at the
same time to preferve the Original, is, to lay  Piece
of tranfparent Paper upon it, and draw the Ourlines
thercon with  Black-lead Pencil; then between that
and the Paper you intend to draw upon, place  Piece
of thin Polt-Paper, reddened or blackned at the Back;
after which, proceed to trace and finith it according to
the foregoing Rule.
If you would reverfe your Original, you need only
turn the tranfparent Paper, with the Drowing you
have made upon it, downwards upon the Poft-Paper,
and trace it as above direted.
Of Entarging and Contratting.
Ivide your Original with  Pair of Compaffes into
any Number of Squares, and rule them acrots
with  Blick-lead Pencil from Side to side, and from
Top to Bottom.
Then, having your Paper of the Size you intend,
divide it into the same Number of Squares, either big
ger of less,  you would enlarge or contrall il.
Place your Original before you, and draw Square
by Square the feveral Parts; obferving to make the
Part you are drawing fall into the same Part of the
Square as it does in your Original. To prevent Mif-
Cakes,


 
DRAWINGTLATE. Art .


 number the Squares both of the Original and
Copy, as in Fig. . and  of the Drawing-Plate.
Then outline it with Indian Iak, rub out the Marks
of the Pencil with Bread, and shade if at Pleafure..
Of Imitation of Life.
Ef the Perfon you draw after be of  properti-
ad onable Size, and well shaped; place him in the
cafieft and moft natural Accitude, then skeich faintly
with your Charcoal the Head, or any of the Limbs
separately; which having carefully done, proceed to
finith with your Pencil.
When you have fufficiently practifed the feveral
Parts or Limbs, you may draw the whole Figure, in
whatever Attitude you think proper to place it; be-
ginning with the eafieff, and proceeding by degrees
to the more difficult Poftures, as Time and Experi-
ence shall enable you.
Be fure to finith your Outline fo correcdly, (mark-
ing all the Mufcles as they occur) that, even before
you give it any Shadow, it may have some Refem-
blance of the Perfon.
The true Proportion which one Part of  Human
Figure bears to another, may be feen in Fig. III.
which will ferve as  Standard to examine your Draw-
ing by; except where the Figure is to be fore-fhort-
ened, in which Cafe Nature will be the beft Guide.
in drawing of  Likeness, Care muft be taken to
express the Paffions in the moft lively manner; which
is to be done by obferving the peculiar Caft and Dif
pofition of every Feature with the exacieft Nicety:
And as this is, of all the Parts of Drawing, by far
the moft difficult, it will require  more than ordi-
nary Attention, and should be laft attempred.
B Drapery.
RAPERY is the Art of Cleathing your Figares

with Elegance and Propriety.
When your naked Figure is outlined, firft draw the
Outlines of the Drapery lighly, then the greater Folds,
and afterwards the leffer; obferving never to let them
Grots each other.
Particular Regard is to be had to the Quality of the
Drspery; as the Folds of Sruff or Woollen Cloth are
more abrupt and harfh, and thofe of silk more flowing
and eaty. Linen, Cambrick, Gauze, Ec. as their Sub-
ftance is lighter than either, require  Hill greater Deli-
cacy in expreffing the waving of the Folds, by the Faint-
nets of their Shadows.
The Drapery should not ftick too clofe to the Body,
but muft feem to flow round as it were; yet in such
 Manner, as that the Motion of the Figure may he
free and ealy.  great Lighiness and Motion of the
Drspery should only be ufed, when the Figures are
suppoted to be in much Agitation, or expoted to the
Wind; but im  calm Place, and free from violent
Acdion, their Drapery should be large and flowing; in
order to give them  more graceful Appearance.
Let the loofe Parts of the Drapery blown by the
Wind all fow one Way; and draw that Part which
lies clofeft to the Body, before you draw thofe which
Ry off.
Suit your Garments to the Body, and make them
bend with it: The clofer the Garment fticks to the
Body, the narrower and fmaller muft be the Folds.;
and if it fits quite clofe, there will be no Folds at all.
but muft only have  faint Shadow, to reprefent the
Part of the Body which lies under it.
By


 obferving diligently in what Manner the Drapery
fows upon any Perfon ffanding or fitting before you
for that purpofe, you will fee in what Manner to dif-
Pote your Folds and Shadows, according to the uner-
ring Rule of Nature.
Of Landfcape.
ANDDSCAPE reprefents the Face of the Country selit

appears to our View, with all the various Objects
analogous thereto; as Towns, Caffles, Churches,
Houfes, Trees, Hills, Cartle, Riners, Rocks, Ruins,
C careful to augment or leffen every Object ac-
cording to its Diffance, making the moff remofe ob-
jelts fainter and lets diffinet, as they appear to the
Eye, and enlarging them proportionably as they ad-
Vance nearer.
Shew the Sky cloudy of clear, as Occafion re-
quires; and if you introduce the Sun, let it be rifing
of fetting; either of which Reprefentations will give
an additional Grace to your Picture, as they repre-
tent Nature in its livelieff and moff agreeable Ap-
Pearance.
Adapt every Part of your Landicape to the Seafon
of the Year, and the Time of the Day you intend it
to reprefent; and difpofe your Lights and Shades with
confiftent Propriety.
Laftly, we would recommend it to Practitioners in
this noble Art, to rife early in  fine Morning that
they may have  better Idea of the Harmony and
Beauty of the Works of the Great Creator, which
would wonderfully replenith their Minds, as to Co-
lour and Effect.
O Light and Shade.
MaHE true Destribation of Light and Shade in 
Picdure is abfolucely necelfary to be known;
as it not only determines the proper Diftance of one
Object from another, without which the whole
would be an undiftinguithable Mass of Confution,
but it gives likewife to each refpeetive Object its
Subffance, Roundnets, and Effect.
Shadowing is performed with the Pen or Pencil;
in either of which great judgement is required.
Having made your Ourlines correct, the firft thing
is to obferve from which side of the Original the
Light comes in; which; if natural, is either from
the Right Hand or Left; for whenever the Light ap-
pears in the Middle of  Pidure, and teems to glare
more than ordinary,  is cauted by  Candle, 
Lamp, of fome other laminous Body, and is called
an artificial Light.
Lay on your little Tints firft, difpoting them as you
fee they are done in the Original; and then proceed
to the decper ones, fill you come to the darkeft Parts
of all: For you may at any Time darken your Shadows,
when you cannot lighten them.
Let all your Shadows in the same Piece fall on the
same Side; that is, if the Rightfide of  Man' Face
be dark, to muft be the Right-fide of his Body, rm,
Leg, Thigh,  But if the light fide be darkened
by the Opposiion of some other Body intercepting the
Light, it muft receive  contrary Shadow.
Make your Shadows fainter as they grow towards the
Light, breaking them gradually, that they may not ap-

pear too fadden or harth.
If you fhide with Black-lead or with Crayons, you
may blend your Shadows, and foften them one into ano-
ther as you require, with  Stump made of Paper of
Glove-


 
Glove-Leather, rolled and cied hard, and cut almoff to
the Point, with which you may allo weaken your Shades
Where they are too frong.
When one Part of the Body projets over or before
another, the Part projecting muft, receive  fronger
Light: Thole Parts that bend inward, muft be made to
much the darker, and thadowed decpelt next the Light.
Two equal Lights muft never be made in the fame
Picture: The frongeff Light should fall upon the Mid-
dle of the Piece, (where the principal Figures ought to
stand) diminithing gradually towards the Extremities.
By frequently examining into Nature, you will have
an Opportunity of improving your Ideas of Light and
Shade, and will be enabled to form  proper Judgment
of the Effect which the different Rays or Degrees of
Light will produce in  Picture; for which Reafon you
should never let slip an Opportunity of remarking the
Various Appearances you meet with.
Of Hiftory.
   Branch of Drawing prefents to our View
Things paft, prefent, and future.
An Hifforical Picture muft describe the Tranfaction
reprefented, in  Manner to clear and confpicuous, as
to convey an Idea of it to our Minds, as fully as could
be done by  verbal Oefcription. And Care muff be
taken to preserve fuch an Analogy or Connection be-
tween the Figures, that not one may seem to be intro-
duced but for some End or Purpofe. And  in Drs-
matic Wriing; it is effential to make every Perton
peak confifient with the Part he reprefents, to here it
will be equally neceffary to obferve the same Propriety
of Character; and make every Figure foot the Sentiment
it is intended to express.
CHAP.


 
 II.
Of PERSPEC TIVE.
ERSPECTIVE is the Art of delineating Objects
(as they appear in Nature upon  plain Sur-
face) according to their Dillance and Height
perpendicular to the Horizon, between the Object and
the Exc.
This Art is of great confequence to thofe who would
exeel in Drawing, Erching, Engraving, Carving in
Bas-Relief, or Painting; for being well underftood,
the Arriff will be enabled to know when to adhere to
the firid Rules, and when to depart from them with
Propriety.
Explanation of the Ferms used in Perspettive.
. DASE, or Fundamental Line, is the Bottom-Ling
of the Drawing on which the Perfon is fuppoted
to Hand, with his Face towards the Point of Sight.
 Perpendicalar is  Line drawn upright with rer
foed to any Part of the Bate.
 Parallel Lines are Lines cquidiftant from each 
 as the Horizon to the Bafe.
 Horiam is the moft diftant Part of  Plain,
where the Clouds, feeming to touch the Earth, limis
the Sight. The Horizental Line gives the Height of
the Eye; for we cannot fee any thing above the Ho-
izon which does not exceed this Height: Vet the
Summit


 
Summit of  Mountain may be above the Horizon,
though its Foot be far beneath it.
:Point of Sight is that Part of the horizental Line
where all the vifual Rays center in  Point.
 Visual Rays are Beams of Light cenveying the
Likenets of any Object to the Eve or Sight, and the
Knowledge thereof to the Mind or Underflanding.
 Point of Diffance are fuppoted Points fet off on
the horizontal Line, at equal Diftances on each Side the
Point of Sight.
 Diagonol Lines are thofe drawn from the Points of
Diffance to the Extremities of the Bafe Line.
 fbridgment of the Square is the Line where the
Disgonals interfect or cross the vifual Rays, and muft
always run parallel to the Bafe. It is only made where
the Sight is limised by  Perpendicular, as the farther
End of  Church, Hall, Room, &. And fuppoling
 Perfon to fland thereon,  parallel Line drawn through
the Point of Sight will seem to pats through the Eyes,
and will confequently shew what fleight that Perion
ought to be.
The nine foregoing Definitions are illuffrated in
Fis. . of the Perspective Plate.
 Point of direct View. This is nothing mere
than the Front View of  Houfe, Church, &. or
in other Words,  Geometrical Elevation raifed from
 Plan of Ground Plot, and comprehending an equal
Space on both Sides of the Point of Sight. See
FiE. XIv
 Point of oblique View, is when we fee the Ob-
jet fideways of allant. Example. Suppofe  Perton
was to draw  View of  Canal with some remarkable
Building he is defirous to thew more diffinct, he muff
place himself (on the Bafe or Fundamental Line) op-
pofite to that Building, that the Ray of Light may be
more oblique; by which means the admired Building
will be less fore thortened, and appear to greater Advan-
 the Points of Sight being fill before him, though
not in the Middle of the Picdure. See Fis. KV.
 Aecidental Points are thote where Objects end in
the horizental Line, but neither in the Points of Sight
of Diftance, and feive for Streets, Houfes, Chairs,
Roads, &. which take different Directions. As for
Example: Suppofe . Street leading to the Point of
Sight, and from it two others branch, the one on the
Right Hand, the other on the Lef, and take  diffe-
rent Direction; thefe two laft Streets make what we
call accidental Points, terminating in some Part of the
horixontal Line, on each Side of the Point of Sight.
See Fig. XVl. The same is to be obferved in  Grove,
Park, &. where the Walk you are in directs imme-
diately to the Point of Sight, and the Avenues branch-
ing out on either side terminate alfo in different Parts
of the Horizon.
Icbnograpby is the Plan or Ground-Plor of any Object
that is to be raifed in Perspective.
Scenograpby is the rt of bringing any Thing railed
in Perspective from an Ichnographick Plan to its due
Propoition, according to the Diftance in which it is
placed; that all Objects may be diminithed according to
their Diftance in  Pilture, in the same Degree as they
are diminifhed by Diftance in  natural Prosped. 
Scenographic View may be either dised, as in Fig. Kiv.
of oblique, as in Fig. XV.
 the Art of Perspetive is contiructed upon Geo-
£ metrical Principles, it will be neceitary, previous
to the Rules themfeives, to learn the following intro-
dultory Operations.
 From  Point in  given Line RE, to raife 
Perpendicuiar. See Fig. II.
Draw with the Ruler the given Line  ; then fet
one Foot of your Compaffes in , and extending them
 rather more than half the Length of the Line  ,
sweep the Arch ed; and with the same Extent of Com-
paffes fef one Point in , and fweep the Arch ef; then,
without altering the Compaffes, fet one Foot in ss
and describe the Arch by; next rule through the Points
egs to interfect the Arch bi in  and draw the Line
from  to , which is the Perpendicular required.
 nother Way. See Fiz. III.
From the Point  take the equal Diftances  Band
  on each fide of it, then fretch the Compaffes to
any Diffance greater than   or  , and with one
Foot of them in  sweep the Arch de; then, with
the same Extent of the Compaffes, fet one Point in .
tweep the Arch yg; and thefe two Arches will inter-
felt each other in the Point , from which  Line
drawn to the Point , is the Perpendicular required.
 To draw one Line parallel (or equidiftant) to another
given Line  . See Fiz. IV.
Extend your Compaffes to the Diftance of the Paral-
lel you require; then with one Foot in any Point of
the given Line, as in , defcribe the Archde. Again,
without allering the Compaffes, fix one Foot in any
other Point, as in , and sweep the Arch gh; then
rule the Line IK, rouching the ourward Parts of the
two Arches, and that will be the Parallel to the given
Line.
 To bisell or divide  grven Line RB, into two equal
Parts. See Fig. .
Take with your Compalfes any Diltance greater than
half the given Line; then, with one foot of them in ,
tweep the Arch ec; and with the fame Diftance, fer-
ring one Foor in , (weeg the Arch dd; and thefe
Arches will interfect each other in the Points gt;
which


 joined by  Perpendicular, will interfect AB in
the middle Point .
 Upon the End  of  given Line RB, to raife &
Perpendicular. Sec Fiz. Vi.
Place one Foot of the Compaffes in , and extend
them to any Point  without the given Line; then fet
one Foor of them in , and turn the Circle de and ,
and through de draw the Dismeter acc, meeting the
Circle in , join Ac, and that right Line is the Per-

pendicular required.
 To turn the Circle through any three given Paimts not
in  right Linc. See Fig. Vil.
Fix three Points at any Diffance you think proper,
as at   and , and join them by the right Lines AB
and Bt; then by Fig. . bifed the Line  Bwish the
Line des which done, bifell the Line BC with the
Line fe; and from the Center , where thefe Lines
meet, extend your Compaffes to , and defcribe the
Cucle ABCG.
 To drow on Oval. See Fis. VIII.
Draw  given Line  , which divids into four .
qual Parts; fet one Foot of the Compaffes at , and
from that Center defcribe  Circle ee; with the same
Exrent of Compaffes place one Foot in the Center ,
and turn the Circle yf; then with one Foot fill in ,
extend your Compaffes, and turn the rch gg; and
with the same Extent, placing one Foor in , describe
the Arch  join the Interfections with  Perpendi-
cular from  to ; next, place one Foot of the Com-
paffes in , fweep the Arch LL, and without allering
them, fer one Foot in  and defcribe the Arch MAT.
 nother


 
 Another Melbed for an Oval. See Fiz. IX.
Draw  given Line AD, and with the Compaffes
extended, placing one Foot in , with the other turn
the Circle ce; then, without alering your Compalfes,
on the Line AD, in the fuppofed Point , (weep the
Circle  and through the Points ggs where the two
Circles interfed, draw the Perpendicular bis then fix
your Compaffes with one Foot in  and extend them
To as to describe the firch ix to the lower Extremities
of the Citcles; then, with the same Extent, with one
Foot in  tweep the Arch  to join the upper Ex-
fremiries.
By thefe Examples it will appear, that an Oval of any
Form, of Size may be confiructed at Pleature, only ta-
King care always to fix the Compaffes equidiflant from
the given Line   in the Perpendicular  Examples in Perfpettive.
 To draw  square Pourment in Perspettive. See
Fiz. . and Xl.
UPPOSE your Piece of Pavement to confift of  of Marble, each  Foot (quare. Vour
firff Bufiness is, to draw an Ichnographical Plan of
Ground Plot of it, which is thus performed. Having
made an exact Square of the Size you intend your
Pian, divide the Bate and Horizon into eight equal
Parts, and from every Divifion in the Bafe to its oppo-
fite Point in the Herisen, rule Perpendicular Lines;
then divide the Sides into the Jame Number, ruling pa-
rallel Lines acrots from Peint to Point; to will your
Pavement be divided inte  square Feet; becaufe the
eight Feet in Length, mulciplied by the fame in Breadth,
five the Number of (quare Feet or Pieces of Marble
contained in the whole: then rule Disgonals from
Corner


  to Corner; and thus will your Ground Plob
appear as in Fis. .
Now, to lay this in Perfpeltive, draw another Square
to your intended Size, and divide the Bate, Line AB
into eight equal Parts, as before; then fix your Point
of Sight , in the Middle of the Horizon DE,, and
from the same Point rule Lines to every Divilion in the
Bate  ; after which, ruls disgonal Lines from 
to , and from  to , anfwerable to thofe in the
Ground-Plot, and your Square will be reduced to the
Triangle  BC; then from the Point , where the
Disgonal DB interfets the Line AC, to the oppos
fire Interfection , where the Disgonal   croffes the
Line CB, rule  parallel Line, which is the Abridg-
ment of the Square.
Then through the Points where the Disgonals crofs
the reft of the Lines, which go from the Bafe to the
Point of Sight, rule parallel Lines, and your Square
Pavement will be laid in Perspective, as in Fig. XI.
 To find the Height and Preportion of any Objects, as
they appear above the Herizon, on  jupposed Plane.
See Fiz. XII.
Firff, rule your horizental Line NO, and fix your
Point of Sight, as at ; then mark the Place of your
neareff Pillar, by making  Dot for the Bate or Bot-
rom, as at ; and another for the Summit or Top,
as at : Rule  Line from  to the Point of Sight
, and another from Bro , and thefe two Lines
will give the Height of any Number of Pillars. As
for Example: Suppose you would have  Pillar at .
fix your Dot for the Bafe, and rule from thence  pa-
rallel Line to meet the Diagonal AM at : then
rule the Perpendicular DE to the Disgonal BM:
which Perpendicular is the Height of your Figure fe-
quired at . Or, if you would place Pillars at  and
 obferve the same Method, ruling the Parallets FG
and


 Ik, and the Perpendiculars Gll and KL will
give their Heights at the Diftances required.
To find the Diameter of Thickness of Pillars at
any particular Diftances, you are allo to be guided by
that neareft the Bafe. For inftance. Suppofe your
neareft Pillar   to be ten Feet high and one Foot
in Diameter : divide it from Top to Bottom into ten
equal Parts, and fet off one of them upon the Bafe of
the Pillar: then rule  Line from the Point of Sight 
to the Diameter ; and you will have the Thickness
of all your Pillars on their respective Parallels of
Bales.
 The same Rule exemplified in Objects below the
Herizen. See Fig. XIII.
If you would know the Heights of  Number of
Figures below the Hofizon, rule. your horizental Line
LR, and fix your Point of Sight, as at : then
place your neareft Figure, or mark the Dots for the
Head and Feet, by the Points  and , which an
fivers the same Purpofe; and rule from thefe Dots to
the Point of Sight the Lines  Pand BP: and if you
would find the Height of  Figure to be drawn at ,
rule from thence the Parallel ed to the Diagonal BP,
and the Perpendicular de will give the Height re-
quired. The fame Directions will thew the Height
of  Fizure at any other Diffance you have  Mind to
place it, as at ,  and , by ruling the Parallels  .
 and ma. and from each of thefe their respective
Perpendiculars  &, and no: which Perpendicu-
lars will fhew the Heights of the Figures at . ,
and .
 To draw  dirett View. See Fig. XIV.
To illuffrate this Example, fuppofe you were to
draw the Infide of  Church, as reprefented in this
Figure: Firlt, take your Station at the Point , in
the


 Center of the Bafe Lint BC: from which you
have  Front View of the whole Body of the Church,
with all the Pillars, E on each Side: then fix your
Horizon at any Height you think proper, as at DE:
bifed it by the Perpendicular  : and where thefe
two Lines inserfed, is the Point of Sight . (This
Perpendicular will pats through the Centers of all the
Arches in the Dome of Cupola. which Centers may
be found by any three given Points,. as in Fig. Vil.)
Next divide your Bafe Line into any given Number
of Feet; and the vifual Lines ruled from thefe Di-
vifions to the Point of Sight, will reduce all your
Objects to their juft Proportion, by fetting off their
Height upon  Pernendicular raifed at their respective
Diftances. The Bafe, in the Example here given,
is divided into twelve equal Parts of five Feet each;
from which (luppoting your Front Column to be
Feet high) take feven Divifions from the Bafe
 of your Drawing, and fet them off upon the
Perpendicular GH; then suppoling this Column to
be five Feet thick at the Bafe) fer off one of thote
Divifions upen the Parallel Ik, which is the Breadsh
required. So that, by proportioning this Scale to any
Diffance by the foregoing Directions, you may not
only find the Dimentions of all your Columns, but
alfo of every ciffind Part of them, as well as of all
the Doors, Windows, and other Objects that occur.
For Inftance. Having found the Height and Breadth
of your firff or neareff Column , draw from the
Top and Bortom of the faid Column to the Point of
Sight the Lines HIF and KF; after which, rule the
Line  from the Bafe of the Column to the Point
of Sight, and you have the Height and Breadsh of all
the reft of the Columns, as has been already thewn
in Fig. XII.
By fuling Lines from the Points , , , , &.
to the Point of Sight, you will fee that all the Sum-
miss


 and Bafes of your Columns, Doors, Windowss
C muft tend immediately to that Point; and by
Lines drawn from the Points     Ec. on
each side, to the correpondent Points on the oppo-
fire side, may be feen all the Parts of your Building
lying upon the same Parallel.
. To draw an oblique View. See Fis. XV.
Firft, draw your horizental Line  ; then, if
your favourite Object be on the Right Hand, as at .
place yourself on the Left Hand upon the Bafe Line,
as af ; then from that Station erect  Perpendicu
lar DE, which will pats through the Horizon at the
Point of Sight ; to which rule the Diagonals GF
and tlF, which will shew the Roof and Bafe of your
principal Building , and will allo, as before directed,
ferve as  Standard for all the reft.
Obferve alfo, either in direct or oblique Vews, whe-
ther the Prospect before you make  Curve; for if it
does, you mult be careful to make the same Curve in
your Drawing.
 To draw  Perspective View, wherein are accidental
Points. See Fiz. XVI.
Rule your horizontal Line ab, and on one Part of
it fix your Point of Sight, as at ; from which rule
the Diagonals ed and ce, on the one fide, and of and
Cg on the other; which will shew the Roofs and Bafes
of all the Houfes in the Street directly facing you;
(suppoting yourtelf placed at  in the Center of the
Bafe Line:) Then fix your accidental Points  and  the horizontal Line, and rule from them to the
Angles if and (, (where the Streets on each Side
take  different Direction, towards the accidental
Points  and  and the Lines gi and gt give the
Roofs and Bafes of all the Buildings on one fide, as
ib and mb do on the other.
C Points feldom intervene where the Dif
tance is ismall, as in Noblemens Seats, Groves, Ca-
nals, Coc. which may be drawn by the Hrid Rules of
Perspective: but where the Prospect is extenfive and
varied, including Mountains, Bridges, Caltles, Rivers,
Precipices, Woods, Cities, ( it will require fuch an
infinite Number of accidental Points, that it will be
better to do them as Nature shall dictate, and your
ripened Judgment approve.
 To find the Center for the Roof of  House, in an
oblique View. See Plate IV.
Suppose from the Point of Sight , the vifual Lines
BA and AC be drawn, BC being one Perpendicular
given, and DE the other, rule the Disgonals from 
 , and from  to , and the Perpendicular FG,
raited through the Point of their Inserfection, will fhew
the true Center of the Roof, as will appear by ruling
the Lines GEand GC.
For want of being acquainted with this necellary
Rule, many who have been well verfed in other Parts
of Perfredive, have spoiled the Look of their Picture,
by drawing the Roofs of their Houles out of their true
Perpendicular.
CHAP.



HFD
  ER

fot cloclalefof
sl   ffforf of of


Fana

 AP. III.
OF ETCHING.
ATCHING is  Method of working on Copper
wherein the Lines of Strokes, inftead of being
 cut with  Graver, are eaten with Aqua Fortis.
This Art, being executed with greater Eafe and
Freedom than Engraving, reprefents curious Subjects
better, and more agreeable to Nature, as Landicapes,
Ruins, and fmall, faint, or remote Objects, Build-
ings, Ec.
The principal Materials for this Art are the Plate,
hard and foff Ground (the firft for Winter, and the
other for Summer),  Dabber, Turpentine-Varnifh,
Lamp-Black, foft Wax, and Aqua Fortis.
The Tools are, an Oil-Rubber,  Burnifher,   Hand Vice, Erching-Boards, Etching-
Needles, an Oil-Stone, and  Parallel Ruler.
The Plate may be had of any Size, and well po-
lithed, fit for Ufe, of the Copperimiths in Landon.
Direftions for laying the Ground.
AVING provided yourfelf with  Plate of the
 size of the Print or Drawing you intend to
copy, rub it well with an Oil-Rubber made of Swan-
KKin Flannel, till all the Marks of the Charcoal ufed
in polithing it, intirely difappear; then, wiping off
the dirty Oil with  Linen Rag, dip your Finger in
some
✓ lean Oil, and touch it over every Part of the
Plate; after which, with your Burnither polith the
Plate, ill you can fee your Face in it: And in cate
any Sand-Holes or Plaws appear, the Scraper will af-
fift you in taking them out. The Marks left by the
Scraper are to be taken out with the Burnifher, till
nothing appear. Having fixed your Hand-Vice at
one End of the Plate, with  Rag and Whiring clear
the Plate carefully from Greafe; then heat it over 
Charcoal Fire, or lighied Paper, till it will melt the
Ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and dabbed
ail over with the Dabber, till it is perfectly fmooth
and even; then warm the Plate again, and holding
it up with the Ground downwards, fmoak it all over
with  large Candle, taking Care that the Snuff of it
do not fouch the round, and waving the Candle
continually over every Part, to that the Ground may
not be burnt by heating it more in one Place than
another. If the Place be large, you may bind four
Penny Candles together.
Direttions for Tracing.
TyHE firff Thing to be done, (while the Plate is

cooling, affer the Ground is laid) is to rub the
Back of your Print of Drawing all over with  Bir of
Rag of Cotton, dipt in the Scrapings of Red Chalk,
and shake off the leofe Duff, or wipe it off gently
with  clean Rag. Place the Red Side upon the Plate,
making it fall at each Corner with  litle Bir of foft
Wex. Lay your Erching-Board under your Hand,
to prevent bruifing the Ground; then with  blunt
Erching-Needle trace lighrly the Outlines and Breadrhs
of the Shadows, fil: the Marks of them appear upon
the Ground, which you muft take Care not to pene-
Wale by tracing too hard.
AS


  great Nicety is required in this Part of your
Work, it will be neceffary now and then to lift up
one Corner of your Original, and examine whether
every Part be traced before you take it off, as it will
be extremely difficult to lay it down again in its former
Pofition.
Directions for Eiching.
AVING carefully traced your Original, take it
I of, and lay  silk or Linen Handkerchief nem
the Plate, and over that your Edging-Board; then
proceed to the Erching; for which obferve the fol-
lowing Directions, which are adapted to every particu-
lar Branch, as Landicapes, Shipping, Portrails, Hiffory,
Archilecture, Coc.
Diffances in Landlcapes, of the faint Parts of any
other Picture, are the firft to be done; and thefe are
to be worked clofer, and with  fharper-pointed
Needle: The darker Parts muff be eiched wider, and
with  blunter Needle; but, to prevent Miftakes, the
Needles may be marked, according to their different
Degrees, and the UUfes for which they are intended.
As for the very fainteff Parts of all, they are to be
left for the Graver, or dry Needle; of which here-
after.
in Building, and all Architecture in general, ufe 
Parallel Ruler, till frequent Practice enables you to
do them well enough without.
The Needles may, when neceffary, be whetted
upon your Oil-Stone, keeping them turning in your
Hand, to as to whet them equally all round. The
Oil-Stone will be further ufeful in whetring the Sera-
per, which is to be rubbed flat upon the Stone, and
with  fleady Hand, keeping Oil conflanly upon the
Stons.
Of
C 
Of Biling, or ealing in the Work with Aqua Fertis:
TIRST examine your Work carefully, to fee that
 nothing be omitted ; and if any Scratches appear
upon the Ground, or Miftakes he committed in the
Etchings, they are to be ftopped out, which is done by
covering them with  Mixture of Lamp Black and
Varnith, laid on thinly with  Hair Pencil, which,
when dry, will refiff the Aqua Fortis. But it will
be beft to fop out thefe, as they occur to you in the
Courfe of your Work, for by this Means they will be
lets liable to elcape your Notice; and when the Vars
with is dry, you may etch over it again, if required.
The next Thing is, to inclofe the Work with 
Rimor Border of foff green, or other coloured Wax,
about Half an Inch high, bending the Wax in the
Form of  Spout  one Corner, to pour off the Aqua
Fortis: And that it may not run out at any other
Part, take care to lay your Wax fo clofe to the Plate,
that no Vacancies be left.
Your Aqua Fortis muft be fingle, and if too ffrong,
as will be feen in the Biting, take it off, and mix it
with  little Water, thaking them together in  Bot-
ile; and when, by often ufing, it becomes too weak,
it may be firengthened by mixing, it in  Bottle with
 little double Aqua Fortis. The Bottle which con-
gains the Aqua Fortis should have  large Moyth, and
 Glats Stopple.
Let the Agua Fortis he on the Plate  fhort Time,
wiping off the Bubbles, as they arife, with  Feather,
which may remain upon the Place while it is biting;
after which, take it off, and wath the Plate with Wa-
ter; then let it dry, and by fcraping off Part of the
Ground from the fainteff Part of the Work, try if it
be bit enough; and if not, fop out the Part you
have


 tried with the Lamp-Black and Varnish; and
when that is dry, pour on the Aqua Fortis again.
When the faint Parts of your Work are bit enough,
stop them out, and proceed to bite the ftronger Parts,
Ropping them out as Occafion requires, till the whole
Work is fufficiently bit; Then warm the Plate, and
take off the foff Wax; after which, heat the Plate
till the Ground melts, pour on  little Oil, and wipe
the whole off with  Rag. When the Ground  off, rub the Work well with the Oil-Rubber,
and wipe the Plate clean; then proceed to finith it
with the Graver, according to the following Dis
rettions.
CHAP.



 IV.
Of ENGR  VINC.
Ot THE Tools neceftary for Engraving are, the
Oil-Rubber, Burnither, Scraper, Oil-StORE,
 and Ruler, already mentioned to be
ufed in Erching; allo Gravers, Compafies, and 
Sand-Bas.
Gravers are of two Sorts, (quare and lozenge;
three of each Sort should be provided. The firft is
afed in cutring the broader Strokes, the other for the
fainter and more delicate. No Graver should exceed
the Length of Five laches and  Half, the Handle in-
cluded, excepting for frait Lines.
The Sand-Bag, or Cuthion, is ufed to lay the Plate
on, for the Conveniency of turning it about. The
Oil-Etone mult be of the Turkey Sort.
Of abelting and tempering the Graver.
 great Pains are required to whet the Graver
£ mcely, paracularly the Belly of it, Care muft
be taken to lay the two angles of the Graver, which
are to be held next the Plate, fist upon the Stone,
and rub them ffeadily til they are polifhed like  Mir-
ror, and till the Belly rifes gradually above the Plate,
to as that, when you lay the Graver flat upon it, you
may juft perceive the Light under the Point; other.
wife it will dig into the Copper, and it will be impot.
lible


  to keepd Point, or execute the Work with Free-
dom. In order to this, keep your Right Arm clofe
to your Side, and place the Fore Finger of your Left
Hand upon that Part of the Graver which lies upper-
moft on the Stone. When this is done, in order to
whet the Face, place the flat part of the Handle in
the Hollow of your Hand, with the Belly of the
Graver apwards, upon  moderate Slope, and rub the
Extremity of Face upon the Stone, till it has an ex-
ceeding fharp Point, which you may try upon your
Thumb Nail. The Oil-fone, while in Ufe, muft
never be kept without Oil.
When the Graver is too hard, as is ufually the
Cafe when firft bought, and may be known by the
frequent breaking of the Point, the Method of tem-
pering the Steel is as follows:
Heat  Poker red-hot, and hold the Graver upon it
within Half an Inch of the Point, waving it to and
fro till the Steel changes to  light Straw-Colour;
then put the Pont into Oil to cool: Or, hold the
Graver clofe to the Flame of  Candle, till it be of
the fame Colour, and cool it in the Tallow: Bur be
careful either Way not to hold it too long, for then
it will be too foff; and in this cafe the Point, which
will then turn blue, muft be broken off, and wherred
afreth, and tempered again, if required. But be not
too hafty in tempering; for fometimes 
little wher-
ting will bring it to  good condition.
Of holding the Graver
WUT off that Part of the Handle which is upon
 the same Line with the Belly, or fharp Edge of
the Graver, making that Side fat, that it may be no
Obstruction.
Hold the Handle in the Hollow of your Hand;
and extending your Fore-Finger towards the Point,
 it reft upon the back of the Graver, that you may
suide it ffat, and parallel with the Plate.
Take Care that your Fingers do not interpofe be-
tween the Plate and the Graver; for they will pre-
vent you from carrying the Graver level with the Plate,
and from cutring your Strokes to clean as they ought
 De.
Direttions for Engraving.
Er the Table or Board you work at be firm and
as Ready; upon which place your Sand Bag with
the Place upon it; and holding the Graver as above
directed, proceed to Bufiness in the following Man-
Ner.
For frait Strokes, hold your Plate firm upon the
Sand Bag with your Left Hand, moving your Right
Hand forwards; leaning lignter where the Stroke
should be fine, and harder where you would have it
Brosder.
For circular or crooked Strokes, hold the Graver
Rediaff, moving your Hand or the Plate, as you fee
convenient.
Learn to carry your fland with fuch  Sleight, that
you may end your Stroke as finely as you began it;
and if you have Occation to make one Part deeper or
blacker than another, do if by Degrees. And that
you may do it wich greater Exacdnets, take Care that
your Strokes be not too clofe, nor too wide.
In the Courte of your Work, fcrape off the Barb
of Roughness which arifes, with the Belly of your
Graver; but be careful, in doing this, not to feratch
the Plare: And that you may fee your Work pro-
perly as you go on, rub it with the Oil-Rubber, and
wipe the Piate clean, which will take off the Glare of
the Copper, and fhew what you have done to the beft
RCVantage.
Any


 Miftakes or Scratches in the Plate may be rub-
bed out wtih the Burnifher, and the Part levelled with
the Scraper, polifhing it again afterwards lightly with
the Burnither.
Having thus attained the Ufe of the Graver, ac.
cording to the foregoing Rules, you will be able to
finith the Piece you had etched, by graving up the
feveral Parts to the Colour of the Original, begin-
ning, as in the Erching, with the fainter Parts, and
advancing gradually with the fironger, till the whole
is compleated.
The dry Needle (to called becaufe not ufed till the
Ground is taken off the Plate) is principally employed
in the extreme light Parts of Water, Sky, Drapery,
Architecture, EoC.
For your firft Practice, copy fuch Prints a are
openly shaded; the more finithed ones being too diffi-
cult, till you have gained farther Experience.
Great Choice of Prints of every Kind, fit for young
Beginners, may be had where this Book is publifhed.
. . To prevent any Obftraction from too great
 Degree of Light, we would recommend the Ufe of
 Safh, made of tranfparent of Fan-Paper, pafted on  and placed floping at  convenient Diftance
between your Work and the Light. This will not
only preserve the Sight, but, when the Sun fhines,
cannot poffibly be dispented with.
CHAP.



 .
Of METZOTINTO-SCRAPING.
 Art, which is of late Date, is recom-
 to the Praltice of the ingenious Read-
er, for the amazing Eafe with which it is exe-
cuted, especially by thofe who have any Notion of
Drawing.
Metzofinto Prints are thofe which have no Hatch-
ing or Strokes of the Graver, but whofe Lights and
Shades are blended together, and appear like  Draw-
ing of Indian Ink.
The Tooks ufed in this Art are,
The Copper-Plate, Oil-Stone,
Grounding-Tools,
Scrapers, Burnither, and Needles.
Direttions for laying the Metzotinto-Ground.
 RK off upon the Boffom of the Plate the
IVl Dillance you intend to leave for the Writing,
Coat of Arms, Gc. then, laying your Plate with 
Piece of Swantkin Flannel under if, upon your Table,
hold the Grounding- Tool in your Hand perpendicu-
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, confinually rock-
ing your Hand in  right Line from End to End, fill
you have wholly covered the Plate in one Direction.
Next cross the Strokes from Side to Side, afterwards

from Corner to Corner, working the Tool each Iime
all



 over the Plate, in every Direction, almoft like the
Points of  Compass; taking all poffible Care not to
let the Toul out (in one Direction) twice in  Place.
This done, the Plare will be full, or, in other Words;
all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear completely black.
Having laid the Ground, take the Scrapings of
Black Chalk, and with  Piece of Rag rub it over the
Plate or you may, with twoer three Candles, fmoke
it, as before directed for Erching.
Now, take your Print or Drawing, and having
rubbed the Back with Red-Chalk Duff, mixed with
White Lake, proceed to trace it, as directed Page  for whetting the Grounding-Tool.
  Tooth of the Tool should break, it may be per-
ceived in the Working by  particular Streak or
Gap, which will appear in the Ground in  ffrait
Line; in which Cafe the Tool muft be whereed on
the Back, holding it floping, and in  circular Man-
ner, like the Bottom of the Tool.
Directions for scraping the Picture.
TTAKE  blant Needle, and mark the Outlines
only, then with  Scraper (crape off the Lights
in every Part of the Plate, as clean and fmooth as pof-
lible, in proportion to the Strength of the Lights in
your Picture, taking Care not to hurt your Ourlines.
And that you may the better fee what you do, with
the Thumb and Fore-Finger of the Left Hland hold
 Piece of tranfparent Paper, floping, juft over your
Right Hand, and you will foon be  judge of the dif-
ferent lints of the Work you are doing; fcraping off
mo:


 or less of the Ground, as the different Strengths
of Light and Tints require.
The Ufe of the Burnither iss to foften or rub down
the extreme light Parts affer the Scraper is done with,
fuch as the Tip of the Nofe, Forchead, Linen, CC.
which might otherwife, when proved, appear rather
mifty than clear:
Another Method uted by Metzotinto- Scrapers, is,
to etch the Ourlines of the Original, as allo of the
Folds in Drapery, marking the Breadth of the Shadows
by Dots, which having bt of  proper Colour with
Aqua Fortis, according to the Directions given Page   take off the Ground uted in Erching, and,
having laid the Metzotinto- Ground as in Page  to (crape the Picture as above.
Four or five Days before you think the Plate will be
ready for proving, Notice muft be given to the Rolling
Prets Printer to wet some Freach Paper, as no other
will do for this Work, and as that Time is neceitary for
it to he in Wet. When the Proof is dry, fouch it with
Whice Chalk; where it should be lighter, and with
Black Chalk where it should be darker; and when
the Print is retouched, proceed as before for the Lights,
and for the Shades ufe  fmall Grounding-Tool,  as you judge neceftary to bring it to the proper
Colour; and when you have done as much as you
think expedient, prove lt again, and to proceed to
prove and touch, till it is intirely to your Mind.
When the Plate farnifhes in the Part where you are at
Work,  litle Vinegar and Salt kept by you in  Phial
will take it off, wiping it dry with  clean Rag.
Avoid as much as poffible over-fcraping any part
before the firft proving, as by this Caution the Work
will appear the more elegant.
CHAP.



 
 ye Witt



CHAr. VI
Of PAINTING upon. GLASS.
PAINTING upon Glass is an Art which has
generally appeared difficult; yet there is no Re-
prefentation can be more elegant than that of 
Picture done well in this Manner: for it gives all the
Soffnets that can be defired in  Picture, and is eafy
to work; as there are no Outlines to draw, nor any
Shade to make, but the Colours are put on without
the Trouble of either.
The Pictures are thofe done in Metzotinto; for
their Shades being rubbed down on the Glass, the
feveral Lines which reprefent the (hady Part of any
common Print, are by this Means blended together,
and appear as foft and united as in any Drawing of
Indian ink.
Provide fuch Metzofintos as you like; cut off the
Margin; then ger  fiece of fine Crown-Glats, the
Size of your Print (as flat and free from Knots of
Scratches as poffible), clean the Glass, and lay fome
Venice Turpentine, quire thin and fmooth, on one
Side thereof, with  Bruth of Hog' Hair. Lay the
Print flat in Water, and let it remain on the Surface
till it finks; tis then enough: Take it carefully out,
and dab it between some Papers, that no Water may
be feen, yet to as to be damp.
Next, lay the damp Print, with its Face upper-
moft, upon  flat Table; then, holding the Glats
OVer


 
over it, without touching the Turpentine till it is
exaclly crea with the Print,, let it fall gearly, an it.
Press the Glats down carefully with your Fingers in
feveral Parts, to that the Turpentine may ftick to the
Print; affer which, take it up; then, holding the
Glats towards you, prets the Print wih your Fingers,
from the Center towards the Edges, till there be no
Bliffers remaining
When this is done, wet the Back of your Print
with  Spunge, till the Paper will rub off with your
Fingers; then rub it gegdy, and the white, Paper will
roll off, leaving; the Impresfion only upon the Glass:
Then let ir dry,; and with . Camels Hair Pencil, dipt
in Oil of Turpentine,, wee it all over, and it will be
perfectly tranfparent, and fir for painting.
Colours proper for Painting upon CL.RSS.
TTHE feveral Sarts of Colours ground in Oil for
this Purpose, and ried up, in ltde Bladdeis, may

 had at all the capital Colour Shops in London,
OC.
Reds.
Whites.
Role Pink.
Flake Whire.
Vermillion.
Podium.
Red Lead.
IndianRed.
Blacks.
Lake Cinnabar.
Lamp-Black.
Ivory- Black,
Fellows.
English Pink.
Browns.
Mafficor.
Spaniss Brown.
Engliss Oker.
Umber.
Spruce


 Blue.
Spruce Oker.
Duich Fink.
Small.
Orpiment.
Greens.
Verdigfis.
Blues.
Bue Bice.
Terra Vert.
Verditer.
Fruffian Elue.
The Ultramarine (for Blue), and the Carmine (for
:Red), are rather to be bought in Powders, as in that
Cafe they are less apt to dry, or be loft: And as the
leaft Touch of thefe will give the ficture  Call, mix
up what you want for prefent Ufe with  Drop or two
of Nut-Oil upon your Pallet, with your Pallet-Knife.
The Pallets and Kaives may be had at moft of the
Colour Shops and lvory-Turners-
To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick 
Hole at the Eottom of each, and press it till you have
:enough upon your Pallet for prefent Ufe; becaufe the
Colours are apt to dry and (Kin over.
Then lay  Sheet of white Paper on the Table,
and taking the Picture in your Leff Hand, with the
Turpentine Side next you, hold it floping (the Bottom
retting on the Whice Paper), and all the Outlines and
Tints of the Print will be feen on the Glass; and no-
thing remains but to lay. on the Colours proper for the
different Parts, as follows.
The NETnOD of using the ColOURS:
 the Lights and Shades of your Picture open, lay
 the lighter Colours firtt on the lighter Parts of
your Print, and the darker over the fhaded Parts; and
having once laid on the brighter Colours, it is not
material if the darker Sorts are laid  little over them;
for
D the firft Colour will hide thofe laid on afterwards.
 for Example.
Reds.
lay on firff the Red Lead, and shade with Lake or
Carmine.
Tellows.
The lighieff Fellow laid on firft, may be shaded
with Duich Pink.
Blues.
Blue Bice or Ultramarine, ufed for the Lights, may
be shaded with Indigo.
Greens.
Lay on Verdigris firfl, and then  Mixcure of that
and Duich Pink. This Green may be lightened by an
ddition of Dutch Pink.
When any of thefe Colours are too frong, they
may be lightened to any Degree, by mixing
White
with them upon your Pallet; or you may darken them
as much as you pleafe, by mixing them with  deeper
Shide of the same Colour,
The Colours muff not be laid on too thick; but if
troublefome, thin them before you ufe them, with 
little Turpentine-Oil.
Take Care to have  Pencil for each Colour; and
never ufe that which you have uted for Green with
any other Colour, without firft wathing it well with
Turpentine-Oil, as that Colour is apt to appear pre-
dominant when the Colours are dry.
Walh all the Pencils after ufing, in Turpentine-
Ol.
Your Glats, when painted, muft fland three or four
Days free from Duft, before it be framed.
All Sorts of Metzounto and other Prints proper for
painting on Glats, may be had at the Place where this
Book is publifhed.
CHAP.


CHAL. VII
Of PAINTINC In CRATONS.
RATONS are to be had in Boxes, every Co-
lour partifioned off feparately, to prevent mix-
ing.
The beft are thofe of Switzerland.
The different Colours are Whice, Black, Vellow,
Orange, Red, Purple, Blue, Green, and Brown; and
each of thefe have their feveral Shades, excepting the
two first.
Directions for using them.
IHE Paper to be ufed on this Occafion is rough

Venice Paper, of  whited-brown Colour, and
the fiffer the better. That Sort called Cape-Paper is
found to be the beff, becaufe upon that the Colours
beft diftribute themfelves. By this Method, Figures
may be drawn in their proper Colours as they appear
to the Eye, becaufe the Colours may be maiched with
the Crayons, and the Crayons being dry, will not alter
their Colour; but the Colours, when wet, appear
deeper than when they are dry, which is apt to deceive
 young Beginner.
Another Way to make the neceffary Preparations,
is to take some of the thickeff and fmootheft light bluc
or other Paper, and get  Straining-Frame from 
Frame-Makers, of Carpenter', on which ftrain fome
Coarfe



 
coarfe Scoich or Iriss Cloth, drawing and fattening it
with fmall Tacks round the Edges, till it be quite
fmooth; after which, with  Spunge and fair Water
genily wet the Blue Paper, and then with  Bruth or
Rag, pafte the Paper all over, and lay it carefully on
the Cloth, exactly even with the Straining Frame;
after which take it up, and laying White Paper on
the Table, place the Blue Paper downwards, with
one Hand keep the Straining Frame feady, and with
the other rub the Cloch clofe to the Paper : Do this
very carefuliy, and taking it up, lay it on the Table
with the Blue Paper upwards, and  Piece of Paper
under your Hand; and rub it clofe to the Straining.
Frame, without touching any other Part, then let
it sland to dry; after which fet it or an Exfel, which
may be had at the Colour Shops, and proceed  the firlt Skeich or rough Draught with Char-
coal; then with Black, White, or Red Chalk, correct
what you fee amiss. The Ourline being thus com-
pleated, rub in your Crayons according to their proper
Colours, and then with your Finger of Fitch foften
and blend them together.
CHAP.







 Materials neceffary for this Art are Gum,
Colours, Hair-Pencils,
Fitches,  Pallet, and


 
Pen-Khife.
The Colours in general, are White, Black, Brown,
Red; Vellow, Bluejrand Green.
The feveral Species of each are as follow:


Whites.
Fellows.
Flake Whice,
Englifh Oker.
Spanish White,
Galf-Sfone.
White Lead.
Cramboge.
Mafficot, dark and light.
Blacks.
Oker de Luce.
Barnt Cherry-Stones.
Orpiment.
Ivory-Black.
Pink-Fellow, dark and
Lamp Black.
light.
Reman Oker.
Browns.
Saffion.
Spanish Brown.
Blues.
Spanish Liquorice.
Bine Bice.
Umber.
Blue Verdite.
Indico.
Reds.
Small.
Burnt Oker.
Ultramarine.
Carmine.
Greens.
Cinnabar-Lake.
Green Bice.
 Lake.
Green Pink.
Indian Red.
Sap-Green.
Red Ink.
Verdigris.
Red Lead.
Verditer.
Vermillion.
Moft
D 
Moft of thefe Colours may be had ready prepared in
Shells, as allo the Hair-Pencils, at the Colour-Shops
in Powders. If you ufe the latter,  Grind-Stone and
Muller muff be provided, which are to be of Pebbie,

and may be had at any Stone-Cutter'.
Directions for making the fellowing mixed Colours.
Afp Colour.
THITE and Lamp- Black; of
Indico and Black; or Cherry-
Stone and Whice, shaded withlvory-
Black.
Bay Colour.
Vermillion, with  little Spanish
Brown and Black.
Brigbt Red.
Indian Lake and native Cinnabar.
Carnation.
Lake and Whire shaded with Lake.
Changeable Silk.
Red Lead and Water of Mafficot,
shaded with Sap-Creen.
Cloud Colour.
Whice; light Mafficor; or Lake and
White shaded with Blue Verditer;
or Blne Verditer alone.
Cinnabar-Lake and White, shaded
Crimson.
with Lake.
Vermillion and Orgiment; or Red
Flame Colour.
Lead and Mafficot, heightened
with White.
Whice, wish  litile Lake, and Red
Flesh Colour.
Lead; add Vellow Oker for  Complexion.
Light Pink and Duich Bice, shaded
French Green.
with Green Pink.
Cerufes with  litile Blue of any
Glass Grey.
Kind.
Mafficot, Umber, Vellow Oker, Ce-
Hair Colowr.
Tufe, Oker-de-Luce, and Cherry-
Stone Black.
Lead


Lead Colour
Light Bluc.
Light Green.
Lion Tawney
Murry.
Orange.
Orange Tawney.
Pearl Colour.
Popinjay Green.
Purple.
Ruset.
Scarler.
Sea-Green.
Sky-Colour.


 and White.
Blue Bice heightened with Cerufe or
Spodium.
Pink and Smalt, with White, if
need require.
Red Lead and Maflicot, shaded with
Umber.
Cinnabar Lake and White Lead.
Red Lead and  little fine Mafticot,
shaded with all-Stone and Lake.
Cinnabar, light Pink, and  litle
Mafficor, shaded with Gall-Stone,
and Lake.
Carmine, with  little White, shaded
with Lake.
Green and Mafticot; or Pink and 
little Indico shaded with Indico.
Indico, Spanish Brown and White;
or Blue Bice with Red and White
Lead; or Blue Bice and Lake.
Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Red Lead and Lake, with or without
Vermillion; of Carmine and Indian
Lake; or Native Cinnabar and
Red Lead, shaded with Indian
Lake.
Bice, Pink and White, shaded with
Green Pink.
Light Mafficot and White, for the
loweff and lighteff Parts; Red
Ink and White for the next; Blue
Bice and White for  third De-
gree; and Blue Bice alone for the
higheff Part of all. Thefe are to
be all fofrened into one another at
the Edges, to as not to appear
harth.
Shy-


  
Shy-Colour for
Blue, Bice and Venice Cerufe; or

Glramarine and White Thaded
Drafery.

  Indico.
Strow-Colour,
Fellow Mallicot, and  very little



Cingabar, ffiaded with dark. inx.
Viclt Colr.
Indico, White and Cinnabar Lake;



or fine  and rake, fhaded
iis
with Indico; of Litmofe, Small,
and Blue Bice; the latter moff

 and Whice, shaded with Blae,
  heighiened with White.
 for ufing the Colours.
 Pencils muft be faft in their Quills, and
&
tharp-pointed after you have drawn them through


Your Mourh.
Before you begin, have all your Colours ready be-
fore you, and  Pollet for the Conveniency of mixing


them;  Paverto lay under your Hand, and to Keep

your Work ciean, as well as to try your Colours
-
upon; alfo  larse Bruth called  Fiuch, to wipe off



the Duff when vour Colours are dry.

Lay your Colours on but thinly at firft, decpening
and mellowing them by degrees as you fee Occafion.

The quicker you lay them on, the evener and cleaner
your Drawing will appear.

Take care to preftive all your Colours from Dull;
and before you ufe them, wipe your Shells and Pallet

every Time with . Frich.:
 you have done your Work, or would lay it
 be careful to walh out your Pencils in warm

Walef.
For Face Painring, mix up  little light Carnation
or Flefh-Colour with Gum-Water in  Shell by it-
felf. If it be for  fair Complexion, mix Vermillion
and


  
and White Flake together; and for  (warghy ons, acd
to the former  litile Mafficotor Engliff Oker, or boch.
Ler your Fleth-Coloug be always lighter. than the.
Complexion you would paint; for by working on, it,
you may bring it to its true Colour.
in  large Shell, or upon your Pallet, lay your, cify
ferent Shades, of Fleth Colour, at  convenient Difr
tance from eagh, other; and always. have ready . fut=
ficient Quantity. of. White to lighten your Shadows.
For the: Checks and Lips. ufe  Mixture of Lake
and Red Lead, or Carniney as. Occafion, requires;
and for blue Tints (as under the Eyes,, and in Veins),
Indico or UUltramarine, and Whife.
For grey faint Shadows, ufe White,
Engliss. Oker,
fomerimes Mafficot: For deep Shadows,
White, English
Oker, Umber for darker Shadows, Lake and Pink,
which make  good flethy Shadow.
In colouring Landicapes, at firff only lay. dead Cos
lours fnooth all over the Piece, leaving no Part un-
covered; and be not over-curious in this Part of the
Performance, but rather ufe  mafterly Freedom; and
the Work, though feemingly rough to the Eye, will
have  good Effect when placed at  Difance.
Let not the Roughness of the Colour difcourage
you; for it is eafily to be foftened by Degrees with
the other Shadows, obfefving only to, fweeten and
heighten them according as the Light falls.
In some Places lay on ffrong Touches, and in thofe
Places bring your Work up together to an equal
Roundness and Strength; tempering and (weetening
your Colours with  Charper Pencil than the firll, that
no Lumps or harth Edges be left, but that all your
Shadows may he difperted, foft and fmooth, gliding
gently, as it were, into one another.
You are not to finith any Part before the other, but
work up all the Parts gradually alike, till you fee nothing
wanting to compleat your Picture.
Having


 laid your dead Colours, begin firft with the
lighieff Parts, as the Sky, Sun-beams, Oc. then the
yellowith Beams (which are to be done with Mafficot
and Whice); (next the Bluenets of the Sky, with UI-
Eamarine of Small alone). For Purple Clouds, only mix
Lake and Whiter, making your Colours deeper as they
go upwards from the Horizon, except in tempeffuous
Skies. The Tops of diffant Mountains muft be worked
to faint, that they may feem to lofe themfelves in Air.
Bring your Colours forward as your Diftance de-
creafes; painting your firtt Ground next the Hori-
zon downwards of  bluith Sea-Green, and as you
advance forwards, of  reddith or darker Green, till
you come to the Fore-Ground itfelf, which, as it is
to be the darkeft Part of all, do with dark Green,
shaded with  dark Brown or Vellow; which Rule of
Shadow will alfo ferve for the Trees on each respec-
live Ground.
All diftant Objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the Eye, as has been already obferved under
the rride of Light and Shade.
in colouring Trees, Boughs, and Branches, touch
in all the dark Shades firft, raifing the lighter Leaves
above the darker by adding Mafticorto the dark Green,
which may be made with Bice, Pink, and Indico,
for the uppermoff of all, which are to be done latt;
rouch lighily the Extremities of the Leaves with 
litile Green, Mafficor, and White, and fet off the
darkeff Shacows with Sap-Green and Indico.
Thefe Rules are adapted to general Appearances;
but the Learner may deviate from them as Nature shall

dictate.
Wich regard to Drspery, Fruit, Flowers, and other
Branches of Peinting, the beft Obfervations are to be
taken from the Objects themfelves, or the moft curious
and exact Reprefentations of them.
RECEIPTS


 
RECEIYTS for those who paint in Waler-Colours;
To make Gum-Waler.
 one Ounce of pure white Gum-Arabic,

and Half an Ounce of double-refined Sugar, in 
Quart of Spring Water; frain it through  fine Sieve
of  Piece of Mullin, and bottle it off for Ufe, keeping
it free from Duft.
Another Way.
Take some Gum-Arabic of the whiteff Sort, bruife
it, and tie it up in  Piece of woollen Clotl, and
seep it in Spring-Water in  Glass or Earthen Vef-
fel, till it be diffoived. If it be too ffiff, add more
Water; and if too thin, more Gum.
With this Water you may temper moft of your Co-
lours; uling fuch  Quantity, that being touched when
dry, the Colour will not come off. If the Colour
Thine, there is too much Cum in it.
To keep the Flies from your Work.
When you have made your Cum-Water according
to either of the foregoing Directions, add thereto 
little Coloquintida, which will preferve your Work,
when exposed, from being spoiled by the Flies.
To make Liquid Gold for Vellum-Painting, Fans, Exc.
Grind the finelt Leaf-Gold with Rrong Gum-
Waier very fine, adding as you grind it more Cum-
Water as you fee neceffary. When you have ground
it as fine as you can, walk it in  large Shell; then
temper it with  little Mercury-fublimate, bind it in
the Shell with  little diffolved Gum, shake and (pread
it equally all over the Shell, and ufe it with fair Water
only.
T make Liquid Silver for the same Purpose.
The Process for this is the same with that of Liquid
Gold, only obferving in the afing it to temper it with
Glare of Eggs inftead of Waier.
To make the Glare of Eggs.
Take the Whires, and beat them with  Spoon fill
they rife all in  Foam; let them fland all Night, and
they will be clarified into good Glare.
To recover Liquid Sitver that has contracled Rust.
If your Silver, by Length of Time or damp Wea-
ther, become rulty, cover that Part of your Work
with Jiurce of Garlick, which will effectually recover
 keep the Colours from sinking.
Boil four Pances of Roch Allum in  Pint of Spring
Water, rill it is thoroughly diffolved; then filter it
through brown Paper, and keep it for Ufe.
Before you, lay on your Colours, take  Spunge,
and wer the Back of your Paper with this Water while
it is hot. This will not only prevent the Colours
from finking, but will lkewife give them an addi-
tional Beauty and Luffre, and preferve them from
fating. If your Paper is not good, it muft be wathed
three or four Times with this Water, drying it every
Fine.
If your Prints are to be varniffied, wath them all
over with Whice Starch before you begin to lay on
your Colours.
To make Sixe for painting Scents, and other Candle-Light
  Caarter of  Pound of the Cuttings of
white Glove-Leather in Water for some time; then
take them our, and boil them in three Quarts of Water
ill





  
till it Walles to  Pint, and ftrain it through  Cloth
into an Eaithen Pap. When the size is cold, if it
feel firm under your Hand, it is brong enough. Vou
may prepare any Colours in this Size while it is warm,
and it will take off the Glare which would appear
Upon them by Candle-Light, if mixed with Gum-
Water.
To reciver Cilours when decajed.
 Rotemary— Water double:fiffllted, or piiie
 of Rofemary, and with  few Drops of it tem


 your Colours, which, nowever dead and falled,
 recover their Bloom and Brillialice.
This Water or Spitit Will pretent the Bubbles in
Whice and Umber, which are troublefome in stinding.
  NK.

HIE Single Pink does not admit of to great  Variety
 the Carnation, but is nevertheless to varjegaied
 to make it an agreeable Flower. for Sattins, Silks,
&. The moft common are either Whice or Crimion,

:others are striped White and Red,gothers are Whice
 with Red; others edged with Red; all which
may be worked according to the Rules for the other
Flowers to diverfified with the same Colours. The
Leaves and Stalk, are  Blneith Green, only at the
Joints there is for the moft Part  Vellowith Tinge,
which is allo at the Botrom of the Cup and Scales.
fffussafalafalabatas tatftofb
CH.AP. IX.
PAINTING On SILES, SATTINS, COc.
RTHEN the Ourline is made according to the Artiffs
Fancy,  Walh of Kinglats should with Care
be laid on to take away the Glare and Sleckinets of the
Satfin,





 
Sattin, otherwife the Colours will not work freely; the
Hinglats to be melied in very clear Water, over the Fires
to as not to be very gluiinous, otherwife it will difco-
lour the Satin, and confequently fpoil the Colours.
In the foregoing Rules we have recommended, for
the moff Part, the leaving the Paper for the light
Parts of  Flower, and working with Colours mofily
tranfparent; but here the Lights are to be made by  Tindure of the Colour of the intended Flower
mixt with the Flake-White, fo much as juft to make
 Degree from the Colour of the Satein, if White, or
of any other Colour; to be mixed proportionably to the
Colour of the Flower; for inftance, if  Blue Flower,
the Bice or Verditer,  very small Quancity of it with
the Whice, ufing lets of it proportionally as the Shades
grow darker; and in the moff dark indico alone may be
uted, it being by that Time rendered opaque enough;
but great Care muft be ufed not to lay the Colours on
too chick, otherwife they will crack:  liitle white
Sugar-Candy will be found necelfary, when mixed
with the Gum-Water, as preventive to that Incon-
veniency. If  Flower happens to be of to deep  Co-
four as not to atmil of any pure Whice in the lighteft
of the Parts,  Sorr of Priming of Whice should be
laid on, after which when dry, begin with the Ground
Colour of the Flower, proceeding gradually with the
Shades, as in the above Directions, which, with the
selected Exemples we have annexed, peculiarly cholen
from Nature for the Purpofe, we hope will be fuffi-
cient for our ingenious Students in this moft delightful
mufement.