 HE

  
 the feveral Aricles contained in
his Book.
    .
The ART of DR AW IN .
Page-&
 Drawing in general,
Of the proper Materials for Drawing, — 

 Light and Shade,—
General Rules for Drawing,-  Directions for Drawing,
 
Of drawing Faces,
Of the Measures and Proportions of the several
 of the Body,
Of drawing the Body at full Length,— —  
Of Drapery,-
Of drawing mixed Figures,  drawing Landskips, Buildings, Eec. —  Rules for drawing any Object in its
Out-lines as exact as Nature; with some far-
ther Instructions for Shadowing, Ec. without
any Regard to the forementioned Rules, or
any Knewledge in the frt of Drowing.—  other curious and eafy Metheds of tak-
ing Views, copying Draughts, Prints, ESc. to
the greateft Degree of ccuracy, — Page  for copying of Drawings, E continued;
also for taking off Medals, ESc. various Ways;
with several other curious Precepts for the Use
of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, Esc. —  AR  II.
The Dedrine of WA TER-ColOURs, for
illuminating Prints, Sc.
- Page  Colours in general,
Whites for Painting in Mimature, —  make  White for the Ground, for Water or

Oil-colours, proper in Minmature,-
 Fellows,-
 Orange-colours,-
Of Minium, the brighteff red Lead; the Man-
 of preparing it,-


Of other Reds,
Of Purple Blue,
D Black,

ibid.
Of Green,--
D the Use and Nature of dry Colours,
Direftions to make Gum, Alum or other Waters, 
  









 

 




in






               
  
 

 

  
PAINTING in Water-Colours; Ecc.
 


    

DRA WING.
The Principles, Sc. of
    .
Of DR AWINC in General.
 Aw INC is the Art of reprefenting the
Appearances of Objects, by Imitation;

or expreffing, by Lines and Shades, the
Form or Appearance of any Thing in Nature or
Art; the Copying of another Draught, or any
Defign conceived in the Mind; and all this withsz.
out the Affiftance of mathematical Rules.



The


 Art of Drawing, being an Accomplifhment

not more elegant, agreeable and ornamental than
ufeful, is, therefore, by no Means to be neglected
in the Education of Touth, wherein any Genius or
Inclination that Way is difcovered. Befides its
being, of all Arts, the moft univerfally admired
and effeemed, there are few other Arts or Pro-
feffions to which it is not affifting: its great UUfe is
not only confined to Painters, Engravers, Gar-
deners, Embroiderers, Weavers, and many others
concerned in Defigning; but the Mathematician,
Engineer, Architect and Navigator daily practife
it. All Defigns and Models are executed in it;
its fe appears in every Station of Life, and it is
equally admired by Children and by Adults.
To be able, on the Spot, to take the Sketch of 
fine Building, or  beautiful Prospect, of any cu-
rious Production of Art, or uncommon Appear
ance in Nature, is not only  very defirable Ac-
complifhment, but  very agreeable Amufement.
Rocks, Mountains, Fields, Woods, Rivers, Cata-
Tacts, Cities, Towns, Caftles, Houfes, Fortifica-
tions, Ruins, whatever elfe may prefent itfelf to
View, on our Journeys or Travels, in our own of
in foreign Countries, may be thus brought Hlome,
and preferved for our future (Ife, either in Bufiness
or Converfation. This Arttranfants to our View
Things that arelongfince paft, or would otherwife
perith; reprefents to us the Deeds of People and
Nations, for many Ages dead, and preferves the
Features


 and Refemblances of Anceffors, or other
valuable Perfons, for many Generations. It is,
therefore, no Wonder that an Atrainment fo uni
verfally ufeful and admired should be diftinguith-
ed as one of the higheft Embellifhments of human
Life, and be patronized and cultivated by all the
generous and ingenious Part of Mankind.
  AP. II.
Of the proper Materials for DE  wivC.
  Materials required in Drawing, are
 black Lead-Pencils; Crayons of black,
white or red Chalk; Crow-Quill Pens;  Rule
and Compaffes; Camel’ Hair-Pencils, and In-
dian Ink.
Accuftom yourfelf to hold your Pencil further
from the Point than you do in Writing, which
will give you  better Command of it, and con-
tribute to render your Strokes more free and bold.
The Ufeof your Pencil is to draw the firft Sketches
or Out-lines of your fiece; as any Stroke or Line
that is amiss, may in this be more eafily rubbed
out than in any other Thing; and when you
have made your Sketch as correct as you can with
the Pencil, you may then draw carefully the beft
Out-line you have got, with your Crow-Quill Pen
and Ink. The Ink made Ufe of for this Purpofe,
muft not be the common, but Indian Ink; being
much fofter than the other, and not running; and,
  mixing it with Water, it may be made to any
Degree of Strength, and may be ufed in  Pen
like common Ink. Afterufing the Ink, you may
wipe out the Pencil-Lines, by rubhing the Piece
gently with the Crumb of Htale Bread. Having
thus got your Out-line difcharged, your next
Work is to shade your Piece properly, as you
shall be directed below, either by drawing fine
Strokes with your Pen, where it requires to be
shaded, or by wathing it with the Hair-Pencil
and the Indian Ink. As to the Rule and Com-
paffes, they are never, or rarely, to be ufed, ex
cept in meafuringthe Proportions of your Figures,
after you have drawn them, to prove whether
they are right or not; or in Houfes, Fortifica
tions and other Pieces of Architecture.

Red Lead and red or black Chalk are ufed in
the same Manner as black Lead. White Chalk
and Tobacco-Pipe Clay are ufed in heightening or
giving firong Lights, and in drawing on coloured
Paper. Paftils or Crayons are any Colours, mixed
with Tobacco Pipe Clay, which, while foft, and
in the Confiffency of  Pafte, is rolled up in Pieces,
about the Thickness of  Ouill, and two or three

Inches in Length, and then dried; they are gene-
rally ufed on coloured Paper; and the Colours are
rubbed and wrought one into another, in fuch 
Manner that no Strokes appear, but the whole
 as if it was done with  Brufh.
anda in 
 slj   
CH  

Si ttSS



  AP. III.
OfLICHT and SHADE.
 is the artful Management of Light and Shade
 that gives the Appearance of Subftance,
Roundness and Diftance, to whatever Bodies are
reprefented by Drawing. Draw  Circle on 
Piece of Paper; fill it up with any even Colour
and it will appear to be  Body with  round Cir-
cumference and flat Sides. But by colouring it
Hronger in the Middle, and caufing it gradually
to weaken towards the Circumference, it will
receive  convex Appearance like that of  Bail
or Globe- Wherever the Vivacity of Colour  that Part of the Object catches the
Sight firft, and appears neareft to it. whereas its
Weaknets and Goings off are more and more bro
ken and faint, and seem to fly farther off from the
Sight. In rounding the Parts of any Object, the
Extremities in turning muft lofe themfelves inten-
fibly and confufedly, without precipitating the
Light all of  fudden into the Shadows, or the
Shadows into the Light, but the Pallage of the
one into the other muft be common and impercep
tible; that is, by Degrees of Light into Shadow,
and Shadow into Light. Objects that are painted
light muft have  fufficient Breadth of Shadow to
fultain them; and dark Bodies muft have  fudden
Light behind, to detach them from the Ground, or
from thofe Objects that are placed behind them;
otherwife

 they will appear confufedly, as sticking
upon each other; whereas the Opposition of
Shade to  light Object, and of Light to  dark
one; gives  Projection, and feparates them from
other Bodies.
There should be  Ballance preferved between
the Lights and Shadows;  broad Light ought
not to be introduced into  Draught without 
large Shadow. The nearer any Object is to the
Eye, it is feen to much the ftronger and plainer;
the Sight is weakened by Diftances, and the more
remote any Object is, it is feen in  more imper-
feet manner: Therefore, thofe Objects which are
placed foremoft to the View, ought to be more
finished than thofe that are caft behind; and they
should have fuch  relative Dominion over each
other, that as one Object, by its Heightnings,
caufes others to retire more backwards, to the
same Object muft be chafed and made to appear
farther from the Sight than others which are
more ffrongly illuminated.
It is not fufficient that remote Objects be only
coloured in  more faint and languid Manner;
but, according to their Diftance, the Parts muft
appear more or less confufed; the Eye not being
able to difcover minutely what is far feparated
from it. Pure and unmixed White either draws
an Object nearer, or carries it off to  greater
Diftance. If it be accompanied with Black, the

Opposition


Oppofition of Light and Dark renders the Object
more fenfible, and brings it neater to the advan-
ced Part; but pure White, being the lighielf of
Colours, unless it be forced forwards, and fup-
ported by Black, will fly off to the remoteft View.
As for pure Black, it is the heavieff, moft earthy,
and moft fenfible of all Colours, and brings the
Objects nearer to the Sight: It muft be placed
in Maffes, be infenfibly confuled, and have its
proper Repofes.
The Reprefentations of Bodies give them al-
ways fuch Lights as are moft proper and conveni-
ent to their suppofed Situations. If the Objects are
in the Fields, of open Air, and the Sun not vi-
fible, or obicured by Clouds, you muft then in-
troduce almoft an univerfal Light, though not
warm and ftrong, and your Shades muft be faint:
but when the Sun is conspicuous, and shines in its
full Luftre, then the Light muft be very ftrong and
bold, and the Shadows very dark. If the Objects
you reprefent be fuppoted in  Reom,  little,
but not very much, illuminated, and you furvey
it from without, and fland on  Level with the
Light that ftrikes upon it, the Shadows of that
Figure muft be very foft, whereby the Figure it-
self will appear beauteous to the Eye; and will,
notwithflanding the Sofiness of the Shadow, seem
as imboffed, and come boldly out.  small Light
illuminating  Bodyoccafions the Shadows on the
dark Side to be large; and their Extremities to be
VErv
.  bold. On the other Hand,  Light makes
the Shadows on the darker side to be more diffind
and more foft in their Limitations.

Reffection is to be ufed in delineating 
littering
 fhining Bodies, as Glass; Pearls, Silver, E the Caufe of the Reffection, be it more orlets,
be seen in the Thing iffelf. Place allyour Lights
one Way through the whole Work; and if the
Light falls fideways on the Picture, the other
Side, which is the fartheft from the Light, muft
be made the darkeff. That Part of the Body muft
be made lighteft which has the Light moft oppe-
fite to it; if the Light be placed above the Head,
then the Top of the Headmuft be made lighteft;
the Shoulder muft receive the next greater De-
gree of Light; and thus muft you continue to
Shade, lofing the Light by Degrees. By how
much one Part of the Body projects more than
another, it muft by to milch be made the lighter
and;:on the contrary; thote Parts that bend in
ward muft he made to much the darker. Two
equal Lights muftnever be made in one and the
same Picture; the greater is to Hrike forcibly
into the Middle, and with greateff Lufire on thofe
Parts of the Defign where the principal Figures
and Strength of the Actionfeem to lie, diminiffi-
ing it gradually; as it approaches neareft the Ex-

tremities of the Piece.

itri
 

is tn fi  
    did pdit   is on hs wd in in 
   .



 
CHAP. IV.


General Rules
for DE AWINE
 CI  with plain geometrical rigures, as
DLines, Angles, Triangles, Polygons, Arches,
Circles, Ovals, Cones, Cylinders, and the like,
being the Foundations of all other Proportions.
The Circle  of ufe in the feveral orbicular
Forms, as the Sun, Moon, Globes, coc. The
Oval, in giving  juft Proportion. to the Face
and Mouth; and the Square confines  Picture

you are to co
  The Triangle is of utein
  fide or half Face; Angles and Arches,
in Perspective; and the Polygon in Ground:plats,
Fortifications, toc. The Cone, in Spires, Sceeples,
Tops of Towers,  The Cylinder, in Co-
Lumns, Pillars, CC.
 ohr WirC. ci 



Having brought your fland to be fit and ready
in general Preportionsy accuftom yourfelf to give
every Object its due Shades, according: to its
Concavity or Convexity, and to elevate or depress
the fame, as the Object appears either nearer of
farther off the Light,;: Before you begin to work,
view your Original with clofe Attention; divide
it in your Mind intor feveral Parts;; observe the
Length, the Breadth, and the Similitude of each
Part; confider their Proportion to each other, and
to the Whole; the Diftances from one Part to the
other, and what Parts lie oppofite to each other.
After


 you have done your Copy, view it afresh,
by comparing it with the Original, for the difco-
vering and amending of Faults, as it will not only
ferve to perfect you in that particular Draught,
but will improve your Knowledge of Lines, and
Proportions in general, and in Time enable you
for the neareft Imitations. The Out-lines muft
be drawn in  gliding Manner, large and (mooth,
which will give them the Refemblance of Lite and
Motion. You muft preferve in your Draught  Refemblance between the Pares and the
Whole; every Member ought to be made to
agree; flrong Limbs have no Relation to  con-
Tumptive Body,, or decayed old Age: and the
Eyes, Legs, Hlands and Feet, should be exactly
paired.
Having good Copies to draw after, learn to re-
duce them to other Proportions, either larger or
Snaller, and this by frequent Practice. In draw-
ing Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, toc. with
their Leaves, Herbs, Trees,  of different
Kinds: As alfo in the Imitation of Beafts, Fowls,
Fithes, Coc, it is requifite not only to be perfect in
laying down the exact Proportions, but, before
you proceed to the fhadowing and trimming your
Work, to be well acquainted in the general or out-
ward Lines; and this is ftill more neceffary in
imitating the Body of  Man with all its Line-
aments, as Head, Nofe, Eyes, Ears, Cheeks,
Arms and Shadows; as alfo in the Drapery, or
Imita-
 


( of the Clothing, and the artificial fetting
off the outward Coverings, Habit and Ornaments
of the Body, in their natural and proper Folds.

CH AP. 
Particular Directions for DR AwinCo
 drawing after  Picture or Print, you muft
 take Care to place it in fuch  Light that the
Gloss of the Colours may not interrupt your
View, but to that the Light and your Eye may
fall equally and obliquely upon the Piece. To this
End you are to confider from whatPoint, and in
what Direction, the Light falls upon the Objects,
according to which Direction let all your Lights
and Shades be placed throughout the Work.
That Part of the Object muft be lighteft which
has the Light moft directly oppofite to it; if the
Light falls fideways on your Picture, you muft
make that Side which is oppofite to it lighteft;
and, on the contrary, that Side which is fartheft
from it darkeft. Let the Piece be placed at fuch
 Diftance, that; upon opening your Eyes, you
may view it all atonce, and the larger the Picture
is, it should be to much the more placed off at
the greater Diftance: but right before you, and
 little reclined.
Draw all your Out-lines at firft very faint with
 Coal, which may eafily be rubbed out again with
the Feathers of  Ducks Wing, or the Crumb of
Bread;


( and thefe Outlines should be drawn true,
and agreeable to the Pattern, before you begin to
Thadow any Part of the Object. The Out-lines
next the Light should be drawn more faint; and
when you have drawn one Feature, it should be
 Direction for you, in fome Meafure, to draw
another, by obferving, with your Eye, the Dif
tance from that to the next Feature, making  Mark at the Place with your Coal; then
draw it, and to to the next, till you have drawn
the whole Figure.
Then observe the Middle of the Piclure you
would copy, and touch upon the Paper with the
Point of your Coal; afterwards obferve the more
confpicuous and uppermoft Figures, if there are
more than one, which you are to touch lightly in
their proper Places. Thus running
 over the
whole Draught, you will fee, as it were, the
Skelefon of the Piece you are to draw.
Having made out thefe Sketches, view them
diligently, to fee if they anfwer your Pattern or
nnot; for the Geftures of the Life ought to thew
themfelves eminently in the firft and rudeft
Draught of the Piece; correct and amend what-
ever you perceive amiss; adding and diminishing
a it varies from the Pattern, by which Meansit
will be brought nearer and nearer to the Life.
Obferve the Diftance of one Limb, Joint or
Mutcle, from another, and the fame in all other
Accidents.


 of the Figure; their Length, Breadsh,
Turnings, Coc. Shadow next to the Light very
faindy; and where you fee bold and free Touchesy
he not timorous in expreffing the fame. In draw-
ing allead after the Life, or otherwife, take Care

to place the Features exactly right upon the Cross
lines, whether it be  full Face or three-quarter
Face. In fore-fhortening, you muft make the
Cross-lines to fly upwards, but where the Aspect
is downwards, they muft be made downwards in
 circular Manner.
Having drawn the Out-lines true with  Coal,
you are to proceed to trace the same Lines again
with  Pen, Indian Ink, Coc. drawing them with
more Exactness; and by imitating all the Hatches,
with their exact Diffances one from another, their
Croffings, Turnings and Windings, with more
Boldness and Freedom, perfect your Defign.
In drawing after  naked Body, all the Mufcles
are not to be to plainly exprefied as in anatomical
Figures; but that Side whofe Parts are moft ap-
parent, and of Signification in the Performance.
of any Action, muft be made to appear more. of.
less, according to the Force of that Action.
In drawing young Perfons, the Mufcles muft
not appear manifeltly to hard as in elder and full
grown Perfons; the fame Thing is to be observed
as to fat and fiethy Perfons, and fuch as are very
delicate and beautiful: and in Women fcarce any
Mufcles


 at all are to be expreffed, or butvery little,
unless it be in some very forcible Action; and then
too they are to be reprefented very faintly; the like
is allo to be obferved as to Children. The Motion
of the whole Body muft be confidered in drawing
of the Mufcles; as in the rifing and falling of the
Arms, the Mufcles of the Breaft appeareithermore
or less; the Hips do the like, according as they
are bent outward or inward; and it is the fame
chieffy in the Shoulders, Sides and Neck, accord-
ing to the feveral Actions of the Body.
The Breadth and Largeness of  Picture is allo
to be confidered; it should be larger about the
Legs and Garments, shewing itfelf flender above,
by difcovering one Shoulder and hiding the other,
which is shortened by turning the Body. But
fometimes the Figure is to be reprefented biggt
 the upper Parts, by reprefenting either or both
the Shoulders, or both the Arms; shewing the one
Leg, and hiding the other; or both of them after
one Manner, at Difcretion. Neither ought this
to be obferved only in the whole Body, but even in
every Part, to that in the Legs, when  Mufcle
is raifed outwards on the one Side, that which is
directly on the contrary Side muft be drawn in
and hid, as it appears in the Life.
The Proportion of the Figure ought to be mul-
tiplied by Degrees, in Proportion of one to two,
three, four, Coc. for herein the chief Skill confifts;
the


 Diameter of the biggeft Place between the
Knee and the Foot is double the leaft, and the
largeft Part of the Thigh triple.
CHAP. VI.
Of drawing FACES.
 drawing  Head, it is ufually divided into
four equal Parts.  From the Crown of the
Head to the Top of the Forehead.  From the
Top of the Forehead to the Eyebrows.  From
the Eyebrows to the Bottom of the Nofe.  thence to the Bottom of the Chin. But
this Proportion is not conftant; thofe Features,
in different Men, being often very different, as to
Length and Shape. In  well proportioned Face,
however, they are nearly right.
To direct you, therefore, in forming  perfect
Face, your firft Bufiness is to draw  complete
Oval, as you fee in Plate . Figure  in the
Middle of which, from the Top to the Bottom,
draw  perpendicular Line; and through the Cen-
ter or Middle of this Line draw another, directly
across from one Side to the other of your Oval.
On thefe two Lines all the Features of the Face
are to be drawn, as follows. Divide your Per-
pendicular-line into four equal Parts; the firft
muft be allotted to the Hair of the Hlead; the fe-
cond is from the Top of the Forehead to the Top
of the Nofe, between the Eyebrows; the third is
from


 thence to the Bottom of the Nofe; and the
fourth includes the Lips and Chin. The Line
acrots the perpendicular, ofr the Breadth of the
Face, is always supposed to be the Length of fire
Eyes; you muft therefore divide it into five equal
Parts, and place the Eyes upon it fo as to leave
exactly the Length of one Eye betwixt them.
This is to be underftood only of  full frontFace;
for if it turns to either Side, then the Diftances
are to be leffened on that Side which turns from
you; less or more, in Proportion to its Turning.
The Top of the Ear is to rife parallel to the Eyer
brows, at the End of the Diameter or crots Line,
and the Bottom of it muft be equal to the Bottom
of the Nofe; the Noffrils ought not to come out
farther than the Corner of the Eye in any Face;
and the Middle of the Mouth muft always be
placed upon the perpendicular Linc. The Mouth,
when thut, is as large as an Eye.
The following is an ingenious Device, which,
perhaps, may fomewhat affift the young Practition
er, in forming the Face according to its different
Turnings, and in placing the Features properly
thereon. Procure  piece of (mooth Wood, turned
for the Purpofe, in the Shape of an Egg, which is
nearly the Shape of the humanHlead; draw  Line
lengthwife quite round it, as in the laft Fig. and
divide this Line into two equal Parts, by another
Line drawn directly across it at right Angles. The
Features being drawn on thefe twoLines, accord
ing


 to the Rules delivered above, will produce 
Fore-right Face. Turn the Oval  fmall Matter
from the left Hand to the Right, and the Perpen-
dicular will appear bent like  Bow, as you fee in
Fig.  upon which the particular Features ars to
be drawn, as in Fig.  always obferving in what
Manner the Nofeprojects beyond the Round of the
Oval. The same muft be obferved, if you turn the
Oval from the right tland to the Left, as inFig: if you incline the Oval downwards, and to the
Right, the Lines of the Crots will appear, as in

and the Features drawn on them, as in
Fis. 

 If youturnitupwards, recliningto the Left,

the Lines of the Crots will appear as in Fig. and
 Face drawnon them, as in Fis.   greatVariety
of Faces may be shewn by this Oval, according as
you incline, recline, or turn it more or less..
But thofe Figures which come Sideways are to
be drawn by Means of  Perpendicular, as in Fiz.
 pon which the Forehead, Nofe, Mouth and
Chin are to be drawn, as you fee in Fig  to be obferved, that if the Face be fat, the
Cheeks will feem to fwell; if lean, the Jaw-bones
will Rick out, and the Cheeks fall in; but if it be
neither too fatnor too lean, it will be nearlyround.
Touch the Features lightly, where the Eyes,
Nofe, Mouth and Chin should fland: then begin
to drawthem more exactly, and to proceed till you
have finithed the Face; after which draw the Hlair;.

Beard and Shadows about it. Vou are to confi-
 all those chief Touches which give Life to 

Face, and that difcover
the Disposition of the


Mind: Thus the Mouth extended, and the Cor-
ners turning  little up, thews  fmiling Counte-
nance, Coc. You muft take Care that the Spa-
dows be not made too dark, where they should
be light, becaufe afterwards they cannot be ren-
dered more light; and remember, that they are
to be more faint and light in  fair, than in  Complexion.
CH  . VII.
Of the MEASUREs and PROPORTIONS of
the several Parts of the Body.
AHIE Antients commonly allowed eightlleads
to their Figures, though some of them had
but feven; however, the Moderns ordinarily di-
vide their Figure into ten Faces: That is, from
the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, in
the Manner following. From the Crown of the
Head to the Forehead, is the third Part of the Face.
The Face begins at the loweft Hairs which are
upon the Forehead, and ends at the Bottom of the
Chin. The Face is divided into three proportional
Parts; the firft contains the Forehead, the second
the Nofe, and the third the Mouth and Chin.
From the Chin to the Pit between the Collar-
bones are two Lengths of  Nofe. From the Pit
betwixt the Collar bones to the Bottom of the
Breaft


( one Face. From the Bottotm of the Breaft
to the Navel, she Face. From the Navel to the

Genitals, one Pace. From the Genitals to the
upper Part of the Knnee, two Faces: The Knce
contains half  Face. From the lower Part of the
Knee to the Ancde, two Faces. From the Ancle
 
to the Sole of the Foot, half  Face.

 Wian, when his rms are flretched out, is,
from the longeft Finger of his right Hland to the
longeft of his left, as broad as he is long. From



one Side of the Breafts to the other, two Faces.
The Bone of the rm, called Humerus, is the
Length of two Faces, from the Shoulder to the
Elbow. From the End of the Elbow to the Root
of the little Finger, the Bone called Cubitus, with
Part of the Hand, contain two Faces. From
the Box of the Shoulder-blade to the Pit betwixt
the Collar-bones, one Face. If you, will, be
fatisfied in the Meafures of Breadth, from the
Extremity of one Finger to the other, to that this
Breadth should be equal to the Length of the
Body, you muft obferve that the Boxes of the
Elbows with the Humerus, and of the Humerus
with the Shoulder-blade, bear the Proportions of
half  Face, when the Arms are firetched out.
The Sole of the Foot is the fixth Part of the Fi=
ure. The Thumb contains  Nofe. The in-
fide of the Arm, from the Place where the Mufcle
Cifappears, which makes the Breaft, called the
pectoral Mufcle to the Middle of the Arm, four
C 
Nofes. From the Middle of the Arm to the Be-
.
ginning of Il
The longeft
andy: five Nefes,


 is, . Note lons
of
he: two, utmost Parts
 
the Teats, and the Fit betwixt the Collas-bones
of  Weman, make an equilateral Friangls.



nt FEn
Dr
oth Isdrcigls sots sit 
rp
For the preadif of the Lumps po precife Mear






fures can be given; becaufe the Meafures them-
felves are changeable, according to the 
uality of
 Min

the Perfons, and according to the Movement of


 Muicles.


 citii iz 
  


  .
VIII.


Of drawing the Bony at full Length.
    

(IRST make your Oval for the Head, and
having divided it, according to the Inftruc-
-
 already given,: draw  perpendicular Line
from the Top of the Head to the Sole of the Foot,
and meafure our eight Lengths of the Head. This
Line is of special Ufe to direct you in placing the
Figure upright; and in the Action of the Pof-
ture, where it falls in, and where it fwells out.
One Heads Length from the Chin, you muft
draw the Breafts; the third Meafure reacheth  Navel; the fourth to the Privities; the fifth
to the Middle of the Thigh; the fixth to the
lower Part of the knce; the feventh to the lower
Part of the Leg; and the eighth to the Heel and
Sole of the Foot.
Obferve,





 in every: Meature;:whact Fouches


 are of the Mufcles. Draw that Leg firhn,

on which the Bodyftandss then draw the other;
and after that the Arms and Hands;; but draw,

at firft, all the Parts very lighilys with  Coal
only. becaufe there is leaft Trouble in altering
and :rubbing: out the Coal. As for the Hands,
they are twice as long as they are broad, and
each of their Parts has its Length, Breadth and
Thickness. The Nail upon the Finger is about
half the Joint it is upon. The Length of the
Foot is  fixth Part of the Heighth of  Perfon;
and the Length is five eighths more than the
Breadth. The Length of the Face and Hands
ought to be exactly equal, and makes but juft the

tenth Part of  Perfon'’ Heighth.
The Rules in drawing Children are as follow.
Some make  Child to contain five Meafures of
the Head, viz. from the Top of the Head to the
Privities, three, and in the Thighs and Legs two
more; the Breadth between the Shoulders, the
Length of  Head and  Half; the Breadth of the
Body above the Navel, the Length of one Head;
and the Breadth of the upper Part of the Thigh,
is the third Part of two Lengths of the Head;
the Breadth of the Knee is juft the Meafure there
is betwixt the Eyes and the Chin; the Small of
the Leg, and the Brawn of the rm, are of the
Thickness of the Neck.


In


 general, let it be obferved always to begin
with the right side of the Piece you are cepyings
for by fo doing you will always have what is done
before your Eyes; and the reft will follow more
naturally, and with greater Eafes whereas if you
begin with the left Side, your Hland and Arm will
cover what you do firft, and deprive you of the
Sight of it; by which Means you will not be able

to proceed with to much Eafe, Pleafure or Cer-
tainty. As to the Order and Manner of your Pro-
ceeding, in drawing the human Body, you muft
firft tkeich the Head; then the Shoulders, in their
exact Breadth; then draw the Trunk of the Body
 with the Arm-pits (leaving the Arms
sill afterwards) and to down to the Hips on both
Sides; being fure to observe the exact Breadth of
the Waift. When you have done this, then draw
that Leg which the Body flands upon, and after
wards the other, which flands loofe; then draw
the Arms, and laft of all the Hlands.
Take notice alfo of the Bowings and Bendings
of the Body, making the Part oppofite to that
which bends correspond in bending with it. For
inftance, If one Side of the Body bends in, the
other muft fland out anfwerable to it; if the Back
bends in, the Belly muft ftick our; if the Knee
bends out, the Hiam muft fall in; and to of any
other Jont in the Body. Finally, endeavour to
form all the Parts of your Figure with Truth, and
in juft Proportion, not one Arm or one Leg bigger
Of


 lets than the other; not broad Shoulders with
 thinflender Waift, nor raw and bony Arms, with
thick and gouty Legs, but let there be  kind of
Harmony and Agreement amongft the Members,
and an agreeable Symmetry thoughout the whole
Figure.
But as the Effence of Drawing confifts in mak-
-
ing, at firft,  good Sketch, you muft in this Par
ticular be very careful and accurate; draw no Part
perfect or exact, till you fee whether the whole
Draught be good; and when you have altered that
to your Mind, you may then finith one Part after
another as curioully as you can. In drawing the
Eyes, Ears, Legs, Arms, Hands, Feet, ( great
Care, Study and Practice, are requifite. This
muft be learned, by carefully imitating the beft
Prints of Drawings you can get of Eyes, Ears,
Coc. for as to the mechanical Rules of drawing
them by Lines and Meafures, they are not only
perplexed and difficult, but alfo contrary to the
Practice of the beft Mafters. But the Actions.
and Poftures of the Hand are fo many and Vari-
ous, that no certain Rules can be given for draw-
ing them that will univerfally hold good; and as.
the Hlands and Feet are difficult Members to draw,
it is neceffary, and well worth while, to beftow
some Time and Pains about them, carefully imi-
tating their Various Poftures and Actions, to as
notonly to avoid all Lameness and Imperfection,
but allo to give them Life and Spirit.
In


 drawing  labouring Man, you muft repre-
fent him with frong Limbs and raifed Muscles
swelling and ftanding out, especially in bearing.
Burdens, drawing Weights, leaping, walking,
combating, or fuch like violent Exercifes. In
reprefenting Perfons affeep, you muft carefully
avoid giving any fuch Poftures or Actions in their
lying as would not in all Probability afford Reft;
for  great want of Judgment would appear in
reprefenting their Limbs or Bodies fupported br
 own Force, and not by the Help of fome-

thing elfe.

With regard to the Reprefentation of the Par
Lions, Mr De Pites obferves, that it is abfurd, as
well as impoffible, to prerend giving fach particu-
lar Demonftration of them as to fix their Expref-
fion to certain Strokes which the Painter should
be obliged to make ufe of, as effential and inva-
riable Rules. This, fays he, would be depriving
the Art of that excellent Variety of Expreftion,
which has no other Principle than Diverfity of
Imagination, the Number of which is infinite.
The same Pastion may be expreffed feveral Ways,
each yielding more or less Pleafure in Proportion
to the Painter' Underftanding, and the Specta-
for’ Difcernment.
Though every Part of the Face contributes
towards exprefting the Sentiments of the Heart,
yet the Kyebrow, according to Mr Le Bran,  principal Seat of Exprestion, and where the
Paftions


 make themfelves moft known. It is
certain, fays he, that the Pupil of the Eyc, by
its Fire and Motion, very well thews the Agita-
tion of the Soul; but then it does not express the
Kind or Nature of that Agitation, whereas the
Motion of the Eyebrow differs according as the
Paffions change their Nature. To express  fimple
Paffion, the Motion is fimple; to exprets  mixt
Paffion, the Motion is compound. If the Paf-
fion be gentle, the Motion is gentle; if it be vio-
lent, the Motion is fo too. We may farther
obferve, fays he, that there are two Kinds of Ele-
vation in the Eyebrows; one in which the Eye-
brows rife up in the Middle; This Elevation ex-
preffes agreeable Senfations; and it is to be ob-
served that then the Mouth rifes at the Corners.
Another, in which the Eyebrows rife up at the
Ends and fall in the Middle, denotes bodily Pain;
and then the Mouth falls at the Corners. In
Laughter all the Parts agree, for the Eyebrows,
which fall towards the Middle of the Forehead,
make the Nofe, the Mouth and the Eyes, follow
the same Motion. In weeping, the Motions are
compound and contrary, for the Eyebrows fall
towards the Nofe, and over the Eyes; and the
Mlouth rifes that Way. It is to be obferved allo,
that the Mlouth is the Part of the Face which more
Particularly expreffes the Emotions of the Heart
for when the Heart complains, the Mouth falls ar
the Corners; when it is pleafed, the Corners of
the Mouth are elevated; and when it has an
Averfion,



 the Mouth fhoots forward, and rifes in
the Middle.
The Head, fays Mr De Piles, contributes more
to the Expreftion of the Paffions, than all the other
Parts of the Body put together. Thofe feparately
can only fhare some few Paffions, but the Head.
expreffes them all. Some, however; are more
peculiarly exprefied by it than others, as Humility,
by hanging it down; Arrogance, by lifting it up;
Languifhment, by inclining it on one side; and
Obkinacy, with  ftiff and refolute Air, makes
it fland upright, fixed and ffiff between the Shoul-
ders. The Head alfo beft thews our Supplications,
Threats, Mildness, Pride, Love, Hatred, Joy and
Grief: The whole Face and every Feature con.
tribute fomething, but more especially the Eyes;
yet though the Paffions of the Soul are moft vifible
in the Lines and Features of the Face, they often.
require alto the Affiftance of other Parts of the
Body: Without the Hands, for Inftance, an Ac-
tion is weak and imperfect; their Actions, which
are almoft infinite, create numberless Expresfions.
It is by them that partly we defire, hope, pro-
mife, call and fend back; they are the Inftruments
of Threatning, Prayer, Praife, Coc. by them, we,
in  great meafure, approve, condemn, refule,
admit, fear, alk, express our Joy and Grief; our
Doubts, Regrets, Pain and Admiration. But to
fay how thefe Parts muft be difposed for expreffing
the Various Paffions, is impoffible. Nor can any
CKaClRules be given for it, both becaute the Tark
would





 be infinite, and becaufe every one muft be
guided in this by his own Genius and the particu-
lar turn of his Studies.

CHAP. IX.
Of DRAPERY.
 the Art of cloathing your Figures, or cafting
 the Drapery upon them with Elegance and Pro-
priety, many things are to be obferved: However,
this Art confifts chieffy in three Points, viz. the
order of the Folds or Plaits, the different Cuality
of the Stuffs, and the Variety of their Colours. As
to the Folds, they ought to be to managed, as that
you may eafily perceive what it is they cover, and
diffinguith it from any Thing elfe; as forluftance,
that you fee it is an Arm that is underthe Drapery,
and not  Leg: or  Leg and not an Arm, Eoc.
Again, the Folds ought to be large, and  Con-
traft should be obferved between them; otherwife,
in the firft Cafe, they break and divide the Sight
too much; and in the next Place, the Drapery will
be tooffiff. As to the Quality of the Stufts, it should
be well confidered; some Folds being abrupt and
harth, while others flow more foff and eaty. Again,
the Surface of some have  Luftre, while others
are flat and dead; and some are fine and tranfparent,
while others are firm and folid. The Variety of
Colours, when well managed, makes the greateft
Beauty in Painting: Some are not equally agree-
able with Respect to each other; and some are
never to be placed near certain others.
  Drapery muft never be made to adhere, or
Stick too clofe to the Parts of the Body, but it muft
teem to flowround, and, as it were, embrace them.
Yet in fuch  Manner as that the Figure may be
eaty, and have  free Motion.  great Lightnets
and Motion of the Drapery are only proper in
Figures in much Agitation, or expofed to the
WWind. The Nudities of the Figure should always
be defigned before you proceed to draw the Dra-
peries. Draw the Out-lines of the Garments
lightly; then draw the great Foldsfirft, and stroke
thefe into leffer; taking Care that they do not crofs
one another. The Draperies that cover thofe Parts
which are expoted to great Light muft not be fo
deeply shaded, as to feem to pierce them; nor
should those Members be croffed by Folds that are
too ftrong; left, by the too great Darkness of their
Shades, the Memberslook as if they were broken.
Folds, in general, should be large and as few as
poffible. However, they muft be greater or less,
uantity and Quality of the Stufts
according to the 
of which the Drapery is suppofed to be made; fuit
the Garments to the Body, and make them bend
with the Body, according as it flands in or out,
Rraight orcrooked, or as it bends one Wayor ano-
ther; and the clofer the Garment fits to the Bo-
dy, the narrower and (maller muft be the Folds.
The Quality of the Perfon is alfo to be confider-
ed in the Drapery. For inftance, if they are Ma-
giltrates, their Draperies ought to be large, fine
and flowing; if Country-clowns, they ought to be
Coarfe


 and short; and if Ladies and Nymphs, light
and foft, toc. Folds, well imagined, give much
Spirit to any Kind of Action, becaute their Motion
impliesthelike in the acting Member, which teems
to draw them forcibly, and make theim more or
lets flirring, as the Action is more or lefs violent.
An artful Complication of Folds, in  circular
Manner, greatly helps the Effect of Fore-Thorten-
ings. All Folds confift of two Shades, and no
more, which you may turn with the Garment at
Pleafure, fhadowing the inner Side more deeply.
The Shades in Silks and fine Linnen are very
thick and small, requiring little Folds and  light
Shadow Obferve the Motion of the Airor Wind,
in order to draw the loofe Apparel all flying one
Way; and draw that Part of the Garment that
adheres clofeft to the Body, before you draw the
loofer Part that flies off from it; left by drawing
the loofe Part of the Garment firft, you should
miftake the Polition of your Figure, and place if
 Ornaments, when judicioutly and fparing
ly ufed, may fometimes contribute to the Beauty
of Draperies. But fuch Ornaments are far below
the Dignity of Angels or heavenly Figures; the
Grandeur of whole Draperies ought rather to con-
fiff in the Boldness and Nobleness of the Folds,
than in the Quality of the Stuff, or the Glitter of
Ornaments. Light and fying Draperies are pro-
per only to Figures in great Motion, or in the
Wind:
  but when in  calm Place, and free from
violent Action, their Draperies should be large
and flowing, that, by their Contraft, and the Fall
of the Folds, they may appear with Grace and
Dignity.

HA . .
Of drawing MixED FICURES.
 order to draw the Form of any Bealt, begin
 at the Forehead, with the Lead or Coal,
drawing downward the Nofe, Mouth, upper and
nether Chap, ending the Line at the Throat.
Then viewing it ; again, from that Part where
you formerly begun, continue it over the Head,
Ears and Neck, till you have given the full Com-
pass of the Buttock. Afterwards mark out the Legs,
and touching out the Breaft with the Eminency
thereof, finith the Tail, Paws, Tongue, Teeth,
Beard, and the feveral Shadows.
In drawing Beafts, you muft be well acquaint-
ed with their Shape and Action, without which
you will never perform any thing excellent in this
Way; and whatever Beaft you draw, you muft
be fure to give  Sketch of the Landlkip of the
Country natural for that Beaft.
In drawing Birds, you are to begin allo at the
Head, continuing the Breaft-line from under the
Throat down to the Legs; then begin at the Pini-
on for making the Wing
 this being joined to

the Back-line, the Figure will be prefently finithed.
The



 Eyes, Legs and Tail, are to be drawn laft ;
the Feathers, beginning at the Head very fmalls
muft fall backwards one Way in five Ranks, ffill
 till finished.
Iifelts, as Flies, Bees, Waips, Grasshoppers,
Worms, and fuch like, are drawn with great Eafe,
provided you, for the firft time, have the Ori-
ginal before your Eyes.
In drawing  Flower, begin from the Rofe-tufe
or Wart in the Middle, as in  Rofe or Marigold
with the yellow Tuft, which being made, draw
Lines equally divided from thence to the greateft
Compass or Extent of the Flower. They may be
drawn either fully open, or in the Bud; the Leaves
may firft be drawn rudely, afterwards giving them.
their Veins, or Jaggedness.
CH . .. XI.
Of drawing LANDSKIRs, BUILDINGs, ESC.
LL true Drawingconfiffs in nicely meafuring
( the Diftances of each Part of your Piece by
the Exc. In order to facilitate this, you are to
imagine in your own Mind, that the Piece you.
copy is divided into Squares: As for Example;
suppofe, or imagine  Perpendicular and an hori-
 Line croffing each other in the Center of
the Picture you are to copy. Then fuppoft alfo
two fuch Lines croffing your own Copy. Obferve
in the Original what Parts of the Defign thofe
Lines
  interfelt, and let them fall on the same Parts
of the supposed Lines in your Copy. If you are
to draw  Landlkip from Nature, take your Station
on  rifing Ground, where you may have  large
Horizon, and mark your Tablet into threeDivifions
downwards, from the Top to the Bottom. and
divide, in your own Mind, the Landlkip you are
to take into three Divifions alfo. Then, turn your
Facedirectly oppofite to the Middle of the horizon-
tal Line, keeping your Body fixed, and draw what
is directly before your Eyes upon the middle
Divifion of your Tablet; then turn your Head,
but not your Body, to the left Hand, and deli-
neate what you view there, joining it properly to
what you had done before. Laftly, do the same
by what is to be feen on your right Hand, laying
down every Thing exactly, both with Respect to
Diffance and Proportion, Make the neareft Ob-
jects in your Piece the higheff, and thofe that are
further off to thoot away lower and lower, till
they come almoft level with the Line of the Hori-
 leffening every Thing proportionably to its
Diftance, and obferving; alfo, to make tyour
Objects fainter and lets diffinet, the farther they
are removed from your Eye. Make all. your
Light and Shades fall one Way; and let every
Thing have its proper Motion, as Trees fhaken
by the Wind, the small Boughs bending more,
and the large ones less; Water agitated by the
Wind, and dathing againft Ships of Boats, or
falling from  Precipice upon Rocks and Stones,
 spirting up again into the Air, and prinkling
all about: Clouds alfo in the Air, now gathered
with the Winds, now violently condented into
Hail, Rain, and the like; always remembering
that whatever Motions are caufed by the Wind
muft all be made the fame Way.
Let the Work imitate the Seafon it is intended
to reprefent; as, if you intend it for  Winter-piece,
reprefent the Felling of Woods, Sliding upon the
Ice, Fowling, Hunting, Coc. making the Trees
every where naked, or laden with Snow or Hoar-
froft; the Earth bare; the Air thick or heavy;
the Water frozen, with Carts paffing over it, COc.
Let every Site have its proper Adjuncts or ad
ditional Graces, as the Farm-houfe, Wind-mill,
Waler-mill, Woods, Flocks of Sheep, Herds of
Cattle, Pilgrims, Ruins of Temples, Caftles and
Monuments, with  thouland fuch other Things
proper to particular Subjects.

 AP. EII.


Curious RUL xs for drawing any Objett, in its
Out-lines, as exatt as Nature, with same far-
for Shadowing, &ec.
ther INSTR.UCTIONS

without any Regard to the forementioned Rules,
or any Knowledge in the Art of DR.  .ING.
VINAK   Sheet of the thinneff, or whiteft
brown Paper, and bruth it over with Oil
of Turpentine, which will immediately render it
tranfparent:


. Then, after drying the Paper in the
Air, ftrain it upon  Frame, and fix it againft
the Object you defign to draw: This done, place,
right before it,  Piece of Wood with  Hole in
it, fit for one' Eye to look through, and as you
meet any Out lines of the Object on the tranf-
parent Paper, trace them over with  Pencil, by
which Means, you will obtain the juft Proportion
and true Reprefentation of any Object, in its
Out-lines.
To render this fill more elegant, obferve the
Tracings of your Draught wherever the Shades are,
and mark them with your rencil, for all the Artin
the World can never difpofe the Shades to regu-
larly, as one may touch by this Method, but the
Shades muft be drawn quickly, after the Out-lines
are drawn, not at different Times, becaufe the
Sun inflantly changes them.
Here obferve, as in certain Objects you will have
fainter, ftronger and darker Shades, in your Re
marks of them, to take fuch Memorandums as



may direct you how to finith them with Indianink,
or other Colour, when you fit down to complete
your Work. To this End the beft Way is, before
you trace out your Object, to prepare three Shells.
or Gallipots of Indian Ink; mixed with common
Water, viz. one of  very faint black; one of 
middling black, and one of an intenfe black,
numbering them    and as youmake your
Obfervation on the Shades of your Object, mark
pon your Draught the Jame Numbers as they

happein.


 to appear, to that afterwards you may
finith with Certainty.
In this Regard the tranparent Paper is of great
Ofe; for being laid upon any Paper or Print in 
loofe Sheet, all the Lines will be feen to perfectly
through it, that you may copy them with the great-
eft Eafe; and if the Print or Picture be done by 
good Mafter, you can fee which Lines are ftrong,
which foft, and how to imitate them.
There is yet another Way to take Views and
Landlkips, which some prefer to the tranfparent
Paper; and that is, either with whice or black
Tiffany or Lawn ftrained upon  Frame, and used
in the fame Manner as the Paper, excepting that,
as the Black-lead Pencil is ufed to the Paper, on
the white Tiffany and on the Lawn, you muft ufe
Charcoal very foft and finely powdered; but on
the black Tiffany, very tender, white Chalk is 
be ufed.
CH  . KIII
Several ether curious and eafy Metheds of taking
VIEs, Copying DRAUGHTS, PRINTS, E the greateff Degree of Accuracy.
  Draught may be taken regularly, from 
  Drawing on transparent Paper, as fot
lows. Take  Piece of Paper of the same Size with
that of the Draught; rub one Side of it with some
Powder of Black-lead, till it be well and equally
blacked,





 to that  Finger, touching it, willhardly
be tinged with the Blacking; then take the Print,
and laying the Paper underneath it with the black
Side downwards upon another Piece of white Paper
of the same Size, pin the three together, in two or
three Places: Afterwards, take  Pin or Needle,
fomewhat blunted at the Point, and trace it over
the Out-lines of your Picture, which, with  little
Preffing, will direct the black Paper to impress the
white, fo as to receive every Stroke you draw ;
this done, you may carefully correct what Errors
you fee with your black-lead Pencil, cleaning the
nnew-made Draughts flightly with the Crumb of
Hale Bread.
 As for the Draughts taken on Tiffany of
Lawn, they are only to be laid on Paper, that is,
fuch as is drawn with Charcoal upon white, and
thatdrawn with Chalk upon black or blue Paper;
and then, giving each of them  Knock or two
with  Hiammer, the Charcoal or the Chalk will
fall through them upon the Papers directly in the
Lines they were drawn, and give you the true
Reprefentation of the Object drawn from the Life,
in white Lines upon the black Paper, and in black
Lines upon the white.
Then firengthen thefe Shadows of Drawings
with your black-lead Pencil, Chalk, or red Cker,
upon the Pieces of Paper, where they made the
Marks; for otherwife the Lines will eafily berub-
bed out: But it muft be obferved that this Amend-
ment is to be made foon after the Lines; becaufe
those


 tender Draughts will quickly vanith, if Care
is not taken to ftrengthen them immediately.
You are to begin this Operation at the Bottom
of the Drawing.
. Another Way is, by taking  thin Piece of
Paper, and holding it againft  Glass-Window,
particularly  fathed one, becaufe the Interruption
of the Lead in the smaller glazed Windows will
hinder part of the Prospect; then draw what you
fee from the Glass, and afterwards the black-lead
Paper is to be ufed as directed before.
 There is another Way Hill which may be
more eaty to the Hand or Arm of  Perfon not ac-
cuftomed to drawing upon  Paper or Lawn placed
upright, which is by the fe of  Camera obicura,
tho' to help the Hand one may hold  Baguette,
or fuch  Stick in the left Hand as the Oil-Painters
ufe to reft the right Hand upon; or have fome
other Reft made for the right Hand; as may be
eafily fcrewed up and down at Pleafure. But there
is this Difference flill between drawing  Piece
of Perspective or View on  tranparent Paper or
Lawn placed upright againft any Object, and
drawing by the Camera obicura, that fuch  Piece
will take in more of the View of Object from 
greater Diftance than the Camera obfcura will:
 the portable Camera obicura will; at
firft, be very eaty to the Arm of  Beginner, by
Reafon the Objects appear on an horizontal
Plane, fuch as  Table, and the Hand having  Reft, will more eafily follow the Line re-
prefented on the Plane, with greater Exactness.
The Camera obfcura is  Machine or Appara-
tus wherein the lmages of external Objects are re-
prefented diftinctly, and in their genuine Colours,
either in an inverted or erect Situation. This Ma-
chine may be made as follows. Darken  Cham-
ber, one of whofe Windows look into  Place fet
with  Variety of Objects; leaving only one little
Aperture open in the Window. In this Aperture fit
 Lens, either  plane convex one, or one convex
on both Sides, fo as to be the Portion of  large
Sphere. At  due Diftance, to be determined
by Experience, (pread  Paper or white Cloth on
the Wall, unless the Wall itfelf be whitened to
as to ferve the Purpofe; and on this the lmages of
the defired Objects will be delincated invertedly.
In this Cafe, it is not more difficult to draw,
of rather co
the Objects, though they are re-
verfed, than to draw or copy feveral Things which
we fee upright on the Frames of tranfparent Paper,
Lawn, or Tiffany; for to trace Lines will be as
eafily done one Way as the other; and though the
Objects falling on the Paper or Cloth will, while
you are drawing them, be reverfed, it is but turn-
ing the Paper or Cloth upfide down, when they
are done, and the Drawing will be right to the
Eye. But to obviate this Difficulty, let the Paper
or what is to receive the Objects, be placed againft
the Back of  Chair, and let  Perfon look on the
several


 Objects reprefented thereon over the Back
of the Chair, and this will fet them right to the
Eyc. Or, if you would rather have the lmages
appearerect, it may be done either by means of 
concave Lens, or by receiving the Image on 
plane Speculum inclined to the Horizon under an
Angle  or by means of two Lenfes included
in  Draw-tube inftead of one.
It is to be obferved, that if the Aperture does not
exceed the Bigness of  Pea, the Objects will be re-
prefented thereon, even though there be no Lens
at all. To render the lmages clear and diffinet, it is
neceffary that the Objects be illuminated by the
Sun; and they will be still brighter if the Specta-
for firtt Ray  Quarter of an Hour in the Dark.
Care muft be, likewife, taken that no Light
elcape through any Chinks, and that the Wall be
not too much illugginated. Farther, the greater
Diffance there is between the Aperture and the
Wall, the larger and more diftinct will the Images
be; but the Rays becoming thus too much dilated,
the Brightness of the Image is weakened, till at
length it becomes infenfible. But the portable
Camera obicura is more proper for Beginners, as
being more eaty for their Arm; befides, the Ob-
jects appearing on an horizontal Plane may, of
courte, be drawn with greater Exactness.
The Conftruction of  portable Camera obicura
may be asfollows; Provide  wooden Cheft, in the
Middle of which raife  little Turret either round
Of


 (quare, open towards the Object. Behind this
Aperture incline  little plane Mirror, to an Angle
of  which will reffect the Rays upon  Lens
Convex on both Sides, included in  Tube. At
the End of the Focus of the Lens, place  Table
covered with  white Paper to receive the lmage;
and laftly, make an oblong Aperture to look
through. By means of this Machine the Images
will be exhibited perfectly like their Objects, each
cloathed in their different Colours, whereby any
Perfon, unacquainted with defigning or drawing,

will be able to delineate any Thing to the greateff
Degree of Accuracy and Juftnels; and thofe even
well verfed in Painting will find many Hints by
it to perfect them in their Art.
. Thus far we have fhewn how any Perton
may copy  Draught, Print or Piece of Painting,
of even make an exact Reprefentation from the
Life: But we shall yet add two other Methods,
both eafy and entertaining, not hithertomentioned,
for taking off Draughts or Drawings, which are
 follow. Prick with  Pin the Out-lines of the
Print or Draught you defign to copy, and then
laying the fame on  Sheet of Paper, take  Pow-
der-puff or Tuft of Cotton, dipping it now and
then in Charcoal Duff, and beat it over the pricked
Lines through the Picture, by which means you
shall have full Directions marked on your Cloth
of Paper fufficient to finith  juft Drawing.
 The other Way is, by making such an Im-
preffion from the Print as shall give  juft Copy of
it;


 and it is of great Ufe when we want to carry
every Stroke of the Engraver along with us, which
Method, if you are very careful, will indeed but
very little fully the Print.
For this End, take some white or green Soap,
which mix with fuch  Quantity of Water, as will
bring it to the Confiffence of  felly; with this
Mixture rub the Print, and with  wet Sponge
gently wet the Paper defigned for receiving the
Impreffion; then laying it on the Print, cover all
with two or three other Pieces of dry Paper, and
rub it very hard all over with any Thing that is
fmooth and polifhed; and thus the wetted Paper
will have upon it the Reverfe of the Print you
rubbed it upon, with every diftinct Line in the
Original, if you have been careful torub itequally.
 .  . XIV
SECRETs for copying of Drawings, &. continued;
also for taking off Medals, &. various Ways,
with several other curious .RE CEPTs for tbe
Dse of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, &.
. To take  Drawing with FixED Iwk.
     thin Sheet of Paper, and rub it all
over withfreth Butter, as equally as poffible;
then dry it well by the Fire, and rub the buttered
Sidewitheither Carmine, Lamp-black, Black-lead
Powder, or blue Bice finely ground; till it is all
equally coloured; taking care in rubbing on any of
thofe, that the Colour will not come off by  very
Hlight



 Touch of the Finger. Then lay the co-
loured Side of this buttered Paper upon  Piece of
clean Paper, and lay the Print you defign to copy
upon the buttered Paper; afterwards with  fine
Pin, or  Needle blunted  little at the Point,
trace the Out-lines of the Drawing carefully, by
which Means you will have  good Copy of it
upon your white Paper; which may be touched
afterwards with Crayons, or the like Colour.
II. To take the Impression of  Print with REDIvk.
Mix some Vermillion finely ground with Lin-
feed-Oil, but not to much, but what it shall ftill
be liquid enough to run or flow in  Pen. With
this trace the Lines of your Print; and then with
 Sponge dipt in Water, wet the Backfide of the
Print, and turn the printed Side down upon  Piece
of white Paper, foas to he fmooth. then lay over
that  Piece of dry Paper, and press it hard in every
Part; and the lower white Paper will receive the
Impreffion. But if you have  Linnen-Fress, it
is better to put your Papers between two of the
Leaves, and fcrew the Press as tight as you can,
by which Means you will have  fine Impreffion.
III. To take Draughts, Writings, &. with red
LOOSE INK.
Take some Vermillion finely ground, and mix
it with fair Water in  Gallipot with some Cotton
in it, to as that it may run very free in the Pen:
With this Mixture draw over all the Strokes of
your Print, imitating both the finer and fironger
Lines;



 then with  Sponge dipt in Gum-water
wet  Piece of clean white Paper, and while it is
wet; turn the Print upon it; and preffing it well
take off the Print, and you will find all the Strokes
remain on the clean Paper; and as foon as it is.
dry the Vermillion will be fixed to it.
This Sort of Ink has been ufed frequently in.
writing any thing deligned to be engraved; for
by turning the writing Side of the Paper down
upon  Copper-plate covered with Bees wax and:
white Ground, rubbing it very equally, the Im=
prestion will be upon the Wax.
IV. Taking Draughts with blue LOosE INk.
You may likewife make fuch  Sort of Ink with
blue Bice and common Water as will run very
finely in  Pen, and ferve for the same Ufe as the:
former liik..
. To take off  Drawing in  standing RED

CoL.OUR by tracing.
Take Vermillion finely ground, and mixing
it with  little fresh Butter, rub.  clean Sheet
of Paper on one Side with this Mixture, to that it
may bear  flight Touch of the Finger without
leaving the Paper; then laying the coloured Side
of this Paper upon . clean Shect, lay your Print
upon the other Side of the coloured Paper; and
then trace every Line you think proper; as already
directed in tracing  Draught with fixed Ink.
But be fure to pin the three Papers together at.
The Corners, to prevent their flipping, which would
inevitably
. fpoil your Work. This Impreftion made
by tracing will hold: without rubbing or preffing
the Papers. The Cuills of  Swallow, after they
are thoroughly dry; are very good for tracing.
By mixing Carmine with some freth Butter, and
colouring  Paper with it in the same Manner, you
will obtain  more beautiful Colour; and by co.
louring  Paper, in like Manner, with blue Bice
and Butter, you may have the Drawing blue.
VI. To take the natural or lively Shape of any
HERE Or TREE.
Firft, take the Leaf you would copy, and genly
rub the Veins on the Back-fide of it with  Piece
of Lvory, or some fuch like Matter; to as to bruife
them  little; afterwards wet the same Side gently
with Linfeed-Oil; and then press it hard upon  of white Paper, and you shall have the
perfect Figure of the Leaf, with every Vein in it
juftly exprefted: This Impreftion being afterwards
coloured will seem truly natural, and may be ufe-
ful to fuch as would remember Plants.
VII. Another Way of painting the LE AVES of
Plants, so that the Impression shall appear as black
as if it had been done in  Printing-press, is as
follows.
When the Leaf is dry, take fuch  Ball as the
Press-menufe for blacking the Types, and rubbing
at equally over with Printer' Ink, firike it gently
four or five Times on the Back of the Leaf, till
 the Veins are blacked with the Ink; then lay-
ing the Leaf on  fiat Board or the like, with the
Backfide upwards, clap  Piece of white Paper
well moiftened on the Leaf; and preffing it pretty
hard, but not to as to bruife the Fibres, you shall
have  fine Impreffion.
But this may ffill be done to greater Advantage
by means of  Piece of Wood in the Form of  about  Foot long, and an Inch and  Diameter, the middle Part, about fix or eight
Inches long, being covered with  woolen Cloth
rolled three or four times round it. With this
Cylinder roll the Paper over the Leaf four or five
times backwards and forwards, and you will have
 curious Impreffion.
But where Printer' Ink is not conveniently
come at; the following Method may be made ufe
of. Rub the back of the Leaf, as before directed,
with burnt Linfeed-Oil: Then, ftrewing fome
Powder of black Lead, or for want of that, fome
Charcoal, or fmall Coal-duft, or the Powder of
burnt Cork, upon  fimooth Board, to as equally
to cover it, stroke the Powder gently over; and
oiling the Backfide of the Leaf, clap it upon the
Board; and then laying the white Paper upon the
back of the Leaf, prets or roll it, as before.
If none of thefe Ingredients are conveniently
had, take Vermillion, and mixing it with freth
Butter to the Confiftence of Printer' Ink, cover
your printing Ball with it; dawb it over the back
of the Leaf, and take your Impreffion as before.
Where


 Vermillion is, ufed, Bice may allo be
made ufe of, either with Butter or Oil, by grind-
ing blue Bice with some burnt Linfeed Oil, and
ufing it as before: Thus, you may have  finered
or blue ink proper for impreffions of this Sort, but.
the blue is preferable in colouring Leaves, becaute
it is an agreeable Colour for the green Sort.
It may be obferved that the Reafon why the
back of the leaf is the proper Side to make the
Impreffion from, is becaufe the Ribs or Veffels rife
on that Side above the flethy Part of it; and there-
fore being coloured with any of thofe Inks, they
are the fitteft to give an Impreffion, whereas in
 Forefide of the Leaf, the ffethy Parts rife, and

thefe fine Fibres are funk between them.
 To take off the LE AVES of PLANTS in.
Plafter of Paris, so as that they may afterwards
be caft in Meial..
Thofe Perfons who caft in Metal have frequent.
occafion to ufe Leaves of feveral Sorts, in order.
to embellish their Work; thefe are generally
made from Models done by the Hand, which take
up  great deal of Time, and even at laft are
imperfect: But the following Way, which is com-
municated by  Gentleman from Iioly, is greatly
preferable, and much eafier.
Soon after you have cropped the Leaf you defire
to take an Impreffion from, lay it between the
Leaves of  Book,, till once it shall lie flat; then,
pon  finooth Board with  ftrong Guni-water,
smade


 of Gum-arabic; fix the forefide or front.
of the Leaf to the Board; when this is done, raife
round it  little Wall of coarfe Pafte, half an.
Inch high; or, if you can conveniently, furround
your Piece of Wood with Pafte-board, or Card-
paper, to clofe as that it shall hold  Liquid for
some time; then oil the back of your Leaf, as.
directed below in the Method for cafting of Me-
dals; and pour on Water and Plafter of Paris  there directed, which, when it is dry, will
give you an exalt impreffion of every Vein of
the Leaf, and from which you may eafily make:
 Mould to caft in as you fancy.
IX. An expeditious Methed of taking the Impression.
of any BUTTERELY in all its Colours.
Having taken  Butterffy, kill it without spoil-
ing the Wings, which contrive to pread as regur
larly as poffible in  flying Pofition; then, with :
small Bruth or Pencil, taking  Piece of white Pa=
per, wath part of it with Crum-water, alittle thick-
or than ordinary, to that it may eafily dry; after-
wards laying your Butterffy on the Paper, cut.
off the Bodyclofe to the Wings, and throwing it
away, lay the Paper on  finooth Board, with the
Fly upwards; and laying another Paper over thats.
put the whole Preparation into  Screw-press, and
screw it down very hard, or otherwife press it,
letting it remain under that Preffure for the Space
of an Hour. Afterwards take off the Wings of
the Butterffy, and you will find  perfect Impref-
fion of them, with all their yarious Colours marked:
diffinctly,


 remain upon the Paper. When this
is done draw between the Wings of your Impref-
fion the Body of the Butterffy, and colour your
Draught of the Body after the Life.
 To take off the Impression of WEDALS.
This may be of Ufe to fuch as would preserve
to themfelves good Specimens of fine Draughts of
curious Medals, especially as it is eafily executed,
and but  triffing Expence.
One Way is as follows. Take Hinglass, and
breaking it in Pieces, diffolve as much of it   over the Fire in  Quantity of Water
fufficient only to cover it, taking care to keep it
firring till the whole is diffolved. This done,
with  Hair Brush, ftroke some of the Glue over
the Medals whofe Impreftion you would take,
after placing them as horizontally as you can,
and when you have covered them. perfectly all
over, let them lie till the Glue is hardened; and
afterward, with the Point of  Pin, or Needle,
raife the Edge of the Glue from each Medal, and
the whole Impreffion of the Medals in Glue will
fy off as hard as  Hforn, with all the fine Sharp-
nnets of the Medal as it was struck.
This Glue may he made of whatever Colour
you pleafe, by, mixing the Colour in the Water
the Glue is boiled in.. The Impreffion muft be
dried immediately, but very regular, and not. in
 hot Sun, nor in any damp Place.
II


( you ufe Ifing
glats without any Colourmixed
with the Water, you may, as foon as you take
the Impreffions from the Medals, breathe gently
on the concave side of them; and then lay them
upon the thickeft fort of Leaf-gold, which will
Rtick to them; and by fhining through the Iling
glats will appear like  Gold Medal: But if we
would imitate  Copper-medal, we should mix
Carmine with the Water that we diffolve our
-slats in.
Hing
Although Water may do very well for diffoly-
ing the Ifing-glats in for this Purpofe, yet Brandy
or Spirits of Wine will give the Glue  much
greater Strength, to as not to be subject to foften
in  damp Air.
XI. To take the Impression of large MEDALS.
Firft rub the Medals gently over with  Tuft
of fine Cotton moiftened or greafed with Sweet-
oil; then having some melted Brimftone, enough
to cover the Medal half aninch thick, put  Hoop
of Card-paper round the Edge or it, and pour the
melred Brunffone on it, but not too hot; as foon
as it is fixed and hardened, take off the Hoop of
Paper, and the Impreffion on the Brmfone will
come clean from the Medal, which shall ferve
for  Charp and correct Mould wherein you may
call another with Plaifter of Paris. Bur Brini
Hone should not be ufed on Silver-medals, be
caufe it will effectually change their Colour.

There-


 to take Silver-medals off, bind them
round, after, oiling them, with  Hoop of some
Riff Paper, as before, and mixing  little Plaifter
of Paris with Water, fill the Hoop with it; then
immediately fill the Cafe in  sprinkling Man-
ner with the same Plaifter, till it hardens; and when
it turns dry, take it off from the Medals. But from
thofe Moulds caft in Brimffone that are concave,
you multagain caft fuch Medals in Plaiffer of Paris,
and they will be convex, oiling the Mould and
ufing the Plaiffer of Paris as before. By this Me-
thod you may take off any Medal or fine Eass-
relief with great exactncts, even to as to form
Medals from them in any fort of Mctal.
XII. Another Way of takine
of MEDALs is as
follows.
Procure some thin pieces of Lead, and placing
the Medal horizontally on the top of  firm Poft,
or any Heady Place; lay  piece of harder Me-
tal flat over the Lead; and place  Piece of 
round turned Stick over that, fuch as is ufed in the
Staff of  Houfe-bruth; faw off about five or fix
Inches in Length; and holding that right wich the
left Hand, on the Lead and flat piece of Metal,
hrike the top of the Stick  fmart Blow with 
large fiammer, and it wil give the Lead  perfect
Impreffion of the lmage of the Medal. But this
mut be done by one fingle Elow to render the
Impreffion perfcel.
XIII.


 Various Ways of taking off MEDALS.
Take the Shavings of Paper, and boiling them
till they are tender, pound them well in  Mortar,
to as to reduce them into  Pafte: then, boil them
again in Spring-water with  little Gum-arabic.
let this Mixture fland some time to fettle then
pour off the Water, ftraining it through  Sieve
or Linnen-cloth and the remaining Part of this
Mixture will be an excellent Ingredient either to
press into any Mould, or upon any Medal: for
when the Pafte is dry, it will come off very
Sharp.
Some Mledals that are under-wrought cannot be
taken off this Way; therefore, in fuch Cafe you
should take common Glue, and melung it, fix 
Hoop of Pafte-board,  round the Edge of
the Medal, and pour on the Glue hot; the sfc.
dal having been firft oiled with  Tuft of greated
Cotton.
WThen the Crlue is dry and hard, take off the
Hoop, and the Clue will fy off from the Edges;
and it wiil, as being funycet to bend and oive way,
which the Things formerly mentioned are  ,
come very cafily off. But the Giue ought to be
made frong, and should be poured on one third
Part of an luch thick.
When an Impreffion has been taken by this
Means, you muft then hoop your mould of Glue
with either Card-paper or Pafte-board, as befire
  taking Care to oil it to that no Bubbles
or Bliffers may be feen; then you may caft your
Plaifter of Paris in it, and you will obtain, by thefe
means,  good Copy of the Medal. When this
is dry, the Glue will fly off, or may be broken off,
will remain  good Pattern to caft
and there
from.
Alfo,  Putty may be made of Lin feed-oil and
fine-ground Starch, which being well worked
together into  Pafte will take  good Impreffion
from any Medal. By means of thefe Moulds
you may caft good Medals of Bees-wax: but
they will come off much charper if the Mould be
in Brimftone, than if it be in Plaifter of Paris. But
then your Wax should be as well blanched of
whicened as if it was ufed for Wax-candles; how-
ever, it will be neceffary to greate the Mould be-
fore the Wax is poured in; and though white
Tax is here recommended, yet it will not be
beft that the Copy of the Medal be white, becaufe
the darker Colours thew the Medal much better.
If you would have your Copy of  red Colour,
mix Vermillion with the Wax, while it is melt-
in and if you would have it blue, put in Stone-
blue well beaten, or ground, into the melted Wax.
As foonas thefe Wax-medals are cold enough to
take off, you should lay some Leaf-gold upon them
prefting it down genly with  piece of Cotton,
without rubbing it backwards and forwards; and
that will gild yourMicdal. Whenyou caft Mledals
i Plaifter of Paris, to make them look like Steel
or Metal, rub them over with  Tuft of Cotton
lightly greated with Oil: then ftrewing over them
some Powder of black Lead, rub them well with
such  Bruth as is ufed for the Feeth, till the
whole is equally covered, and this will give them
 fine Meral-gloss. You may make thefe Me-
dals in Plaiter of Paris look like Box, by boiling
them in Linfeed-oil; and this will harden them
to fuch  degree as to hear the Brusk, to clean
them when they tarn foul, or dirty. If you
would have thefe Medals look of  yellow Colour,
boil  litle Pearl-athes in  Pint of Water. til
it makes  firong Lixiwium; then put in half  of  Pint of French-berries Boil this till
the Liquor is of  firong yellow, and ufe it with
your Plaifter of Paris infread of common Water.
If you would have the Medals look green, the
fine, tranfparent Gum of Verdegreafe mixed with
the Plaifter of Paris, will give them that Colour;
and for  Silver-colour, Leaf-filver or Tin-foil
may be ufed in the Jame Manner as the Leat-
gold for the Gold-colour. for the Copper-colour,
German leaf-copper may be ufed.
XIV To take off Impressions in Plaiffer of Paris
from CoPPER-PL ATES.
Oil the Plates  little, and binding them about,
either with Card or other Pafte-board paper, pour
on them fome of the fineft Plaifter of Paris and
Water; and finithing the Work with Plaifier till
it
  becomes dry and hardens, you will have  fine
Imprestion or Draught of the Lines on the Platg
in the Plaifter, which you may make ufe of to
draw from as you may have Occafion.
XV. Totake off the fine Engravings from WATch-

CASES, SNUFF-BCKES, Eic.
Hold them over the Smoke of  Candle, till they
are quite black; then wiping off the Blacs with
the foft Part of the Palm of your Hand, lay 
piece of white Paper,  little wetted with  Sponge,
over the Engravings; and over that clap  thin
piece of Flannel, or brown Paper preffed down
very hard, which being rubbed, the Paper next
the Picture will obtain as fine an Impreffion as if
it had pafted through  Rolling-press.

   





 

PAR  II.
The Doctrine of WATER-COLOURS, for
illaminating Prints, &. in the beft:
Manner
CH AP .
Of CoL  URS in General.
& Olours are to be diffinguithed as follows.
the firff is the White Colour; next, the

Fellow; next the Orange; then the Red;
after that, the Purple; afterwards, the Blus;
and laftly, the Black. It is to be obferved, that
White and Black are the Extremes of Colour.
Fellow is the leffer point of Colour towards the

White; the next to that is the Green; and after
it, the Blue.
With regard to the colouring of Prints, if the
Paper be pure white, you are to ufe no Colour on
it, unless in the shaded Parts; and then in painting
of Flowers, if they tendtowards  reddith Colour,
youaretoufe  faint Colour of Carmine with Gum-
water, upon the Shades only ; if bluith, ufe  litile
faint Indigo in Gum-water flightly paffed over the
Shades, eafily touching upon the Lights. Where
there is  yellow Tinge, either ufe  faint Tinc-
ture of Gamboge, or of French-herries, which
will be defcribed among the Vellows; or if the
Whites have  purplith Caff, ufe  thin Cake on
the
 


 Chady Side fuffering the Colour only to thine 
lirde into the Light, which will give  Luffre to
the Whites; and if  greenith Caft should be there,
afe  very faint Colour of the Sap-green; or in
Proportion of the Sap-green mixed with the Ver-
degreafe-green.
All thefe Colours mentioned for fhading the
Whites may be found in the following Directions.
   . II.
HIT Es for Painting in Miniature.
 beft White fold for painting in Wa-
 ter Colours is Flake-white this is bet-
ter than whice Lead ground, and if it be pure
far exceeds it in Beauty; becaute the white Lead
is apt to turn blackith, especially if it be ufed in 
hard Water.
 Butfomerecommend  White made of Pearl
and Oyfter-shells reduced into an impalpable Pow-
der, fo foft as to feel like Grounds of Starch, or
Hair-powder this is by fome called Pearl-white,
and will mix well with any Colour. But if you
ufe white Lead, firft rectify it with White-wine
Vinegar, which caufing  Fermentation, the
White will foon fettle; after which pour off the
Vinegar, and wath the White with common
Water. The Method of wathing it is thus, Put
the Powder into  Glats of Water; ffir it about,
and prefently pouroff the Water, while it is white,
into fome other clean Glats, or Veffel: then
letting it fettle, pour off the Water from it, and
 shall have an excellent White, to which
when it is fettled, you are to put as much Gum
water as is neceffary to give it  Glazc.
It is obfervable that white Lead will turnblack,
if mixed with Water that comes from Iron or
Clay; that is, in the Space of  Month or two,
you may perceive thofe places where it lies thick-
eff tinged with black; and if it be mixed with
any other Colour it will foon change, or alter it.
 Some recommend the Powder of Egg-shells
of the brighteff Colour, and well cleaned and
wathed, as very good to be ground with Gum-
water; or you may put  twentieth Part of clean
white Sugar candied to grind with it in Water.
it muft be ground as fine as poffible; that is, to
the State of an impalpable Powder; and then ule it.
Some lay it is better if rectified Spirit of Wine be
poured on it, which will clear it from any Dross
that may be in it: this, it is probable, muft be
poured off, when the Spirit of Wine has done its
Work; and then the Parts left behind muft be
mixed with Gum-water again.
But it has been found by experience that Eoo-

shell Powder is of very great Service, as  White,
in Water-colours, and that itfelf and the Oyfter-
shell Powders, well rectified and mixed with the
White of an Egg well beaten, will make an ex-
traordinary MixtureinotherColours, and will cor-
rect them from changingor altering their Qualities.
 As to  White for illuminating of Prints, the
clear White of the Paper is to be left uncoloured,
and


 if it happens that the Paper is apt to fink, or
to pread any Water-colour that is laid upon it
more than is neceffary; then the way to correct it
is as follows. Fix the Paper in fuch  Station asthet
it may only receive the Colouryoulay on to slaze,
juft as far as you defigned it; then take fome
Starch boiled and prepared in Wiater, of  middle
Strength, and with  large Painung-bruth, firoke
it over the Back of the Print; and after it has been
well dried in the Air, or Sun, put the Print in 
Book with  Weight upon it, to take out the
Crumplings which it may receive by wetting of it;
and thus will any Print be rendered fit to receive
Water-colours, which will be prevented from
running further than one would have them.
  fine Whire for Water-colours is made by
diffolving Filings of fine Silver or Silver-leaf in -
qua-fortiss then evaporating the Aqua-fortis till it
looks like Cryftals in the Bottom of the Glass: de-
cant the other Part of the Aqua-fortis, and wath
the Silver five or fix times in common Water, till
it is freed from the Aqua fortis, which may be
Known by talting it; then dry it for Ufe. It muft
be ufed with Gum-water, and  little water of
Sugar-candy.
 An incomparable, fine white Lead-colour is
made by grinding choice white Lead well upon 
Porphery with Vinegar, to that it turns blackith:
then take  Pot full of Water, and wathing the
white Lead in it very well, let it fettle; and pour-
ing off the Water, grind it again with Vinegar;
repeat this once or twice more; and you will have

 excellent White both for Water-colours and
painting in Oil.
 To make  good white for the Ground, for Water
or Oil-colours, proper in Miniature.
Take  Pound of Glover' clippings, put them
some time to sleep in Water then boiling them
in  Ketle, with twelve Quarts of Water, till
it finks to two, flrain it through  linnen-cloth
into  new earthen Pan: this is called Glove-glue,
or Size; and to know whether it be firong
enough, it is only neceffary to try, when it is
cold, and has got its Confiftence, whether it be
Riff and firm under the Hand.
The Cilue being made, take white Chalk, and
reducing it to powder, and melting the Glue, while
it is hot, put fuch  quanticy of White in it, as to
make it to thick as Pap: then leaving it to kteep for 
quarter of anffour, fir it about with  Briftle-bruth.
Then taking some of this White put more
Glue to it, in order to make it brighter, for the
firff or second Lay: this muft be applied by beating
with the end of the Bruth. Mind that you letevery
Laydry well before you put on another. If it is
Wood you work on, you muft put on  Dozen;
but if it is thick Paper, fix or feven are fufficient.
This done, take Water, and dipping  foft
Bruth in it, and draining it with your Fingers rub
the Work with it, in order to render it the
fmoother. When your Bruth is full of White, you
muft wath it again; and alto change the Water
when


 it is too white. Voumay likewife fometimes
make ufe of  wet linnen-rag inflead of  Bruth.
Your Work being very even, let it dry, and
when it is fo, rub it with Shave-grats, or  bit of
new linnen-cloth, to make it foft and free.
   . III.
Of VELL  
 AHtere are some Objects which have the ap-
pearance of oldfhiningthrough the Co-
lours of Green, Red or Elue, fuch as fome fort
of Flies and Beetles, and the Cantharides.  his
golden Tranparency is very well imitated by lay-
ing fome Gold-leaf on the fhaded part of the
giving in  little to the light Side of the
Brawing
Print. The way of laying on the Gold-leaf, is
by wathing the part where the Gold is to be with
Hrong Gum-water, and, when it is fomewhat
dry, by laying on the Grold as fmooth and even as
poftible; prefting it down clofe with Cotton. But
in doing this, care muft be taken that, in laying on
the Gum-water, you do not exceed the Lmitsyou
would have the Gold appear to shine. In this
cafe the Gold is to thine only through the tranfpa-
rent Colour which is to be laid on.
Itmuft be obferved, that the Gold-leaf will not
receive Water-colours regularly, and for that
Reafon it muft be ftroked over with  little thin
liquor of Ox-gall in  painting Bruth of Camels
Hair, by which means it will receive any Colour
that you have  mind to paint upon it, and will
hold it. The Greens may be firft the Verdegreafe-
TTeCIl



( or Sap-green (which Colours shall be de-
scribed in their Places;) the Reds may be Lake or
Carmine; the Purples, Lake and fine Indigo, or
Carmine and Indigo; and for the Blues, Indigo on
the dark fide, and on the light  little flroke of
Ultramarine-blue, juft to thine into the Light,
which will have an admirable effect.
 There may be found upon Rofe-trees, in June
and July,  kind of Bectle of  gold and green Colour,
which may ferve for  Direction in this kind of Paint-
ing. Butif Gold itself be ufed, it will bebeft to po-
lith it, which may be done in the following manner.
Theremay be feen in some Manuscripts finegol-

yen Letters which rife above the Surface of the Vel-
lum or Paper: the Compofition that raifes them thus
is faid to be made up of Vermilion and the white of
anEgg, whilked or beaten up to the Confiftence of
an Oil, and worked together like  kind of Pafte,
and with  ftamp fixed to the Vellum or Paper with
Gum-arabic. On this Figure of  Letterwath some
Hrong Gum-water with  Pencil of Camel’ Hair,
obferving that the Gum does not reach more than
the Out-lines; then lay on the Gold-leaf clofe with
some Cotton, and being dried, rub it with fome dry
Cotton; and ten polifh it with  Dog’-tooth. this
will makeit appearas if it was really caft in Gold.
 There is befides this another way of working

in Gold, and that is pe.-ormed by Shell-gold, but
then it muft be pure Cford, and not that brought
 Germany, which taras green in  few Days

time. Before voz ate tns Lord, cover the fhady.
parts





 with Vermillion; and after your Gold has
been well rectified with Spirit of Wine, lay it on
with Gum-water, which will readily mix with it;
and when it is dry, polith it with  Dog' tooth.
In laying on Gold, it will be beft to leave the
Lights without it, becaufe it will make  much
brighter Appearancethan if the Object was covered
all over with it. But if, by Accident or other=
wife, the whole Piece happened to be covered
with Gold, there is no better way to fet it off,
than by tracing over the fhady parts with Gall-
fone, or, what is much preferable, the Vellow
made of French-berries, the Compofition of which
is treated of below. But it is the deepeft that is to
be ufed in this way.  little Minium heightens it
very much. How the Mimum is to berectified may
be learned among the Reds Obferve to polith the
Gold before you afe the Minium on it.
After this Colour of the Gold, the Vellows shall
be treated of as they fall gradually in their ftrength.
 The firtt Vellow is  kind of Straw-colour,
and is made of Flour of Brimffone, which of itfelf
is fine enough to mix with Cum-water.
  common way of illuminating Prints is by
giving the Tincture of Gambogefora Fellow; and
ths may be of two or three forts, either fainter or
Rronger; the laft to be  shade to the firft, and to
be thaded with the Preparation of French-berries.
 Mr Boyle fays, that if the Roots of Barber-
ries are cut and put into  Lixivium made ftrong
with Water and Pearl-alhes, there will be  fine
Fellow


 produced from it; this having been often
tried fucceeded very well.
 Helikewife propofes another way for making
 tranfparent Vellow, which is by boiling the Root
of  Mulberry-tree, washed well from theEarth, in
 ftrong Lixivium of Pearl-affes and Water; this
will afford  yellowith Juice, from which may beex-
tracted  Tincture much deeperthan the former.
. Vellow Oker will likewife make another
good pale Vellow, but it is  Colour rather of too
much Body for illuminating of Prints; yet being
well ground with Gum-water, it is of ufe after
it has seen well wathed.
 The Plant Celandine will affordanothergood
Fellow by infuling it in Water and preffing it gent
ly, and then boiling the Liquor with  little Alum.
This Fellow will incline fomewhat to Green.
 But  Vellow which some prefer to the reft,
and may be ufed in several casacities of Lights, is
one made of French-berries, and prepared as fol-
lows. Boil two ounces of French-berries in  of Lixivium made of Pearl-afhes and Water,
till the Liquor gives  fine tinge of Vellow to  bit
of Paper dipped in it; and then pour it off from the
Berries; let the Liquorcool, and bottle it upforufe.
Then again, put  Pint of the fame Lixivium to
the Berries, and boil them till the Liquor is as
deep-coloured as Gall-ftone, and this will be fit
for the Shade of any fort of Yellews you can ufe.
This may be boiled till it produces  brown Co-
lour; and will, with  little Ox-gall, ferve to
 any Leaf-gold that is laid on Paper, and is
much preferable to Gall-ftone in imitating any
Gold-colour; and it anfwers well upon  Tinc-
ture of Gamboge, or any of the former Vellows.
 Nextto this may be reckoned the Tincture
of Saffron in common Water only, which affords
 bright reddith Fellow, fuch as would be required
for an Orange-colour, in covering the fhadowed
parts of  Print; and when Saffron is infuled in
rectified Spirits of Wine, there is nothing higher:
but then it will fly, unless it be loaded with Cum-
arabic.
 sfor  deep Vellow, with  Body, Dutch
Pinkcomes the neareft of any to the forementioned
 Fellow made of French-berries in point of
Rrong
Colour: but the Englith Pink, which is still made
of French-berries, is of  lighter Vellow.
 Alfo,  good yellow Colour for illuminat-
ing Prints may be extracted from the Roots of
Ginger; and with tran(parent Verdegreafe it makes
 fine Green.
It is to be obferved, that the Englith and Dutch
yellow Pinks are made with French berries ground
to  fine Powder and hoiled.


  AP. IV
Of OR     Colours.
NOrange-colour for wathing Prints is made
Ad bylaying on  reint of amboge; and over
that fome Minium or red Lead wathed, and ren-
dered fine and fit for ufe; it not being fine enough
 paint with as it is bought at the Shops; and

befides it will change, or turn black in  few
Weeks, if it be not refined; but being well pre-
pared, it will be very lafting and beautiful. But
this you muft take notice of, that an Ounce will
not produce above twenty rains of  good Colour
to fland the Teft of Painters. This Colour may
be mixed with Gamboge upon  white Dutch
Tile, to render it of the teint you would have it,
either fofter or ftronger; or elfe the Gamboge
may be glazed over, and ftrengthened with the
Tincture of Saffron, which will make it glare
into  flrong Orange.

 

CHA. 
Of NINTUM, the Uighieff RED LEAD; the
Manner of preparing it.
rm ATIE Minium or red Lead is as heavy and
 Rrong  Colour as moft we have; and
prepared, is the moft beautiful one, when it is
wellwathed and cleanted of itsmore weighty Parts,
which caue it to turn black.
Nir Eogls dirccts the preparing, or cleanfing it
in the following manner. Put four Ounces of it iir
 Quart of Rain-water; then firring it, pour off
the Water immediately, and let it fculeto the bot-
tom of every Cup or Giats you pour it into; then
pouring off that trater, in  Days tume you will
have the Colourdry, and as fine as can be defired,
Afterwards put  little Crum-arabic into eachGlats
or Cup, and as much Water as will moiften cacis
of them.
Any
 of thefe may be afterwards ufed with Gum-
water; but if the um you put in at firft make it
Hrong enough to glaze it, then you need only add
to it common Water; and according as your Co-
lour isless or more gummed, ufelets ormore Cum-
water; for it is of itfelf  dead Colour. When
you ufe this Colour, touch it gently on the Vel-
low above-mentioned that is made of the yellow
Berries, into the light fide; and if it wants  Shade,
you may put  little Vermillion upon it; but Ver
million is too heavy to paint with, when you would
illuminate your Frints, becaute it hides the Shades
of the Engraving, though fomeumes they had bet-
ter be hidden than appear; some generally shade
this Minium with Carmine, which gives it  fine
efieet, and renders it equal to the brighteft red
Flower that is to be feen; leaving Hill the Lights
uncoloured, only dathing  little way into the
Lights with the Mimum.
WWhen the Carmine has fhaded the Minium, it
may be shaded again with Lake in the frongeft
part to bring it to  deeper :.
  AP. VI.
Of other REDS.
 Scarlet-Red.
& Carlet may be reprefented on  Plane with

 Minium  little mixed with Vermilion; but


if you have occafion to paint  Flower of  Scarler
Colour on  Print, letyourLights as well as Shades
be covered thin with Mlinium; and the fhaded
Parts


 glazed with Carmine, which will produce
an admirable Scarlet, fuch as is feen in the Flowser
Scarlet Martagon.
 Crimson-Red.
 Crimfon-colour is reprefented with Carmine,
but it is necellary that the Buyer be informed that
there are feveral Sorts of it; fome darker, and
some much coarfer than others therefore it should
neverbebought by Candle-light, unless of fuch as 
Perfon can confide in. for between the beft and
the worft there is ten Shillings an Ounce differ-
ence; nay indeed all the Money that an Ounce
will coft, becaufe bad Carmine will but spoil the
Work.
 Next after Crimfon comes Lake, which is
of ufe in fhading and heightning Carmine. But it
muft be obferved that in laying of Carmine upon 
Print, you mult touch your Lights only with fuch 
thin teint of it as can fcarcely he obterved; laying
 on ftrong juft on that Part of the Light which
enters upon the Shade, and afterwards laying tome
Lake on the ftronger Part of the Shadc.
Lake is to be had in moft Colour-fhops ready
prepared in Shells for Water colours.
To make  fine Lake, take half  Pound of
good Brafil, and boiling it in three Pints of Lye
made with the Afhes of Vine-twigs till half the
Lye be evaporated, let it fettle, and then ftrain
it; which done, boil it again with freth Brafil, 
quarter of  Pound; Cochineal, two Pounds,
and Terra marita half an Ounce, adding  Pint of
fair Water. Let this boil tili it be half craporated


 before: then fet it by to fettle, and ftrain it.
But when you take it off the Fire, remember to
put in half an Ounce of calcined Alum, reduced
to an impalpable Powder, and diffolve it, by
firring it about with  Stick, adding  quarter of
 Dram of Arfenic.
In order to give it  Body, reduce two Cuttle-
fifh-bones to  very fine Powder, and putting in the
Powder, let it dry up at Leifure. Then grind it
with  good quantity of fair Water, in which leave
it toffeep, and afterwards ftrain it through  Cloth;
and making it up into  few Tablets, or Cakes, fet
it to dry on  Card, or Pafte-board. If you would
have this Lake redder, add Lemon-Juice; and if
you would make it deeper, add Oil of Tartar.
nother Lake may be made as fillows. Boil
Shavings or Shearings of Scarler in  Lye of the
fathes of burnt Tartar: this Lye having the Pro-
perty of Teparating the Dye from the Scarlet
Shreads. When it has beiled enough, take it
off, and purting in Cochineal, powdered Maftic,
and Roch-alum, boil the whole again, and while
it is quite hot, ftran it two or three times through
 fine Bag; the firft time the Bag muft be tqueez-
&dwithtwoSticksfrom the topto thebottom; then
the grots Matterremaining being taken out of the
Bag, wath it well. After this pats the Liquor you
exprefied with the Sicks through the Bag again,
and you will find  Pafte flicking to the fides of
the Beg, which you may either pread upon 
Pafte-board, or divide into (mall Parcels upon
To
 iger and fet it afide to dry,


 make Lake-columbine, steep half  Pound
of the fineft Brafil-wood of Fernambuca raffied in
three Pints of the fineft diftilled Vinegar, for at
leaft  Month, the longer the better. After which
feeth the whole in Balneo Marix, till it boils up
three or four times; letting it fettle for  Dajy or
two. After this, prepare  fourth part of pow-
dered Alum, and putting it in  clean earthen
Pan, ftrain the Liquor upon the Alum, and folet
it remain for  Day. Afterwards, heat the whole
again till the Liquor fimmers, and let it fettle
twenty-four Hours; then reduce two Cuttle-fith-
bones into powder, and having warmed the Li-
quor, pour it in upon them, and ftir it about with
-
aStick till it be cold, and leave it again for twenty-
four Hours before you ftrain it. Remember that
it muft be firft ftrained upon the Alum, before it
i poured upon the Cuttle-fith-bone.
 But  liquid Colour not much inferior to
Carnune itfelf may be made of the Rafpings of
Brafil-wood: this Colour is the tranfparent Crim-
fon, and is made as follows. Boil an Ounce of the
Rafpings of Brafil-wood, fold at the dry Salters
and at fome Colour-fhops, intwelve Ounces of pale
Htale Beer and  little Alum, till the Colour of the
Liquor is as ftrong as you pleafe, which may be
difcovered by dipping  slip of white Paperinto it.
When this Colour is as you would have it, pais
it when cooled into  Linnen-cloth, and bottle
it up for ufe.
And if you would bring this Colour to  Body,
take Ox-blood, and dry it till it can be reduced
  powder, which being done, mix it with the
Liquor, and it will communicate  Colour to it
little inferior to  middling Carmine. fome fay
that the Blood of an Ox or Cow dried will make 
good Body for any Colour.
  Crimson Colour from Nir Boyle.
Take the Fruit of the Berry-bearing Spinach,
prefied, will yield  beautifulred-co-
which being
loured Jice; boil this, adding  fourth part of
Alum to it; then letting it cool, put it up for ufe.
 The red Bect-root baked with  liitle firong
Vinegar produces an elegant Red-colour equal to 
Tincdure of Carmine, then pour it on Alum, and
it is fit for ufe, where Carmine should be ufed in
wathing Prints: for it is  fine tranfparent red.
 Another Crimson Colour for washing Prints,
Ec. is prepared as follows.
Put thirty or forty Grains of bruifed Cochineal
into  Gallipot, with as many Drops of Fartar-lye
as will juft wet it, and make it give forth irs Co-
Lour; then immediately adding to this mixture half
 Spoonful of Water, or more, if the Colour be
Hill too deep, you will have  delicate Purple-
Liquor or Tincture. Then taking  bit of
Alum, fcrape very finely with  Knife  small
-quantity of it into the Tincture, and this will take
away the Purple-colour, and make it  delicate
Tincture. Strain it through  fine Cloth into  Gallipot, and ufe it as foon as you can, be-
caule this is  Colour that will always look exqui-
fitely fine, if it is foon made ufe of; but will decay
 Indian
.
if it flands long.



 Indian Red.
Next to thefe is the Indian Red, which though
it is  Colour of  Body, yet is ufeful for  black.
Ground for Flowers at  diftance, when ufed with
Gum-ater.
 There is alfo an Earth brought from the
Hle of Wight which has been found to mix ex-
tremely well with Cum-water, though being of 
vifcous Nature, it requires less Gum than moft
other Colours; and as it is naturally fit for ufe
without grinding, and is vifcous, fo it will no
doubt mix with Oil, as well as with Water.
Thereis one thingvery extraordinary in this Earth,
which is, that if you rub  Deal-board with it,
it will make the Board exactly of the Colour of
Mahogony-wood, and ftain it to deep, and with
to much flrength, that it is hard to get it out
with wathing.

  AP. VII.
Of PURPLE.
Fine tranfparent Purple may be made either
  redder, or nearer the blue, as you would
have it, by boiling four Ounces of rafped Brafil-
wood in  Pint of Htale Beer, with half an Ounce
of Logwood, or Campeachy-wood, till the Liquor
is heightened to the Colour you defire, which may
be known by dipping  piece of Paper in  youfinditfoored, addan Ounce of Logwood
to the Brafil-wood, which will make it much near-
CT


 to the Purple than the former; and by this me-
thod you may humour it to any degree of Purple,
by putting in either more or less Logwood to the
former Compofition; and fixing the Colour; with







Afum.
  ric  
This will- produce, fuch  clear Purple as no
Nixture of folid Reds and Blues will do, and the
Receipt has been for  long time kept secret. It
is faid, that the beft purple Colour that can be
made may be compoted between the Carmine and
Indigo, to ftrengthen which, on the red fide, you
may add Lake between the ligher and darker
part; and to Lake when it is ufed in the fame
way on the foregoing Purple, or the liquid Crim-
Ion, produces  very fine effect.
The Colour may be varied, and made either
redder, by putting more Carmine, or bluer, by
ufing more Indigo, which, being mixed on  white
Dutch Title, will thew itfelf.
 fine Purple colour may be made of the grots
Part of Sediment of Lake-columbine, both for
Oil and Water-colours, as follows.
Take the Sediment of Lake-columbine which
falls to the bottom of the Vial in which is the
Bone of the Cuttle-fith. Let it dry, and grind
it; there, will be no Lake to fine as this; and it
you mix it with Lake it will give it  better
Body, befides more Strength and Vigour.
CHAP.



   . VIIl.
Of BivE.
 :IE Ultramarine-blue is not only the firft
but the beft fort of bright Blue we have;
as it gives  Spirit to all Paintings where Blues are
uted. The Colour is made from the Lapis Lazuli
divefted of its Gold, and ground into an impalpa-
ble Powder, which is done as follows. Take half
 Pound of LapisLazuli, and putting it upon red-
hot Coals, let it ftaythere until it is red-hot then
quenching it in very Hrong Vinegar, and grinding
it upon Porphery, or any fuch hard Stone, with
rectified Brandy to an impalpable Powder, make
 Paftil with which the Lapis is to be incorporated.
for the making of this Paftil take Bees-wax, Tur-
pentine, Rofin and  infeed-oil, of each  quarter of
 Pound; and melting the whole together over 
flow Fire, when it begins to boil, pouritintoa glaz-
ed Por: this is the Pafte of Ultramarine. Takeof
this Pafte  quantity equal to that of the Lapis,
Knead them together upon the Marble, and being
well incorporated, let them remain for one Night;
afterwhich, to bring out the Ulramarine that is in
the Pafte, pour clear Water upon it, and knead it
with your Hands as Pafte is kneaded, and the U will comeour; forthereceiving of which,
place  Porringer or other proper Vellel under
your Hlands, and let it fertle in this Water till you
tee the Ultramarine at the bottom of it.
Iyour Colour feems to be clammy or nafty, you
may correct it thus: Add thereto Tartar, diffolved
in



 Water, as much as will drown it, and let it
reft for one Day at leaft; then wash it in warm
Water, and you will by that means have it cor-
fect and well purified. Ulramarine prytt be
chosen of  high Colour and well ground, which

may be known by putting it between the Feeth;
for if it feels gritty, it is  Sign that it has not
been well ground.
To know whether it be pure and unmixed, put
 little of it into  Crucible, and hearing it red
hot, if the Powderdoesnot change its Colour after
Trial, it is certainly pure; but, on the contrary,
if there be any Change, or black Specks in it, then
it has been adulterated.
 The Pruffian Blue is next to Ultramarine in
Beauty, if it be ufed in Oil, though it is not agreed
on whether it will hold to well as the other, par-
ticularly asnot having the Body of the Ultramarine,
The Pruffian Blue does not grind well in Water,
becaufe there is fuch an oily Quality in it that it
does not mix kindly with Water, and at the beft
will change, as it is now prepared in the common
Way. Attempts have been made to make it  blue
Inc, which indeed has held the Colour for 
Monthortwo, but then turned to  muddyyellow.
And when you put your Pencil with Gum-water
into  Shell of this Elue, you will find that where
the Water preads, the Blue will turn yellowiff,
till the Body of the Colour is well ffirred up; and
after all that can be done with this Colour in Wa-
ter, it will only ferve to fhade Ultramarine, with:
b in Oil it may ferve very well for the prefent
to fupply the Place of Ultramarine.
 Blue-bice is  Colour of  good brightness,
and is the next to the Praffian Bluc. It alfo is 
Colour of   Body, and will flow prerty well
in the Pencil, especially if it be well wathed, as is
directed to be done of the Whites and Mlinium.
 Saunders-Blue is allo of very good Ife, and
may ferve as  Shade to Ultramarine, or the Bluc-
bice, where the Shades are not required to be
very deep, and is of itself  pleafant Elue to be laid
between the Lights and Shades of fuch  Flower
 is of  Mazarine-blue.
 The Laemus or Litmus-bluc is another
 Colour, and will run in  Pen as free as
Ink. being made of Laemus, or, as fome terni
it Litmus, which is fold at moft Druggifts (hops.
But as this Colouris never to be met with prepar-
ed for Water colours we therefore  all give the
following Method of preparing it, according to
Mrs Mliriona. Take an Ounce of Lacmus, and
boil it in about  Pint of finall Beer-wort, till
the Colour is as ftrong as you would have it; then
pour off the Liquor into  Calipot, and let it coel
for Ufc. it will foon become  Jelly, and by
Degrees will grow hard.
But this Colour is to be opened again and made
liquid by Water, to as to be ufed in Ink, and will
be either paler or darker, as it is made thicker or
thinner.  his affords  bright Colour and has
Extraerdinary Effects: for it is not only  beautiful
HI   holding Colour. This Colour, if it be
touched with Aqua fortis, immediately changes
into  fine Crimfon, little inferior to Carmine, and
finks quite through the Paper, to as not to begotout;
to that when it is ufed as  Blue, it is beft to keep
it from Aqua-fortis, or fuch ftrong Acids. It is 
good Shade for Ultramarine or Blue-bice, where
the ftrongeft Shades should not be extremely deep;
and for colouring of Prints it is very good, as it
is  tranfparent Colour, and goes  great way.
 Indigo. Blue makes the ftrongeft Shade for
Blues of any other, and is  foft, warm Colour
when it has been well ground and wathed with
Gum-water, by means of  Stone and Muller.
It is made of what Lightness joupleafe, by putting
more Gum-water to it; and by how much the
less Cum-water is put to it, the darker it will be.
Before you ufe it upon  Print, it will be proper
to try it upon  Duich Tile; for it runs warmly
in the Pencii, and to perhaps may otherwife prove
too frong for your Defign, which is always to be
taken Care of, when  flowing Colouris to be laid
over the dark Shade of  Print; which Shade will
much heighten its Blackness, and even make it
appear quite black.
  fine Blue from Mr Boyle.
Take of the blue Leaves of Rue, and beating
them  little in  Stone-mortar with  wooden Pef-
ile, infule them in Water, Juice and all, for four=

teen ways or more, wathing them every Day till

they


they are rotten; and at laft beat them and the
Water together till they become  Pulp, and let
them dry in the Sun.
This will produce as good Blue as Indigo, and
be much fofter; but in order to keep it  long
Tune, when you beat it the laft Time, add 
litle Powder of Gum-arabic to it, of which
you may put more or lets as you would have it
more free or tenacious in the working. This is
an excellent Blue for fhading, has  good Body,
and runs warm in the Pencil.
  transparent Blue from Mr Boyle equal to
Tliramarine.
This is  beautiful Blue, the chief ingredient of
which is the Cyanus or blue Cornbottle-ffower.
This Flower has two Blues in it, one of  pale
er outward Leaves, the other
Colour in the larg
of  deeper Colour in the inner Leaves, or Mid-
dle of the Flower. Both thefe will do, being
teparated from the Burtons and Cafes they grow

in; but the deep blue Leaves in the Middle pro-
duce by much the beft Colour; this may be ob-
served by rubbing the Leaves, while they are freth,
to hard upon  Piece of good writing Paper,  press out the Juice, which will yield an excel-
lent Colour that will not fade for feveral Years.
This Part of the Flower is therefore the principal,
and what may be depended on, and should bepicked
from the reft of the Flower-leaves the same Day
it was gathered, or as foon afterwards as poffibly
can be.  good Quantity of these middle-leaves
being
H procured, press out what Juice you can fromm
them, and adding  little Alum to it, vou will
have  lafting tranparent Elue of as bright  sland-
ing Colour as can be defired, fcarce inferior in
Beauty to Ultramarine, and very durable.
As for the outward Flower-leaves, which are
much paler, it is not certain that they will antver
the End, but some Trials may be made whereby
that may be knownalfo. Let the Flowers be ga=
thered about the Beginning of June, or in July
or uguft, but the Preparation of the Colour, by
picking out the middle deep blue Flower-leaves,
and preffing out the Juice, muft be done with all
the Expedition poffible, or elfe they will lofe their
Perfection.
It is probable that if the Leaves of thefe blus
Cornbottle-ffowers were cured in the same man-
ner as Saffron is they would produce  tuch great-
 Body of Colour, from which   inctare might
be drawn with more eafe, than if preffed raw of

fieth from the Field.
in order to do this fuch  Kiln muft be prepar-
ed as is ufed for curing of Saffron, in which may
be made  fmall Charcoal fire that may communi-
cate  Heat to the Top of the Kiln, which is to
be covered with  Hair-cloth; upon this should
be laid four or five Sheets of white Paper, fuch as
is ufed in curing of Saffron: afterwards  Parcel of
the picked Flowers are to be laid on to the thick-
nets of two or three Inches, laying them clofe and
Hat with  Knife, and (prinkling them with some
.WII-


 Then the Cake of Flowers is to be
covered with two or three Sheets of Paper and  with  small Weight laid on for  few li-
nutes; after which the Board is to be taken off, and
the Cake of Flowers to be turned on the Kiln,
taking hold of all the Papers with both Hlands;
and when it has been rightly placed, take off the
upper Papers, and prinkle the Cake  second
Time with some Gum-water; then fettling the
Cake again with  Knife, let the Papers be laid
on as before, with the Board and Weight for 
Minute or two; after which let the Papers be
turned again and again till the Cake of Flowers
becomes united; and of the Thickness of  Cake
of Saffron.
In this Operation you will. find the Flowers
row darker and darker every time they are turn-
ed, till at length the Gake will look of  deep blue
tending to black, from whence  Tincture may
be eafily drawn; during this Operation great
care should be taken that the Fire does not
fcorch the Flowers, but that it be as confiant and
entle as poftible, which will be  fure Way so
bring the Cake to  good Colour.
But it will not be improper for any Perfon who
shall undertake the Curing of this Colourto confult
the Niethods of curing Saffron, of which they may
be informed either in  Treatife of the Method of
curing Saffron written by Mr Dowglas, or in
another by Mr Bradley in his Treatife of Agri-
sulture, Hulbandry and Gardening.
CHAP.
H HAP. Ix.


 Of BLACK.


 proper Black for Water-colours is
Ivory-Black, which, if pure and well

ground; is of ufe in Painting in Miniature, but it
is not proper for colouring Prints; being too heavy
 Colour, and hiding the beautiful Strokes of the
Graver, unless done with great Care: however
if it be neceffary to ufe black for darkening  Print,
tather choofe  ffrong Tincture of good India Ink
than the lvory-black; but to colour Pieces in Mi-
niature; ufe the lvory-black prepared as follows.
Grind the lvory-black well in Gum-water, till
you perceive  Kind of oily Liquor fertle to the Bot-
com: this Liquor mix with as much of the Ivory-
black as you think will be proper to make it flow
freely in the Pencil, and it will bear an extraor-
dinary. Gloss; and if the Object is fhining, fuch
as the Wings of some Beetles, mix with some of
it  little white upon  Dutch glazed Tile, till
you find it light enough to receive the Shade;
and then make another lighter Mixture of the
same, which being uted on the brighter Part of the
Subject will preduce the Effect you defired.
   

MC ... .
  
 GREENS.


 &  allowed by all to depend upon
. the yellow and blue; and any green Co-
lour


 whatever you pleafe, may be made with
them. Gamboge is one of the firft Fellows, which
may be made to produce five or fix Greens with
Verdegreafe, according as the Gamboge is in the
greater or leffer Proportion; if it abounds it will
make  tolerable Oak-green; and being mixed
with  greater Quantity of Verdegreafe, it will
make  fine rafs-green.
 But the Fellow which some prefer before
all others is made of French-berries (as already
described under the Yellows) which is either
deeper or fainter as the Liquor they are boiled in
is more or less ftained with them; if it be very
thin, it makes  good Glaze all over the Verde-
greafe, and as it approaches nearer to Duich-pink
or Gall-fone, commands almoft any Colour we
want; being agreeably mixed with the tranfparent

Verdegreafe; and is fill tranparent.

 In like manner,  yellow drawn from the
Roots of Barberries and allo that drawn from the
Roots of the Mulberry-tree will in  great Weafure
produce the like Effect, being mixed with the
tranparent Verdegreafe. As for the Verdegreafe
itself, it produces  fine bluith Green, flows eaty
in the Pencil, and may even ferve asann Ink to
write with.
 
 The Way of preparing the tranfparent Ver-
degreafe is as follows, Take fix Ounces of com-
mon Verdegreafe, (the diftilled Verdegreafe not
antwering this Purpofe fo well) break it into lityle
Pieces,


 and boil it genly in  Quart of Whiter
wine-vinegar, keeping it continually ftirring,
and, when: you perceive it to boil, add  little
Tartar broken ; and continuing flill to fiir it till
you find the Liquor of fuch  Colour as you would
have it, that is, till it is of  fine tranfparent greeff
with  bluish Caft, which you may know by dip-
ping in  Bit of white Paper, then pour it through
 Linnen-cloth into an open Veffel and fet it to
cool; and when it is quite cold; bottle it up for

afe. Remember to cork the Bottle clofe, for
being exposed to the Air it will dry; however it
may be reduced again by common Water.
 This Liquor should be touched upon part of
the Lights: and Shades of  Print, and the Shades
afterwards coloured with Sap-green.
In the making of this Green, remember that it
be ftrong enough, becaufe it cannot be ftrengthen-
ed afterwards without the Trouble of boiling it
afreth but may at any time be rendered as faiit
as you pleafe by rhixing common Water with it.

 Sap-green is  Colour like that of an Oak-
leaf, if it be uled thin with common Water for
this as well as the former wants no Gum. but if
it be ufed flrong it will produce as dark  Green
as any. It will be proper to try the Colour firft
upon  white Dutch Tile; and by thinning it with
Water you may render it of what ftrength you
pleafe, and may brighten it very much by the
ddition of  very little Verdegreafe.
There


 nere ae twe ways of making Sap-green, viz.

 cake the Flowers of biuc Flag-iris or Flow-
or de Luce, and press them while there is any
since to be got fom them; boil this genly in 
glazed Pipkin, till it grows thick, adding  latle

Alum to it, and it will make  very ufeful and
laking Green.
Vou muft obterve this, that in the Boiling of
any Juice, coc. of the Colours before mentioned
you should always do it in an earthen Pipkin; for
if it be boiled in Veffels of Metal they will often-
times change it from the Colour intended.
The second Way to make  Sap-green, for the
wathing and illuminating of Prints, is to take the
Juice of Buckthorn-berries, and tho' that Juice
Simply will yield only  dark Purple of  very
bafe hue, yet either of thefe Colours will mix with
the liquid Verdegreafe above mentioned, and will
make  delicate Shade for it.
 There is befides thefe another Green, which
is admired by some Perfons, that carries  good
Body with it, and  Degree of Tranfparency too,
as it may be made) but, as it is commonly ufed;
  Colour of  full Body and fit only for Painting
in Miniature. This is made by mixing Duich
Pink with Indigo to what degree of Colour you
pleafe but the high Preparation of French-berries
with Indigo is much to be preferred to Dutch
Pink, especially as this anfwers all the Intentions
of Dutch Pink, and carries  Tranfparency with
it which the Dutch Pink has not.
CHAP.


  .. XI
The Use and Nature of dry ColOURs.
 DLue-bice is the moft excellent Blue next
ID to Ultramarine, which is too good to wath
withal; wherefore we leave it out here, becaute
Blue-bice may do very well inftead of it; and in-
deed both may be left out, fince Smalt may be
ufed inftead of them : however, it will not work
to well as Blue-bice which without doubt is too
good to ufe upon all Occafions; only when you in-
tend to beftow fome Coff and Pains upon your
Work. otherwife, you may ufe no other Blue
in your Piece than Blue-verditer, with which you
may make  very good Shift without any other
Blue, that is, in any ordinary Work.
 Indigo is  dark Blue that is ufed principally
to Shade with upon other Blues. Indigo and
yellow Berries mixed together make  dark Green,
to shade other Greens in the darkeft Places.
 Blue-verditer is  very bright pleafant Blue,
and the cafieft to work in Water: it is fomewhat
inclining to  Green; and, being mixed with
yellow Berries, it makes  very good Green.
this is the Blue moft ufed.
 Verdegreafe is  good Green but subject to
decay. when it is dry upon the Paper it will be
of  lighter Colour than it was when firft laid on.
therefore to preferve it from that Fault, put some
Sap-green among it, to diffolve in it, which will
make it keep its Colour. There is  diftilled
Verdegreate


 to be bought at the Shops that is 
far better Green than the other, but it is fome-
what dearer and the other may ferve inflead of it.
 Verditer-green is  light Colour feldom ufed
in any thing but in colouring Landlkips, and
those Places that should appear afar off; and it is
good for fuch  Purpofe, becaufe it is fomewhat
inclining to  Blue, but you may make shift to do
any thing well enough without it, for  little
Blue-verditer mixed with Copper-green and 
little White make juft fuch another Green.
 Sap-green is  dark, dirty green, and never
ufed but to fhadow other Greens in the darkeft
Places, or elfe to lay upon some dark Ground be-

hind  Picture which requires to be coloured with
 dark Green: but you may do without this
Green, for Indigo and yellow Berries make juft

such another Colour.
 Copper-green is an excellent tranfparent
Green, of  fhining Nature if it is thickened in the
Sun or upon  genle Fire; and it is the moft used
of any Green in Wathing, especially in colour-
ing of the Grass, Ground, or Trees, for it is al-


moft Grats-green.

 Vermillion is the moft perfect Scarlet-colour:
you need not either grind or wash it; being fine

enough iffelf; only temper it with your Finger in
 Gallipot, or Oyfter-fhell, with Cum-water,
   
and it will be ready to ufe: if you put,  little
 Berries among it, it will make the brighter
Colour: this is principally ufed for Garments.
 Lake is an excellent Crimfon-colour, with
which you may fhade Vermillion, or your yellow
Garments, in the darkeff Places; and being mix-
ed with white, you may make  Sky-colour with
it; or  Fleth-colour, by mixing white and  red Lead with it; and it is an excellent Co-
four of itfelf for colouring Garments, of the like.
Indian Lake is the beft Lake, but it is too
good to be ufed in wathing Prints with, unless
you intend to beftow great Curiofity upon your
Work; for the beft Sort of ordinary Lake will
ferve well enough for ordinary Ufes; and this
allo will be fomewhat too coftly, therefore inflead
thereof you may ufe red Ink thickened upon
the Fire, which may ferve your Purpofe very
well, better even than Lake unless it is very good.
Obferve, that if you would make  light Sky-
colour of your red Ink, or if you would mix it
among your Fleth-colour, you muft not thicken
it; but (hade your Vermillion rather with Spanifh-
brown than thick red Ink, as it may ferve very
well for that Purpofe; but is not altogether fuch
 bright and clear Colour.
 Red-lead is the neareft to an Orange-co-
lour, and putting  little yellow Berries into fome
of it, will make  perfect Orange-colour. but if
you defire to make  Fleth colour of it, you muft
put no yellow in it. This Colour is ufed in co-
louring


 Buildings, or Highways, in Landskips; after
being mixed with  little white. Befides; this is
the only bright Colour to fhade yellow Garments
with, in order to make them look like change=
able Taffecy. It is good allo to colour any light
Ground in  Picture, taking only the thin Water
of it; and to for feveral other ufes, as you shalf
fee occafion.
 Yellow Berries are moft ufed in wathing
of all other Colours they are bright and trantpa-
rent, fit for all ufes, and will be fufficient without
the Ufe of any other yellow.
 Saffron is  deep yellow, if you let it fland
 good while: it is of ufe principally to fhade
yellow Berries with inflead of red Lead; and it
is fomewhat of  brighter Shadow; but you may
make  Shift well enough without this Colour,
for red Lead and yellow Berries make juft fuch
another Colour.
 Mafficote is  light yellow juft like yellow
Berries and white; and therefore you may do well
enough without it, only for faving
you the Labour
to mix your yellow Berries with white when you
have occafion for  light yellow; then you may
make ufe of it to colour  light Ground in  Pic-
ture. in which Cafe, fhadow it with the Water
of burnt Umber or red Lead; that is, the thin-
neft Part of the Colour.
 Cerus is the beft white, if it be good and
im
anely ground: or, for want of it, white Lead
picked


 either of thefe will ferve well enough;
for either of them being mingled with another Co-
four will make it lighter, and the more to in pro-
portion to the Quantity of either mixed with it.
 Spanish-Brown is  dirty brown Colour,
and of no great ufe to colour any Garment with,
unless it be an old Man’ Gown, or to shade
Vermillion, or lay upon any dark Ground behind
 Picture, or elle to fhade yellow Berries in the
darkeff Places, when you want Lake or thin red
Ink.

It is the beft and brighteft Colour, when it is
burnt in the Fire till it be red-hot, though if you
would colour  Hlare, Horfe, Dog, or the like,
you ms It not burn it, but for other ufes it is beft
when burnt: for inftance, to colour any wooden
Poft, Bodies of Trees, or any Thing elfe of Wood,
or any dark Ground in  Picture. It is not to be
uted about any Garments, unless you would co-
lour  Number of old Men’ Gowns or Caps,
flanding together, on Account they muft not be
all of one Colour: therefore for Diftinction and
Variety’ Sake, you may ufe Umber unburnt for
some of them.
 Printer' black is moft ufed, becaute it
is eafieff to be had, and ferves very well in
wathing.
You muft observe that you are not to put any
Black among your Colours to make them dark,
becaufe it will make them dircy. neither should
you fhade any Co. our with black, unleis it be
Spaniffi-


 browny when you would-colour, an off
Man' Crown or the like that requiresso be dome


   Mt   
:ofa fad Colour.
 Ivory burnt, or inftead of that, burnt
Bone is the beft black, and is thus made; take
Ivory, or for want of it, fome white Bone, and
but it into the Fire till it be thoroughly burnt;


then taking it out, and letting it cool, flif it and
taking out the blackeff Part of it in the Middle,
grind it for ufc.
de     aa ia   



  Pi XII.
    unsin wic 
 for making Gum, Hlamer, other Wciers.
 To make .UM-WATER.

TMMAKEan Ounce of fine, white Gum-arabic,
. and half an Ounce of clear, white, candied
Sugar; diffclve thefe in  
wart of fair: Water-
then pafting it through  fine Sieve; or  Piece of
Muflin, bottle it for ufe; and; as you have oc-
cafion to ufe it, pour out  little at  Time,, re-
membering to keep it clear; for if it should prove
dirty or foul it will spoil your Colours. By add-
ing  little Coloquintida to the Solurion of the
Gum, toc. it will prevent the Flies from spoiling
your Work, if it should chance to be expoted.

Or Cum-water may be made thus. Pour 
Quart of pure Spring-water into  Jar-glats, and
haning in it, tied up in  fine woolen Rag, 
suficient
 Quantity of pure, white Gum-arabic
bruifed, let it hang till the Gumis diffolved: then
putting your Fingers into the Water, if you find
them stick together, as if they were glued, your
Water istoo ftrong or full of the Gum; and there-
fore you muft put more fair Water to it; and, if
you find it too weak, you muft put in it more
Cum; adding, if there is any occafion for it, the
Coloquintida as before.
With this Water moft of the Colours are to be
tempered; and with to much of it, as that being
touched when dry the Colour will not come off.
It is to be observed that if the Colour gliffers
there is too much Gum in it.
 To make ALUM-WATER.
Boil four Ounces of Alum in  Pint of fair Wa-
ter, till the Alum is diffolved; or thus, to two
Quarts of Springor Well-water, put half  Pound
of powdered Roch-alum : diffelving it well: by
boiling; then filtering it through brown Papers
keep it up for ufe.
Wet your Paper with this Water before you
lay on any of your Colours, and it will prevent
them from finking in, and will befides add 
Luftre and Beauty to the Colour laid on. But
you muft take notice that if the Paper is not good
it muft be wathed over four or five Times with
 large Brush or Pencil; remember alfo that Alum
Taifes


 flanding Colours, and preferves them from
fading
If you defign to Varnith your Prints after they
are coloured, then wath them all over equally
with white Starch, before you colour them; and



that being dry, lay on your Colours.
 To make LIME-WATER.

Take some unllacked Lime, and covering it
an Inch over with fair Water and to letting it re
main for twelve Hours, pour off the clear Part.
of the Water, and keep it for ufe. By wathing,
with this Water you may change your Sap-green
into Blue.
 To make PEARL-ASHES-WATER.
Take about half an Ounce of Pearl-athes,
and kleeping this Quantity for twelve Hours in
Rain or River-water, pour off as much of the
Water as is clear, and you will find it of excel-
lent ufe with Brafil-wood in giving its Colour an
enlivening Luftre.
. To make SI for Waler-celours.
Take half  Pound of the Cuttings of white
Gloves, and steeping them in Water for fome
time, boil them with six Quarts of Water, till it
be confumed to one; then frain it through 
Cloth into an earthen Pan. 

 when the Size has ffood till it is:celdy it
feels firm under your Hland, then it is fufficiently
Strong. You may prepare any Colours with this

Size, while it is warm, after diffolving it. The
principal ufe of it is to prevent Colours from
thining by Candle-light, as they would do if mixed
with Gum-water: on this Account the Scenes of
Play-houfes are painted in Size.


 
Lately Publissed,




(Price ONE SHILLIN Glys.
 NEW EDirit.
 Art of DEAWINC in PERSPECTIVE, wherein
the Doctrine of Perspective is clearly and con-
cifely treated of, upon Geometrical Principles, and 
mechanical Method of Perspective and Defigning, in-
:vented for the Benefit of fuch as are Strangers to Ma-

thematies; illultrated with Variey of Copper-plate
Figures. To which is added; The Art of FAINTINC
upon Glass, and DRAWINC in CRAYONs, with: Di-
rections for making them after the French and Ialian.
:manner. Alfo the Art of Erching, and Japanning
 Wood, Metal, Coc. and making the hardeff and
:moft tranfparent Varnifhes, with  Method of calling
Amber in any Form whatever.



