


THE

 ASSISTANTESN
IN
DRAWINC,
MEZTOTINTO
SCRAPINC.
PERSPECTIVE,
PAINTING on GLASS,
ETCHING.
in CRAYONS, and in
ENGR AVING,  WATER-COLOURS.
CONTAININ 
The eafiefl and inoft comprehenfive RULES
For the Attainment of thofe truly UsErvl and
POLIT     .
Methodically digefted,
And adapted to the Capacities of VOUNC BECINNERS.
IL  US TR  TED    
Suitable ExAMPLEs engraved on COPPER.



  ND  :
Printed for . KITCHIN, Printfeller, (Engraver to his
Royal Highness the DUxE of VoRk)
at the Star, Hol-
bourn-Hill.
Price One Shilling.)

   peut  ar      oe seser   pe who ee,   ma
REFACE.
 has ever been the Misfortune of those who
have profefted to lay down Rules for the At-

tainment of any Art or cience, to leave them
enveloped wich Difficulties, which, if not ut-
terly insuperable, at leaft  fcourage the Learn-
er from proceeding in  Study which he can
have little Hopes will ever reward his Purlun.
From hence we may reafonably infer, that
the faid Profeffors were rotally unacquainted, if
not with the Theory, at leaft with the practical
Part of what they undertook to teach others;
and that the Inttructions they have given were
founded rather upon  bare Supposition of their
Efficacy, than upon the furer Bafis of long and
repeated Experience, which alone could have
enfured their Success, and from which, with
all due Deference to the Judicious, (whose
Sanction we shall ar all Times be ambitious to
deferve) we may venture to anfwer for the Prac=
ficabiliry of our own.
To obviate every Objection, and to remove
all thofe Difficulnes which had to long blocked
up the Path of Science, and retarded, if not
wholly impeded the Pupil, in his Progress to
the Temple of Fame, was the chief View in
compiling the fublequent little Treatife.
       .
Over and above the Improvements made in
illutraung the feveral Arts hitherto to imper-
fectly and uninrelligibly explained, we have
introluced Direcuons for Straping in M which, as they have never been before
attempied in any Books of this Kind, we ffatter
ourfelves will be the more acceptable; espe-
cially when it shall appear from the Rules laid
down for the Performance of this Art, that it
 to ealy to be artained, that  tolerable Profi-
crency in Drewing will enable any one to un-
dertake it with all imaginable Prospect of Suc-
C this Book is chieffy intended for the Ufe
of young Practitioners, we have purpofely
avoided all ablirufe Expreftions and obfolete
Terms, contenting ourfelves with fuch  fa-
miliar Stle as we judged moft likely to inform
Thofe Minds we would with to improve. Pet,
as the Ideas of an Arcift are not wholly to be
conveyed withour some neceffary Terms pecu-
har to each Branch, we have taken Care to ex-
piem fuch as could not be omitted without 
manifelt injury to the Work, by familiar Words
of  Lynonymous Tendency, where-ever they
occur; to that we apprehend we have not left
the leatt Stumbling Block for the Reader to
Ecounter.
INDEX.









    . .
Pas.




 DRAWINC,

  Rules for Drawing,

Of copying of Draughts,
 Enlarging and Centracting,
 Ibid.

Of Imitation of Life,
 Drapery,
Of Landskip.
 Light and Shade,


Of Histery,

   . II.
Of PERSPECTIVE,
I of the Terms used in Perspective,
Bid.
To raise  Perpendicular
 Way,
 draw  Parallel Line,
IhiI.

To divide  grven Lime into two equal Parts,
 raife  Perpendicular at the End of  Line,
 turn  Cirde through three groen Points,
Ihid.
To draw an Oval,
 Methed for an Oval,
 draw  square Pavement,
To
     find the Propertion of Objects above the Herizon,
The same exemplified in Objects below the Harizon,
To draw  direct View,
To draw an oblique Vicw;
To draw  View with accidental Points,
   . III.
Of ErcHINC,
-

Dircaions for lying toe Ground,
Dirctious for Traing,
Direcizins for Etching,
Of Biting in the Werk with Aqua Fortis,
   . IV.
Of ENCRAVINC,
Of whetring and tempering the Graver,
Of helding the Graser

Direllisns for Engraving,
   . .
Of MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPINC,
Directions for laying the Mezzotinto-Ground,
Dircetiors for wbetting the Grounding-Tool,
Direttions for foraping the Pilture,
   . VI.
Of PAINTINC upon GlASS,
Colsurs proper for Pairting upen Glass,
Mocked of ufing the Colsurs,




    
   . VII.
Of PAINTINC in CRAYONS,
Directions for ufing them,
   . VIII.
Of PAINTINC in WATER-COLOURS,
Names of the simple Colours,
Directions for mixed Colours,
Diretlims for using them,
To make Cum-Water.
Knother Way,
To keep the Flies from your Werk,
To make Liquid Gold,
To make Liquid Silver
To make the Glair of Eggs,
To recover Liquid Silver from Rust,

To keep the Colours from sinking,
To make Sixe for Candle-Light Pieces,
To recover Colours when decayed,


Pas.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
- Bid.
-
Bid.
Ibid.
BDid.
 Ibid.
THE









CHAP. .
OF DR  WIN .
RAWING is the Art of reprefenting by
Outlines and Shadows the Various Produc-
tions of Nature and rt, and of enlarging

and contracting Objects in the moft exact
Proportion.
This Art recalls to our Memory Thingslong fince
paft, and refenes from Oblivion the Deeds of our moft
illuftrious Anceffors, at the same Time that it revives
their lmage in our Mind, by preferving their Fea-
tures for many Generations. In  Word, it may be
said to be the filent, but moft expreffive Language of
Nature, which (peaks to the Eye, is underftood by
all Nations, and conveys an Idea where even Words
themfelves would prove deficient.
After giving some general Directions for the At-
tainment of this truly polite and rational Amufement,
which is the Bafis on whch all the reft of the Arts
depend,


 we shall confider it more particularly under
the following Heads, and lay down the moft copious

and intelligible Rules for each respectively, viz.
Drapery,
Copying of Draughts,.

Landkip,
Enlorging and Contrasting;
Light and Shadow,
Imitation of Life,
Hiflery.
The Implements neceitary for Drawing
AIC, 
Ruler, Compaffes, Charcoal,  Black-lead
Pencil,
Pen-knife, Porte-Crayons, Black, White, and Red
Chalk, Crayons, Indign ink, Crow-Quill Pens, Ca-
mels-Hair Pencils, Fitches, Paper of feveral Sorts,
and Porte-Folios.
General Rules for Drowing.
INIHE firft Thing to be obferved is the Choice of
proper Originals; and here we would recom-
mend Le Cleres Principles of Drawing as the calfeft
and beft calculated for the Instruction of Beginners.
This may be had, Price   where this Book is
publifhed.
Having provided this, begin with the Outlines of
the feveral Features, as Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, Ears,
Gc. as they occur in the Book. Practife thefe often
orer, till you are quite Mafter of them; then proceed
to  Profile or Side-Face, after that to an Oval or Full
Face; always remembering that each of thefe muft
be perfectly attained before you venture to proceed
further.
When vou can copy  Face correctly, the next
Thing is, to draw the feveral Limbs or Parts of the
Body, as the Hands, Arms, Feet, Legs, Coc.; then
go on to the Body isfelf; which having done, you
will








 Fart  (

 ansun er eccumensie  aoers insoad


 be able to undertake  whole Figure, obferving
carefully the exact Proportions and Bearings of one
Part with respect to the other.
The Learner ought to be particularly cautious that
he do not attempt  whole Figure before he has made
himfelf Mafter of the feveral Parts; for this is begin-
ning the Work at the wrong End, and is indeed the
fame Thing as if  Man should attempt to climb to
the Top of  Houfe without the Help of the Stairs.
As for Beafts, Birds, Fruit, Plants, oc. we deem
if afeless to give Directions for drawing them, as it is
well known, that he who has to far improved his Ideas
as to be able to draw  Human Figure correctly, will
find it no Difficulty to perform every other Branch of
this Art.
Sketch or draw all your Outlines faintly, with  of foff Charcoal (which may be known by the
Pith in the Middle) cut to  Pointlike  Pencil; and
when you fee any thing amiss, whilk it out with  of Feather, correct your Errors with 
Black-Lead Pencil, and compare your Work with the
Original, till every Part of them perfectly correspond.
This done, finith your Outlines with Black Lead or
Indian Ink. This Advice, properly attended to, will
lave you an infinite deal of Trouble, in drawing over
and over again, to your no fmall Dilcouragement.
If you prefer Indian ink, rub it with Water upon
 Marble, (fold for that Purpofe where this Book is
publifhed) and with  Crow-Quill Pen perfect your
Outlines; then rub out the Marks of the Pencil with
Bread.—Keep three or four different Shades of Ink
in the Hollows of your Stone, to diftinguith your
Diftances, referving one of the Holes for Water.
When you are thoroughly verfed in the Ourlines,
your next Bufiness will be to learn to thadow: But of
this hereafter, under the Arucle of Light and Shade.
Be not too hally at firtt fetting out, which will but
impede
   your Progress, and hunder your Improvement;
whereas, by beffowing  little more Time, you will
aftain Perfection fooner than you can well imagine,
and Expedition will come of itfelf as you become
more experienced.
Of Copying of Draughts.
THEN you would copy  Print or Drawing
exactly of the same Size, rub the Back of it
with the Duft of Red Chalk or Black Lead; lay this
upon your Paper, and pin it down at the four Cor-
ers; then with  blunt Point trace the Ourlines and
Breadths of the Shadows; which done, having care-
fully examined it, to fee that nothing be omitted, take
 eff, and finith it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another Way to make an exact Copy, and at the
same time to preferve the Original, is, to lay  Piece
of tranfparent Paper upon it, and draw the Outlines
thereon with  Black-Lead Pencil; then between that
and the Paper you intend to draw upon, place  Piece
of thin Poft-Paper, reddened or blackened at the Back;
after which, proceed to trace and finith it according
to the foregoing Rule.
If you would reverfe your Original, you need only
turn the tranfparent Paper, with the Drawing you
have made upon it, downwards upon the Poft-Paper,
and trace it as above directed.
The tranfparent Paper may be had where this Book
is publifhed.
Of Enlarging and Contralling.
Ivide your Original with  Pair of Compalfes
Le into any Number of Squares, and rule them
across with  Black-Lead Pencil from Side to Side,
and from Top to Bottom.
Then,


 
Then, having your Paper of the Size you intend,
divide it into the fame Number of Squares, either
bigger or lets, as you would enlarge or contract it.
Place your Original before you, and draw Square
by Square the feveral Parts; obferving to make the
Part you are drawing fall into the same Part of the
Square as it does in your Original. To prevent Mif-
takes, number the Squares, both of Original and
Copy, as in Fig. . and Il. of the Drawing-Plate.
Then outline it with Indian ink, rub out the Marks
of the Pencil with Bread, and shade it at Pleafure.
Of Imitation of Life.
ET the Perfon you draw after be of  propor-
 tionable Size, and well shaped; place him in
the eafieft and moft natural Atticude, then sKetch
faintly with your Charcoal the Head or any of the
Limbs feparately; which having carefully done, pro-
ceed to finith with your Pencil.
When you have fufficiently practifed the feveral
Parts or Lumbs, you may draw the whole Figure, in
whatever Attitude you think proper to place it; be-
ginning with the cafieft, and proceeding by Degrees
to the more difficult Poftures, as Time and Expern-
ence shall enable jou.
Befure to finith your Outline to correctly, (marking
all the Mufcles as they occur) that, even before you
give it any Shadow, it may have some Refemblance
of the Perfon.
The true Proportion which ong Part of  Human
Figure bears to another, may be seen in Fig. III. which
will ferve as  Standard to examine your Drawing by,
except where the Figure is to be fore-shortened, in
which Cafe Nature will be the beft CGuide.

In


 drawing of  Likeness, Care mult be taken to
express the Paffions in the moft lively Manner; which
is to be done, by observing the peculiar Caft and Dif:
pofition of every Feature with the exacteft Nicety:
And as this is, of all the Parts of Drawing, by far
the moft difficult, it will require  more than ordi-
nary Attention, and should be laft attempted.
Of Drepery.
RAPERY is the Art of Cloathing your Figures
with Elegance and Propriety.
When your naked Figure is outlined, firft draw
the Ourlines of the Drapery lightly, then the greater
Folds, and afterwards the leffer, obferving never to
let them crols each other.
Particular Regard is to be had to the Quality of the
Drapery; as the Folds of Stuff or Woollen Cloth are
more abrupt and harth, and thofe of Silk more flow-
ing and eafy. Linen, Cambrick, Gaure, Coc. as
their Subftance is lighter than either, require  ftill
greater Delicacy in expresting the Waring of the Folds,
by the Faininels of their Shadows.
The Drapery should not stick too clofe to the Bo-
dy, but muft feem to ffow round it as it were; yet in
such  Manner, as that the Motion of the Figure
may be free and eaty.  great Lightness and Motion
of the Drapery should only be ufed, when the Fi-
gures are fuppofed to be in much Agitation, or ex-
poted to the Wind; but in  calm Place, and free
from violent Action, their Drapery should be large
and flowing, in order to give them  more graceful
Appearance.
Let the loofe Part of the Drapery blown by the
Wind all fow one Way; and draw that Part which
lies




















 
DRAWING-PLATE.Aa



 

/ clofeft to the Body, before you draw thofe which
Ay off.
Suit your Garments to the Body, and make them
bend with it. The clofer the Garment fticks to the
Body, the narrower and smaller muft be the Folds;
and if it fits quite clofe, there will be no Folds at all,
but muft only have  faint Shadow, to reprefent the
Part of the Body which lies under it.
By obferving diligently in what Manner the Drapery
flows upon any Perfon ftanding or fitting before you
for that Purpofe, you will fee in what Manner to dif
pofe your Folds and Shadows, according to the unerr-
ing Rule of Nature.
Of Landskip.
ANDSKIP reprefents the Face of the Country .
 it appears to our View, with all the various Ob-
jects analogous thereto; as Towns, Caftles, Church-
es, Houfes, Trees, Hills, Cattle, Rivers, Rocks,
Ruins, ( to angment or leften every Object ac-
cording to its Diftance, making the moft remote Ob-
jects fainter and less diffinet, as they appear to the
Eye, and chlarging them proportionably as they ad-
Vance nearer.
Shew the Sky cloudy or clear, as Occafion re-
quires; and if you introduce the Sun; let it heriling
or fetting; either of which Reprefentations: will give
an additional GGrace to your Picture, as they iepre
fent Nature in its livehielf and moft agreeable Ap

pearance.
Adapt every Part of your Landlkip to the Seafon
of the Vear, and the Time of the Day you intend it
to reprefent; and difpofelipaur Lights and Shades
with confiffent Propriety.
  we would recommend it to Practitioners in
this noble Art, to rife early in  fine Morning, that
they may have  better Idea of the Harmony and
Beauty of the Works of the Great Creator, which
would wonderfully replenith their Minds, as to Co-
lour and Effect.
Of Light and Shade.
TTHE true Distribution of Light and Shade in 
Picture is abfolutely neceltary to be known;
as it not only determines the proper Diftance of one
Object from another, without which the whole would
be an undiffinguithable Mass of Confulion, but it
orves likewife to each respective Object its Substance,
Roundness, and Effect.
Shadowing is performed with the Pen or Pencil;
in either of which great Judgment is required.
Having made your Outlines correct, the firft Thing
is to obferve from which Side of the Original the
Light comes in; which, if natural, is either from the
Right Hand or Left; for whenever the Light appears
in the Middle of  Picture, and feems to glare more
than ordinary, it is caufed by  Candle,  Lamp, or
some other luminous Body, and is called an artificial
Light
Lay on your light Tints firft, dispoting them as you
fee they are done in the Original; and then proceed
to the deeper ones, till you come to the darkeft Parts
of all: For you may at any Time darken your Sha=
dows, when you cannot lighten them.
Let all your Shadows in the same Piece fall on the
same Side; that is, if the Right Side of  Man' Face
be dark, to muft be the Right Side of his Body, Arm,
 Thigh,  But if the light side be darkened
b the Opposition of some other Body intercepting
the Light, it muft receive  contrary Shadow.
Make your Shadows fainter as they grow towards
the Light, breaking them gradually, that they may
not appear too fudden or harfh.
If you fhade with Black Lead, or with Crayons,
you may blend your Shadows, and foften them one
into another as vou require, with  Stump made of
Paper or Glove-Leather rolled and tied hard, and cut
almoft to  Point, with which you may alfo weaken
your Shades where they are too ftrong.
When one Part of the Body projects over or before
another, the Part projecting muft receive  ftronger
Light: Thofe Parts that bend inward muft be made
to much the darker, and shadowed decpeft next the
Light.
Two equal Lights muft never be made in the same
Picture The frongeff Light should fall upon the
Middle of the Piece, (where the principal Figures
ought to ftand) diminithing gradually towards the
Extremities.
By frequently examining into Nature, you will
have an Opportunity of improving your ldeas of Light
and Shade, and will be enabled to form  proper
Judgment of the Effect which the different Rays or
Degrees of Light will produce in  Picture; for which
Reafon, you should never let slip an Opportunity of
remalking the Various Appearances you meet with.
Of History.
TAHIS Branch of Drawing prefents to our View
Things pall, prefent, and future.
An Hifforical Picture mult defcribe the Tranfaction
reprefented, in  Manner to clear and confpicuous,
 to convey an Idea of it to our Minds, as fully as
could


 
could be done by  verbal Description: And Care
muft be taken to preferve fuch an Analogy or Con-
nection between the Figures, that not one may feem
to be introduced but for some End or Purpofe. And
 in Dramatic Writing, it is effential to make every
Perfon speal confiffent with the Part he reprefents, to
here it will be equally neceffary to obferve the fame
Propriety of Character, and make every Figure loot
the Sentiment it is intended to express.
For the Choice of Subjects, the Practitioner is left
to his Difcretion. Books will furnish him with -
Dundance. But there will be no Need to ranfack the
venerable Rubbith of Greek or Roman ntiquity, while
there is to fair an Opportunity of doing Juffice to the
Merits of our gallant Countrymen and Fellow-Sub-
jects, by recording the heroic Actions they have atr
chiered in the Courfe of the late War; which, as
they reffect the higheff Honour on this Kingdom in
general, it will be meriforious to perpetuate, by fuch
 laudable Tribute of Gratitude to their Memory.
CHAP.


 II.
Of PERSPECTIVE.
ERSPECTIVE is the Art of delinesting Ob-
jects (as they appear in Nature upon  plain
Surface) according to their Diftance and Height,
perpendicular to the Horizon, between the Object
and the Eyc.
This Art is of great Confequence to thofe who
wwould excel in Drawing, Eiching, Engraving, Car-
ving in Bas Relief, or Painting; for being well un-
derffood, the rtiff will be enabled to know when to
adhere to the frict Rules, and when to depart from
them with Propricty.
Explanation of the Terms used in Perspettive.
.  Afe or Fundamental Line is the Bottom-Line of
the Drawing on which the Perfon is suppoted
to fand, with his Face towards the Point of Sight.
 Perpondicular is  Line drawn upright with re-
spect to any Part of the Bafe.
 Parallel Lmes are Lines equidiftant from each
other as the Horizon to the Balc.
 Horizon is the moft diftant Part of  Plain,
where the Clouds, feeming to touch the Earth, limit
the Sight. The horzontal Line gives the Height of
the Eye; for we cannot fre any Thing above the Ho-
rizon which does not exceed this fleight: Vet the
Summit


  
Summit of  Mountain may be above the Horizon,
though its Foor be far beneath it.
 Pont of Sight is that Part of the horizontal Line
where all the vifual Rays center in  Pount.
 Vifual Roys are Beams of Light conveying the
Likenels of any Object to the Eye or Sight, and the
Knowledge thereof to the Mind of Underffanding.
 Points of Distance are suppoted Points fet off on
the horizontal Lme, at equal Diftances on each Side
the Point of Sight.
 Diagonal Lines are thofe drawn from the Points
of Diftance to the Extremities of the Bafe Line.
 Abridgment of the Square is the Line where the
Disgonals interfect or cross the vifual Rays, and muft
always run parallel to the Bafe. It is only made where
the Sight is limited by  Perpendicular, as the far-
ther End of  Church, Hall, Room, toc. And fup-
poting  Perfon to fland thereon,  parallel Line drawn
through the Point of Sight will seem to pass through
the Eyes, and will confequently thew what Height
that Perfon ought to be.
The nine foregoing Definitions are illuftrated in
Fis. . of the Pertpective Plate.
 Point of direcl View. This is nothing more
than the Front View of  Houfe, Church, ℥. of.
in other Words,  Geometrical Elevation raifed from
 Plan or Ground-Plot, and comprehending an equal
Space on both Sides of the Point of Sight. See
Fis. XIV.
 Pount of oblique Vicw, is when we fee the Ob-
ject fideways, or aflant. Example. Suppose  Per-
fon was to draw  View of  Canal, with some re-
markable Buiiding he is defirous to thew more di-
Rinct, he mult place himfelf (on the Bafe or Funda-
mental Line) oppofite to that Building, that the Ray
of Light may be more oblique; by which Means the
admired Building will be less fore-thortened, and ap-
Dely


 
pear to greater Advantage, the Point of Sight being
fill before him, though not in the Middle of the Pic-
ture. See Fig. Xv.
 Accidental Points are thofe where Objects end in
the horizontal Line, but neither in the Points of Sight
or Diftance; and ferve for Streets, Houfes, Chairs,
Roads, (oc. which take different Directions. As for
Example: Suppofe  Street leading to the Point of
Sight, and from it two others branch the one on the
Right Hand, the other on the Left, and take  dif-
ferent Direction; thefe two laft Streets make what
we call accidental Paints, terminating in some Part of
the horizental Line, on each Side of the Point of
Sight. See Fig. XVl. The same is to be obferved
in  Grove, Park, (Oc. where the Walk you are in
directs immediately to the Point of Sight, and the
Avenues branching out on either Side terminate alfo
in different Parts of the Horizon.
Ichnegraphy is the Plan or Ground-Plot of any Ob-
jelt that is to be raifed in Perspective.
Scenography is the Art of bringing any Thing raifed
in Perspective from an Ichnographic Plan to its due
Proportion, according to the Diftance in which it is
placed; that all Objects may be diminished accor-
ding to their Diftance in  Picture, in the fame De-
gree as they are diminished by Diltance in  natural
Prospect.  Scenographic View may be either di-
rect, as in Fig. KIV. or oblique, as in Fig. Xv.
 the Art of Perspective is conftructed upon Geo-

metrical Principles, it will be neceffary, previous
to the Rules themfelves, to learn the following intro-
ductory Operations.
 From  Point in  given Line AB to raise  Perpen-
dicular. See Fig. II.
Draw with the Ruler the given Line Ab; then fet
one Foot of your Compaffes in , and extending
them


 to rather more than half the Length of the Line
AB, Tweep the rched; and with the same Extent
of Compaffes fet one Point in , and sweep the Arch
ef; then, without altering the Compaffes, fer one
Foot in , and describe the Arch  next rule
through the Points cg, to interfect the Arch bi in ts
and draw the Line from  to , which is the Perpen.
dicular required.
 Ancther Way. See Fig. III.
From the Point  take the equal Diftances   and
AC on each Side of it; then ftretch the Compalles to
any Diftance greater than   or AC, and with one
Foot of them in  sweep the Arch de; then, with
the same Extent of Compaffes, fet one Point in .
freep the Arch yg; and thefe two Arches will inter-
feet each other in the Point , from which  Line
drawn to the Point  is the Perpendicular required.
 To draw one Line parallel (or equidiftant) to another
given Line AB. See Fig. IV.
Extend your Compalfes to the Diftance of the Pa-
tallel you require; then with one Foot in any Point
of the given Line, as in , defcribe the rch de.
Again, without altering the Compalles, fix one Foot
in any other Point, as in , and sweep the Arch gb;
then rule the Line IX, touching the outward Parts of
the two Arches, and that will be the Parallel to the
given Linc.
 To bifett or divide  given Line RE into two equal
Parts. Sec Fis. .
Take with your Compaffes any Diltance greater
than half the given Line; then, with one Foot of
them in , [weep the Archec; and with the fame
Distance, fering one Foot in , Tweep the Arch dd;
and thefe Arches will interfect each other in the Points
 which, joined by  Perpendicular, will interfect
  in the middle Point:.
 UUpen the End  of  given Line AB to raife  Per-
pendicular. See Fig. Vi.
Place one Foot of the Compaffes in , and extend
them to any Point  without the given Line; then
fet one Foot of them in , and turn the Circle de and
, and through de draw the Dismeter dce, meeting
the Circle in , join Ae, and that right Line is the
Perpendicular required.
 To turn  Circle through any three given Paints not in
 right Line. See Fig. VII.
Fix three Points at any Diftance you think proper,
as at   and , and join them by the right Lines
 Band BC; then, by Fig.  bifect the Line AB
with the Line de; which done, bifect the Line BC
with the Line fe; and from the Center , where
thefe Lines meet, extend your Compaffes to , and
describe the Cirle ABC .
 To draw an Oval. See Fig. VIII.
Draw  given Line  , which divide into four
equal Parts; fetone Foot of the Compaffes at , and
from that Center defcribe  Circle ee; with the fame
Extent of Compaffes place one Foot in the Centre ,
and turn the Circle ff; then, with one Foot Htill in
, extend your Compaffes, and turn the Archgg;
and with the same Extent, placing one Foot in ,
describe the Arch bb; join the Interfections with 
Perpendicular from  to ; next, place one Foot of
the Compaffes in  sweep the Arch LL, and without
altering them, fet one Foot in , and defcribe the
Arch MM.
 Another





 
 Another Meshed for an Oval. See Fig. IX.
Draw  given Line AD, and with the Compaffes
extended, placing one Foot in , with the other turn
the Circlece; then, without altering your Compaft-
es, on the Line AD in the fupposed Point  sweep
the Circle ff; and through the Pointsgg, where the
two Circles interfect, draw the Perpendicular bi;
then six your Compaftes with one Foot in  and ex-
send them fo as to defcribe the rch  to the lower
Extremities of the Circles; then, with the same Ex=
tent, with one Foot in , fweep the Arch to join
the upper Extremities.
By thefe Examples it will appear, that an Oval of
any Form of Sixe may be constructed at Pleafure, on-
ly taking Care always to fix the Compaffes equidi-
Hant from the given Line AD in the Perpendicularb:.
Prattical Examples in Perspettive.
 To drow  Square Povement in Perspective. See
Fiz. . and XI.
Uppofe your Piece of Pavement to confift of  Pieces of Marble, each  Foot (quare. Vourfirft
Bufinets is, to draw an Ichnographical Plan or Ground-
Plot of it, which is thus performed. Having made
an exact Square of the Size you intend your Plan,
divide the Bafe and Horizon into eight equal Parts,
and from every Divifion in the Bafe to its oppofite
Point in the Horizon, rule perpendicular Lines; then
diride the Sides into the same Number, ruling paral-
lel Lines acrots from Point to Point So will your
Pavement be divided into  (quare Feet; becaufe the
eight FeerinLength, multiplied by the same in Breadth,
give the Number of iquare Feet or Pieces of Marble
contained in the whole: Then rule Diagonals from
Corner


 to Corner; and thus will your Ground-Plot
appear as in Fig. .
Now, to lay this in Perspective, draw another
Square to your intended Size, and divide the Bafe
Lme AB into eight equal Parts, as before; then fix
your Point of Sight  in the Middle of the Horizon
DE, and from the same Point rule Lines to every Di-
vition in the Bafe AB; after which, rule diagonal
Lines from  to , and from  to , antwerable to
thofe in the Ground-Plot, and your Square will be
reduced to the Triangle ABC; then from the Point
, where the Diagonal DB interfects the Line AC.
to the opposite Interfection , where the Diagonal
.  croffes the Line CB, rule  prallel Line, which
is the Abridgement of the Square.
Then through the Points where the Diagonals cross
the reft of the Lines which go from the Bafe to the
Point of Sight, rule parallel Lines, and your (quare
Pavement will be laid in Perspective, as in Fig. XI.
 To find the Height and Proportion of any Objects, as
they appear above the Herizon on  supposed Plane.
See Fiz. XII.
Firft rule your horizontal Line NO, and fix your
Point of Sight, as at ; then mark the Place of your
nearelt Pillar, by making  Dot for the Bafe or Bot-
tom, as at ; and another for the Summit of Top,
as at . Rule  Line from  to the Point of Sight
, and another from  to , and thefe two Lines
will give the Height of any Number of Pillars. As
for Example Suppofe you would have  Pillar at ,
fix your Dot for the Bafe, and rule from thence  pa-
rallel Line to meet the Diagonal AMl at ; then
rule the Perpendicular DE to the Diagonal BM;
which Perpendicular is the Height of your Figure re-
quired at . Or, if you would place Pillars at Fand
 obferve the same Method, ruling the Parallels FG
and


 IK, and the Perpendiculars GH and KL. will
give their Heights at the Diftances required.
To find the Diameter or Thickness of Pillars at
any particular Diftances, you are alfo to be guided by
that neareft the Bafe. For Inftance: Suppose your
neareff Pillar   to be ten Feet high, and one Foot
in Dismeter; divide it from Top to Bottom into ten
equal Parts, and fet off one of them upon the Bafe of
the Pillar; then rule  Line from the Point of Sight 
to the Diameter , and you will have the Thickness
of all your Pillars on their respective Parallels or
Bafes.
 The same Rule exemplified in Objects below the He-
rizen. See Fig. KIII.
If you would know the Heights of  Number of
Figures below the Horizon, rule your horizontal Line
OR, and fix your Point of Sight, as at ; then
place your neareft Figure, or mark the Dots for the
Head and Feet, by the Points  and , which an-
twers the same Purpofe; and rule from thefe Dots to
the Point of Sight the Lines  Pand BP; and if you
would find the Height of  Figure to be drawn at ,
rule from thence the Parallel ed to the Diagonal BP,
and the Perpendicular de will give the Height requi-
red. The fame Directions will thew the Height of
 Figure at any other Diftance you have  Mind to
place it, as at , , and , by ruling the Parallels fg.
 and mn; and from each of thefe their respective
Perpendiculars gb,  and no; which Perpendicu-
lars will thew the Heights of the Figures at , 
and .
 To drow  direct View. See Fig. XIV.
To illuftrate this Example, fuppofe you were to
draw the intide of  Church, as reprefented in this
Figure. Firtt take your Station at the Point , in
the


 Center of the Bafe Line BC; from which you
have  Front View of the whole Body of the Church,
with all the Pillars, Coc. on each Side; then fix your
Horizon at any Height you think proper, as at DE;
bifect it by the Perpendicular EH; and where thefe
two Lines interfect, is the Point of Sight . (This
Perpendicular will pass through the Centers of all the
Arches in the Dome or Cupola; which Centers may
be found by any three given Points, as in Fig. VIl.
Next divide vour Bafe Line into any given Number
of Feet; and the vifual Lines, ruled from thefe Di-
vifions to the Point of Sight, will reduce all your
Objects to their juft Proportion, by fetting off their
Height upon  Perpendicular raifed at their respective
Diffances. The Bafe, in the Example here given,
is divided into twelve equal Parts of five Feet each;
from which (fuppofing your Front Column to be
 Feet high) take feven Divifions from the Bafe
Line of your Drawing, and fet them off upon the
Perpendicular Gll; then, (fuppoling this Column to
be five Feet thick at the Bafe,) fet off one of thofe
Divifions upon the Parallel IX, which is the Breadth
required. So that, by proportioning this Scale to any
Diffance by the foregoing Directions, you may not
only find the Dimenfions of all your Columns, but
alfo of every diftinct Part of them, as well as of all
the Doors, Windows, and other Objects that occur.
For Inftance: Having found the Height and Breadsh
of your firft or neareff Column , draw from the
Top and Bottom of the said Column to the Point of
Sight the Lines HF and KF; after which, rule the
Lins IF from the Bafe of the Column to the Point
of Sight, and you have the Height and Breadth of all
the reft of the Columns, as has been already fhewn in
Fis. XII.
By. ruling Lines from the Points , &, , , &.
to the Point of Sight, you will fee that all the Sum-
  and Bafes of your Columns, Doors, Windows,
. muft tend immediately to that Point; and by
Lines drawn from the Points     Ec. on
each Side, to the correfpondent Points on the oppo-
fite Side, may be feen all the Parts of your Building
lying upon the same Parallel.
 To drow an oblique View. See Fiz. XV.
Firft, draw your horizontal Line  ; then, if
your favounte Object be on the Right Hand, as at .
place yourfelf on the Left Hand upon the Bafe Line,
as at ; then from that Station erect  Perpendicu=
lar DE, which will pass through the Horizon at the
Point of Signt ; to which rule the Diagonals GF
and HF, which will thew the Roof and Bafe of your
principal Building , and will alfo, as before di-
rected, ferve as  Standard for all the reft.
Obferve alfo, either in direct or oblique Views,
whether the Prospect before you make  Curve; for
if it does, you muft be careful to make the same Curve
in your Drawing.
 To draw  perspective View, wherein are accidental
Points. See Fig. XVI.
Rule your horizontal Line at, and on one Part of
it fix your Point of Sight, as at ; from which rule
the Diagonals ed and ce on the one Side, and of and
og on the other; which will thew the Roofs and Bafes
of all the Houfes in the Street directly facing you;
(suppofing yourself placed at  in the Center of the Bafe
Lime:] Then fix your accidental Pointsg and  upon
the horizontal Line, and rule from them to the Angles
 and im, (where the Streets on each Side take  Direction, towards the accidental Points
 and ) and the Lines gr and gt give the Roofs and
Bafes of all the Buildings on one Side, as  and mb
do on the other.
Accidental


 .
Arifet
Fng
 IV. 



it

 
Fig. III.
 II.
.
   PLATE
Fir.XIV.
RH  .
. 

III
PHt


Fiz. II.


 "      II.

 




 


(
At

   






Themaatet




 


Fir. III.
Fi. IIII.








  



  
 


 ananssous anasng hinetandan afonhy






Mit Tn 
 Points feldom intervene where the Di-
stance is fmail, as in Noblemens veats, (roves, Ca-
nals, Coc. which may be drawn by the sriet Rules of
Perspective But where the Prospect is extenfive and
varied, Inciuding Mountains, vriages, Caities, kr-
vers, Precipices, Woods, Cities, toc. it will re-
quire luch an infinite Number of accidental Points,
that it , be better to do them as Nature shall dic
tate, and your ripened judgment approve.
a  

  .
Of 
SEpant
TA TCHING is  Method of working on Copper,
wherein the Limes or Strokes, inftead of being

cut with  Graver, are eaten in with AquaFortis.
This Art, being executed with greater Eafe and
Freedom than Engraving, reprefents curious Subjects
better, and more agreeable to Nature, as Landskips,
Ruins, and small, faint, or remote Objects, Build-
ings, (ol.
The principal Maternals for this Art are the Plate,
hard and foff Ground, (the firft for Winter, and the
other for Summer,)  Dabber, Turpentine-Varnith,
Lamp Black, foft Wax, and Aqua Fortis.
The Tools are, an Oil-Rubber,  Burnifher,   Hand-Vice, Etching-Boards, Etching-
Needles, an Oil-Stone, and  Parallel Ruler.
The Plare may be had of any Size, and well po-
lithed, fit for Ufe, of Mr. Whittow, in Shos-Lane,
Hobbourn; Nr. Torond, in Little St. Andrew’ Street,
or Mr. Wotts, in Queen-Street, Seven Dials.
The Ground, with complete Sets of Etching-
Tools, may be had where this Book is publiffed.
Directions for laying the Ground.
Aving provided yourself with  Plate of the
  Size of the Print of Drawing you intend to
copy, rub it well with an Oil-Rubber made of Swan-
-Flannel, till all the Marks of the Charcoal ufed
in


 polifhing it, entirely difappear; then, wiping off
the dirty Oil with  Linen Rag, dip your Finger in
some clean Oil, and touch it over every Part of the
Plate; after which, with your Burnifher polith the
Plate, till you can fee your Face in it: And in cafe
any Sand-Holes or Flaws appear, the Scraper will af
fill you in taking them out. The Marks left by the
Scraper are to be taken out with the Burnifher, till
nothing appear. Having fixed your Hand-Vice at
one End of the Plate, with  Rag and Whiting clear
the Plate carefully from Greafe; then heat it over 
Charcoal-Fire, or lighted Paper, till it will melt the
Ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and dabbed
all over with the Dabber, till it is perfectly fmooth
and even; then warm the Plate again, and holding
it up with the Ground downwards, fmoak it all over
with  large Candle, taking Care that the Smuff of it
do not touch the Ground, and waving the Candle
continually over every Part, to that the Ground may
not be burnt by heating it more in one Place than an-
other. If the Plate be large, you may bind four
Penny-Candles together.
Direttions for Tracing.
TWTHE firf Thing to be done, (while the Plate is
cooling, after the Ground is laid) is to rub the
Back of your Print or Drawing all over with  Bit of
Rag or Cotton, dipt in the Scrapings of red Chalk,
and shake off the loofe Duft, or wipe it off gently
with  clean Rag. Place the red side upon the Plate,
making it fall at each Corner with  little Bit of foft
Wax. Lay your Etching-Board under your Hand,
to prevent bruifing the (round; then with  blunt
Etchino—Needle trace lightly the Outlines and Breadths
of the Shadows, till the Marks of them appear upon
C Ground, which you muft take Care not to pene-
trate by tracing too hard.
As great Nicety is required in this Part of your
Work, it will be necelfary now and then to lift up
one Corner of your Original, and examine whether
every Part be traced before you take it off, as it will
be extremely difficult to lay it down again in its for-
mer Polition.
Direttions for Riching.
AVING carefully traced your Original, take
  II off, and lay  Silk or Linen Handkerchief
next the Plate, and over that your Eiching-Board;
then proceed to the Etching; for which observe the
following Directions, which are adapted to every par-
racular Brench, as Landlkips, Shipping, Portraits,
Hiffory, Architecture,  in Landlkips, or the faint Parts of any
other Picture, are the firft to be done; and thefe are
to be worked clofer, and with  tharper-pointed
Needle. The darker Parts muff be erched wider, and
with  blunter Needle; but, to prevent Miftakes, the
Needles may be marked, according to their different
Degrees, and the Ufes for which they are intended.
As for the very fainteff Parts of all, they are to be
left for the Graver, or dry Needle; of which here-
 Building, and all Architecture in general, ufe 
Parallel Ruler, till frequent Practice enables you to
do them well enough without.
The Needles may, when necelfary, be wherted
upon your Oil-Stone, keeping them turning in your
Hand, fo as to whet them equally all round. The
Oil-Stone will be farther ufeful in whetting the Scra-
and
per, hich is to be rubbed flat upon the Stone,
with


  fleady Hland, keeping Oil conftantly upon the
Stone.
Of Biting, or eating in the Work with Aqua Fortis.
TIRST examine your Work carefully, to fee that
nothing be omitted; and if any Scratches appear
upon the Ground, or Miftakes be committed in the
Etching, they are to be stopped out, which is done by
covering them with  Mixture of Lamp-Black and
Varnish, laid on thinly with  Hair-Pencil, which,
when dry, will refift the Aqua Fortis. But it will
be beft to stop out thefe, as they occur to you in the
Courfe of your Work, for by this Means they will be
lets liable to efcape your Notice; and when the Var-
nith is dry, you may etch over it again, if required.
The next Thing is, to enclofe the Work with 
Rim or Border of foft green, or other coloured Wax,
about Half an Inch high, bending the Wax in the
Form of  Spout at one Corner, to pour off the Aqua
Fortis And that it may not run out at any other
Part, take Care to lay your Wax fo clofe to the Plate,
that no Vacancies be left.
Your Aqua Fortis muft be fingle; and if too frong,
as will be feen in the Biting, take it off, and mix it
with  little Water, shaking them together in  Bot-
tle; and when, by often uling, it becomes too weak,
it may be ftrengthened by mixing it in  Bottle with
 little double Aqua Fortis. The Bottle which con-
tains the Aqua Fortis should have  large Mouth, and
 Glats Stopple.
Let the Aqua Fortis hie on the Plate  short Time,
Wiping on tie Bubbles, as they arife, with  Feather,
which may remain upon the Plate while it is biting;
after which, takein off, and wath the Plate with Wa-
ter; then let it dry, and by fcraping off Part of the
Ground


 from the fainteft Part of the Work, try if it
be bit enough; and if not, stop out the Part you
have tried with the Lamp-Black and Varnish; and
when that is dry, pour on the Aqua Fortis again.
When the faint Parts of your Work are bit enough,
Htop them out, and proceed to bite the ftronger
Parts, ffopping them out as Occafion requires, till the
whole Work is fufficiently bit: Then warm the Plate,
and take off the foft Wax; after which, hear the
Plate till the Ground melts, pour on  little Oil, and
Wipe the whole off with  Rag. When the Ground
is taken off, rub the Work well with the Oil-Rub-
ber, and wipe the Place clean; then proceed to finith
it with the Graver, according to the following Di-
rections.
&
 )



CHAP IV.
Of ENCR  VIN .
PTHE Tools neceftary for Engraving are, the Oil-
Rubber, Burniffer, Scraper, Oil-Stone, Nee-
dles, and Ruler, already mentioned to be ufed
in Etching; allo Gravers, Compaffes, and  Sand-
Bag.
yravers are of two Sorts, (quare and lozenre:
Three of each Sort should be provided. The firit is
ufed in cutting the broader Strokes, the other for the
fainter and more delicate; and both Sorts may be had
at the White Lion and Key in Fefter-Lane. No Graver
should exceed the Length of five Inches and  Half,
the Handle included, excepting for ftrait Lines.
The Sand-Bag, or Cuthion, is ufed to lay the Plate
on, for the Conveniency of turning it about, and may
be had at the fame Place; as may likewife the Oil-
Stone, which muft be of the Turkey Sort.
Of whetting and tempering the Graver.
 great Pains are required to whet the Graver
nicely, particularly the Belly of it, Care muft

taken to lay the two Angles of the Graver, which
are to be held next the Plate, fat upon the Stone,
and rub them freadily till they are polifhed like  Mir-
for, and till the Belly rifes gradually above the Plate,
to as that, when you lay the Graver fiat upon it, you
may


 juft perceive the Light under the Point; other-
wife it will dig into the Copper, and it will be impot
fible to keep  Point, or execute the Work, with
Freedom. In order to this, keep your Right Arm clofe
to your Side, and place the Fore-Finger of Jour Left
Hand upon that Part of the Graver which lies upper-
moft on the Stone. When this is done, in order to
whet the Face, place the ffat Part of the Handle in
the Hollow of your Hand, with the Belly of the
Graver upwards, upon  moderate Slope, and rub the
Extremity or Face upon the Stone, till it has an ex-
ceeding sharp Point, which you may try upon your
Thumb Nail. The Oil-Stone, while in UUfe, muft
never be kept without Oil.
When the Graver is too hard, as is ufually the Cafe
when firft bought, and may be known by the frequent
breaking of the Point, the Method of tempering the
Steel is as follows.
Heat  Poker red-hot, and hold the Graver upon it
within Half an Inch of the Point, waving it to and
fro till the Steel changes to  light Straw-Colour;
then put the Pont into Oil to cool: Or, hold the
Graver clofe to the Flame of  Candle, till it be of
the same Colour, and cool it in the Tallow: But be
careful either Way not to hold it too long, for then
it will be too foft; and in this Cafe the Point, which
will then turn blue, muft be broken off, and wherted
afresh, and tempered again, if required. But be not
too hafty in tempering; for fometimes  little whet-
ting will bring it to  good Condition.
Of bolding the Graver
VUT off that Part of the Handle which is upon
 the same Line with the Belly, or sharp Edge of
the Graver, making that Side fiat, that it may be no
Obftruction.
Hold


 )
Hold the Handle in the Hollow of your Hand; and
extending your Fore-Finger towards the Point, let it
feft upon the Back of the Graver, that you may guide
it flat, and parallel with the Plate.
Take Care that your Fingers do not interpofe be-
tween the Plate and the Graver; for they will pre-
vent you from carrying the Graverlevel with the Plate,
and from cutting your Strokes to clean as they ought
to be.
Direftions for Engraving
ET the Table or Board you work at be firm and
Ready; upon which place your Sand-Bag with
the Plate upon it; and holding the Graver as above
directed, proceed to Bufiness in the following Man-
Ner.
For ftrait Strokes, hold your Plate firm upon the
Sand-Bag with your Left Hland, moving your Right
Hand forwards; leaning lighter where the Stroke
should be fine, and harder where you would have it
broader.
For circular or crooked Strokes, hold the Graver
Redfaft, moring your Hand or the Plate, as you fee
convenient.
Learn to carry your Hand with fuch  Slight, that
you may end your Stroke as finely as you began it;
and if you have Occafion to make one Part deeper of
blacker than another, do it by Degrees. And that
you may do it with greater Exactness, take Care that
your Strokes be not too clofe, nor too wide.
In the Courfe of your Work, (crape off the Barb
of Roughness which arifes, with the Belly of your
Graver; but be careful, in doing this, not to fcratch
the Plate: And that you may fee your Work pro-
perly as yeu go on, rub it with the Oil-Rubber, and
Wipe


 the Plate clean, which will take off the Glare of
the Copper, and thew what you have done to the beft
dvantage.
Any Mistakes or Scratches in the Plate may be rub-
bed out with the Burnifher, and the Part levelled with
the Scraper, polifhing it again afterwards lightly with
the Burnifher.
Having thus attained the Ufe of the Graver, ac-
cording to the foregoing Rules, you will be able to
finish the Piece you had etched, by graving up the
several Parts to the Colour of the Original; begin-
nning, as in the Etching, with the fainter Parts, and
advancing gradually with the ftronger, till the whole
is completed.
The dry Needle (to called becaute not ufed till the
Ground is taken off the Plate) is principally em-
ployed in the extreme light Parts of Water, Sky,
Drapery, Architecture, oc.
For your firft Practice, copy fuch Prints as are
openly shaded; the more finithed ones being too dif-
ficult, till you have gained farther Experience.
Great Choice of Prints of every Kind, fit for young
Beginners, may be had where this Book is publifhed,
. . To prevent any Obftruction from too great
 Degree of Light, we would recommend the Ufe of
 Safh, made of tranfparent or Fan Paper pafted on 
Frame, and placed floping at  convenient Diltance
berween your Work and the Light. This will not
only preferve the Sight, but, when the Sun shines,
cannot poffibly be difpented with.
CHAP.


 .
OTMEZ Art, which is of late Date, is recom-
mended to the Practice of the ingenious Read-
er, for the amazing Eafe with which it is exe-
cuted, especially by thofe who have any Notion of
Drawing.
Mezzotinto Prints are thofe which have no Hatch-
ing or Strokes of the Graver, but whofe Lights and
Shades are blended together, and appear like  Draw-
ing of Indian ink.
The Tools ufed in this Art are,
The Copper-Plate, Oil-Stone, Grounding-Tools,
Scrapers, Burnifher, and Needles; all which, except-
ing the Plate and Oil-Stone, may be had where this
Book is publifhed.
Directions for laying the Nezzetinto-Ground.
ARk off upon the Bottom of the Plate the
Diftance you intend to leave for the Writing,
Loat of Arms, Coc. then, laying your Plate with 
Piece of Swantkin-Flannel under it upon your Table,
hold the Grounding-Tool in your Hand perpendicu-
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually rock-
ing your Hand in  right Lme from End to End, till
you have wholly covered the Plate in one Direction:
Next crof: the Strokes from Side to Side, afterwards
from


 Corner to Corner, working the Tool each Time
all over the Plare, in every Direction, almoft like the
Points of  Compass; taking all postible Care not to
let the Teol car (in one Direction) twice in  Place.
+
This done, . Piate will be full, or, in other Words,
all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear completely black.
Having laid the Ground, take the Scrapings of
Black Chalk, and with  Piece of Rag rub it over
the Plate; or you may, with two or three Candles,
fmoak it, as before directed for Etching.
Now, take your Print or Drawing, and having
rubbed the Back with Red-Chalk Duft, proceed to
tace it, as directed Page  for rwbetting the Grounding-Tool.
  Tooth of the Tool should break, it may be per-
ceived in the Working by  particular Streak or
Crap, which will appear in the Ground in  ffrait
Line; in which Cafe the Tool muft be whetted on
the Back, holding it floping, and in  circular Man-
her, like the Bottom of the Tool.
Direttions for fcraping the Pitture.
IPPAKE  blunt Needle, and mark the Outlines on-
ly; then with  Scraper fcrape off the Lights in
every Part of the Plate, as clean and fmooth as pof-
fible, in proportion to the Strength of the Lights in
your Picture, taking Care not to hurt your Outlines.
And that you may the better fee what you do, with
the Thumb and Fore-Finger of the Left Hand hold
 Piece of transparent Paper, floping, juft over your
Right Hand, and you will foon be  Judge of the dif-
ferent


 
ferent Tints of the Work you are doing; fcraping off
more or less of the Ground, as the different Strengths
of Light and Tints require.
The Ufe of the Burnither is, to foften or rub down
the extreme light Parts after the Scraper is done with,
such as the Tip of the Nofe, Forehead, Linen, Oc.
which might otherwife, when proved, appear rather
mifty than clear.
Four or five Days before you think the Plate will
be ready for proving, Notice muft be given to the
Rolling-Press Printer to wet some French Paper,  other will do for this Work, and as that Time is
neceffary for it to lie in Wet. When the Proof is
dry, touch it with White Chalk where it should be
lighter, and with Black Chalk where it should be
Rronger; and when the Print is retouched, proceed
as before for the Lights, and for the Shades ufe 
fmall Grounding-Tool, as much as you judge necef-
fary to bring it to the proper Colour; and when you
have done as much as you think expedient, prove it
again, and to proceed to prove and touch, till it is en-
tirely to your Mind. When the Plate tarnifhes in
the Part where you are at Work,  little Vinegar and
Salt kept by you in  Vial will take it off, wiping it
dry with  clean Rag.
Avoid as much as poffible over-[craping any Part
before the firtt Proving, as by this Caution the Work
will appear the more elegant.

 HAP.


  


 PAINTING upon GlASS.
AINTING upon Glass is an Art which has
generally appeared difficult; yet there is no Re-
prefentation can be more elerant than that of 
Picture donewell in this Manner for it gives all the
Sofiness that can be defired in  Picture, and is eaty to
work; as there are no Outlines to draw, nor any
Shades to make, but the Colours are put on without
the Trouble of either.
The Pictures are thofe done in Mezzotinto; for
their Shades being rubbed down on the Glats, the
several Lines which reprefent the fhady Part of any
common Print, are by this Means blended together,
and appear as foft and united as in any Drawing of
Indion Ink.
Provide fuch Mezzotintos as you like; cut off the
Margin; then get  Piece of fine Crown-Glats, the
Size of your Print, (as flat and free from Knots
or Scratches as poffible); clean the Glass, and lay
some Venice Turpentine, quite thin and fmooth,
on one Side thereof, with  Bruth of Hog' Hair.
Lay the Print ffat in Water, and let it remain on the
Surface till it finks; Tis then enough: Take it care-
fully out, and dab it between fome Papers, that no
Water may be feen, yet fo as to be damp.
Next, lay the damp Print, with its Face upper-
moft, upon  Har Table; then, holding the Glats
orer it, without touching the Turpentine till it is
exactly


   even with the Print, let it fall gently on it.
Press the Glass down carefully with your Fingers in
feveral Parts, to that the Turpentine may stick to the
Print; after which, take it up; then, holding the
Glats towards you, press the Print with your Fingers,
from the Centre towards the Edges, till there be no
Blifters remaining.
When this is done, wet the Back of your Print
with  Spunge, till the Paper will rub off with your
Fingers; then rub it gently, and the whice Paper will
roll off, leaving the Imprettion only upon the Glass:
Then let it dry, and with  Camels-Hair Pencil, dipt
in Oil of Turpentine, wet it all over, and it will be
perfectly tranfparent, and fit for painting.
Colours proper for Painting upon Gless.
ITTHE feveral Sorts of Colours ground in Oil for

this Purpofe, and tied up in little Bladders, may
be had of Mr. Dicker, opposite Newport-Mfarket, and
Mr. Drake or Mir. Sandys in Long-Acre, whole Bufinets
it is (diftinct from that of other Colourmen) to pre-
pare the finer Colours for Limners.
Whites.
Reds.
Flake White.
Rofe Pink.
Spodinm.
Vermilion.

Red Lead.
Blocks.
Indian Red.
Lake-Cinnabar.
Lamp-Black.
Irory-Black.
Fellorws.
BrOTURS.
English Pinz.
Mafficot.
Spanish Brown.
Umber.
English Oker.
Spruce
D Oker.
Saunders Blue.
Duich Pink.
Smalt.
Orpiment.
Greens.
Bluls.
Verdigreafe.
Blue-Bice.
Terra Vert.
Verditer.
Prussian Blue.
The Ultramarine (for Blue), and the Carmine (for
Red), are rather to be bought in Powders, as in that
Cafe they are lets apt to dry, or be loft: And as the
leaft Touch of thefe will give the Picture  Call, mix
up what you want for prefent Ufe with  Drop or two
of Nut-Oil upon your Pallet, with your Pallet-Knife.
The Pallets may be had at the Colour-Shops above
mentioned: The Pallet Knives are fold at Mr. Bur-
chells, Culer in Long-Hcre.
To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick 
Hole at the Bottom of each, and press it till you have
enough upon your Pallet for prefent Ufe; becaute the
Colours are apt to dry and (kin over.
Then lay  Sheet of white Paper on the Table,
and taking the Picture in your Left Hand, with the
Turpentine Side next you, hold it floping (the Bottom
refting on the white Paper), and all the Outlines and

 ints of the Print will be seen on the Glass; and no-
thing remains but to lay on the Colours proper for the
different Parts, as follows.
The Nielhod of using the Colours.
 the Lights and Shades of your Picture open, lay
the lighter Colours firft on the lighter Parts of
 Print, and the darker over the shaded Parts; and
having once laid on the brighter Colours, it  not
matenal if the Carker Soris are laid  little over them;
for


for the firft Colour will hide thofe laid on afterwards.
As for Example,
Reds.
Lay on firft the Red Lead, and shade with Lake or
Carmine.
Fellows.
The lighteff Vellow laid on firft, may be shaded
with Dutch Fink.
Blues.
Blue-Bice or Ultramanne, uled for the Lights,
may be shaded with Indigo.
Greens.
Lay on Verdigreafe firft, and then  Mixture of
that and Duich Pink. This Green may be lightened
by an Addition of Dutch Pink.
When any of thefe Colours are too frong, they
may be lightened to any Degree, by mixing White
with them upon your Pallet; or you may darken them
as much as you pleale, by mixing them with  deep-
or Shade of the fame Colour.
The Colours muft not be laid on too thick; but if
troublefome, thin them before you ufe them with 
little Turpentine-Oil.
Take Care to have  Pencil for each Colour; and
never ufe that which you have ufed for Green with
any other Colour, without firft wathing it well with
Turpentine-Oil, as that Colour is apt to appear pre-
Gominant when the Colours are dry.
Wath all the Pencils after ufing in Turpentine-
Ol.
Your Glass, when painted, muft fland three of
four Days free from Duft, before it be framed.
All Sorts of Mezzotinto and other Prints proper for
painting on Glass, may be had at the Place where this
Book is publifhed.
CHAP.
D  . VII.
Of PAINTINCM CRAYONS.
VRAYONS are to be had in Boxes, every Co-
lour partitioned off feparately, to prevent mix-
ting.
The beft are thofe of Switzerland, fold by Nr.
Drake of Mr. Sandys, in Long-Hcre.
The different. Colours are White, Black, Vel
low, Orange, Red, Purple, Blue, Green, and Brown;
and each of thefe have their feveral Shades, excepting
the two firft.
Direttions for afing them.
VIHE Paper to be ufed on this Occafion is rough
Venice Paper, of  whited-brown Colour, and
the ftiffer the better. That Sort called Cape-Paper is
found to be the beft, becaufe upon that the Colours
beft distribute themfelves. By this Method Figures
may be drawn in their proper Colours as they appear
to the Eye, becaufe the Colours may be matched
with the Crayons, and the Crayons being dry, will
not alter their Colour; but the Colours, when wet,
appear deeper than when they are dry, which is apt
to deceive  young Beginner.
Another Way to make the neceffary Preparations,
is to take some of the thickeff and fmootheft light Blue
of other Paper, and get  Straining-Frame from 
Frame-Makers of Carpenter', on which strain some
COarfe


 Scotch or fri Cloth, drawing and faltening it
with small Tacks round the Edges, till it be quite
fmooth; after which, with  Spunge and fair Wa-
cer vently wet the Blue Paper, and then with  Bruth
or Rag pafte the Paper all over, and lay it Care-
fully on the Cloth, exactly even with the Straining-
Frame; after which take it up, and laying White
Paper on the Table, place the Blue Paper dowii-
wards, with one Hand keep the Straining-Frame
Ready, and with the other rub the Cloth clofe to the
Paper Do this very carefully; and taking it up, lay
it on the Table with the Blue Paper upwards, and  of Paper under your Iland, and rub it clofe to
the Straining-Frame, without touching any other
Part; then let it fand to dry; after which, fet it on
an Eafal, (which may be had at the Colour-Shops,
and proceed as follows.
Make the firft Sketch or rough Draught with Char-
coal; then with Black, White, or Red Chalk, cor-
rect what you fee amils. The Outline being thus
completed, ruh in your Crayons according to their
proper Colours, and then with your Finger or Fitch
foffen and blend them together.
D   . VIIl.
OfPAINTINGInWATER COLOURS.
VTTHE Materials neceftary for this Art are Gum,
Colours, Hair-Pencils, Fitches,  Pallet and
 Colours in general are White, Black, Brown,
Red, Fellow, Blue, and Green.
The feveral Species of each are as follows:
Whites.
Indian Lake.
Indian Red.
Cerufe.
Red Ink.
Flake White.
Red Lead.
Sponish White.
Vermilion.
Spodium.
White Lead.
Fellows.
Blacks.
English Oker.
Gall-Stone.
Burnt Cherry-Stones.
Gamboge.
Ivory-Black.
Mafticot, dark and light.
Lamp-Black.
Oker de Luce.
Orpiment.
BrcUs.
Pink-Yellow, dark and
Spanish Brown.
light
Sbanish Liquorice.
Roman Oker.
Umber.
Saffron.
Reds.
Blues.
Burnt Oker.
Carmine.
Blue Bice.
Blue Verditer.
Cinnabar-Lake.
Indico.



  
Griens.
Indico.
Green Bice.
Litmofe.
Green Pink.
Smalt.
Sap-Green.
Ultramarine.
Verdigreafe.
Verditer.
Moft of thefe Colours may be had ready prepared in
Shells, as alfo the Hair-Pencils, where this Book is
publifhed, or at the Colour-Shops in Powders. If
you ufe the latter,  Grind-Stone and Muller muft be
provided, which are to be of Pebble, and may be had
at any Stone-Cutters.
Directions for making the following mixed Colours.
Ass Colour.
 and Lamp-Black; or
Indico and Black; or Cher-
 and White, shaded with
Ivory-Black.
Bay Colour.
Vermilion, withalitile Spanih Brown
and Black.
Bright Red.
Indian Lake and Native Cinnabar.
Carnation.
Lake and White, shaded with Lake.
Changeable Silk.
Red Lead and Water of Mafticot,
Shaded with Sap-Green.
Cloud Colour.
White, light Mafficot; or Lake and
White shaded with Blue Verditer;
or Blue Verditer alone.
Crimson.
Cinnabar-Lake and Whice, shaded
with Lake.
Flame Colour.
Vermilion and Orpiment; or Red
Lead and Mafficot, heightened
with White.
Fless
 Colour.
French Green.
Cless Gres.
How Colour.
Lead Colour.
Ligbt Blue.
Light Green.
Lyen Towney.
Murry.
Orange.
Oronge Towny.
Pearl Colcur
Pepinjay Green.
Purple.
Rufd.
Searlet.


 with  little Lake, and Red
Lead; add Vellow Oker for  Complexion.
Light Pink and Duich Bice, fhaded
with Green Pink.
Cerufe, with  little Blue of any
Kind.
Mafficot, UUmber, Fellow Oker,
Cerufe, Oker-de
Luce, and Cher-
 Black.
Indico and White.
Blue Bice, heightened with Cerufe
of Spodium.
Pink and Small, with White, if
Need require.
Red Lead and Mafficot, shaded with
Umber.
Cinnabar Lake and White Lead.
Red Lead and  little fine Niafficot,
shaded with Gall-Stone and Lake.
Cinnabar, light Pink and  little
Mafficot, shaded with Gall-Stone
and Lake.
Carmine, with  little White, tha-
ded with Lake.
Green and Mafficot; or Pink and 
little Indico, fhaded with Indico,
Indico, Spansh Brown and White;
or Blue Bice with Red and Whice
Lead; or Blue Bice and Lake.
Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Red Lead and Lake, with or without
Vermilion; of Carmine and In-
dian Lake; or Native Cinnabar
and Red Lead, shaded with In-
dian Lake.
Sea-


 Pink and White, shaded with
Sea-Green.
Green Pink.
Light Mafficot and White, for the
Sky-Colour.
toweft and lighteff Parts; Red
Ink and Whire for the next; Blue
Bice and White for  third De-
gree; and Blue Bice alone for the
higheft Part of all. Thefe are to
be all foftened into one another at
the Edges, to as nnot to appear
Barth.
Sky-Colour for  Blue Bice and Venice Cerute; or
Ultramarine and White, shaded
Drapery.
with Indico.
Straw-Colour. Vellow Mafficot, and  very little
Cinnabar, shaded with dark Pink.
Violet-Colour. Indico, White and Cinnabar Lake;
or fine Duich Bice and Lake, tha-
ded with Indico; or Litmofe,
Small, and Blue Bice; the latter
moft predominant.
Blue and White, shaded with Blue,
Water.
and heightened with White.
Directions for using the Colours.
 OUR Pencils muft be faft in their Cuills, and
Charp-pointed after you have drawn them through
your Mouth.
Before you begin, have all your Colours ready be-
fore you, and  Pallet for the Conveniency of mixing
them;  Paper to lay under your Hland, and to keep
your Work clean, as well as to try your Colours
upon; alfo  large Bruth called  Firch, to wipe off
the Duft when your Colours are dry.
Lay


 your Colours on but thinly at firft, deepening
and mellowing them by Degrees as you fee Occation.
The quicker you lay them on, the evener and cleaner
your Drawing will appear.
Take Care to preferve all your Colours from Duft;
and before you ule them, wipe your Shells and Pallet
every Time with  Firch.
When you have done your Work, or would lay it
afide, be careful to wath out your Pencils in warm
Water.
For Face-Painting, mix up  little light Carnation
of Fleth-Colour with Gum-Water in  Shell by it-
felf. If it be for  fair Complexion, mix Vermilion
and White Flake together; and for  fwarthy one,
add to the former  little Mafficot of Engliff Oker, or
both.
Let your Flesh-Colour be always lighter than the
Complexion you would paint; for by working on it,
you may bring it to its true Colour.
In  large Shell, or upon your Pallet, lay your dif-
ferent Shades of Fleth-Colour, at  convenient Di-
fance from each other; and always have ready  fuf-
ficient Quantity of White to lighten your Shadows.
For the Cheeks and Lips ufe  Mixture of Lake
and Red Lead, of Carmine, as Occafion requires;
and for blue Tints, (as under the Eyes, and in Veins)
Indico or Ultramarine and White.
For grey faint Shadows, use White, Engliff Oker,
fometimes Mafticot : For deep Shadows, White,
Engliff Oker, Umber; for darker Shadows, Lake
and Pink, which make  good flethy Shadow.
In colouring Landlkips, at firft only lay dead Co-
lours fmooth all over the Piece, leaving no Part un-
covered; and be not over-curious in this Part of the
Performance, but rather ufe  mafterly Freedom;
and the Work, though feemingly rough to the Eye,
will have  good Effect when placed at  Distance.
Let


 not the Roughness of the Colour difcourage
you; for it is eafily to be foftened by Degrees with
the other Shadows,
obferving only to Tweeten and
heighten them according as the Light falls.
In some Places lay on ftrong Touches, and in thofe
Places bring your Work up together to an equal
Roundnets and Strenoth; tempering and (weetening
your Colours with  Charper Pencil than the firtt, that
no Lumps or harth Edges be left, but that all your
Shadows may lie disperfed, foft and fmooth, gliding
gently, as it were, into one another.
 You are not to finith any Part before the other, but
work up all the Parts gradually alike, till you fee no-
thing wanting to complete your Picture.
Having laid your dead Colours, begin firft with
the lighteft Parts, as the Sky, Sun-Beams, Coc. then
the yellowith Beams (which are to be done with Ma-
Ricot and White;) next the Blueness of the Sky (with
Ultramarine or Smalt alone.) For Purple Clouds on-
ly mix Lake and White, making your Colours deep-
er as they go upwards from the Horizon, except in
tempeftuous Skies. The Tops of diffant Mountains
muft be worked fo faint, that they may feem to lofe
themfelves in Air.
Bring your Colours forwards as your Distance de-
creafes; painting your firff Ground next the Hori-
 downwards of  bluith Sea-Green, and as you
advance forwards, of  reddith or darker Green, till
you come to the Fore-Ground itself, which, as it is
to be the darkeff Part of all, do with dark Green,
shaded with  dark Brown or Vellow; which Rule of
Shadow will alfo ferve for the Trees on each respec-
tive Ground.
All diftant Objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the Eye, as has been already obferved under
the Article of Light and Shade.
In


 
In colouring Trees, Boughs, and Branches, touch
in all the dark Shades firft, raifing the lighter Leaves
above the darker by adding Miafficor to the dark Green,
which may be made with Bice, Pink, and Indico,
for the uppermoff of all, which are to be done latt;
touch lighily the Extremities of the Leaves with 
little Green, Miafficot, and White, and fet off the
darkeff Shadows with Sap-Green and Indico.
Thefe Rules are adapted to general Appearances;
but the Learner may deviare from them as Nature
shall dictate.
With regard to Drapery, Fruit, Flowers, and
other Branches of Painting, the beft Observations
are to be taken from the Objects themfelves, or the
moft curious and exact Repretentations of them.
Receipts for those who paint in Water-Colours.
To make Gum-Water
ISSOLVE one Ounce of pure white Gum-
 Arabic, and Half an Ounce of double-refined
Sugar, in  Quart of Spring—Water; frain it thro'
 fine Sieve or  Piece of Muflin, and bottle it off for
Ofe, keeping it free from Duft.
Another Way.
Take some Cum-Arabic of the whiteff Sort, bruife
it, and the it up in  Piece of Woollen Cloth, and
Keep it in Spring-Water in  Glass or Earthen Vef-
fel, till it be diffolved. If it be too fliff, add more
Water; and if too thin, more Gum.
With this Water you may temper moft of your
Colours; ufing fuch  Quantity, that being touched
when dry, the Colour will not come off. If the Co-
lour fhines, there is fco much Gum in it.
T  keep the Flies from your Work.
When you have made your Grum-Water according
to either of the foregoing Directions, add thereto 
little Coloquintida, which will preferve your Work,
when exposed, from being spoiled by the Flies.
To make Liquid Gold for Vellum-Painting, Fans, &.
Grind the finelf Leaf-Gold with flrong Gum-Wa-
ter very fine, adding as you grind it more Gum-Wa-
ter as you fee necelfary. When you have ground it
as fine as you can, wath it in  large Shell; then tem-
per it with  little Mercury-Sublimate, bind it in the
Shell with  little diffolved Gum, shake and pread it
equally all over the Shell, and ufe it with fair Water
only.
To make Liquid Silver for the same Purpose.
The Process for this is the fame with that of Li-
quid Gold, only obferving in the ufing it to temper
it with Glair of Eggs inflead of Water.
To make the Glair of Eggs.
Take the Whites, and beat them with  Spoon till
they rife all in  Foam; let them fland all Night, and
they will be clarified into good Glair.
To recover Liquid Silver that has contracted Ruft.
If your Silver, by Length of Time or damp Wea-
ther, become rufty, cover that Part of your Work
with Juice of Garlick, which will effectually re-
cover it.
To keep the Colours from sinking.
Boil four Ounces of Roch-Allum in  Pint of
Spring-Water, till it is thoroughly diffolved; then
fikter it through brown Paper, and keep it for Ufe.
Before


  you lay on your Colours, take  Spunge,
and wet the Back of your Paper with this Water
while it is hot. This will not only prevent the Co-
lours from finking, but will likewife give them an
additional Beauty and Luffre, and preferve them from
fading. If your Paper is not good, it muft be wath-
ed three or four Times with this Water, drying it
every Time.
If your Prints are to be varnifhed, wath them all
over with white Starch before you begin to lay on
your Colours.
To make Size for painting Scenes, and other Candle-Light
Pieces.
Steep  Quarter of  Pound of the Cuttings of
white Glove-Leather in Water for fome Time; then
take them out, and boil them in three Quarts of Wa-
ser till it waftes to  Pint, and ftrain it through 
Cloth into an Earthen Pan. When the Size is cold,
if it feel firm under your Hand, it is frong enough.
You may prepare any Colours in this Size while it
is warm, and it will take off the Glare which would
appear upon them by Candle-Light, if mixed with
Gum-Water.
To recover Colours when decayed.
Take Rofemary—Water double-diffilled, or pure
Spirit of Rofemary, and with  few Drops of it tem-
per your Colours, which, however dead and faded,
will recover their Bloom and Brilliancy.
This Water or Spirit will prevent the Bubbles in
White and Umber, which are troublefome in grind-
ing.
    .
