
I ExfONs on the WoRks of the moft
Celebrated MASTERs, and of the Leveral
Sibools of Enrope, as well ancient as modern.
 the moft perfect Work of the Kind extant.

Transtated from the French of Monsicur De .IL. ..


To which is added,
An ESSAY towards an ENclisH SchoOl.
enti

is

 THIRD EDITioN:
In which is now firft inferted the Life of Sir GODFREY
KNELLER, by the late . BUCKERIRGE, Elq; who
wrote the greateft Part of the English School.
mi

 NE
   
Printed for THOMAS PAYNE, in Caple-Street; next the
Mews-Gate, near Charing-Cress.





   
 Main
   

 
CHILD,
Eiq
ROBERT
  
 is one of the greateft encouragements
 moft writers, that they generally

 addrets to perfons who knowing little
 of the subject they treat of, it gives


 them an opportunity to fay as many
Kind things as they pleafe of their own productions,
without fear of reprehenfion. But this advantage  entirely loft; for in speaking of Painting to
you, Sir,  speak to one of the bett judges of that
rioble art, which is not to be underftood without
penetration, delicacy, good fenfe,  refined tafte,
and  portion of that genius which inspired the Pain-
ter in his performance. If  should fay things bold-
ly to you, and as of my own knowledge, you would
eafily derect the deceit, and my prefumption would
be more unpardonable than my ignorance. Pet,
though  muft be very caurious how  go out of my
depth, left  fink when  attempt to fwim,  may
venture farther on your candour and humanity than
on my own judgment, were it to the full as good
  could with it.
It is the happinels, Sir, of men of your fortune,
that they can read and fee what they think fit for
their pleafure or instruction; but this benefit rather
expofes than improves many, who have not  true
relifh of the things about which they are curious.
Vaft libraries ill-cholen, are rather rubbith than
curiofities; and numerous collections of pictures
injudicioutly made, are the port and contempt of
the spectaror, and  reffection on the owner. But
when fuch libraries and collections excel alike in
number and value, they are treafures of which the
greateft
 DE DIC ATIO .
greateft princes are proud. There is no gentleman
in England who has any thing of this kind in greater

perfection than yourfelf, who poffets fomething of
feveral of the beft mafters that are spoken of in the
following treatife; and every day in your own houfe
the ornament of the fineft (quare in Europe) you
behold fome of the wonders that the hands of Paolo
Veronefe, Guido, Nicholas Pouffin, Carlo Maratt,
and other excellent artifts have produced. By the
nicety of your choice, the world admires that of
your tafte, and are furprifed to fee fo many rare
things together in  country where Painting and the

politer arts are not to much encouraged as in thofe
places, where, perhaps, the nobility and gentry are
not to well qualified to judge of imerit, nor fo well
able to reward it, as in England. Yet there are even
here some few illuftrious perfons, and men of worth
and honour, who are folicitous for the profperity of
thearts, and contribute, by their ftudies and bounty,
towards making them flourith and prevail among us.
Painting is fifter to Poetry, the mufe' darling;
and though the latter is more talkative, and confe-
quently more able to puth her fortune; yet Paint-
ing, by the language of the eyes and the beauty of
 more fenfible imitation of nature, makes as frong
an impreftion on the foul, and deferves, as well as
poctry, immortal honours.
Confuls, Emperors and Kings, have entertained
themfelves with the exercifes of poetry, and exalted
the mufe by the homage they paid her: as much is
to be faid for Painting. One of the four houfes of
the Fabii, as eminent as any in Rome, affiumed the
name of Pictor; for that Fabius, their anceitor,
painted the temple of Health, and was efteemed the
founder of the old Roman fchool. More than one
of the Emperors in the Bas Empire, spent many
hours with  pallet and pencil; and, in the laft cen-
sury, Lewis MlIl. learned to defign of Vouet. The
late


The DE DICATIO .
late queen Mary, of glorious memory, and her fif-
terfuour prefent gracious fovereign, queen Annes
were both instructed in this art by Gibfon the dwarf.
Allthe children of the queen of Bohemia, daughter
to King James . were taught to paint by Hlontorft;
and among the reft, the princels Sophia, who, with
her fifter the abbess of Mabuiffon, fays Monficur
de Piles, se diftinguerent par Phabilete de leur pingeau.
Alexander the Great was not fo fond of his miftress
as of his Painter, for he parted with her to pleafe
him; and our own King Charles . delighted more
in Painting than in alk the other fciences, as much
 mafter as he was of all. But you, Sir, are too
wellacquainted with the hiffory of the art to be
pleafed with any information from me, nor does
itihvant any other recommendation than the delight

Itatsonce affords the moft fublime faculty of the
fouly the judgment, and the moft delicate fenfe of
thei bodygrthe fight, std engage the protection of

TheTCuaGus: And as you are to in  very high de-
grebishhope, Sir, this wilf be no ungrateful offer.
Fis
ingy fince) as far as our author is concerned, it is
the Irofercomplete and exact difcourfe of the kind
thatewer was publifhed in fo fmall  compals.
 Tin differtation before his lives of the Painters
has beeithought admirable by fevere crities, and
 rales he lays down: for Painting, to juft, that
 Poetry.  do not fay
this, dSityr tobiats rourcspinion in his favour, that
arould belequally, vainrand arrogant; you are fo
well acguainted withcsur author in his own language,
that it will be eafy-fortyou to judge whether he de-


ferves the Charamigis which is given of him or not.
He calls his accountcokthe Painters lives an abridg-
ment, and that with:gsedireafon, for you will im-
mediately perceive that he induftrioutly avords en-
tering into the detailof their actions. Indeed, the
greateft of them, Leokardo da Vinci, Michael An-
gelo,
  DE DIC .
gelo, and Sir Peter Paul Rubens only excepted; did
nothing of confequence enough, otherwife than as
Painters, to give occafion for any thing to be faid of
them worthy the notice of the public. In their pri-
vate capacities, their lives were like the reft of the
bulk of mankind, too mean for the pen of an hif-
Corian; and Monficurde Plies has thought fit to let
his short hiftory of them contain only fuch of their
actions as ferved to give the world the beft idea of
them as Painters. He has inferted none but what had
some relation or other to their art, and that was
eafily done in  few pages, and fometimes in  few
lines, unless he had defigned to write  hiftory of
pictures, and not of Painters.  believe gentle-
mens curiofity, in this cafe, will go no farther
than to know where the Painter was born, whofe dif-
ciple he was, what was his manner, how he executed
it, which were his beft pieces, and when he died.
Our author tells us in the Preface; that he had feen
 the remarkable books of this Kind; and afterche
had examined Vafari, Ridolfi, Carlo Dati, Bagloniz
Soprani, the Count Malvafia, Pietro Bellorist Vant
Mandre, Cornelius de Brie, Felibien, Sandrart and
others, thought his abridgment neceffary as wrell as
his differtation; for large volumes on the lives of
private men, muft certainly contain many trivial
things, and confequently provetirefom. There are
few who have lerfure or application enoughrtorrun
through ten or twenty books on an art which was
intended chieffy for pleafure, though it has alfo its
opportunities of instructing, as is made appear; we
hope, in the following tranflation.
His reafons had the fame weight with me in the
Effay towards an Englifh -School.  have written
of the Englith mafters,more as they were Painters
than as they were men: Andyer  have, with much
pains and trouble, gathered together, from the beft
authorities, materials enough to make fome of the
lives


The DE DICATT. .
lives larger than Monficur de Piles has done his.
 would not meddle with thofe mafters that are
living, as well knowing that is  tender affair, and
not to be touched without running the rifque of
giving general offence &. If difcretion would have
permitted me to do it,  might have enlarged and
adorned our fchool fo much, that neither the Ro-
man nor the Venetian would have had caufe to be
afhamed of its company. At prefent it is more than
 march for the French; and the German and Fle=
mith fchools, only excel it by the performances of
thofe mafters whom we claim as our own. Hans
Holbein and Vandyck are as much ours as Sebaf-
lian of Venice belongs to the Roman fchool, Spas-
noletto to the Lombard, or Ellis and De Cham-
pagne to the French: Nor have we  small title to
Sir Peter Paul Rubens, for it was the protection and
friendship of the duke of Buckingham that procured
him the opportunities he had of diftinguithing him-
felf above others of his cotemporaries and coun-
trymen of the fame prefeffion. It was the duke of
Buckingham that recommended him to the governor
of the Netherlands, as  proper perfon to refide at
the court of England, as the King of Spain' minif-
ter. And it was here that he performed feveral of
his beft pieces, and acquired the character of 
Statefman; which, no doubt, was  confiderable ad-
vantage to his reputation as  Painter.
But why should we be fo unjult to ourfelves, as
to think we sland in need of an excufe, for pretend-
ing to the honour of  fchool of Painters as well as
the French, who have been in poffeffion of it almoft
as long as the lralians. Tou Know, Sir, by the
many beautiful pieces you have feen of the principal
mafters of both nations, that if they have had their
Vouets, their Pouffins, and le Bruns, we have had
Olir
  account of Sir Godfrey Kneller is inferted in this third
edition.


The   DY.GA .IO..
our Fullers, rour Dobions, and our Coopers;; and


have not only infinitely out, denethem in Pertrairs,
but have produced more mafters, in that Kind than


all the relt, of Europe.
 .
We may allo affirm, that the art is indebted te

us for the invention of Metzetinto, and therper=
fection of crayon- Painting., By our author staccount
of Paftils,  name formerly, given to Crayons,: one
may fee that the Italians had  very flight nomon: of
 manner that is practifed here with fo much fuc
cets. They made their drawings on  grey-paper,
with black and white chalk,, and leftitha paper
to ferve for the middle tipnt.
Their colours were
like ours, dry, without any mixture of oil or. water.
Our. countryman, Mr Afffield, multiplied the
number and variety of tints, and painted various
complexions in imitation of oils and this manner has
been to much improved among, us, that there is no
subject which can be expreffed by oil, but the cray-
ons can effect it with equal. force and beauty. 
 Lou, Sir, who are fo good  eritic, and fo gene:

fous  patron of the art, canner but with, we had the
Jame advantage as other fchools pavein ap academy.
It is true, we have several admirable collections,
and your own in particular, whofe pieces are enough
to inform the moft induftrious disciple, and inspire
his genius to arrive at  mattery in the art,  have
heard  famous Painter affert, that our Englith no-
bility and gentry may boaft of as many good pictures,
of the beft Italian mafters, as Rome ittelf, churches
only excepted; and yer it is fo difficult to have ac-
cels to any of thefe collections, unlets it be to yours,
Sir, who feem to have made your excellent collec-
sion as much for the public instruction, as for your
own private latisfaction, that they are, in  great
meafure, rendered ufelefs, like gold in nuferscoffers.
Had we an academy, we might fee how high the
Englith genius would foar; and as it excels all other
Rations in Poetry, fo, no doubt, it would equal,
it


TheD EDIT. ..TO .
if net excel, the greateft of them all in Painting

wene her wingsas well impedas thofe of ltaly, Flan=
ders and France.. As for ltaly, her academies have
kept her gemys alive, or it would have expired
with her mafters, who firft thewed the had one, as
her genins in poetry died with Taffe and his cotem-
poraries.. The French indeed are  forward people,
who pretend to rivalallnations of the world in their

fexeral: excellencies; yet confidering they value
themfelves to much on their own;academy, it is 
matter of wonder to fee fo little improvement in
them by it: Andif we are equal only to them now,
how much should we ourthine them, had the Eng-
lith difciples in this art as many helps and encourage-
Mients as theirs 
Sir, It is with all poffible respect that  offer you

 which has been finished with to many
difficulties. The art was new to us, though the
language of the original was not; but we wanted the
advice of thofe gentlemen whom Mr Dryden con-
fulted in his tranflation of Frefnoy. If we have
erked in terms; you will,  hope, confider us, as
the world has been favourable to that immortal
poet for the fame fault. Could  have to far pre-
fumed on your readiness to oblige all mankind, as
to have defired to be enlightened by you when  was
in the dark;  had committed fewer errors on my
part; buc  had no warrant for that freedom; and
though we communicated the whole work to all
that we believed could affift us in it, yet it is certain,
wish all our caution, we are far from being infalli-
bles
 Several mafters whom  have applied to have dif-
fered about the interpretation of some terms; and
even French Painters have affured me, that our an-
thor has ufed fome which were unknown before.
 took the fenfe of thofe words from them, and it
agreeing with that of the author,  hope we have no
where


The DE..IC AT. ..
where mittaken him; ;at leaft confiderably. He is
excufable for his innovations, on account of his great
knowledge in the art. It was this gentleman who
tranflated Monfieur Frefnoy' Latin poem, De Arte
Grapbica, and wrote the reflections upon it; but yet
not thinking them fufficient to explain it as clearly
as he would have it, he publifhed this book twenty
years afterwards. He is Hill living in Paris, and
defigns and paints very well himfelf for his diverfion,
being not of the profeffion; however, Idoubt, from
the character of the French fchool, whether his
practice comes up to his theory.
 am confcious to myfelf, that our tranflation of
him, as to the stile, falls shore of Mr Dryden' ver-
fion of Frefnoy' poem. The original will, in fome
meafure, make amends for that; and it had been
happy for our author, and the whole art of Painting;
if the gentleman who added the lives of the Paint-
ers to Mr Dryden' tranllation, had had leifure or
inclination to have done for us what he was fo kind
as to do for him, and have fet out the Englith fchool
with the ornaments that his judgment and elegance
could have given it.  had his work before me in
the execution of my own, and endeavoured to imi-
tate him in the account of thofe Englith Painters,
whom he thought worthy his pen. They had all
been immortal in his name and works, whereas. 
can only expect to have mine preferved by thofe of
the Mafters of whom  have written.
Sir,  beg your pardon for troubling you with fo
long  ftare of my cafe.  with the tranflation and
additions ftood less in need of your protection, and
that  had some berter way of shewing to the world


with what zeal and respect  am,


 IR.

Tour most bumble, and.

Most obedient Servant.






 
 
OE .
CTHE Idea of  perfetl Painter : or, Rules for forming
&  right Judgment on the Works of the Painters, Page &
Remarks and Instructions on the preceding Idea,
Chap. . Of Genins,
ibid.
Chap. II. That  man may, without any scruple, make use
of another man' studies,
 III. Of Nature; of the actions of Nature; of the
actions of Habit, and of Education,
 IV. In what fense one may Jay Art is above Na-
ture,
 . Of the Antique,
Chap. VI. Of the grand Custo,
 VIl. Of the Efence of Painting,
 VIIl. Whether Truth of History be effential in Paint-
ing  IXX. Of the imperfelt Ideas of Painting
 . How the remains of the imperfett Idea of Paint-
ing have been preserved in the minds of many ever since its
re-establishment,
 XI. Of Composition, the first part of Painting,
 XII. Of Design, the second part of Painting,
Chap. Kill. Of the Attitudes,
ib.
Chap. XIV. Of the Expressions,
 XV. Of the Extremities,
ib.
Chap. XVI. Of the Draperies,
 XVil. Of Landships,
 KVIll. Of Perspective,
 XXIX. Of Colouring, the third part of Painting
 LX. Of the Harmony of Colours,
ib.
Chap. XXI. Of the Pencil,
 
 :ON

 

 









Chap. AIl. Of the Licencesg

 
   AaIl. By what authority the Painters have repre-
fented, under buman figures, things Divine, Spiritual and
Inanimate,
 XXIV. Of naked Figures, and how they may be made
use of
 Exv. Of Crace,
 XaVI. Of Designs,
 RaVII. Efabe sefulnessand Use of Prints,
 XXVIII. Of the Knowledge of Pictures,
 To know what is good, and what is bad, in 
Picture,

ib.
II. To know who is the author of  Picture,
 To know if  Pilture be an Original or  Copy,
 .
The lives of eminent Painters, and of the Origin of Paint-
 abridgment of the lives of the six principal Painters of


ErEeCe.

 OK.III:
The lives of the Roman and Florentine Painters,
 IV

The lives of the Venetion Painters,

 .


The lives of the Lembard Painters,
 OE VI.
The lives of the German and Flemish Painters,
 OK VII
The lives of the French Painters,
 Tafte of several Nations,
 VIII

An EJay towards an English School of Painters,
 ALPHABETICAL INDEx of the Painters
Names in De PIl ES.



Page
.
Page
Cavallino, Pietro
. Lbani, Francefce
 Alberti, Leone Battiffa  Philip de
 Durer
Champagne, Jean Baptiffe de
 Albert
 Martin de
 del Sarto
 Domenico
Angelico, Giovanni
 da Meffina
 Antonioda
Cornelius, Cornelius
.
 Peter
 Bandinelli
 Pictro
Balthazar Peruzzi
 Andrea
 Jean
Barent, Ditteric
 Frederico
Coxis, Michael
 and his Sons  to
 del Piombo
Daniele da Volterra
 William
Derick, Peter Cornelius
 Abraham
Beccafiumi, Domenico
 Giacomo
 Gentile
 Michael
 Doffos
Bellino, Giovanni
 Jacques
.
 Cornelius
Blomaert, Abraham
 John
Eltheimer, Adam
 John and Henry
Ferdinando Elle
 Pietro
 John
Fouquier, Jacques
 Floris
 Sebaltian
 Adrian
Franceica, Pietro della
 Francefco
Brendel, Frederic
 Breail
Francois, Simon
 Matthew
Friminet, Martin
 Paul
Frefnoy, Charles Alfonfe du  Peter
 Charlesle
 Gaddo Gaddi
 Bonamico
 Gaddo Gaddi, Taddeo di
 Cornelius Poelen
 Henry Count Palatine  Claude
 Paolo
Genga, Girolamo
 Benedetto
George Pens
 Carolo
 Sir Balthazar
 Domenico
 John of
Giorgione
 Pietro
Giottino, Thomafo
 Caracci
   .
Girard Don
Mutiano, Girolamo
Page   Udine
Murillo, Bartolomeo
 Hernandez el
 Henry
.
 Hubert
Neticher, Gafpar
 da Cento
 Reni
Oliver
 Andrea
 or Hemts, Jofeph
Otho Venins
 Martin
Palma Vecchio
 Laurens de la
Pamphilus
 Hians
Parmegiano
 Gerrard
Parrhafius
 della Marca
 Abraham
Paolo Veronefe
 James
 di Bologna
 Romano
Pellegrino da Modena
 Francefco
 William
Penni, Luca
 Peter
Perrier, Francis
 del Vaga
 Lombard
Pietro da Cortona
 Grovanni
 Perugino
 Pietro
 Bernardino
 da Vinci
 da Caravaggio
 Giacomo da
 Filippo
Pordenone il Vecchio
 Filippo, the Son
 Julio Licinio
 Nicholas
Pourbus, Peter and Francis
 Ambrogio
 Nicholas
 of Leyden
Primaticcio, Francefco
 John of
 Bartolomeo
 Erafmus
 Andrea
uintin Mattys
 de Vos
Raphael Sanzio
 Franceico
 del Rhegio
 Simone
Rembrant
 da Siena
 Grofeppe
 Angelo Buonarott
Richard
 Angelo da Caravaggio
Roffo
 Sir Peter Paul
 Nicholas
 Michael
 Franceico
 Francis
 Joachim
More, Anthony
 Botticelli
 da Feliro
 Rowland
Schouarts,


    .
.
Schouarts, Chriffopher .   /Van Ach, John
Schut, Cornelius
Van-Dyck, Sir Anthony  John
 Cornelius
 John and Hubert
 Daniel
 John
 Luca
 Bernard
Sprangher, Bartholomew
 Noort, Adam
 of Florence
 Francefco
 James
 Henry
 Giorgio
Stimner, Tobias
 Francefco
 John
 Horatio
Swanevelt, Harman
 Charles
 Eaftache le
Ver-Meyen, John Cornelius Andrea
 Andrea
 Henry
 David, the Elder
 Claude
Teniers, David, the Tounger  Simon
 Pietro
 Giacomo Robufti Taddeo
 Maria
 Frederico
 Vecelli
 John

An INDEx of the Painters Names in the Esjay
towards an Englith School.
 Frederic
.
 Cleyn, Francis
Ggas, Mr Robert
 Adam
  Anderton, Mr Henry  Henry
 Mr Edmund
 Mr Henry
.
 Mr Alexander
 Galpars
 Samuel, Elq;
 Monnoyer
 Wr, the Copier
Barlow, Mr Francis
 Mrs Mary
 John and Henry
Du Bois, Edward
 William
 Daniel
 Lord Bishep
 Jofeph
 Mr William
 Nicholas
 Gerrard
.
 Mr John
Faithorn, Mr William
 Mrs Anne
Flat-


Veranese


 

 .
Flatman, Mr Thomas . Fevre de Venife
Oliver, Mr Iaac
  Mr John
 Mr Peter
 Mr Haac
 Mr Henry.
 Mark
Pembroke, Mr Thomas
 Henry
Pen, Jacob
 Horatio
 Mr Edward
 Artemifia
 Piper, Mr Francis
 Mr Pichard
 Mr William
Remee
 Mr Edward
 John, Esqs
 Mr John
 Peter
 Mrs Sufan
 Adian
 James
 Mr John
 Egbert
 Gapar
 Mr Nicholas
 Mr Thomas
 Hans
 Mr Henry
 Wencellaus
 Peter
 Abraham
 Mr Robert
 Mr John
 John
 James
 Mr Henry
 Cornelius
 Martin
 Henry
A John
 Keifar, Henry
 Adrian
 Mrs Anne
 Sir Anthony
 Mr John Zachary
 William
 Sir Godfrey
Jan-Loon, Francis
 Harman
 Henry
 Major-General
 . de
 ProfperHfenricus  Nir
 Mr Robert
 Laroon, Marceliusib.
Walton, Mr Parrey
 Sir Peter
 Mr William
 Balthazar van
Wouters, Francis
 Mr William
 Mr Michael
 John
 Thomas Van
 John van
 Mr Thomas
 Daniel
 /Loutt or Soeft
 



(  

LX
Of  Perfect






OR.
RULEs for forming  right judgment
on the works of the
AIIVLERS.

   ENIUS is the firft thing we muft
suppofe in  Painter; tis  part of
him that cannot be acquired by ftudy
or labour. It should be great to an-
fwer the Greatness of an art, which
 includes to many fciences, and re-
quires fo much time and application to be mafter of,
as Painting does. Allow then  man born with this
happy talent, the Paihter muft regard Vifible Na-
ture





 Apr of PAINTING.
ture as his object. He muft have an image of her
in his mind, not only as he happens to fee her in
particular subjects, but as the ought to be in herfelf,
and as she woud be, were the not hindered by cer

 accidents.


Now it being very difficult to meet with this
perfect state of nature, tis necefiary the Painter
should improve himself by the same fearch the an-
cients made after it, with  great deal of care and
capacity, of which they have left us examples in
sculptures, that in fpite of the fury of time and
Barbarians, have been preferved, and are even yet
to be feen. He ought,  fay, to have  fufficient
Knowledge of anriquity, and to learn by that how
to follow nature; for the Antique has always been
the rule of beauty to the beft judges. He muft
not content himfelf with being exact and regular,
he should, in every thing he does, thew  grand
gulto, and above all things avoid what is mean and
infipid.
This grand gufto in the works of the Painters, is
 ufe of the choiceft effects of nature, fuch as are
great, extraordinary, and probable. Great, becaute
things are to much the less fenfible to us, by how
much they are little or divided. Extraordinary,
becaufe what is ordinary does not Itrike us, nor
draw our attention. Probable, becaufe it is requi-
fire that thefe great and extraordinary things should
appear to be poffible, and not chimerical. The
perfect Painter minft have  juft idea of his profef
fion, which may be thus defin’: 
Painting is an
 that by means of defign and colouring, imi-
E all vifible objects on  Hlat fuperficies.
Three things should be comprehended in this defi-
nition, Delign, Colouring, and Compofition; and
though the latter does not teem to be very clearly
exprefted, yet it may be underftood by thefe words
Vifible Objects, which imply the matter of the
subject


The ART of PAINTIN .
subject the Painter propofes to himfelf to reprefent.
He ought to Know, and to practice thefe three
parts of his art, in as much perfection as poffible:
We shall therefore further explain them; in speak-
ing of the other parts that depend on them.
Compofition contains two things; Invention and
Dispofition. By invention, the Painter should find
our thofe subjects to work upon, that are moft pro-
per to be express’ and adorn’. And by Dispo-
fition he ought to place them in the moft advan-
tageous fituation, and where they will have the
greateft effect, the eye being pleafed with viewing
the faireft parts of the things reprefented, which
should be well contrafted, well diverfify’, and well
group’.
The Painter, to be perfect, muft defign correct-
ly, with  good gulto, and  different Htile, fome-
times heroic, fometimes paftoral, according to the
character of the figures he introduces. He muft
Know, for example, that the Our-lines, which
would agree with divinities, would in no wife be
fuitable to common people; heroes and and private
foldiers, the ftrong and the weak, the young and
the old, ought each to have their feveral forms.
Befides, nature differing in all her productions, re-
quires that the Painter should have an anfwerable
variety in his; and he muft never forger, that of
all the various manners of defigning, there is none
good, but that which is compos’ of beautiful na:

ture and the antique together.
The Attitudes, or poftures of the figures,
should be natural, expreffive; vary’ in their actions,
and contrafted in their members. They should be
fimple or noble, animated or temperate, according
to the subject of the picture, and the difcretion of
the Painter.
The Expreftion muft be juft to the subject,
what relates to the principal figure should be noble,
  ART of PAINT IN .
 and fublime; and  medium ought to be
observed between what is exaggerated, and what
infipid.
The Extremities,  mean the head, feet, and
hands, muft be drawn with more nicety and exact-
nets, than the other parts of the figures, and muft
together help to render their action more ex-
preffive.
The Draperies should be well. fet, the foldings
large, as few as may be, and well contrafted. The
Htuff ought to be heavy or light, according to the
quality and convenience of the subject: Sometimes
it should be wrought, and of  different Kind, and
Tometimes plain, agreeable to the figure and its fitua-
tion, whichrequires more or less luftre for the orna-
ment of the pieture, and for the ceconomy of the
whole.
Animals are chiefly characteriz’ by  lively and
particular lroke of the pencil.
Landlkips should not he encumber’ with too
many objects, and the few that are there ought to
be well cholen. If  great quantity of objects are
reprefented together, they muft be ingenioutly
group’ with lights and fhadows; the placing of
them muft be well connected, and yet free. The
trees muft be of different forms, colour, and touch,
as prudence and the variety of nature require.
 touch ought always to be light, as it were in
motion; the Fore-ground should be rich, either
by the objects themfelves, or, at leaft, by nicety
of work, which renders things true or palpable.
+
The Sky muft be light, and no object on the
earth have any of its acrial character, except fmooth
waters, and poliffd bodies, which are lufceptible
of the oppofite colours, as well celeftial as terref-
trial. The clouds should be well chofen, well
touch’ and well plac’.
The


The ART of PAINTING.
 Perspective should be very regular, and yet
with  feeming negligence.
In Colouring, which comprehends two things,
the local colour, and the claro obfcuro, the Paint-
or should inform himfelf very well of both the
one and the other. This only will diftinguith him
from thofe artifts, who underfland meafure and
proportion as well as he; and this will render him
the more faithful, and more perfect imitator of
Bature.
The local colour is nothing elfe but that which
is natural to each object, in whatever place tis
found; which diftinguithes it from others, and
which perfectly marks its character.
The claro obfcuro is the art of diftributing
lights and fhadows advantageoully, as well on par-
ticular objects, as on  picture in general. On par-
ticular objects, to give them  convenient relievo
and roundnels; and, in the picture in general, to
expofe the objects with pleafure to the view of the
spectarors, by giving the eye an occation to reft;
which is done by an ingenious diftribution of great
lights, and great fhadows, which lend each other
murual affiftance by their oppofition. Thus great
lights are  repofe for great fhadows, as great tha-
dows are for great lights. Tho', as has been faid,
the claro obfcuro comprehends the art of placing
all lights and fhadows well, yet tis more particu-
larly underftood to be the knowledge of rightly
difpoting great lights and great thadows.
Their Distribution, in this laft fenfe, may be
made four ways. Firtt, by the natural fhadows of
the Body. Secondly, by Croupes, that is, by dif-
pofing the objects in fuch manner, that the Lights
may be join’ all rogether, and the fhadows the
same; as one may imperfectly perceive in  grape,
whofe grains on the fide of the light make  mats
of brightness, and on the oppofite fide  mats of
  ART Of PAINTIN .
darkness; yet all together form but one groupe,
and are as one object. This muft be done fo arti-
ficially, that no affectation may appear in it: The
objects muft feem fo fituated naturally, and as by
chance. Thirdly, by the accidents of  suppoted
light. And fourthly, by the nature and the body
of the colours which the Painter may give to his
objects, without altering their character. This part
of Painting is the beft and fureft way for  Painter
to add force to his works, and to render his objects
 as well in general, as in particular.
don' find that the way of the claro obfcuro was
Known in the Roman school, before Polidoro da
Caravagios time, who difcovered it, and made it
one of the principles of the art of Painting; and 
wonder the Painters who came after him, did not
perceive that the great effect of his works, on the
spectators, proceeded from the reft, which he gave
the fight in grouping his lights on one fide, and
his shadows on another, which he did, only by the
Knowledge of the claro obfcuro:  wonder,  fay,
how they could let fo neceffary  part of their
art elcape, without taking notice of it. However,
the claro obfcuro is to be found among fome of the
Roman Painters; yet tis not to be efteemed as any
thing more than  happy effect of genius or chance,
and not as proceeding from an eftablifh’ principle
of the art.
Andrew Bofcoli,  Florentine Painter, had  right
notion of the claro obicuro, as may be feen by
his works; but the re-eftablishment of this principle
is owing to Giorgione, whofe competitor, Titian,
perceiving it, made ufe of it ever after.
In Flanders, Otho Veniuslaid it down as  funda=
mental in Painting, and communicated it to Rubens,
his pupil. The latter rendered it more fenfible to
the spectator, and shew’ the neceffity of it fo ap-
arenily, that the beft Flemish Painters follow’ him
in


The ART of PAINTIN .
in it, and have recommended their Paintings by
this part of perfection; for without it all the care
they have taken to imitate the particular objects of
nature, with the utmoft faithfulness, had not been
Worth our confideration.
in the distribution of colours there ought to
be an Agreement or Harmony, which has the fome
effect on the eye, as mufick has on the ear. If
there are feveral groupes of the claro obfcuro in 
picture, one of them should be more fenfible than
the reft, and be predominant over the others; that
there may be unity of object, as in the compofi-
tion there should be unity of fubject.
The Pencilling, if poffible, muft be bold and
light; but whether it feems all of  piece, like
that of Corregio, or unequal and uneven, like that
of Rembrant, it ought always to be foft and
caty.
If  Painter be forc’ to make ufe of the Licen-
ces, they should be imperceptible, judicious, ad-
vantageous and juftifiable: The three firft forts
belong to the Painter' art, and the laft to hiftory.
Whatever Painter is mafter of his art in all the
parts we have mentioned, he may depend upon it
he is arrived to  great degree of perfection;, and
 pictures will infallibly be fine; yet not enturely
perfect, if beauty be not accompanied with Grace.
Grace muft feafon the parts we have fpoken of,
and every where follow Genius: Grace fupports
and perfects it; but it is not to be fo thoroughly
acquired, as by any rules to be demonftrated.
 Painter has it from nature only, and does not
Know that he has it, nor in what degree, nor how
he communicates it to his works. It furprifes the
spectator, who feels the effect without penetrating
into the true caufe of it; but this grace does not
rouch him otherwife, than according to the difpo-
Lition
  AET of PAINTING.
 wherein he finds it. We may define it thus:
se Tis what pleafes, and gains the heart, without
 concerning itfelf with the underitanding. Grace
and beauty are two different things; beauty pleafes
by the rules only, and grace without them. What
 beautiful, is not always graceful; but grace join 
with beauty is the heighth of perfection.
We have given this idea of  perfect Painter
in as few words as we could, that we might not
be tedious to thofe who are in no doubt about the
things it contains; but for thofe that defire proofs
of it, we have endeavoured to fatisfy them in the
following remarks; in which both the one and the
other will find, we have treated of fuch things as
naturally prefented themfelves to us, and perhaps
will not be indifferent to them.
The following remarks anfwer in chapters to the
feveral parts of the Idea of  perfect Painter, of
which we have spoken in the foreroing treatife;
and the reader, in all the chanters, should by his
nemory lupply the parts where we have treated of
them, to explain them.

  


 
 Dnsi
ie
it

    ART of PAIN


NC.
. HAP. .
REMARKS and INSTRUCTIONS
on the preceding IDE .
Of GEN
 .
  in vain for men to endeavour, with all
: their might to reach the point of perfection,
in the art of Painting, or any other art, if they
are not born with  particular talent for the fcience
they profefs. They will always be uncertain of at-
taining the end they propofe to themfelves; rules
and examples may shew them the means of reach-
ing it, but that is not fufficient: If thefe examples
and rules are not eafy and agreeable to them, they
will never be fure.
This facility is only found in thofe, who before
they learn the rules of art, or fee the works. of
other men, have confulted their own inclination,
and examin’ whether they were put upon the
choice of their profeffion by fome inward light,
which is indeed genius, and is what guides them
by the neareft and eafieft way to perfection, render-
ing them infallibly hap
 both in the means, and
in the end.
Genius therefore is that light of the mind, which
conducts us to the end by the moft eafy means.
  prefent which nature makes to  man at
the hour of his birth; and tho' the commonly gives
it for one thing only, the is fometimes fo liberal as
to make it general in one perfon. There have been
feveral men, on whom the has beftowed this pleni-
tude of influences, who have with eafe perform’
WWhat-


 ART of PAINTING.
 they attempted, and always fucceeded in
what they undercook :  particular genius, tis true,
does not extend its force to all forts of knowledge
as  general one does, but then it penetrates far-
ther into that over which tis predominant.
 Painter, in the firft place, should have  Ge
nius, but that genius muft be corrected by rules,
reflection and induftry. He muft have seen much,
read much, and ftudy’ much, to direct his genius,
that it may produce things worthy pofterity. But
fince he cannot fee or fludy every thing he would
defire to know, in the way to the perfection he
aims at, he may, without fcruple, make ufe of and
ther man' udies.

  AP. II.
That  man may, without scruple, make use of
anotber mans studies.
 - impoftible for  Painter to reprefent well,
not only all the objects he has not feen, but
alfo thofe he has not defign’. If he has not feen
alion, he can never paint one; and if he has seen
one, he will always paint it imperfectly, unless he
firft defigns it after nature, or after another man'
WOTkS.
For this reafon we ought not to blame  Painter,
who having never feen or fludy’ the object he is to
reprefent, makes ufe of another man' Htudies, ra-
ther than draw fomething falfe out of his own
head. Tis neceffary he should have his examples
in his memory, or his Table-book; his own,  fay,
of thofe of another man.
When  Painter has furnish’ his mind with ima-
ges of the beautiful things he has feen, he adds to,
Of


The ART of PAINTING.
I diminithes them according to his gout, or as his
judgment directs. This change arifes by compa-
ring the ideas of what he has feen one with the
other, and chufing that which he thinks beft. For
example, Raphael in his youth, while he lived with
his mafter Perugino, had only the ideas of the works
of that Painter in his mind; but afterwards com-
paring them with thofe of Michael Angelo, and
with the Annque, he chofe that which feem’ beft
to him, and our of it form’  refin’ gufto, fuch
as we fee now in all his productions.
Thus genius makes ufe of the memory, as 
veftel wherein it keeps all the ideas that prefent
themfelves to it. The Painter choofes thofe that are
for his purpofe, by the help of his judgment, and
treafures them up in  magazine, out of which he
takes them as occafion requires.
Iwas out of
fuch  magazine (if  may fo exprets myfelf) that
Raphael took all thofe high ideas, which he had
drawn from the Antique; and thus Albert Durer,
and Lucas van Leyden drew from theirs, thofe
Gothic ideas, with which the practice of their
time, and the nature of their country, furnifh’
them.
 perfon that has  genius may invent  subject
in general, but if he has not Rudy’ particular ob-
jects, he will be embarals’ in the execution of his
work, unlefs he has recourfe to the works of
another.
If  Painter has neither time nor opportunity to
fee nature, yet has  fine genius, he may fludy af-
ter the pictures, the defigns, and the prints of thofe
mafters, who knew how to choofe their subjects
well, and to draw them with judgment. He
who would draw  landlkip, and never faw, or
never made fufficient observations on the countries
proper to be painted, for the oddness or agreeable-
nets of the prospect, will do well to make his ad-
Vantage


The ART of PAINT IN .
 of the works of thofe who have ftudy’
thofe countries, or who, in their landskips, have
reprefented the extraordinary effects of nature. He
may look on the productions of thofe able painters
as fafely as on nature herfelf, and by them affift his
invention in fome future production. To ftudy, at
firft, the works of the beft mafters will be two
ways ufeful to him; one is, he will fee nature free
from many things, which  man is oblig’ to throw
afide when he copies after her. The other is, he
will by this method learn to make  good choice of
nature, to take nothing from her that is not beauti-
ful, and to mend what' defective in her.
Thus  genius well regulated and fupported by
the theory of an art, not only makes ufe of its
own Audies, but alfo turns thofe of other men to
its own advantage.
Leonardo da Vinci writes, that the fpots which
are to be feen on an old wall, forming confus'
ideas of different objects, may excite genius, and
help it to produce fomething. Some perfons fancy
this affertion is an injury to genius, without giving
any good reafons for their objecting to it; for tis
certain, that on fuch  wall, or fome other fuch like
potted things, theres not only room to form out
of it ideas in general, but each Painter may con-
ceive different ideas, according to the difference of
his genius ; and that which is feen in  confus’
manner only may produce fomething clear, and
form an image in the mind of the artift who fees
it according to his particular tafte. By this means
one man shall fee  fine and rich compofition, be-
caufe his genius is fruitful, and his taffe good; and
another, on the contrary, shall fee nothing but
what is poor, and of an ill tafte, becaufe his ge-
nius is barren, and his tafte bad.
Let the minds of the painters be of what cha-
racter they will, each may difcover enough in
such


TBe ART of. PAINTING.
 an object to excite his imagination, and help
him to produce fomething of his own. The imagi-
nation growing warm by degrees; becomes at last
capable, by the fight of  few, figures, to conceive
 great number, and to enrichthe fcene of his
subject with certain objects of his own. Thus he
may, as it were, beget extraordinary ideas, which
otherwife he had never thought of.
We have thewn that the faying of Lconardo da
Vinci, concerning genius, does it no injury; on
the contrary, that tis often of great service to it,
as well to thofe who have much, as to thofe who
have little of it.  shall only add to what he faid,
that the more  man has of genius, the more things
he will perceive in thofe forts of (pots, or confus’
lines.
CH AP. III.
Of Nature; of the actions of Nature; of the
actions of Habit, and of Education.
Ature is as much alter’ by the accidents the
meets with, as by the habit the contracts by

feveral actions, which may be confidered two ways;
when the acts of herfelf, or by habit to pleafe others.
The actions that are purely natural are thofe which
men would do, if from their infancy they had been
left to themfelves; and the actions, which are the
product of habit, and education, are fuch as men do
by the inftruction or example of others. Of the lat
terkind there are as many different forts, as there
are nations, and they are to mingled with the ac-
tions, purely natural, that in my opinion tis very
hard to difcern the difference. Pet this is what the
Painter ought to aim at; for he muft often treat of
subjects,


 AET of PAINT ING.
subjects, where he ought to co
pure nature in
the whole, or in part; and tis neceffary there to
know the different actions in which nature is fet out
by the chief nations of the world. But becaufe the
differences of them proceeds from affectation,  veil
which difguifes truth, it should be the ftudy of 
Painter to diftinguith one from the other, and to
know wherein the fidelity, the beauty, and the fim-
plicity of nature confifts, whole graces are all owing
to her purity.
 vifible the ancient fculptors fought after this
natural fimplicity, and that Raphael borrow’ from
them thofe natural Strokes, which he has every
where pread over his pieces with  good guito.
Tet tho' nature is the fource of beauty, tis com-
monly faid, that art excels her. Several authors
have talk’ thus, and tis  Problem which wants
very much to be folv’.
CH  . IV.
In wbat sense one may Jay, Ax is above
NA TURE.
 should confider nature either as we find

her in particular objects, or in objects in
general, and as the is in herfelf. She is generally
defective in particular objects, in the forming of
which the is, as we have faid, alter’ by accidents
againft her intention, which is always willing to
produce her works in perfection; wherefore, if we
confider her according to her intention, and in her
productions in general, we shall find her perfect.
 from thefe her works in general, that the an-
cient fculptors took the perfection of their figures,
from whence Polycletes drew the beautiful propor-
tionS


 ART Of PAINTINC.
sions of the ftatue, which he made for pofterity,
and which is called the RULE.
Tis the fame with Painters the advantageous
effects of nature gave them  defire to imitare them,
and  happy experience, by little and lirtle, reducd
thofe effects into precepts. Thus it was not from
one object, but from feveral; that the rules of this



art were eftablish’.
If we compare the art of Painting,: which has
been form’ our of nature in general, with any one
of her particular productions, we shall find it comes
short of her, and perceive it to be true, That Art is
above Nature; but if we compare it with nature her-
felf, who isthe model of art; this propolition will
prefently be found to be falfe. Indeed, to confider
things aright, whatever care the Painters have taken
to imitate this miftrefs of their rart: they have not
hitherto been; able to reach. hers the has: an inex-
hauttible ffore of beauries, and for this reafon tis
said, that in the arts we are always learning: By
experience and reflection we are continually difco-
vering fomething new in the effects of nature, which
are without number, and always different one from
is
the other.
is  AP.
Of the ANTIGHE.
 the word Anrique are meant all. the pieces
aD of Painting, Sculpture and Archirecture, which
pt, as in Greece, from
were made as well in Eg
the time of Alexander the great to the irruption of
the Coths, who, out of rage or ignorance, deftroy’
all the fine Arts. The term Antique is still more
particularly us’, to denote the fculprures of that
time,


Te ART of PAINTING.
 as well ftatues and baffo relievo', as medals
and  flones engrav’. All thofe pieces of antiquity.
are not of an equal goodnels, yet even in thofe that
 indifferent; there is  certain beauty which dre

Kinguithes them from the works of the moderns.
 not of thofe indifferent pieces that we are

Ipeaking here, but of the moft perfect productions
of the ancients, fuch as we cannot now look on
without wonder. An ancient author has put them
above nature; and praifes the beauty of mankind but
a it has an agreement with the beautiful satues.



(Ifg; ab ungule ad capillum summum eft festiviffima.
Kftnez Considera: Wide signum pirtam pulchre videris:
 Plauti Epidic. A    
 might quote an: infinite number of ancient an=
thorities to prove this affertion, if  did not fear to
tire the reader with repetitions;  refer
 Tranlated him therefore to my: Comment  on
by MrDryden. Monficur Frefnoy' Art of Painting,
and shall content myfelf with relating
what  modern Painter, who had penetrated far
into the Knowledge of the Antique, faid on the
Jame occafion. Tis the famous Monficur Pouffin
of whom  am (peaking. Raphael, faid he, is an
Angel compar’ with other Painters; but in com-
parifon of the Ancients, hes an Afs. The phrafe is
 little too ftrong, and  think tis enough to fay,
Raphael is as much below the ancients, as the mo-
derns are below him.
 shall examine this thought more at large when
 come to write his Life.
 certain there are few who are able to difcern
all the delicacy that is to be found in the ancient
fculptures, becaufe, to do it, the artifts should have
 mind


 ART of PAINTINC.
 mind proportionable to thofe of the fculptors that
made them. They should have  fublime gufto,
 quick conception, and an exact and lively per-
formance. They gave their figures proportions
conformable to their character; and defign’ their
divinities by contours more eafy; more elegant
and with  greater gour than thofe of ordinary
men.
They made  refin’ choice of beautiful nature,
and found out excellent remedies for the impotence
of the maiter they work’ with, hindring them to
imitate all things.
 Painter therefore cannot do better than en-
deavour to find out the excellence of thefe pieces,
that he may know the purity of nature the better,
and defign the more learnedly, and the more ele-
gantly. Neverthelefs, fince there are in fculpture
feveral things that do not agree with Painting, and
fince the Painter has, befides, the means to imitate
nature more perfectly; he ought to regard the
Antique; as  book which is to be tranflated into
another language, wherein tis fufficient he keeps to
the fenfe and meaning of the author, without tying
himself fervilely to his words.

Li

CH  . VI.
Of the grand GUsto.

 has been thewn by the definition  have given
 of the grand guito, as it relates to the works
of the Painters, that tis not to be accommodated
to ordinary things.  mediocrity is not allowable
but in the arts which are neceffary for common ufe,
and by no means in thofe that are invented only for
ornament and pleafure; wherefore in Painting there
mult


The ART of PAINTING.
 be fomething great and extraordinary to fur-
prife, pleafe and instruct, which is what we call the
Tis by this that ordinary things are
Grand guito.
made beautiful, and the beautiful fublime and
wonderful; for in Painting, the grand Gulto, the
Sublime, and the Marvelous, are one and the fame
thing. Language indeed is wanting, but every thing
peaks in  good Picture.
  AP. VII.
Of the ESsENCE of PAINTING.
 have faid, that Painting is an art which
by means of defign and colours, imitates
all vifible objects on  flat fuperficies. Tis thus,
or very near it, that all who have fpoken of this
art have defined it, and no body has yer had any
thing to fay againft the definition. It contains
three parts, Compofition, Defign and Colouring,
which are the effence of Painting, as the body, the
foul, and reafon, are that of  man; and as man, by
thefe three parts of him only, thews feveral pro
pricties and agreements that are not part of his ef-
fence, but the ornament, for example, the fciences
and virtues; fo tis only by the effential parts of
his art that  Painter thews an infinity of things
which heighten the worth of his pietures, tho' they
are not of the effence of Painting. Such are the
proprieties of instructing and diverting; upon which
one may alk this confiderable question:
CH  .


The ART of PAI

NC.
   .

VIII
Whether
TRUTH 
HisToRY be efential in
PAINTINGS
 plain that compofition, which is an effen-
tial part of Painting, comprehends the ob-
jects that are to be met with in hiftory, of which
truth is the effence, and by confequence this fide-
lity ought to be effential in Painting, and the
Painter  on all occafions, oblig’ to conform him-
felf thereto.
To this it has been antwer’, That if truth of
hiffory be effential in Painting, there could be no
picture in which it should not be found, whereas
there are feveral which reprefent no hiftory at all;
fuch as allegorical pictures, landskips, beafts, fith,
fruits, ffowers and feveral other things, which are
the pure effect of the Painter' fancy. Norwith-
standing all this, tis certainly true that the Painter
ought to observe an exact fidelity in the hiftory he
reprefents, and that by  curious fearch after the
circumftances which accompany it, he should en-
creafe the beauty, and the value of his picture, yet
this is not an obligation on him which is of the
effence of Painting, Tis only an indifpentible decency,
as virtue and fcience are in  man. Thus, as  man
is  man ftill, let him be never fo vicious and igno-
rant, to  Painter is still  Painter, tho' he be igno-
rant of hiftory;
yet as the virtues and fciences are
the ornaments of  man, to tis undeniably true,
that all the works of the Painters wherein hifto-
rical subjects are reprefented, are to much the more
valuable, by how much the more the truth of
hiffory is preferv’, fuppoling that there is nothing
 ART of PAINTIN .
 as to the imitation of nature, which is ef
fential in Painting.
 Painter may be very fkilful in his art, and yet
Know nothing of hiftory: There are almoft as
many inftances of this, as there are pictures of Ti
tian, Paolo Veronefe, Tintoret, the Balfans, and
feveral other Venetians, whofe chiefeft care was
about the effence of their art; that is, in the imita-
tion of nature, and who very little apply’ them
felves to things that might, or might not be with-
our altering its effence. Tis in this fenfe the curi-
ous judge of the pictures of the Painters  have men-
tion’, or they would not buy them by their weight
in gold, nor would their works be otherwife among
thofe that have the firft place in their cabinets.
And yet tis not to be difputed, but that if this
effence of the art, in the pictures of the Venetian
Painters, had been accompany’ with thofe orna-
ments that certainly render fuch things more valu-
able,  mean the truth of hiftory, and chronology,
they would have been much more eftimable even
than they are now. We muft, however, confels,
 by this effence only that the Painters ought to
instruct us, and that we ought to prefer the imita-
tion of nature in their pieces to all other excellencies
whatfoever. If they instruct us, to much the ber-
ter; if they don', we shall sill have the pleafure
of viewing  Kind of creation that will both divert
and rove iIs.
When  would learn hiffory,  would not go to
 Painter for it; he is an hifforian meerly by acci
dent.  would read thofe books that treat of it
exprefly, and inform myfelf by thofe, whofe effen-
tial dury it is, not only to relace events, but to do
it truly.
Neverthelefs, after all  have said on this subject,
 will not pretend to excufe  Painter, where he
thews himfelf  bad hiftorian; for  man is always
blame.


The ART of
PAINTING.  in ill performing what he undertakes.
If  Painter is about to treat of an hifforical subject,
and Knows nothing of the objects which should
be  part of his compofition to render it true, he
ought carefully to inform himself either by books,
or from men of learning, and if he is negligent in
this matter, he is without doubt inexcufable. 
except fuch as have painted pieces of devotion,
where they have incroduced famts of different ages
and countries, not out of choice, but out of 
forced complaifance for the perfons that fet them
to work, whofe weakness incapacitated them to
reflect on thofe additional things, that might con-
tribute to the ornament of Painting.
Invention, which is an effential part of Painting,
confifts folely in finding out objects proper to enter
into the compofition of  picture, as the Painter'
imagination guides him, whether in things true or
falfe, fabulous or hiftorical. Suppofe then  Painter
should imagine Alexander the Great was dreft as we
dress at this day, and should reprefent that Con-
queror with  hat and perriwig, he would doubt-
lets do  very ridiculous thing, and be guilty of
an unpardonable error; but his crime would be
againft the truth of hiftory, and not against Painting;
if the reft of the things he painted were according
to the rules of art.
Burtho' nature is the effence of Painting, and hi-
Rory only an accident, yet this accident is not lefs
worthy of the Painter' confideration than the ef-
fence, in cafe he would pleafe every body, especially
the men of letters, and fuch as judge of  picture
more by their underftanding than their eyes, and
whofe opinion it is, that the perfection of thefe
fort of works confifts chieffy in reprefenting hiftory
faichfull
 and expreffing the paftions well.
   .


TING.
The ART of PAIN
 IX.
Of the imperfest IDEAs of
PAINTING.

IE . are few perfons who have  clear
idea of Painting, even among the Painters
themfelves; feveral of whom place the whole ef-
fence of their art in Defign; and others think tis
in the Colouring only.
The greater part of thofe bred to the profeffion
of learning, have no notion of Painting, but as it
relates to the invention of the Painter, whofe fancy
is the chief thing they look on. They examipe this
invention narrowly, they diffect it, and as it appears
more or lefs ingenious, they praife or difpraife the
picture, without confidering the effect, or to what
degree of perfection the Painter has carry’ his imi-
tation of nature. In this fenfe it was, that Saint
Auftin faid, ce The Knowledge of Painting, and the
cc fable is fuperfluous, and at the same time the
holy father commends the profane Sciences.
In vain did Titian, Giergione, and Paolo Ve-
ronefe, exert themfelves to excel in the effence
of their art, the imitation of nature. In vain
were they at fo much pains to imitate her to per
fectly as they did, and the critics have in vain
regarded their pieces as the moft perfect copies of
Nature, if that is not in the firft place to be con-
fidered. They gave themfelves the trouble of
Painting to no purpofe, fince correct prints would
Juffice to exercife the judgment of fuch crities,
and fill up the extent of their knowledge.
To return to Saint Auttin, if he had had  true
idea of Painting, as it is only an imitation of truth,
and had reflected that by this imitation the fouls of
the righteous may be  thouland ways rais’ up to
divine love, he would have written  panegyrick

O ART of ..INT ING.
 this fine art with to much the more warmth, by
how much the more, he was himfelf fenfible of
 thing that might carry  man to heaven.
Another father had  jufter idea of Painting, 
   
 St Gregory of Nice, who, after having made
 long and beautiful defcription of Abraham' fa-
crificing his fon Haac, has thefe words,
 have
EC
often caft my eyes upon  picture, which repre-
ce fents this moving object, and could never with-
ce draw them without tears, fo well did the picture
se reprefent the thing itfelf, even as if the action
 were then palting before my fight.
CH  
 the remains of the Imperfect Idea of Paint-
ing have been preserved in the minds of many
ever since its re-eftablishment.
Have in the former chapter shewn, that the effence
of Painting confifts in,  faithful imitation, by
which means the Painter may, both pleafe and in-
struct, according to the meafure of his genius.
 now treat of the falfe ideas of Painting, and
in this chapter thew how the remains of thofe that
are imperfect lid down to us from our forefathers.
Painting, as well as other arts, came to be Known
by the progress it made in, the minds of men.
Thofe that began to revive it., in, Italy, and confe-
quently had but weak principles to go by, drew the
admiration of the spectarors by the novelty of their
works; and as the number of Painters encreas’,
and emulation gave, them new lights in their art,
   Roman’ Catholic that faid it.
  AET of PAINTIN .
fo the beauty and value of their pieces encreas'
alfo, from whence arofe  great many lovers and
crities in Painting; and things being come to 
 peint, the world believ’ it impoffible for
the pencil to produce any thing more perfect, than
what was in thofe days the object of their wonder.
Men of the higheft quality vifited the Painters,
Poets fung their praifes, and in the year  King of Naples, palting through Florehce,
call’ upon Cimabue, who was then in reputation;
and Cofmo di Medicis was fo charm’ with Filippo

Lippis pieces, that he try’ all manner of ways to
overcome the whimficalness and laziness of that
Painter, and to make him mind his work.
However, tis eafy to judge by the remains of
their firft productions, that Painting, at that time,
was  very indifferent bufiness compar’ with what
is now to be feen from the hands of the beft mafters,
who fucceeded them in their profeftion; for the
part that depends on compofition and defign, was
not then feafoned by the grand gufto, which the
Painters have fince acquired. Thar of colouring
was entirely unknown to them, and in both the
colouring of objects in particular, which we call
the local colour, and in the knowledge of the
claro obicuro, they were abfolutely ignorant, and
Knew nothing at all of the harmony of them both
together. They made ufe of colours,
tis true, but
the way they took was trivial, and did not help
them to much to reprefent the truth of objects, as
to call them to our remembrance.
They were bred up in fuch ignorance of colour-
ing, as to have no conception of the power of that
charming part of their art; nor to what degree of


height ir could raife their works. They took their
matters words, which were oracles to them, and
having, as they thought, nothing to do put to
tread



OF  AI
The ART
FINC.
 in the paths in which they led them, all their
Hudy was about invention and defign.
At laft, after feveral years, the good genius of
Painting rais’ up fome great men in Tulcany, and
the dutchy of Urbin, who by the goodness of their
talent, the folidiry of their underftanding, and the
affiduity of their fudies, elevated the ideas of the
Knowledge which they learnt of their mafters, and
produced fome things to perfect, that they will al-
ways be the admiration of pofterity.
Thofe to whom we owe this perfection moft, are
Lconardo da Vinci, Michael Angelo, and Raphael;
but the latter, who excell’ all of them, acquired fo
many parts of his art, and carried them to to high
 degree, that the great praifes which have been
given him, have made it to be believ’ he was
wanting in nothing, and have in his perfon center’
all the perfection of Painting.
It being neceffary, in this art, to begin with De-
Lign, and certain that the fource of  good talte,
and correctnels, is to be found in the ancient fculp-
cures, and the works of Raphael, who took out of
them what was moft valuable, moft of the young
Painters, in fucceeding times, never fail’ going to
Rome to ftudy, and continue fo to do now -days,
from whence they bring the general efteem of
thofe pieces which are admird there, and tranfmit
it to all that hear them. Thus  great number of
the curious have preferved, on the faith of others,
or the authority of authors, the firft idea which
made an impreftion on their minds, to wit, thar all
the perfection of Painting is to be found in the
Works of Raphael.
The Roman Painters have alfo, for the moft
part, remain’ of this opinion, and have infinuared
it into ftrangers, either out of  love they bore their
country, or out of  neglect of colouring, which they
never underftood well; or that they preferr’ the
other


 ART
Of .AIW TING.
 parts of Painting before atx.

which, being.
 many in number, took up their whole lives
to Rudy- and acquire.
    wi     
 Tat 
For thefe reafons therefore they, minded nothing
but what depends on invention and defign
and
 Raphael invented very ingeniouly, though
he
delign’ moft corectly and elegantly, though he
expreft the paftions of the mind with infinite ferce
and grace, thoughhedrew his subjects
with all poffible
decorum and nobleness, and no Painter has disputed
with him the advantage of fuperiority in the multi-
tude of the parts of his art, which he was mafter of;
tis, however, undeniable, that he did not penetrate
far enough into:colouring to render the objects very
true; or very fentible, nor to give an idea of  per-
feet imitation; and yet this perfect imitation. and
tenfation make the effence of Painting, as  have
 prov’.
Tis compos’ of defign and co-
louring; and if Raphael, and the Painters of his time,
had but an imperfect notion of the latter, the idea
of the effence of Painting, which is produced by
their works, muft neceffarily be imperfect, as well
as that which has been introduced into the minds of
Tome perfons fince thofe days, otherwife of good
judgment.
 works of Titian, and thofe other Painters,
who have thewn their thoughts with the advantage
of  faithful imitation, ought, one would think, to
have deftroy’ thofe evil remainders which we are
Ipeaking of, and have fettled the ideas of the art, as
nature and reafon require from an underftanding
that is juft. But the youth of the fucceeding times
fince Raphael, going from Rome to Venice preju-
diced in their fight and their judgment, and feldom
Staying there long, fee, as it were, en paffant, the
beautiful pieces that might give them  juft idea,
and are very far from contracting  good habit of
colouring, which would make their Hudies at Rome
more


 ART Of .AIN TIN .
Fa Valuable; and render them without reproach
hirall the parts of their profettion.
But what is moft aftonifhing, is, that fome cer-
tain curious perfons; who have the remainders of
this falfe idea, and are themfelves charmed with the
Venetian Paintings, buy them up, with good reafon,
at high prices, though thofe pictures have almoff
no other merit than their colouring, one part
of the effence of Painting, which  have here
eftablith’.
cim




CH AP. AI.

     Tbe
rt part

 TINC.
 we have only us’ the word Invention,
 to fignity the firft part of
Painting. Several

 confounded it with Genins, others with 
fruitfulness of thought, others with the dispofition
of objects; but all thefe things are different from
one another; wherefore  am of opinion, that to
give  clear idea of Painting, it should be call’
Compofition, divided into two parts, invention and
difpolition. Invention only finds out objects for 
 difposition places them -right.
Tis true
thefe two parts are different, and yet they have fuch
 relation to each other, that they may be com-
prehended under the fame name.
Invention is form’ by reading hiftory, and the
fable.
Tis the pure effect of the imagination in
metaphorical subjects. It contributes to the truth
of hiftory, as well as to the clearnels of allegories,
and in what manner foever tis made ufe of, it
ought not to keep the mind of the spectator in
tuspence by any obfcurity: And yet as faithfully and
inge-



The ART of .AINT IN..
 as  subject may be chofen, it will never
have  good effect, if it is not difpos’ of advan=
tageoutly; as the oeconomy, and the rules of art
require; and the juft mixture of thefe two parts, is
what  call Compofition.





CH  . XII
Of DESIGN, the second part of PAINTINC.
Good gufto, and correctnets of defign, are
 to neceffary in Painting, that  Painter who
wants them muft, do miracles to attract the leatt
efteem: And the defign being the bafis and foun-
dation of all the other parts; being what termi-
nates the colours, and difentangles the objects, its
elegance, and correctnets are no less neceffary in
Painting, than the purity of language is in elo=
quence.

  . KIII.
Of the ATTITUDES.
 the Attitudes, the Ponderation, and the Con-
 traft are founded in nature; the does no action
but the thews thofe two parts; and if the fails of it,
the muft be either depriv’ of motion, or conftraind
in her action.
  AP.


IV
 ART 
  AP. XIV.
Of the ExPRESS IONS.
AHIE Expreffions are the touchftone of the

 Painters underftanding; by the juttness of
his diftriburing them he shews his penetration, and
his difcernment: But there is as much fenfe requir’
in the spectator to perceive, as in the Painter to
perform them.
 picture is like  foene, where each figure plays
its part. Figures well defign’, and well colour’,
are admirable indeed; yet moft people having not
 juft idea of Painting, are not fenfible of thofe
parts of it any farther than they are accompany’
with vivacity, juftness and delicacy of expreffion,
which is one of the moft rare talents of  Painter;
and he that is fo happy as to manage his Expreffions
well, will not only make them relate to the parts of
the face, but alfo to thofe of the whole body, and
will expofe them in fuch manner, that even the
moft inanimate objects shall agree with the general
expreftion of the subject.
CH  . XV
Of the ExTREMITIES.
&

HIE Extremities, which are the head, feer
 and hands, being the moft Known and re-
markable parts of the body, and thofe which, if
one may to fay, speak moft to us in  picture, they
ought to be more cerminated than the others, if the
action of the piece expofes them much to view.
CII  


 The ART of PAINTING.
CH AP. XVE
Of the DR APER.IE .

FYT. fot or caft  Drapery is  term in Painting
by which is underftood to clothe and dress 
figure. The word caf seems to me to be fo much
the more expreffive, by how much the more the
draperies ought not to be adjulted as we put on
our clothes. In following the character of nature,
who is far from all fort of affectation, the folds
should fall about the members as by chance: They
should leave enough of them naked to thew what
they are, and by  careful artifice contraft them in
showing them, and, if  may fo express it, carels
them by their tender windings, and foft touches.
The ancient fculptors, who had not the ufe of
different colours, becaufe they work’ the fame
thing on the fame matter, have avoided the large
preading of the folds, left, furrounding the mem-
bers they should attract the eye, and hinder their
feeing the naked of the figures with as much eafe
as they would have had them. For their draperies;
they often made ufe of wet linnen to clothe their
figures, or elfe they multiply’ the fame folds, to
the end that this reperition inight make  fort of
etching, which by its obfcurity renders the mem-
bers it furrounds themore fenfible. They have com-
monly obferv’ this merhod in their baffo relievo',
and which way foever they managed their drape-
ries, they placed their folds in wonderful order.
The Painter, who by the diverfity of his colours
and lights should diftinguith the members from the
draperies, may govern himfelf by the good order
of the antique folds, without imitating their num-
ber; and may vary his ftuff according to the cha-
ratter of his figures. Thofe Painters, who did not
Know


The ART of: . IR
INC.
 what liberties they were allow’ in this mat-
ter, have been ;as much in the wrong in copying
the ancient fculptures, as the modern fculptors have
been in imitating the Painters.
The reafon why the folds ought to difcover
where the limbs of apicture are, is becaufe Painting
is on  flat fuperficies; and he muft annihilate fome
things, by deceiving the fight, and leave nothing
equivocal to, be feen in his piece: Wherefore the
Painter is oblig’ to obferve this order in all his dra-
peries, of what nature foever; either coarfe or fine,
rough or plain; and he muft always, prefer the ma-
jelty of the folds, to the richness of the stuff, which
muft be fuiced to the age and fathions of the hiftory
that is reprefented.
As the Painter ought to avoid all manner of ftiff-
nets and hardness in his folds; and be careful that
they don’. fmell: of the lay-man, as we commonly
fay; fo he should alto ufe his flying draperies with
difcretion, for they canonly be agitated by the wind
in  place where one may reafonably fuppofe it
blows, or, by the compreftion of the air.
When 
figure is fuppos’ to be in motion, fuch fort of dra
peries are nmoft advantageous, becaufe they contri-
bute to the life of  figure by the contralt: Vet care
muft be taken,;that the caufe of it may appear na-
tural and probable, and there should never be flying
draperies on different fides in the fame picture,
when they cannot naturally be agitated by any thing
but the wind, and when the figures are in repofe.
Several skilful Painters have committed this fault,
without thinking of it.

CH  .


 ART of PAINT INC.
  AP. XVII.
Of .ANDSKIPS.
 Painting be  fort of creation, tis more ferr
 fibly fo in Landlkips than in any other Kind of
pictures. We fee there nature rifing out of her
chaos, the elements feparated, the earth adorn’
with her various productions, and the heavens with
their ftars. This fort of Painting contains all the
others in little, and therefore the Painter, who exer-
cifes it, ought to have an univerfal knowledge of
the parts of his art; if not in to particular  manner
as thofe that are us’ to paint hiftory, yet; at leaft,
speculatively, and in general; and if he does not
finith all the objects that compofe his picture, or
accompany his landskip, he is, at leaft, oblig’ to
specify livelily the gufto, and the character, and by
how much the less his piece is unfinith’, to give it
the more vivacity.
However,  do not pretend to exclude exactnets
of work from this talent; on the contrary, twill be
the more admird, and the more valuable for it.
But let  landikip be never fo well finith’, if its
merit does not confift in the comparifon of the ob-
jects one with another, and if their character be not
thereby preferv’; if the prospects are not well
cholen, or not well fet off by  good intelligence of
the claro obfcuro; if the ftrokes are not lively,
and the fcene animared by the figures, by animals,
or other objects, which are ufually in motion; and
if to  good gufto of colouring, and to extraordinary
tenfations, the genuineness and truth of nature are
not join’, the picture will never be efteem’, nor
be admitted into the cabiners of the true critics.
CH  .


PAINTING.
The ART 
 AP. KVIII
PERSPECT IVE.
Certain author has faid, that Perspective and
 Painting are the fame thing, becaufe there is
no Painting without Perspective. Tho' the propo-

fition is falfe, abfolutely, fpeaking, inafmuch as 
body cannot be without fhadow, and yer it is not
the fame thing as the fhadow; neverthelets tis true
in this fenfe, that  Painter cannot do any thing
without Perspective in all his operations, and that
he does not draw  line, nor ftrike  flroke with his
pencil, which has not  share of this in it, at leaft
habitually. It regulates the meafure of forms, and
the gradation of colours in all places of the picture.
The Painter is forced to know the neceffity of it,
and tho' his practice of it is, or should be confum-
mate; yet he will often be expofed to make great
faults againft this knowledge, if out of lazinels he
will not confult -new, at leaft in the moft vifible
places, and take his rule and compaffes with him,
that he may put nothing to rifque, nor lie open to
cenfure.
Michael Angelo has been blamed for neglecting
perspective, and the greateft mafters of ltaly have
been to throughly convinced, that without it tis
impoftible for any composition to be regular, that
they have endeavour’ to go to the bottom of it;
and in fome deligns of Raphael, there are to be
leen even  fcale of degrees; to exact was he in this
Point.

   .


The RT of PAINT ING.
 AP. KIE
CoL OURIN , the third part  ING.
Everal Painters have talked of colours fo very
 far from what they ought to have done, thatI
was tempted to endeavour to fet them right; and
wrote  Dialogue in defence of Colouring, which
was printed four and twenty years ago; and having
nothing better to fay of it at this time,  muft refer
the reader to that treatife, wherein  have done my
utmoft to thew the merit and prerogative of colours,
with all poffible perfpicuity.
CH  . XX.
Of the Harmony of Col OVXs.

HERE is  Harmony and Diffonance in the
 Kinds of colours, as there is in the tones or de-
grees of light; and in  compoficion of mufic, the
notes muft not only be true, but in the performance
the inftruments muft alfo be agreeable: And as all
mufical inftruments do not agree one with another,
as for example, the lute and the hautbois, the fpi-
net and the baspipe, fo there are colours that will
never appear together without offence to the fight;
as the vermilion with the green, the blue with the
yellow; and yet as the moft fharp inftruments bear
 part with  good effect, among feveral others, fo
the moft oppofice calours being placed  propos,
amongdivers others which are in union, will render
some parts of  picture the more fenfible, especially
thofe





The RT
PAINTINC.
 that should predominate; and draw the eyes
of the spectator.
Titiahn, as  have ehfewhere obfer
, has made
this ufe of them in his triumph of Bacchus, where
having placed riadne on the borders of the picture,
and for that reafon not being able to make her re-
markable by the luftre of the light, which he pre-
served for the middle of his piece, he gave her 
vermilion fearf on  blue drapery, as well to loofen
her from his ground, which was  blue fea, as be-
caufe the was one of the principal figures of his lub-
ject, upon which he defired to attract the eye.
Paolo Veronefe, in his marriage of Cald, becaute
Chrift, who is the principal figure of the subject, is
carry’ fomewhat into the depth of the picture, and
that he could not make him be taken notice of by
the brillant of the claro obfcuro, has dreft him in
blue and vermilion, thereby to conduct the light
to that figure.
CH AP XXI
 the PENCIL.

HE term, Pencil, is fometimes taken for all

the parts of Painting, as when we fay, that
Raphael' transfiguration is the finelt picture that
ever came from his Pencil; and fomerimes tis to be
underftood of the work irfelf; for example, when we
fay, of all the Painters of antiquity, Apelles' Pencil
was the moft learned. In this place the word Pencil
fignifies fimply the exterior manner he obferved in
employing his colours, when thofe colours don'
seem too much agitated, or, as one may fay, too
much formented by the motion of  heavy hand;
D The ART of PAINT. ING.
but on the contrary, when the movement appears
free, ready and light, we fay, the piece is of  good
Pencil; yet this freedom of the Pencil. is of little
worth, if tis not guided by the head, and if it does
not ferve to thew us that the Painter underftands
his art. In  word,  fine Pencil in Painting, is
like  fine voice in mufic; both the one, and the
other, are valued according to the proportion of the
great effect, and the harmony that accompanies
them.
CH  . XXII
Of the LICENCES.
TOAHE Licences are fo neceffary, that all ares
admit of them; they are literally againft the

rules, but when we come to explain ourfelves, we
shall shew they affift them, if they are made ufe of
 propos. Every man of fenfe thinks they are to
the purpofe, when the piece in which they are
employ’, has the greater effect by them, and when,
by their means, the Painter reaches the end he aims
at, which is to impofe on the fight; but tis not
every Painter that can make an advantageous ufe
of them. There are none but great genuiss who
are above rules, and who know when to make ufe
ingeniouly of the licences, either in the effence of
the art, or in hiftory. The latter is the more diffi-
cult work, and requires our attention. We shall
speak further of it in the following chapter.

   .


The ART of PAINTI

 XXIII
By what authorit
 the PAINTERS bave repre-
fented under buman figures things Divine,
Spiritual and Inanimate.
&
ipture tells us, in feveral places, of God' ap-
 pearing to man, either by the miniftry of his
angels, or in dreams and vifions.
There is  fine
delcription of God, under the form of an old man,
in the feventh chapter of Daniel, and the ninth
verfe. The fame holy writ informs us of feveral
apparitions of angels under human forms. For
this reafon, the church in the council of Nice,
made no fcruple to allow Painters to reprefent God
the Father, under the figure of  venerable old man,
and angels under human figures.
Painters are alfo juftify’, on the fame account,
to give life to inanimate things, when they follow
exactly the idea the fcripture gives us of them. The
spectator should not prefently be fcandaliz’, if he
fees facred things mixt with poetical fictions, as if
fiction and poetry were indifpentibly profane. The
book of Job, the Plalms of David, the Apocalyple,
are all poetical, and full of figurative expreftions,
without reckoning all the parables which are in the
other parts of the (cripture.

Iwas in copying the
facred text, that Raphael, Painting the paffage of
Jordan, gave that river  human figure, and drew
him puthing back his waters to their fource. He was
Warranted to do this by holy writ, which, to pro-
portion its expreffions to man' underftanding, often
reprefents divine things in the shape of human;
and, for the instruction of the faithful, makes ufe
of the moft palpable and fenfible comparifons and
ideas. We have  paffage, relating to the subject

Of


The ART of PAINTIN .
 rivers, in the  Pfalm, where it is faid, & ce Let
co the floods clap their hands: letthe hills be joyful
ce together. The Painter, who has the fame inten-
tion to instruct, and to edify, cannot follow  ber-
ter pattern.
Pouffin, in his picture of the finding of Mofes,
has obferved the same conduct, in reprefenting the
river Nile, for which he has been blamed by some
perfons, who alledge thefe reafons againtt him:

They fay, that Painters should not mingle falfe gods
with things relating to our religion; that rivers are
falfe divinities whom the Hleathens worthiped, and
whom we ought not to introduce in facred hiftory:
And further, that  Painter may well enough repre-
fent  river, as  river, but not do it under  hu-
man figure. To all this one may eafily antwer,
That as the holy fcripture, when it introduces rivers
under human figures, had no intention to speak of
thote the Pagans adored, and tho' it might have
exprets’ itfelf fimply and naturally, yet it makes
ufe of  figurative ftile, without fearing to feduce
the faithful; to alfo  chriftian Painter, who ought
to imitate the fcripture, is very far from endea-
youring to alter the truth of hiftory: He rather
strives, conforming himfelf to his original, to thew
it more livelily and elegantly, not to an Infidel, but
to  Chriftian as he is, who being prejudiced againft
the falfe divinities, ought not to find out another
meaning than that of the holy scripture.
But with respect to Pagan divinities, which are
introduced as fuch, and with the characters that
thew what they are, tis more difficult to admit
them in fuch kind of compofitions. The learned
have handled that matter by its relation to poefy,
and the caufe remains still to be decided: However,
the Painter, who has no other way to express him-

Pfal. xcvil.  ART of PAINTING.
 than by thefe forts of figures, inttead of being
blamed, will always be commended by the beft
judges, when they find them brought in prudently
and ingenioutly. For the falfe divinities may be
confider’ two ways; either as gods, or as fymbo-
lical figures. As gods; the Painter muft never re-
prefent them, except it is in subjects entirely pro-
fane; and as fyribolical figures, he may incroduce
them with difcretion on all occafions, where he
thinks them neceffary.
Rubens; who of all Painters mmade ufe of thefe
fymbols the moft ingenioully, and the moft learn-
edly, as may be feen in the book of the Cardinal
Infant' entrance into Antwerp, and by the pictures
of the gallery of Raixemburg; has been cenfured for
if: He should not; fay they, have brought allego-
rical figures into his compofitions, nor have mixed
table with truth.
Fs
To which we may antwers Tuai as Rubens has
managed it, he has not confounded fable with truch;
he rather has employ’ the fymbols of the fable to

exprets the fame truch. In the picture of the birth
of Lewis XlIith, on the top of it, in clouds, at 
diftance, he has reprefented Caffor on his winged
horfe, and on the fide, Apollo in his chariot mount-
ingon high; to thew that the Prince was born in the
thorning; and that his mother'’ delivery was happy.
From whence we may infer, that the Painter had
 thoughts of reprefenting the gods as gods, but
Caftor only as  conftellation that render’ events
fortunate, and the chariot of Apollo mounting up-
wards, to mark the time of the morning.
If the Painter, with an intention to express himfelf
the better, has thought it neceffary or convenient
to reprefent the diviniries of the fable among hifto-
rical figures, thofe fymbols muft be look’ upon
as invifible, and as not there any otherwife than
by their fighification.
D ART of PAINTING.
 in this fenfe the fecond council of Nice,
authoriz’ in what they did by the scripture, allowed
the reprefentations of God the Father, and the angels
under human figures; for there would have been
 greater inconvenience in painting the Perfons of
the holy Trinity, and the angels, than in introducing
Pagan divinities in  picture, if the fenfe that the
former should be taken in, were pot explain’.
Chriltians being fufficiently prepoffeft againft thefe
falfe appearances, which are intended only for their
instruction, to profit by them, should have the fame
notion of them as the Painter, and look upon them
a not there.
The authority for Painting the angels with wings,

is taken from the ark of the covenant?, and from
the  chapter of Daniel, the  verfe; however,
thefe paftages do not indifpenfibly oblige Paintersto
draw angels always with wings; they may do it, or
not do it, as their art, good fenfe, and the inftruc-
tion of the faithful require.
The reader will easity perceive tis  Papift that
argues thus for the idolatrous cuftom of representing the
boly Trinity, and the angels under buman figures.  be
argument is so mean, it deserves no answer; and the per-
(on so weak, it needs no antidote; or we might quote
against him, the  verse of the  Pfalm, the same
be has quoted above, where are these words.
ce Confounded be all they that ferve graven ima-
CC
ges, that boaft themfelves of idols; worship him
  ye gods.
 xxv.
 AP.


 ART of PAINTINC.
 . AP XXIV
Of naked Figures, and how they may be made
ise of
THIHE Painters and fculptors, who underfland
defigning very well, commonly feek after oc-
cafions to thew the naked, to gain efteem and di-
Ainction; for which they are certainly praife-worthy,
provided they keep themfelves within the bounds
of the truth of hiftory, of verifimility and modetty.
There are some subjects, in which  man may more
reafonably reprefent nakedness than in others; as for
example, in tables, when the fcene lies in hot coun-
tries, and we know nothing of the modes of the
people, or when the labourers of the firft ages are
reprefented. Cato the Cenfor, as Plutarch relates,
worked naked among his labourers, when he came
from the fenate; and St Peter was naked when our
Saviour appeared to him after his refurrection, and
found him fithing with the other Apoftles. Nakednets
may alfo be made ufe of in the reprefentation of
allegorical subjects, the Pagan gods or hero': in
thort, on all occafions, where we may fuppofe we
look upon fimple nature, where cold or impudence
is not predominant; for clothes were only invented
to keep men from cold and fhame.
There are, at this day,  great many people, in
feveral parts of the world, who go ftark naked,
either becaufe they dwell in hot countries, or that
cuftom has taken away the indecency and shame of
hakednets. In  word, the general rule, which
should be obferved in this cafe, is, as we have al
ready faid, that there be nothing againtt modefty or
verifimility. The Painters draw moft of their figures
with their heads and feet naked; wherein they follow
the



The ART of .AINTING.
 dictates of fimple nature, which eafily accultoms
thofe two parts to nakedness: We fee examples of
this Kind, not only in hot countries, but in the midft
of the cold mountains of the Alps, where even the
children go with their feernaked in fummer, among
the ftones and flints, and in winter over the ice and
fnow. But with regard to the truth of hiftory,
though nakedness be  licence which Painters are
poffets’ of, and wfe to the advantage of their aft,
yet they often abufe it.  went except either Ra-
phael or Pouffin: They have reprefented the Apof-
tles with their feet raked, centrary to what is pofi-
tively faid in the gofpel, where our Saviourordering
them to take no care for what they should put on,
commands them to be content with the shoes they
have on their feet, without carrying. others with
them. And in the Acts of the Apoftles, when the
angel dilvers St Peter, he bids him put on his gir-
dle, and tie his shoes; from whence we may con-
clude they were commonly worn.
 the fame with Mofes, who in the viftion of
the burning bufh, was warned to leave his shoes,
and yet Raphael paints his feer naked in all the
other actions of his life; as if Wofes had never any
Thoes on, but when he was keeping his father-in-
law' Theep.  might here give many more in-
Rances, wherein Raphael, and feveral other Painters
after him, have drawn their figures without thees
and flockings, againft hiftony and verifimility, did
not  think what  have faid fufficient.
 obferved, that the Grecian [culptors more
commonly made their figures paked than the Romian;
but  know no other reafon for it, than that the
Crecks chofe subjects more agreeable to the defire
they had to have the depths of their art admird,
in their reprefenting the conftruction and union of
the parts of man' body. In their ftatues they re-
prefented gods rather than men, and in their baffe
TC-


The ART of PAINT IN .
 Eacchanals and facrifices, rather than
hifferies. The Romans, on the contrary, who by
their ftatues and baffo relievo', armed at tranfmit-
ing the memory of their Emperors to pofterity,
were neceffarily obliged to de nothing againtt the
truth of hiffory; but to dresstheir figures according
to the mode then in fathion.


HAP. XXV.
Of. GR AE Ee.

FFYHIE necefficy of Grace in Painting, generally
(peakings is  thing that needs no proof.

There is only one difficulty in the matter, te wit;

if this Grace be neceffary in all forts of fubjeus; in
bactels, as well as feftivals; in foldiers, as well as
Women.
 grant it is  and my reafon for it is, that tho'
Grace thews infelf firft in the face, yet it is not in
 part only that it refides; it confifts chiefly in
the turn the Paipntergives his objects to render them
 even fuch are inanimate: From whience

it follows, that there may be GGrace in the fiercrness
of  foldier; by the turn which may be given to his
air, and his pofture; and even in drapery; or any
thing elfe, by the manner in which it may be dif
pofed.
Having given this idea of  perfect Painter, and
proofs of the feveral parts that go to the forming
one, there only remains an application to the works
of the Painters, and to put them as it were in the
fcale, not to reject entirely thefe that have not all
the qualities which we have eftablished, but to value
them according to their weight.
This


The ART of PAINTING.
 Idea may help us to judge of the defigns: of
different mafters,  mean of the degree of their
goodness; for Tis almoft impoffible to write with
uftness of the originality of  defign, or the name
of the author; or to lay down rules how he may be
Known.


CH  . XXVI
Of DESIGNS.

AHIE Defigns of which we intend to fpeak
 here, are thofe thoughts that Painters com-
monly exprets on paper, for the execution of fome
work, they are going about. We should place among
Defigns the Hudies of 
reat mafters, that is, thofe

parts which they have defigned after nature, as
heads, feet, and entire figures; draperies, animals,
trees, plants, flowers, and in thort, every thing
that may enter into the composition of  picture;
for whether you confider  good defign by its rela-
tion to the picture of which it is antidea, or by rela-
tion to fome part of which it is the Htudy, it always
deserves the attention of the curious.
Tho' the knowledge of defigns be not fo efti-
inable, nor of fo large extent as that of pictures;
it is however delicate and pleafant, becaufe the great
number of them gives thofe that love them more
opportunity to exercife their criticifins, and the
work is all the production of the mind. Defigns
denote beft the character of the mafter, and thew if
his genius be lively or heavy, if his thoughts are
elevared or common; in thort, if he has  good
manner and  good gout of all the parts which may
be expreft upon paper.  Painter who would finish
 picture endeavours, if one may fo fay, to go out
Of


The ART of PAINTING.
 himfelf, that he may acquire praife for fome parts
of his art, which he knows very well he is not pof-
feft of. But in making  defign, he gives  loofe
to his genius, and thews what he is. For this reafon
it is, that in the collections of the great, we find
the deligns of the beft mafters preferved, as well as
the pictures.
And yet there are few perfons who are curious
about deligns; and among thofe few, if some know
the manner, fcarce any one knows the end. The
half crities have no inclination towards this curio-
fity, becaufe, having no fufficient notion of the
meaning of defigns, they have no relifh of the per-
formance, and take more pleafure in prints carefully
engraved from good pictures; which may be occa-
fioned fometimes thro' fear of being deceived, and of
taking, as it often happens, copies for originals, for
want of experience. There are three things in ge-
neral to be obferved in Defigns, learning, fpirit and
freedom. By Learning  underfland  good compo-
fition,  defign correct, and of  good gont, with
 laudable knowledge of the claro obfcuro. By the
word Spirit  comprehend  lively and natural ex-
preffion thro' the whole work, of the subject in ge-
neral, and the objects in particular. Freedom is no
more than  habit, which the hand has contracted,
to express readily and boldly the idea in the Painter'
mind; and as there is more or less of thefe three
things in  defign, tis the more or less valuable,
though free defigns are generally accompanied with
 good deal of fpirit, yet all the defigns that are
made with freedom, are not, for all that, fenfibly
touch’; and, if the learned defigns are not always
free, they are thofe generally which have the moft
pirit in them.
 might here name abundance of Painters, whofe
defigns have  great deal of freedom without any
spirit, whofe bold hands produce nothing but ramb-
ling


The ART Of PAINTIN .
 petformances.  might alfo name feveral able
men, whofe deligns appear fliff, though otherwife
 and fentible, becaute their hand was re-
ftrained by their judgment, and they Rudied, above
all things, to make their out-lines correct, and their
expreftion juft.  avoid naming them; not to offend
any body: Let every one judge as he thinks fit.
This muft be faid of freedom, tis to agreeable
that it hides, and often excufes  great many faults;
which, in fuch cafe, are rather attributed to an
impetuofity of genius, than to infufficiency; but,
we mult own alfo, that freedom of hand does not
seem to be freedom when tis confined within the
bounds of  great regularity. Thus in the moft
correct defigns of Raphael, there is  delicate free
dom which is only vifible to the eyes of the learned.
In  word, there are fome deligns which are not
over correct, and which yet are not without their
merit, having  good deal of fenfe and character.
Of this fort are the defigns of William Baur, Rem-
brant, Benedetti, and fome others.
Defigns that are butjuft rouch’, and not finith’;
have more (pirit, and pleafe more than thofe that
are perfected, provided their character be good, and
they pur the idea of the spectator in  good way.
The reafon is, that the imagination fupplies all the
parts which are wanting, or are not finithed, and
each man fees it according to his own gout. The
defigns of thofe mafters, who have more genius
than learning, often give occafion to experience the
truth of this affertion; but the defigns of excellent
mafters, who join folidity to  fine genius, lofe no-
thing by being finith’; and, fuppoting every thing
elfe is antwerable, deligns are to be efteemed ac-
cording as they are finith’.
Though we ought to value moft thofe defigns
wherein moft parts are found, yet should we not re-

jeet thele wae: there is no more than one, pro-
vided


The ARF of PAIN TING.
 tis of fuch  manner, that it shews some prin-
ciple of the art; or carries with it any fenfible fin-
gularity which pleafes or instructs. Neither ought
we to reject thofe that are but fketches, by which
one fees  very faint idea only, and but an eftay
of the fancy, fince tis curious to remark how skil-
ful Painters at firft conceived their thoughts before
they digefted them; and Tkerches thew us further,
what touches great mafters make ufe of to charac-
terife things with  few strokes. To Tatisfy one'
curiofity therefore, it would be well if one had de-
figns of all Kinds of the fame mafter; to wit, not
only of his firft, second or laft manner, but even his
lighteft (kerches, as well as his moft finithed defigns.
 confess, however, the curieus; who are purely spe-
culative, don' fo much find their account in it, as
thofe who knowing how to prabtice, are more capa-
ble of relifhing this curiofiry. There is one thing
which is as the falr of  Defign;; that feafons it, and
gives it its relifh, withour which Ifisworth little or
nothing, and which  canr exprets better than by
is
the word Character.
This Character confifts then in
the manner in which the Painter thinks things.
 the feal that diftinguithes his works from thofe
of other men, and which imorints on them the
 image of his mind.
& is this character that
agitates our imagination, and tis by this that iKilful
Painters, after having ftudied under good mafters,
or after the works of others, feel themfelves con-
ftrained by  sweet violence to let their gemis loofe,
and fly with their proper wings.
. exclude out of the number of good defigns
all that are infipid; of which there are three forts.
Firft, thofe of Painters who, though they produce
great compofitions, and are exact and correct, yet
pread over their works  certain coldnels, which
freezes the fpectator. Secondly! thofe of Painters
who having more menmory than genius, are always
playins
 ART of PAINTING.
 the plagiaries; and working by the ideas
they have ftored up from other mens productions
which they have feen; or elfe make ufe of fuch as
are before them with too little induftry, and too
much fervility. And thirdly, thofe of Painters
who tie themfelves up to their mafter' manner,
without ever quitting or enriching it.
The knowledge of deligns, as well as of pictures;
confifts in two things, viz. to find out the name of
the mafter, and the goodness of the delign.
To Know that  defign is of fuch  mafter, 
man muft have viewed with attention  great many
others of the fame hand, and have had in his mind
 juft idea of the character of his genius, and of the
character of his practice. The knowledge of the
character of genius requires  great extent, and 
great clearnels of mind; to keep the ideas without
confounding them, and the Knowledge of the cha-
racter of practice depends more on  great habitude,
than  great capacity; and for this reafon tis, that
the moft Ikilful Painters do not always decide this
point the mott juftly. To know if  defign be fine,
if it be an original, or  copy,  great deal of deli-
cacy and penetration is requifite, togetherwith much
exercile that way, and  question whether it can be
done withour fome knowledge of manual practice;
and yet, after all,  man may be deceived.
It feems to me, tis eafy to infer from what has
been faid, that the comparifon of the works of the
Painters, with the Idea we have eftablifhed of  per
feet Painter, is the beft way to know what efteem
is due to them. But fince  man has not always 
great number of pictures at his difpofal, nor enough
finished defigns to exercife his judgment, and fo to
acquire in  short time  habit of judging well, good
prints may ferve inftead of pictures; for excepting
the local colour, they are fulcepriple of all the parts
of Painring; and befides that, they will shorten the
time.


The ART of PAINTING.
 and are very proper to fill the mind with the
knowledge of an infinity of things. The reader, 
hope, will not be difpleated to find here what  have
difcovered in this matter.

CH  . XXVII

Of the Ufefulness and Use of PRINTS.
  is born with  defire to Know, and
a nothing to much hinders his informing him
as the trouble of learning, and the eafiness of for-
getting, two things of which the greateft part of
mankind complain with  great deal of reafon; for
fince the arts and fciences have been fought after, and
to penetrate far into them an infinity of volumes have
been publifhed, at the fame time was brought to light
an object terrible enough to frighten us from looking
into them, and capable to thock our minds, and dit-
hearten our memories. However, we have more
reafon than ever to exercife both the one and the
other, or at leaft to find out means to help them in
their feveral functions. That which we are about
to treat of (the invention of prints) is  very power-
ful one, and one of the happielt productions of
latter ages.
They are in our age arrived to to high  degree
of perfection, and good gravers have given us fo
many on all forts of marters, that it may truly be
faid, they are the depolitories of all that is fine and
curious in the world.
Their origin was in the year  and arofe
from one Mufo Finiguerra,  goldfimith of Florence,
who graved his plate, when cafting fome of it in
melced fulphur, he perceived that what came out of
the mould was marked with the same prints as his
.
plate,


The ART of PAINTIN .
 by the black which the fulphur had taken
from his graving: he tried to do as much on filver
places with wet paper, by rolling it fmoothly with
 roller, which alfo succeeded.
This novelty tempted Baccio Baldini,  goldfmith
of the fame city, to try whether he could do the
same, and his fuccess occafioned him to engrave
feveral plates of Sandro Boricello' invention and
delign; and upon this Andrew Mantegna, who was
at Rome at that time, fet about engraving fome of
his own pieces.
The knowledge of this invention getting into
Flanders, Martin of Antwerp, then  famous Pain-
ter, engraved abundance of places of his own inven-
tion, and fent feveral prints into ltaly, which were
marked thus, . . Vafari, in the life of Marco
Antonio,  Painter, gives an account of the greateft
part of his fubjects, of which there was one among
the reft, (the vifion of St Anthony) that pleated
Michael Angelo, then very young, to well, for the
invention of it, that he coloured it. After Martin
of Antwerp, Albert Durer began to appear, and
gave the world an infinite number of fine prints, as
well in wood as in copper, all which he fent to
Venice to be fold.
Marco Antonio, who happened at that time to
be there, was fo ravithed with the beauty of thefe
prints, that he copied fix and thirty of them,
which reprefented our Saviour' paftion; and thefe
copies were received at Rome with fo much the
more admiration, by how much the more they were
finer than the originals. At the fame time Hiugo
du Carpl, an Italian Painter of  mean capacity, but
of  wit apt for invention, found out, by means of
feveral plates of wood, the way how to make prints
retemble deligns of claro obfcuro; and tome years
after the invention of erching was difcovered, which
Parmeggiano foon made ufe of.
Thefe


 ART of PAINTINC.
Thefe firft prints drew the admiration of all that
faw them for their novelty, and the skilful Painters,
who worked for glory, were willing to ufe them
to pread their works over the world. Raphael,
among others, employed the famous Marco An
tonio to engrave feveral of his pictures and defigne;
and thofe admirable prints were fo renowned, that
they carried the name of Raphael through the
world.  valt number of gravers have made them-
felves famous, fince Marco Antonio, in Germany,
Italy, France, and the Low-Countries, and have pub-
lifhed, as well by graving as etching, an infinite
number of prints on all forts of subjects, as well
hiftories, fables, emblems, devifes, medals, animals,
landskips, flowers, fruits, as in general all the vifible
productions of art and nature.
There is no body, of what condition or profeffion
foever, but may profit very much by them. Di-
vines, monks, devout men, philofophers, foldiers,
travellers, geographers, painters, fculptors, archi-
tects, gravers, lovers of the fine arts, all that are
curious in hiffory or antiquity, and, in thort, all
who having no particular profeftion, but that of
men of honour, would adorn their minds with the
Knowledge of thofe things that might render them
the more worthy of efteem.
It is not pretended that perfons are obliged to fee
all the prints that have been publifhed, to know
how to profit by them; the infinite number of
them prefenting at once to many different ideas to
 man' view, will rather confound than inform
him thofe only, who are born with  great and
clear genius, who have been ufed for fome time to
the fight of to many different things, can make
them profitable to them, and fee them all without
confulion.
Every particular man may choofe thofe subjects
that are moft proper for him, that may either re
Irefn
t ART of PAINTING.
freth his memory or Rrengthen his judgment; in
which he should be directed by the inclination he
has for things of his own goit and profeffion.
As for example, nothing is more fuitable to di-
vines than prints which relate to religion, our holy
myfteries, the facred hiftories, and every thing
which difcovers the exercifes, or the persecutions of
the primitive chriftians. the antique baffo re-
lievos, which in many places inform us of the cere-
monies of the heathen worship. in thort, any thing
that has relation to our own, whether it be facred
of profane.
For thofe devout subjects are moft proper, which
raife the foul to heaven, and continue it in the love
of God.
For monks, the facred hiffories in general, and
what concerns their order in particular.
For philofophers, all the demonftrative figures,
which relare not only to the experiments of phy-
fic, but all that may encreafe their knowledge in
patural things.
For thofe that are bred up to war, the plan and
clevation of fortified cities, the order of bartles,
and books of forrification, of which the demonftra-
tive figures are the greateft part.
For travellers, the particular views of palaces, of
cities, and confiderable places, to prepare them for
the things they are to fee, or to preserve the ideas
of thofe they have feen.
For geographers, the maps and charts neceitary
in their profeffion.
For Painters, every thing that may ftrengthen
them in the feveral parts of their art, as the antique
pieces, and thofe of Raphael and Caracci for the
good goit, correctness of defign, the dignity of
manner, for the choice of the airs of the head, the
pallions of the mind, and the attitudes; thofe of
Corregio for grace and delicacy of the expreftions;
thofe


The ART of PAINTIN .
 of Titian, Baffano, and the Lombards, for the
character of trath, for the fimple expreffions of na-
ture, and, above all, for the goit of landskips:
thofe of Rubens, for the grandeur and magnificence
of his invention, and the artifice of claro obfcuro:
in short, thofe that, though they may be defective
in fome particular part of them, may yet have fome-
thing in them fingular and extraordinary, for the
Painters may draw  confiderable advantage from
all the different manners of thofe that have gone
before them, who are as fo many flowers, from
whence, like the bees, they may fuck  juice, which,
incorporating with their proper fubltance, will bring
forth fuch works as are ufeful and agreeable.
For fculptors, ftatues, baffo relievos, medals, and
other antique works, thofe of Raphael, Polidoro,
and the whole Roman fchool.
For architects, the books that concern their pro-
feftion, and that are full of demonftrative figures of
the invention of their authors, or copied from the
antique.
For gravers,  collection of pieces of different
manners, as well graved as erched. This collection
should alfo ferve to thew them the progress of
graving, from Albert Durer to the gravers of
our own times, which will include the works of
Marco Antonio, Cornelius Cort, the Caracci, Sa-
delers, Ponrius, Bolfvert, Colrius, Muler, Vofter-
man, Vifcher, and  great many more that  have
not named, who had  particular character, and
who by different ways ftrove all of them to imitate
either nature, when they did fomething of their own
invention, or pictures of different manners, when
they only aimed at the faithfulness of imitarion. In
comparing thus the works of all thefe matters, they
may judge which of them underffood beft the ma
nagement of their tools, of light, and the utefulnets
of tones, as it relates to the claro obfcuro; which
 
 ART of PAINTING.
 them in their operations reconciled delicacy and
force beft, and in their productions were moft fen-
fible and exact, that making  good ufe of thefe
lights, they may have the laudable ambition to equal
or furpats thefe skilful mafters.
For the curious in hiftory and antiquity, every
thing that has been engraved belonging to facred or
profane hiftory, the fabie, the antique baffo relievo,
the Trajan and Antonine pillars, the books of medals
and ftones engraved, and feveral prints that may
help them in the knowledge of thofe things they
would Know, or to keep thofe they know already in
their memories.
In thort, for thofe that to be more happy, and
more gentleman-like, would form their gout by the
Hudy of good things, and have  reafonable tincture
of the fine arts, nothing is more necelfary than good
prints: their fight, with  little reflection, will rea-
dily and agreeably inform them of every thing that
may exercile their reafon, and ftrengthen their judg-
ment. They may fill their memory with the moft
curious things of all times, and all countries, and
in learning the different hiftories, learn the feveral
manners of Painting: they will judge readily, by
the facility with which they may open  few leaves,
and to compare the productions of one mafter with
thofe of another, and by this means, in Iparing
their time, they will (pare their expence alfo; for it
is almoft impoftible to put the pictures of as many
mafters together in  room, as will fuffice to form
 perfect idea of the work of each mafter, and when
at  valt charge  man has filled  large chamber
with pictures of different manners, he cannot have
above two or three of each, which is not enough to
enable him to make  nice judgment of the character
of the Painter, or the extent of his capacity; where
as, by means of prints, one may eafily fee the
works of feveral mafters on  table, one may form
 ART of PAINTING.
 idea of them, judge by comparing them one
with another, know which to choole, and by practif-
ing it often, contract  habit of  good tafte, and 
good manner; especially if we do it in the company
of any body that has difcernment in thefe things,
and can diftingith what is good, from what is but
indifferent.
But as for the critics in, and lovers of the fine
arts, we muft prefcribe them no rules; all things, if
we may ufe the phrafe, are subjected to the empire
of their knowledge they entertain themfelves by
their fight, fometimes in looking on one thing, and
fometimes on another, becaufe they reap profit by
it, and take pleafure in it. Among other things, in
feeing what has been engraved from the moft famous
mafters of Painting, they perceive the origin, pro-
grets, and perfection of their works; they follow
them from Giotto, and Andrea Mantegna, down to
Raphael, Titian, and the Caracci; they examine the
different fchools of thofe times; they fee into how
many branches they have been divided by the mul-
tiplicity of difciples, and how many ways the mind
of man is capable of conceiving the same thing;
what imitation is, and that as many different man-
hers have come from her as countries, ages, minds
or nature, by their diverfity have produced. Among
all the good effects that may arife from the ufe of
prints, we shall content ourfelves to name fix, by
which we may eafily judge of the reft.
The firft is, to divere us by imitation, in reprefent-
ing vifible things to us by their Painting
he second is, to instruct by  more forcible and
ready manner than by (peech: Things, lays Horace,
that enter at the ear, go more about to come at us, and
touch us less than those that enter by the eyes, which are
the more sure and more faithful witneffes.
The third is. to fhorten the time we employ in
 thofe things that have efcaped
  ART of PAINTING.
 and to refreth it with  glance of the
eyc.
The fourth is, to reprefent abfent and diftant
things, as if they were before oureyes, which other-
wife we could not fee without troublefome voyages,
and great expence.
The fifth is, to afford us by this means an eaty
way of comparing feveral things together; prints
taking up to little room, that we may make ufe of
to great  number and to different.
And the fixth is, to give one  tafle of good things,
and  tincture of the fine arts, which no gentleman
should be ignorant of.
Thefe effects are general, but every one may ima-
gine the particular ufes and benefits of them accord-
ing to his underftanding, and his inclination, and
by thefe parricular benefits or effects he may make
his collection; for it is eafy to guets, that in the va-
riety of conditions of which we have been peaking,
the curicfity of prints, the order and choice that is
to be obferved, depend on every man' gout and
Views.
Thofe, for example, that love hiffory, feek after
thofe subjects only that belong it : and that nothing
may efcape their curiofity, they follow this method,
which cannot be enough commended; all that re-
late to particular countries and ages are put into one
or more covers, where they may be readily come
 the pictures of the fovereigns that have go
verned  country, the princes and princeffes de-
scended from them, thofe that have held any con-
fiderable office in the flate, in the church, in the
army, or courts of juftice, thofe that have diftin-
guithed themfelves in different profeffions, and par-
ticular perfons who have had any share in hiftorical
Thofe pictures are accompanied with
CVents.
some lines in writing, which denote the character of
the


 ART of PAINTING.
the perfon, his birth, his remarkable actions, and
the time of his death.
Secondly, the general and particular maps of his
country, the plans and elevations of cities, caftles,
palaces, and other places worthy the knowledge of
the public.
Thirdly, every thing that has any relation to
hiftory; as entries into cities, and feftivals, funeral
proceffions, and pompous ceremonies, modes and
cuftoms in thort, all particular prints which are
hifforical.
The collection thus made for one country, is in
the same manner done for all the reft. The inven-
tion of this order is very ingenious, and we are

indebted for it to 
gentleman, otherwife well
enough known by his extraordinary merit, and the
number of his friends.
Such as have any paffion for the fine arts take
another method in their collections; they do it by
the Painters and their difciples. In the Roman
school they place Raphael, Michael Angelo, their
difciples, and their cotemporaries. In that of Ve-
nice, Giorgione, Titian, the Baffani, Paolo Vero-
nefe, Tintoret, and other Venetians. In that of
Parma, Corregio, Parmegiano, and thofe that fol-
lowed their gour. In that of Bologna, the Caraccis
Guido Dominichino, Albani, Lanfranco and Quer-
chino. In that of Germany, Albert Durer, Holben,
the little mafters, William Baur, and others. In that
of Flanders, Otho Venius, Rubens, Vandike, and
thofe that practifed their rules. In the fame man-
ner they put the mafters of the French fchool, and
thofe of other countries, in their feveral claffes.
Others collect their prints by the gravers, with-
out respect to the Painters. others, by fuch and
such subjects; and others, by other fathions; and,

Monficur de Ganicres.
indeed,


The ART of PAINTING.
 it is reafonable that every one should have
liberty to do in this what feems to him to be ufeful
and agreeable.
Though one may at any time, and in any age, be
nefit one' felf by the fight of prints, yet youth is
more proper for it than any other part of man'
life, becaufe memory is the gift of childhood, and
while perfons are young, they ought to make ufe of
it as of  magazine, to lay up things, that can con
tribure towards forming their judgment.
But if the ufe of prints be profitable to youth,
it is  pleafant and agreeable entertainment to old
age, which is the proper time for repofe and re-
fection, and in which our thoughts being no longer
diffipated by the amufements of our firtt years, we
may with the greater leifure relifh the pleafure that
is to be received by prints, whether it be by their
informing us of fomething new, or bringing fome
thing to our minds that we knew before; whether
it be, that having  gufto for the arts, we judge by
them of the different productions which the Painters
and gravers have left us, or having no knowledge
of thofe things, we flatter ourfeives that we shall
acquire it; or, in thort, if we aim at nothing by it
but to pleafe ourfelves by agreeably exciting our
attention in obferving the beaury and fingularity
of the prints that we meet with; for there we fee
countries, towns, and all the confiderable places that
we have read of in hiftory, or have feen in our
travels, in fuch fort that the great variety, and the
great number of rare things which we find there
may ferve inftead of travelling, and this may be
done with eafe by the curious, who have no ftrength,
leifure, or convenience to travel.
It is certain therefore from what we have faid,
that the fight of fine prints, by which youth is in-
strueted, and the knowledge of old perfons revived
and confirmed, muft be ufeful to all the world.
WVe


The ART of PAINTING.
 do not think it neceffary to enter into  detail
of all the feveral things that might recommend the
ufe of prints, we believe we have faid enough to in-
duce the reader to draw confequences from it, con-
formable to his views, and his occafions.
If the ancients had had the fame advantage in this
as we have, and if they had, by the means of prints,
tranfmitred what they had done that was fine and
curious to poftericy, we should have diffinctly known
abundance of things, of which we have but confuled
ideas in hiftory; we should fee the ftately monuments
-
of Memphis and Babylon, and the temple of Jeru-
falem which Solomon built with to much magnifi-
cence; we should make  judgment of the buildings
of Athens, Corinth, and old Rome, with more
ground, and with more certainty than we can now
by the poor remains that are left of them. Paufa
nias, who has made fuch an exact description of
Greece, and who leads us though all places, as it
were by the hand, would have accompanied his
difcourfes with demontrative figures, which might
have been handed down to us, and we might have
seen with pleafure not only the temples and places
as they were in their perfection, but we should alfo
have inherited from the ancient workmen the art of
Vitruvius, whofe demonftrations
good building.
are loft, would not have fuffered us to be ignorant of
all the inftruments and machines which he has de-
scribed, and we should not find in his book to many
obfcure places, if the figures had been preferved by
prints; for in arts thofe figures are the light of dif-
courfe, and the true means by which an author can
communicate his meaning. It is for want of thefe
means that the machines of Archimedes and the el.
der Hiero are loft, and the knowledge of Diofcori-
des' plants, as alfo, of feveral animals, and of 
great many of the curious productions of nature,
which the ftudies and meditations of the antients
dit


 The ART of PAINT ING.
difcovered: but not to trouble ourfeives any longer
in grieving for the loss of things which we cannot re-
cover, let us profit ourfelves by prints that we have
amongft us.
The Idea which  have given the world of  per-
fett Painter, may in my opinion affift the curious in
making  judgment of Painting: bowever, since to know
pictures perfectly requires something more,  thought
my self obliged to add what has appeared to me necesfary
in that matter.

    KXVIII
Of the knowledge of PicT URES.
WVIIERE are three feveral forts of Knowledge
 relating to pictures. The firft confifts in dif-
covering what is good, and what is bad in the fame
picture: the second has respect to the name of the
author and the third is to know whether it is an
original of  cop
 know what is good, and what is bad in 
PIC TURE.
 firft of thefe two fores of Knowledge is.

without doubt, the moft difficult to be ac-
quired; it fuppofes  penetration and fineness of wit,
with the principles of Painting, and on the meafure
of thefe things the knowledge of the art depends.
Penetration and fineness of wit ferve to make  judg-
ment of the invention, of the expreftion, of the fub-
ect in general, of the paftions of the foul in parti-
cular,


The ART of PAINTING.
 of allegories, and of what depends on + cof-
tume and poefy. The knowledge of principles helps
one to find times and places out, the caufe of the
effects that we admire, whether they proceed from
 good relifh, from the correctness or elegance of
defign, or whether the objects appear advantageouly
difpoted, or the colouring, lights, and fhadows, be
happily managed. Thole that have not cultivated
their minds by the knowledge of principles, or at
leaft have fome speculation of them, may however
be fentible of the effects of  fine picture, but can
never give  reafon for the judgment they make.
 have endeavoured, by my Idea of  perfect Painter,
to affift the natural light of the lovers of Paintings
however,  do not pretend to make them penetrate
into the detail of the parts of the art; that is rather
the bufiness of the Painters than of the curious: 
would only put their minds in  good way towards
Knowledge, that they may, in general, be able to
know what is good, and what bad in  picture.
The lovers of the art only, who have genius and
inclination, are permitted, if we may fo fay, to en-
ter into the fanctuary, and acquire the Knowledge
of this whole detail, by the lights which they infen-
fibly gain by ferious reflection.
The gout of the arts was to much in fathion in the
time of Alexander the great, that to know the bot-
tom of them  little, young gentlemen were taught
to defign. By this means, thofe that had  talentcul-
tivared it by exercife, they made ufe of it upon oc-
cafion, and diftinguithed themfelves by the luperio-
rity of their Knowledge. Irefer thofe, acleaft, who
have not any experience of this manual practice, to
the Idea  have given of its perfection.
 term of art which ignifies manners.
 ART 
 know who is the author of  PiCTURE.
TII  knowledge of the names of the authors is

got by long practice, and the fight of  great
many pictures of all the fchools, and of the principal
mafters that compofe them: There are fix of thefe
Ichools to which we may give  particular name, as
the Roman, the Venetian, the Lombard, the Ger-
man, the Flemish, and the French. And, after
having by much application acquired  diftinct idea
of each of thefe fchools, if we would find out to
which of them  picture belongs, we muft compare
it with that to which we think it has the neareft affi-
nity, and when we have found our the fchool, we
muft apply the picture to that Painter, whofe man-
ner agrees moft with that work; but to Know this
particular manner is, in my opinion, the greateft
part of the difficulty.
There are some curious men who form an idea of
 mafter; by the fight of three or four of his pictures;
and who, after this, believe they have  fufficient
authority to decide what his manner is; without
confidering what care the Painter took about them,
and what age he was of when he drew them.
It is not from particular pictures of  Painter, but
from his works in general that we judge of his me-
rit; for there is no Painter that has not made fome
good, and fome bad pictures, according to his care,
or the motion of his genius.
There is none alfo that had not his beginning,
his progress, and his end; that is to fay, three man-
ners. The firft he took from his mafter; the second
he formed by his gotir, in which his capacity and
genius are to be found; and the third commonly
deze-


 ART of PAINTING.
degenerates into what we call manner: For  Pain-
ter, who has,  long time ftudied after nature, is
willing, without any more trouble, to make ufe only
of the experience he has got.
When  curious perfon has well confidered the
different pictures of  mafter, and has formed  par-
feet idea of his stile, he may then judge who is the
author of  picture, without being condemned for
rathnels; though  critic, who has  talent, and has
udied and practifed the art, may fometimes be
deceived in the name of an author, yet he will, at
leaft; never be deceived in the juftness and folidity
of his fentimentsiz
Therevare pictures made by disciples, who have
copied their mafters very exactly in their judgment
and their manner.  Some. Painters have followed
the golt of another country, and not their own;
and there are fome who leave one manner for and
ther, and who have, by this means, made fome
pictures which will purzle the beft judges to guets
the name of their author.
Neverthelefs this inconvenience is not without  for fuch, ias not fatisfying themfelves in
knowing  malter' hand, have penetration enough
to difcover the character of his mind..  skilful man
may eafily communicate the manner in which he
executes his defigns, but not the delicacy of his
thoughts. It is not, to find out the author of 
picture, enough therefore to know the motion of
the pencil, if the curious cannot penetrate that of
the mind; and though it is very much to have  juft
idea of  Painter' golt in his delign, yet it is ne-
ceffary to enter into the character of his genins, and
the turn which he is capable of giving to his con-
ceptions.  do not pretend, however, to ftop the
mouths of thofe lovers of Painting, who have not
seen nor examined this great number of pictures.
By talking of it they may acquire and increafe
KnOw-





 The ART of PAINTIN .
Knowledge.  would only, that every one should
give us the fenfe in which he speaks, by the mea-
ture of his experience. Modefty, which is to be-
coming in beginners, agrees alfo with the moft ex-
perienced, especially in difficult cafes.
III.
If  picture be an original or  copy.
. is not my intention to difcourfe here of:in=
 different copies, which the curious will find
out at firft fight; much less of bad ones, which are
thought to by all the world.  fuppofe then  copy
made by  good matter, which deferves  ferious
reflection, and makes one doubt; for fome timerat
leaft, whether it is  copy or an original. There
are three forts of fuch copies.
The firft is done faithfully, but fervilely.
The second is light, eafy, and not faithful.
The third faithful and eaty.
The firft, which is fervile and faithful, includes
the defign, the colouring, and the touches of
the original; but the fear of pafting beyond the
bounds of this exactnets, and to err againft fide-
lity, makes the hand of the copift fliff, and if
it is never fo little examined, thews it to be what
it is.
The second is more likely to impofe on the spec-
tator, becaufe of the lightness of the pencil, but the
unfaichfulness of the contours, or our-lines, unde-
ceive the beft judges.
And the third, which is faithful and eafy, made
by  learned and light hand, and above all, in the
time of the original, purzles the greateft critics,
and often hazards their pronouncing againft the
truth, though it may be agreeable to verifimility. As
there


The AFr of PAINTING.
 are fome things which feem to favour the ori=
ginality of  piece; to there are others that feem to
deftroy it, as the repetition of the fame picture, its
having been forgotten  long time, or cofting  little
money: but, though thefe confiderations may have
weight, they are fometimes very trivial, for want of
being well examined.
That  picture is forgot; proceeds often from the
hands into which it falls, the place where it is put,
the perfons that fee it, or the little value that the
owner has for Painting.
The cheapnets of it proceeds commonly from the
neceffity or ignorance of the feller.
The repetition of  picture, which is  more spe
cious caule; is not always  fubltantial reafon. There
is fcarce  Painter but has repeated fome one of his
works; either becaufe he was pleafed with it, or be-
caufe he was defired to draw one like it.  have
feen two Madonnas of Raphael, which being, out
of curibfity, placed by one another, would perfuade
the crities that they were both originals. Tirian
has repeated the fame picture feven or eight times,
as  play that fucceeds is played  great many nights
together; and we fee feveral pictures of the beft
mafters of lialy repeated, which dispute with their
other pieces for goodness and originality. There
have been fome that have deceived the moft skilful
Painters among many examples of this Kind  shall
think it fufficient to relare one, which is, that of
Julio Romano, and is taken from Valari.
Frederic  duke of Mantua, going through Flo-
rence towards Rome, where he went to pay  vifit
to pope Clement VIl. in the palace of Medici, over
one of the deors faw the picture of Leo . between
the cardinal of Medici, and cardinal Di Roffi. The
heads were of Raphael, the drapery of Julio Roma-
no, and all together admirable. The duke looked
upon it earneltly, and became fo in love with it,
hit


 The ART of PAINT ING.
that he could not forbear begging it of the pope
when he came to Rome. His holinels very graci
oully gave it him, and ordered his secretary to write
to Octavian di Medici to put the picture up in 
cafe, and fend it to Mantus. Octavian, who was
 great lover of Painting, and lothe to deprive Flo-
rence of fuch  rarity, invented an excufe to defer
tending it, pretending that the frame was not rich
enough, and he would get one fitted up for it.
This delay gave Octavian time to have it copied,
which was done by Andrea del Sarto, who imifated
even the little fpots that were upon it. This piece
was fo like the original, that Octavian himfelf could
hardly diftinguith the ope from the other, and that
he might not be deceived, he put  private mark
upon the copy, and  few days after fent it to Man-
tua. The duke received it with all poffible fatis-
taction, not doubting but it was the work of Raphacl
and Julio Romano. The latter, who was then in
the service of that prince, had no fuspicion that what
was his part of the picture was not done by him-
felf, and had thought it his own doing as long as he
lived, if Vafari, who had feen the copy while it
was drawing, had not difabufed him; for coming
to Mantua he was mighty well entertained by Julio
Romano, who shewed him all the duke' rarities,
  That the fineft thing was still to be feen,.
naming the picture of Leo . done by Raphael,
It is very fine,
and shewing it him, Vafari faid,
 Romano looking
co but it is not Raphaels.
How, is it not
on it more attentively, replied,
ce Raphael’? do not  know my own work in it?
co do not  fee the strokes of my pencil, and remet
 antwered, co Fou
 ber the ftriking them:
 do not oblerve it clofely enough;  affure you, 
&
Law Andrea del Sarto draw this very picture; be-
CC
hind the canvas you will fee  mark which was
 upon it to diftinguith it from the original.
Julio


The ART Ef PAINTIN .
 Romano turning about the picture, and per-
ceiving it was matter of fact, held up his hands
with aftonishment, faying,
oc  value if as much as
 if it was Raphaels, and even more; for it is very
 to fee fo excellent  mafter fo well imi-
 tated as to deceive ofe.
Now, fince Julic Romano, with all his skill;
after having had notice given him, and examined
the picture, paffionacely perfifted in the deceit of his
judgment, as his proper work, we muft not think
it Rrange that other Painters, lefs Ikilful, should
Tometimes be miltaken about the workss of others:
for the truth may ve thus hidden to the profoundeff
Knowledge, and though  man may be out as to the
fact, he may not always be out in his judgment:
however, let  picture be never to well copied, 
good critic will perceive exterier tokens enough
upon it to juttify his faying boldly what he thinks,
without running the rifque of  cenfure of rafhnels,
if he does not lay it down in  politive tone; but as
an opinion founded on folid Knowledge. It remains
for me to fay fomething of thofe pictures that are
neither originals nor copies, which the Italians call
paltici, from pafte, becaufe, as the feveral things
that feafon  pafty, are reduced to one tafte, fo coun
terfeits that compofe  paftici tend only to effect one
truth.  Painter that would deceive in this way,
ought to have, in his mind, the manner and prin
ciples of the mafter of whom he would give an
Idea, whether he takes any part of  picture which
that mafter has made and puts it in his own work,
or whether the invention is his own, and he imitates
lightly, not only his touches, but even his gout of
defign and colouring. It often happens that thefe
Painters who propofe the counterfeiting another'
manner, aiming to imitate fuch as are more skilful
than themfelves, they make better pictures of this
  The ART of PAINTING.
kind, than if they were to do fomerhing of their
OWIn.
Among thofe who took delight in counterfeiting
the manner of other Painters,  shall content my-
felf with naming David Teniers only, who has de-
ceived, and ever will deceive the curious, who are
not prepoffeft of his dexterity in transforming him-
felf into Baffano and Paolo Veronefe. There are
some of his paftici made with fo much cunning, that
the eyes of the moft judicious are furprized by them
at firft fight; but after having examined them near-
er, they foon diftinguith the one' colouring, and
the one' pencil, from the other'.
For example, David Teniers had  particular ta-
lent in imitating the Balfans; but the light and eafy
pencil which he employed in this artifice, is the very
proof of his deceit, for his pencil, though eafy and
light, is not fo lively nor to proper to characterize
objects, as that of the Baffans, efpecially as to ani-
mals.
It is true, Teniers underftood the union of co-
lours; but there was  certain grey, predominant in
his, and his colouring had not the vigour and fweet-
nets of Giacomo Baffano'. It is the fame with all
paftici, and if we would not be deceived by them,
we should examine their gont of defign, their co-
louring, and the character of their pencils, with the
originals from whence they were taken.

 Dnancn

 




 HE



OF EMINEN 








 the orioin of PAINTINC.
For

 GH the authors, who have


Efn


 any thing of the origin of Paint-
 have differed among themfelves,
Re

 
they agree, however, in this, that


.


Shadow gave the firtt occafion to the

birth of this art. Upon which Pliny
tells us  ftory of one Corinthia,  girl of Sicyone,
who being in love with  certain youth, and finding
him afleep near  lamp that was burning, the sha-
dow of his face, which appeared on the wall,
feemed fo like him that the was incited to draw the
extremities of it, and thus made  portrait of her
lover. If, as it is likely, fhadow was the rife of the
invention of Painting, imitation is fo natural to
mankind, that they would not have ftaid till the

tile
 . VES of
 of Corinthia, without drawing figures after
Thadow, which is as old as: man himfelf.
But not to enlarge on this thought, or feek after
to uncertain  fource as is that of Painting, we may
with good grounds aver, that this art and fculpture
had their birth at one and the fame time, the one
and the other having the fame principle, which is
defign, and ever fince the days of braham, when
fculpture was in ufe, Painting was confequently
practifed in the fame degree. It has appeared and
difappeared according to the revolutions of ages.
War is an art that deftroys all others, and Painting
is to much the more exposed to it, by how much
the more it is done for pleafure. However, the fine
arts are like the Phoenix, they revive out of their
athes wherefore we have feafon to believe, that
Painting was feveral times extinguished, and renewed


again in the firtt ages, though it was in  very poor
degree; and that thefe to whom we attribute the
invention of that art, were only the renewers of it.
But to (peak like orher authors, after having
compared them one with another, we shall in the
main find, that Gyges the Lydian invented Painting
in Egypt, Euchir in Greece, and Bularchus brought
it out of Greece into Italy in the reign of Romulus.
This Painter reprefented the bartle of the Magne-
fians to well in one of his pictures, that Candaulus
King of Lydia thought it worth  prodigious fum,
and to purchafe it covered it with gold, by which
we may conclude, that Painting was highly in efteem
in thofe days.
It were needlets to relate, in this abridgment, the
little that has been faid by the antient authors of the

firtt rainters, who lived before the declention of the
empire there being none of their works left, no
man has much curioficy to know any thing of them,
or to trouble himfelf ro remember their names. We
mult, however, except tome of them who are cele-
brated


eminent
PA INT ER .
 by fame, and of whom it would be fcanda-
lous not to Know fomething. Six of them,  Pamphilus, Timanthes, Apelles and Pro-
togenes, lived at the fame time with Alexander the
Great, when the fine arts were in their vigour; and
though we have none of their productions, we may,
notwithflanding, judge of the perfections of them,
by the fculptures of the fame age, which are pre-
served to this day, and by the price that thofe anti-
ent Painters had for their pieces. Tamanthes, and
after him Apelles, having had roo talents, near
 pounds of Englith money, for one picture.
It is true there are fome small remains of the old
Painting Hill to be feen, but we know not when
they were done, or who did them. The moft con-
fiderable is at Rome in the vineyard of Aldobran-
dino, and reprefents  marriage. This work thews
 great gout of defign, and much of the Grecian
sculpture and baffo relievo. Fer it is dry, and
there appears in it no knowledge of groupes, or the
claro obfcure but we muft not believe that all the
pieces painted in Greece were of this fort, becaufe
what we read of Zeuxis and Parrhafius, that by their
pencil they deceived even animals and Painters them-
telves, is enough to convince us that they penetrated
farther into the principles of their art, than the au-
thor of that picture. We confels they did not ufe
oil, yet, perhaps, they might have fome other fe-
cret of which we are ignorant, that gave to much
Rrength to their colours, as is reported of Apelles'.
Pliny rells us, he made ufe of  certain varnith,
which invigorated his colouring, and preferved it.
Be it as it will, we cannot reafonably fland out againft
the evidence of all the antient authors, who have
poken of the Painters of chofe times, from whofe
writings we ought to infer, that Painting was in 
high degree of perfection, and that the number of
F LI    of
 mafters was great.  shallheremention only some.
of the chief of them.
An abridgment of the lives of the six principal
PAINTERS Of GREECE.
 EUX IS
   native of Hleraclea in Macedonia,
and learned the firft elements of Painting in
the  olympiad,  years before the birth of
Chrift: he followed his ftudies very affiduoutly,
and his fuccess being anfwerable to his induftry, he
was enabled to undertake feveral bold things that
got him reputation. He was skilful in defigning,
and underffood colouring better than any Painter of
his time. Pliny fays, Apollodorus, who firft found
out the principles of the claro obfcuro, and of
colours, opened the doors of Painting to Eeuxis,
and that the fame Apollodorus complaining of
He had entered to far within
that Painter, faid:
co them, that he had carried out with him the whole
The confideraple works which
cc art of Painting.
he was employed about, brought him in vait fums
of money, and having got riches enough, he gave
away his pictures, becaufe, as he faid, he did not
fee how they could be rated at their full value. The
Agrigenrines defiring him to make  picture of Hel-
len naked, to be fet up in their temple, fent him,
at his request, fome of their moft beautiful maids,
of whom he kept five, and having well examined
them, formed an ides of their finelt parts, to com-
pofe the body he was to reprefent. He painted it
after them; and this figure, when he had carefully
finifhed ir, appeared to perfect in his own eyes, that
he could not forbear telling the Painters who came
      ER .
 admire it, that they might praife it, but could
not imitate it.
Neyerthelefs, Parrhafius disputed with him the
honour of being the beft Painter of the age. To
decide the controverfy they agreed, that each of
them should make  picture, and let the world judge
whofe performance was beft : Ecuxis painted fome
grapes, and Parrhafius  curtain; Zeuxis' work
being expoted to fight, invited the birds to come
and peck at it, believing the grapes to be real; and
Qcuxis, proud of the judgment the birds had given
in his favour, bad Parrhafius draw the curtain, and
thew his picture; but finding himself cheared by the
curtain, he ingenuoully confeft he was overcome,
for he had only deceived birds, whereas Parrhafius
had deceived him himself, as great  Painter as he
was. Leuxis fome time after painted  boy carrying
 balket of grapes, and feeing the birds come and
peck at them, he confeff, that if the grapes were
well painted, the boy muft he ill, fince the birds
were not afraid of him.
Agatharchus, being impatient to fee Zeuxis take
up to much time in finithing his pieces, told him
one day. for my part  foon difparch my pictures.
You are  happy man, replies Ecuxis,  do mine
with time and application, becaufe  would have
them good, and  am fausfied, that what is foon
done, will foon be forgorten.

Though Zeuxis was generally admired in his life-
time, yet he had his enemies. Ariftorle cenfures
him for not having  talent of exprefting juftly the
paftions of the foul; and Quintilian fays, he made
the extremities of his figures too powerful, imi-
taring Homer, who delighted in defcribing bodies,
to give them rong and robult members, even to
thole of women. Pliny mentions Leuxis' works,
and Lucian carefully defcribes his picture of the
centaur, and his family. Feftus writes, his latt piece
WWaS


   .   of
was the picture of an old womans which when he
had finifhed, he was fo pleafed with, that he laughed
himself to death at the fight of her comical figure;
but though one can hardly believe this, yet the event
is not without example.
Qcuxis' competitors were, Timanthes, Andro-
cides, Eupompous, and Parrhafius.
   .   TV 
   born at Ephefus, was the fon and dif
ciple of Evenor, and the cotemporary of
 We have feen in the life of the latter,
that they painted pictures as  trial of skill between
them they were both looked upon as the greateft
mafters of their age, which was the age of matters;
and Quintilian informs us, they raifed the arr of
Painting to  very high degree of perfection, Par-
thafius in defigning, and Leuxis in colouring.
All authors who mention the former, agree in
giving him the glory of defigning very correctly
and very elegantly, and in reprefenting bodies, not
as nature had produced, but as the might have pro-
duced them; and it was according to this great idea
that he wrote of the fymmerry of the body.
Among other things, he was excellent in expref-
fing the paffions of the foul,  quality that cannot
be enough commended ; in adjufting the head-
dreffes, in diftriburing the hair, and in the graces
of the mouth.
He had  great genius and elevation of mind, but
the praifes which were given him, and which he
thought he deferved, made him extremely proud.
He talked contemptibly of all others, and of himfelf
as if he had brought the art to the laft perfection.
he very frankly ftiled himfelf the mafter and prince
of Painting, and was magnificent in every thing about
him, yet it was withour affectation or conftraint.
There


eminent    .   .
 was fomething of enthufiafim in his pro-
ductions: he never went to work but he expected
to find pleafure in it, and when he was at it, he
ufed to fing to himfelf to fweeten his labour. He
made  great many pictures, of which the moft
celebrated are named in the  book of Pliny,
where the curious may find  catalogue of them.
  MPH IL.  
AS  Macedonian, born in the reign of
King Philip: he was Enpompus' difciple
and Apelles' mafter: he had fo high an idea of his
art, that he believed no man could be skilful in it
without fludying police learning and geometry, of
which he was himself  mafter. His reputation got
him confiderable difciples, of whom he had  talent
 near  fterling, for ten years teaching,
and to long they were with him to learn Painting
Apelles and Melanthus gave him that fum, which
Bede fays was fomuch  year, and not for the whole
time. It was by his advice and credit with Alex-
ander the Great, that the young men of quality of
Sicyone, and afterwards of all Greece, were com-
manded to learn firft to defign; and by his means
Painting was reckoned fuch an honourable profeffion,
that all who were not noble were, by an edict,
forbidden to exercife that art; whence we may
infer, that if Painting was fo much efteemed by
the policeft people of antiquity, it is not without
reafon that the moft judicious princes, at this time,
love and proteet it, and men of wit value themfelves
pon underftanding it.
    NT   .
 imanthes was cotemporary with Pamphilus.
The place of his birth is not Known, but he
was one of the moft learned and moft judicious Pain-
tefS


 . VE   of the age he lived in. The moft celebrated of
all his works, and that of which feveral authors
have fpoken with the higheft culegies, was the
facrifice of Iphigenis. The young virgin appears
wonderfully charming as to her beauty, and feems
voluntarily to devote herfelf to death for the good
of her country. The Painter, in reprefenting Cal-
chas, Ulyffes, Ajax and Menelaus, having drained
himself to give each of them  different character of
forrow, painted Agamemnon, father of Iphigenia;
with his face hid in the drapery of the figure, not
being able otherwife to express his fentiments of
forrow as they deferved: and the expreftions which
appear in the faces of the victim'sbrother and uncle,
make one guets at the forrowful condition of the
father.
Timanthes, at another time, having drawn 
Cyclops aflcep in  little picture, to give an image
of his bignels painred fome fatyrs near him, who
meafured his thumb by  Tyrfe. Pliny mentions
the chief pieces of Timanthes, and fays, that in all
his works, he gave the pectator to underftand  many more things than he painted.
  .  ..
Pelles, whom same has put above all Painters,
  was born in the ifle of Coos, in the Archi-
pclago, being the fon of Pirhius, and the disciple of
Pamphilus whom we have fpoken of. Great Pain-
ters, as well as great poets, have in all ages gained
the favour of fovereigns. Apelles was particularly
valued by Alexander the Great, who not only ho-
noured him with his efteem, becaufe of his great
capacity, but loved him for the candour of his
manners.
. Apelles was born with fuch  difpofition and in-
clination to Painting, that in order to arrive at per
  .
fection in his art, he made no fcruple of giving
Pamphilus, his mafter,  talent . year, and fet it
down as  rule, that  day should never go over his
head without defigning; from whence came the
proverb, Nulla dies. fine Linea, No. day withour.
drawing  Line, that is, without exercifing himself
in defigning.
The force of his genius, and, the
affiduity of his ftudies, did not give him fo good an
opinion of himfelf, as the mafters are apt to have?
he never made  judgment of his own capacity but
by comparing: it with that of others whom he. vi=
fired. Every body knows what happened between
him and Profogenes. The larter lived in the ifle of
Rhodes, whither Apelles went on purpofe to fee his
works, of which he knew nothing but by their re-
putation. When he arrived there, he found only an
old woman in Protogenes' houfe, who alking him
his name, he antwered,  am going to write it on
this canvas, and taking his pencil with colour on it,
he defigned fomething with extreme delicacy. Pro-
togenes coming home, the old woman told. him
what had paft fince he had been gone, and thewed
him the canvas; who then obferving attentively the
beauty of the lines, faid, it was certainly Apelles
that had been there, believing no one elfe could
draw any thing to fine. then taking another colour,
he drew on thofe lines an our-line more correct and
more delicate; after which he went our again, bid-
ding the old woman thew that to the perfon who
had been there, if he recurned, and tell him, that
was the man he fought after. Apelles returning,
and being afhamed to fee himfelf our-done, takes 
third colour, and among the lines that had been
drawn, lays fome with to much judgment, and fo
wonderfully fine, that it took in all the fubrlety of
the art. Protogenes law them in his turn, and con-
feffing that he could not do berrer, gave over the
dispute, and ran in hafte to find out Apelles.
Pliny


 . VE  of
Pliny, who rells this ftory, fays he faw this piece
of canvas before it was confumed in the fire that
burfnit down the emperor’ palaces that there was
nothing upon it but fome lines which could fcarce
be diftinguifhed, and yet this fragment was more
valued than any of the pictures among which it was
placed.
It is very near in this fenfe, that we muft unders
Hand this place of Pliny; for to think it was 
Timple line divided from another in its whole ex=
rent, would be ridiculous, and fhock every one
that has the leaft knowledge of Painting, there being
in that no fign of capacity to be thewn, nor skill in
the art.
What has given rife to this interpretation is, in
my opinion, the ill construction of the word sines;
for by linea in that place is to be understood; either
defign or out-lines. Pliny himself makes ufe of it in
thisfignification elfewhere, when he fays of Apelles,
that he never let  day go over his head without
defigning, Wulla dies fine Lined; which was not
drawing fimple lines, but to accuftom himself to
correct defigning.
In the same manner we should underfland the
word subtittas, not to give an idea of  very de-
licate line, but of the exactnets and finenets of de-
Lign. Thus the fubtlety is not in the line, con-
sidered fimply as  line, but in the intelligence of
the art, which is thewn in the lines of  defign.
 confels, however, that the word tenuitas, which
is in the fame place of Pliny, may create some diffi-
culty in this explication, which  believe is not unan-
Twerable, for by that word the fineness and exactnets
of an out-line may very well be underftood: befides,
 will maintain it would be nonfenfe to think, that the
victory, in the difpute between Aplles and Proto-
genes, depended only on Htriking  line, one more
delicately than another; and if Pliny, who is ill
CO-


emnent    NT . .
 in this place, meant it as thofe who to con-
strue him weald have him, he knew little of the
fine arts, though one may eafily perceive elfewhere;
that he was  paffionate, admirer of them.
Envy, which is fooften met with among perfons
of the fame profeffion, never entered into the foulof
Apelles, and if he endeavoured to raife himfelf, it
was wholly by the affiftance of his, art, which he
Knew to be of great extent, and was fond of the
glory of poffefting it., He was as folicitous about
the advantage of his emulators, as about his own;
and being fentible of the capacity of Protogenes, he
recommended him to the Rhodians, who, upon
his character of him, gave him  price for his works
incomparably greater than that Painter was ufed to
receive for them before.
Apelles was circumspect, but ealy, in his produc-
tions; the elegance and grace which is every where
to be feen in his pictures, was no obftacle to the
truth which  Painter owes to nature; and he drew
his pieces with to much likeness, that some Aftro-
logers made ufe of them to draw the horofcope of
the perfons he had painted.
Alexander, who often, vifited Apelles, delighting
in his converfation and manners, commanded him
to talk to him freely, and had  very great Kindness
for him; an inftance of which was shewn upon the
occafion of his drawing the picture of Campaipe,
which he had drawn by his order. Campaipe was
very handform, and the moft beloved of all Alexan-
der’ concubines, who perceiving that Apelles was
in love with her, gave her to him; by which, lays
Pliny, he not only shewed the affection he had for
his Painter, but that after having evercome many
nations, he Knew Htill how to overcome himfelf.
 continues the fame author, by his courage,
but more great by the dominion he had over his
paftions.
Apelles


 
ES  often drew the picture of Alexanders atsd
this monarch not thinking it convenient that his
irmage should be profaned by the hands of the igno-
rant, publifhed an edict, forbidding all Painters
whatfoever to make his portrait; except pelles
and by the fame edict he permicted Pyrgoteles only
to engrave his image on gems and precious flones;
and Lyfippus only to caft his ftatue in brass.

Though Apelles was very exact in his works, he
Knew how far to carry his exaciness; without fa
riguing his mind: one day talking of Protogenes;
he faid, = He was  great mafter, but he often
& spoiled his pieces by endeavouring to make them
& perfect; that he did not know when he had
 done well; that  man may do too much as well
 too little; and that he was truly fkilful, who

 knew what was fufficient.
One of his difciples thewing him  picture to
have his opinion of it, and telling him he had done
it in  little time; Apelles replied, cI fee it plain

ehough, and  wonder that in the time you have
 made  great many fuch pictures.
Another Painter shewing him the picture of an
Hellen, which he had drawn with care, and adorned
with abundance of jewels, Apelles told him, Since
& you could not make her handfome,  perceive,
& friend, you have made her rich.
As he spoke his mind freely, to he took in good
part what was faid to him; and to avoid flattery, he
expofed his works to the publick, and hid himfelf
behind them, to hear what paffengers faid of them,
with an intent to turn their obfervations to his
advantage.  fhoemaker coming by one day,
took the liberty to criticife on  fandal which
he had painted, and it was immediately alcered;
but pafting by the same place the next day, and
being proud to fee that his criticifn was taken
notice of, he paft his cenfure on  leg, which had
nothing


eminent        .
 faulty in it; upon which Apelles came
from behind the canvas, and told the thoe-maker,
his judgment went no higher than  fandal, which
afterwards grew into  proverb.  do not know
whether there are many Apelles' in our days, but 
am confident there are more thoe-makers than ever.
nother fign of the ingenuity of Apelles, was his
acknowledging that Amphion underftood difpolition
better, and lcleprodorus the regularity of delign;
but he gave place to no body for grace, which was
his particular talent. When he viewed the works of
the great Painters, he admired the beauries of them,
yet he frankly faid, he did not perceive that grace
in them, which no body was fo much mafter of as
himfelf; for without vanity he might fay it was his
own peculiar excellence.
Apelles never painted on walls, nor on any thing
that could not be faved in  fire. He would have
had the works of the beft mafters carried from one
country to another, and could not endure that 
picture should not be capable of having more than
one mafter; becaufe Painting, he faid, was  com-
mon good to all the world.
Pliny has given us  description of Apelles' fineft
pieces, and one may judge of their excellence by the
price that was paid for them, fomerimes one hundred
talents, fometimes  fum without counting, and
with profution.
   TO  ENE .
Rotogenes was  native of Caunus,  city of
 Caria, subject to the Rhodians. we know not
who was his father or his mafter; it is likely enough
he had no other mafter than the publick pieces that
he faw, and probably his parents being poor, could
not be at any fuch expence for his education in the
art as was given at that time. Himfelf was forced

 LI VE. of
 firft to paint ships for his livelihood. his ambi-
tion was not to be rich, but to be  mafter of his
profeftion; for this reafon he lived  retired life, that
he might not be difturbed in thofe fiudies, which he
thought necelfary for the perfection of his; art.
He finished his pictures with too great. care:
Apelles faid of him, he knew not when he had done
well, or how to get away his work; and by dint of
labour leftened its beauty, and fatigued his mind.
He was more for truth than verifimility in Painting;
by which in exacting more of his art than he ought
to have done, he drew less from her than he might
have done.
The fineft of his pieces is the picture of Jalifus;
feveral authors have mentioned it without giving any
description of it, or telling, who this Jalifus was.
some perfons fuppofe him to have been  famous
hunter.
For feven years that Protogenes worked on this
picture, all his food was lupines mixed with  little
water, which ferved him both for meat and drink,
He was of opinion, that this fimple and light nou-
rifhment would leave him the freedom of his fancy,
Apelles feeing this piece, was fo struck with ad-
miration, that he could not speak  word, having
no exprestion to anfwer the idea of the beauty of the
picture, which he had formed in his mind. It was
this fame picture that laved the city of Rhodes,
wiien King Demetrius befieged it; for not being able
to attack ir, but on that fide where Protogenes
worked, which he intended to burn that it might
fer fire to the reft of the town, he chofe rather to
abandon his hopes of conquest, than to deftroy fo
fine  piece as was that of Jalifies.
Protogenes' work-houfe was in  garden in the
suburbs of Khodes, near the camp of the enemy, yet
the norle of arms could not diftract him in his labours.
co with

The King fending for him, and alking him,
of what


eminent       .
 what affurance he could work in the fuburbs of 
 city that was befieged ? He replied, That he un-
ce derftood, the war he had undertaken was againtt
 the Rhodians, and not againtt the arts. The King
was to pleafed with this answer, that he ordered tome
soldiers to be his guard, and was glad that by this
means he could fave to skilful  hand.
Aufus Gellius reports, that the Rhodians, during
the flege, fent ambaffidars to Demerrius, to pray
him to lave the picture of Jalitus, reprefenring, thit
it he was victoriotus, it might ferve to adorn his
friumph, and if he was forced to raife the fiege, he
might be blamed for turning his arms againtt Pro-
togsnes; when he could ner cenquer the rown. The
King hearing them out, liked the meffage to well,
that he drew off his army, and by this means faved
bogh the picture of Jalifus and the ciry of Khodes.

 will not here relate the memerable conteft be-
tween Apelles and Protogenes, the reader may fee it
in the life of Apelles.  shall only add, that the latter
alking Protogenes wharprice he had for his pictures,
and Protogenes naiming an inconfiderable fum, ac-
cording to the fad forrune of thofe who are obliged
to work for their bread, Apelles, concerned at the
injuftice done to the beauty of his protuctions, gave
him fifty ralents for one picture only, telling it abroud
that he would make it pats, and fell it for his own.
This generofity opened the eyes of the Rhodians, as
to the merir of Protogenes, and made them to get the
picture Apelles had bought out of his hards, prying
down  much greater price for it than he had given.
Pliny fays, Protagenes was  fculptor, as well as 
Painter confult this author if you would know more
of his works, of which he fpeaks as well as of thefe
of other skilful Painters.  shall only relate here 
paflage our of 
uintilian, which thews the particular
talents of Lix famous Painters. Protogene:, tays ie,
excelled in exactnels, Pamphilus and Melanthus in
  LI VES of
the difpofition, Antiphilus in eafinets, Theon, the
Samian, in fruitfulnels of ideas, and Apelles in grace
and ingenious conceptions.
Pliny writes, that the mafters of theart of Painting,
in his time, made ufe but of fourcapital colours, out
of which they compoted all the others. This is not
 place to argue on that, nor to make  comparifon
between the ancient and modern Painting.  shall
content myfelf with faying, that if Painting in oil,
which has been in ufe about  years, has  great
advantage over the diftemper for the facility of
Painting, and union of colours, the ancients had 
vernish which gave force to their brown colours, and
their white was more light and fhining than ours; by
which means, having  greater extent of the degrees
of the claro obicuro, they could imitate certain ob-
jects with more force and truth, than we can in oil.

Titian Knew this advantage, and tried it in fome
pictures, where he made ufe of white in diftemper;
but the diverfity of thofe two fathions in ufing
colours was  flavery which foon difgulted Titian,
and took him off from the practice of it.
 shall conclude with one word more of the Pain
ters and fculptors of thofe days, who knowing there
was no work to compleat to which fome perfection
might not be added, observed always, in putting
their names to their works, to express that they
were not finished, though they had done what they
could do to them. we fee examples of this upon
the Greekftatues, on which we find written, Glicon
of thens would have made this work; Praxiteles
would bave made this work; Athenodorus, Lilip-
pus, Exc. would have made this work, and not did
make it.  great many in our days are not fo
scrupulous, and are very far from believing, that
any thing
which comes from their hands is not
perfect.
THE


eminent
PAII
    .

  

Dd

 
THE
Roman and Florentine
 L  OK III.
  tn   

CI MA BUE.
  II  fine arts having been excinct in
 ever fince the irruption of the
Barbarians, the fenate of Florence fent
for Painters out of Greece to reftore
Ddo
Painting in Tufcany, and Cimabue
was their firft difciple he was of  noble family in
Florence, and his parents finding he had  difpofi-
tion for the fciences, made him apply to them. He
exercifed himfelf abour them fome time, but the ar-
rival of thefe Grecian Painters roufed his inclination,
and decermined it entirely to Painting.
The con-
fiderable progrets that he made in that art, encou-
raged him in the ftudy of it, and got him fuch  re-
putation, that when Charles of Naples paft through
  VE.: of
 he vifited Cimabue, and thought himfelf
very well entertained by the fight of his works. He
painted, according to the cuftorm of thofe times, in
trefee, and in diftemper; Painting in oil being not
then found out. He underftood architecture; and
died in the yoth year of his age, Anno Dom.  was his ditciple.
 NDR       
 Florence, made himfelf taken notice of by
 anew fort of Painting. He left Florence, and
went to Venice, whither tome Greek Painters were
come as well as to Florence. They were doing
mofaic work in St Mark' church. Andrea be-
came acquainted with them, especially with Apol-
lonius, whom he carried with him to Florence, and
learned of him the merhod and secrets of this fort of
Painting, which had the charm of novelty, and
was the more curious, becaufe it was fo lafting. They
did together feveral ffories out of the Bible in Se
John' church, by which they acquired  great deal
of reputation; but he did one himfelf, that was
very much to his hoour and advantage; it was the
picture of Chrift, feven cubits long, about which
he took much pains and care. The praifes that were
given him did him  mischief; for finding himfelf
etteemed by all the world, he neglected his Rudiess
and minded nothing but getting of money, of which
he was very greedy. His works raifed emulation
in Gaddo Gaddi and Giotto, and were as to much

feed that brought forth feveral Painters in  uicany.
He died at  years of age, . .  AD DO.  ADDI
 Florence, applied himfelf alfo to mofaic
work, which got him efteem in Rome and
Florence, becaufe he defigned better than all the
other


eminent
  IN  ER .
other Painters of his time. After having made fe
veral great pieces in divers places, he retired to
Florence, where he did some little ones, as it were
to reft himfelf after his great labours. To this
end he made ufe of egg-shells, which he ftained with
feveral colours, and bufied himself about it with
much pacience: he died at
years old, in the
year   AR IT ONE
  born at Are in Tufcany, and was
both  Painter and fculptor. Pope rban
IV commanded him to draw fome pictures for St
Peter'’ church, and Gregory . dying in the city of
Are the citizens employed him to do the fculp-
ture for that popes tomb. This opportunity helped
Margaritone to thew, in the fame place, his capa-
city in the one and the other profeffion; for he en-
riched the chapel, where the marble ftatue which
he had made was fet up, with feveral pictures: he
WVaS
years old when he died.
    
   born in  village near Florence, and
 very much to the progress of
Painting. His memory is preferved not only by the
great picture of mofaic work, which is over the
gate of St Peters church in Rome, and was done
at the command of pope Benedict . but allo by
the praifes given him by the poers of his time, and
the ftarue of marble which the Florentines erected
for him, and which is over his tomb. The ltalian
proverb, Tu sei pin rondo che  di Giotto, which
as ufed to express little wit, is founded on an acci-
dent which happened to him. Benedict Ix. being
willing to try the capacity of the Florentine Painters,
  LI VE  of
fent  perfon thither to bring him  defign from
each of them. This perfon addreffing himfelf to
Giotto, the latter drew  perfect circle on paper,
with the point of his pencil, and one slroke of his
hand, co There, fays he, carry that to the pope, and
 man replied, 
co tell him you law me do it.
alk for  defign. Giotto antwered, ce Go, Sir,  tell
 you his holinels alks nothing elfe of me.
this the pope gave him the preference, and fent for
him to Rome, where, among other things, he drew
the picture of mofaic work which we mentioned
before, as alfo St Peter' bark toft by the tempeft,
which piece is Known to all Painters by the name of
Giortos veffel. The ftory of the circle shews us,
that boldness of hand was, in thofe days, moft part
of  Painter'’ merit, and that the true principles of
colouring were little or not at all Known. Giotto
worked in feveral places, at Florence, Pifa, Rome,
Avignon, Naples, and other cities of lialy. he
died at  years old, Anno  and had feveral
diiciples, as we shall fee in the following pages.
BONAMICO BUFALMACO
  ingenious in his compofitions, and plea-
fant in his converfation.
As he was Painting the life of Chrift in  convent
of nuns, he came in one day very ill dreft, and the
fifters afking him why his mafter did not come? he
antwered, he would be there prefently. In the mean
time he fet two chairs together with  pot upon
them, and covered them with  cloke, and  hat,
turning the figure towards the work. The nuns
coming again to fee it  little while after, and being
furprized at the light of this new workman; he told
them, this is my mafter: when they knew the jeft
they were diverted with it, and informed at the fame
time, that clothes do not make  man the more
Ano
Skilful.


eminent   IN    .
 time, as he was Painting for the bishop
of Are when he came to his work, he often
found his pencils out of order, and his picture blot-
red: he ufed to be in  rage about it, and all the
servants in the houfe difowning the fault, he re-
folved to watch, and fee who it was that plaid him
such  trick wherefore leaving his work early one
evening, he was no fooner gone from his place but
he faw  monkey take his pencils, and would have
daubed what he had been doing, if Bufalmaco had
not hindered him.
 friend of his, whofe name was Bruno, con-
fulting him how he might give more expreftion to
his subject, Bufalmaco told him he had nothing to
do but to make the words come out of the mouth
of his figures by labels, on which they might be
written. Bruno thought him in earneft, and did fo,
as feveral foolith Painters did after him, who re-
fining on Bruno, added anfwers to queftions, and
made their figures enter into  fort of converfation.
Bufalmaco died in the year   FANO Of FLOREP
IC .
  
PIETRO LAURATI Of SIENA
 ERE difciples of Giorto, and the firtt Pain-
ters that took care to thew the naked under
the draperies; and to observe perspective more re-
gularly, than any other of their predeceffors in the
art. Stefano worked at Florence, Pita, and Affifi;
Laurati at Siena and Arez Stefano died in the
year  in the  year of his age.
AM.


T LI VE  of
 LORENEETTI of SIEN  
PIETEO CAVALL INO
 Rome, were ditciples of Giotto. Loren
Zetti joined the Hudy of polite learning and

Philofophy to Painting, and was the firft that painted
rain, forms, and the effect of the winds. He died
at  years of age. Cavallino, who was both Pain-
ter and fculptor, among other works, did  crucifix,
which is in St Pauls church at Rome; and which
talked to St Bridger, if one may believe the legend.
This Painter was looked upon as  faint, on account
of his humility and piety. he died at  years old,
and was buried in the church of St Paul.
ST MO NE ME MMI
 Siena, confiderably augmented the progress
 of delign: he had  great deal of genius, and
drew portraits well: he was Petrarcn' particular
friend, and painted the fair Laura for him: he
died in the Coth year of his age, anno  He
had  brother, whofe name was Lippo, who fur-
vived him twelve years.
TADDEO diGADDO GADDI
  
ANG EL.  AD DI, his Son,
 ERE disciples of Giotto, and painted after


his manner. Angelo applied himfelf very
Itrenuouly to exprets the paftions of the foul well,
and was ingenious in his inventions. he was  good
archicect, he built the tower of Santa Maria del
Fiore,





eminent        .
 and the bridge over the Arnd in Florence
he died in the year  being about go years old.
To MASO  IOTT INO
  the fon and difciple of Stefano, of whom
we have (poken, and having been alfo the
difciple of Giotto, he was firnamed Giotrino. He
was more skilful than his mafters, but the too great
vivacity of his wit weakning his conftitution, hin-
dered his following the fight he had taken. He
worked much at Florence, and died of  confump-
sion in the  year of his age.
ANDR      AN 
 Florence, learned fculpture in his youth, and
was befides  poet and architect. His genius
was fruirful, and his manner much the fame with
that of the other Painters of his rime. The greateft
part of his works are at Pila; and in his picture of
the univerfal judgment, he painted his friends in
heaven, and his enemies in hell. He died in   years old.
.    Florence, applied himfelf late to Painting, yet.
 by his fenfe and ftudy he came to be  good
Painter. He was the firft that thewed an intelligence
of colours: he had  law-fuit in which he was very
obstinate, and having given his adverfary very bad
words one day, he waited for him at night in the
corner of  ftreet, and ran him through the body,
of which he died in the year  .  VE  
LEONE BATTISTA ALBERTI
  noble family in Florence, had  foul of 
great extent, which he culrivated by the
Knowledge of the belles lettres, and the mathema-
ties. He was very well acquainted with the fine
arts, and underftood Painting, fculpture, and archi-
recture perfectly well, having wrote of all three in
Latin. His Rudies did not permit him to leave any
thing confiderable behind him in Painting; but being
pope Nicholas Vths friend, he was very much em-
ployed in his buildings, of which fome are still to be
feen with admiration. He wrote alfo of arithme-
tic, and fome treatifes of morality.
PIETRO della FR ANCESC the republic of Florence, delighted in re-
 prefenting night-pieces and battles. Pope Ni-
cholas fet him at work to paint the Vatican: he
made, among other pieces, two pictures which were
taken down by command of pope Julius Il. to make
room for two others, which Kaphael had painted,
the miracle of the Sacrament that happened at Bol-
fena, and of St Peter in prifon. He drew feveral
portraits, and wrote of arithmetic and geometry.
Lorentino  Angelo  Arez and Lucas Signo.
relli were his difciples. Under the pontificate of the
Jame pope Nicholas, there worked at Rome, and
other places in ltaly, feveral Painters of reputation
in thofe days, viz. Giovanni da Ponte, Agnolo
Gaddi, Berna da Siena, Ducio, Jacopo Caffentino,
Spinello, Antonio Venetiano, Gerardo Starnina, who
went into Spain, Lorenzo,  monk of Cmaldoli,
Taddeo Bartolo; Lorenzo Bicci, Paolo, firnamed
Occello, becaufe he painted birds well: Mafaccio,
who diftinguithed himfelf by the good gout he
Thewed


emment        .
 in Painting
and though he died at twenty
two years of age, the works that he left behind him
ferved to open the eyes of the men of art who came
after him in his profeffion. He died in  Lo-
rentino  Angelo, as we have faid, was his disciple,
and feveral others, among whom
GIoV ANNI ANGEL IC Sa frier of the order of St Dominic, and
rendered himfelf confiderable by his Paint-
ings, but more by his piety, and to profound  that he refufed the archbishopric of Flo-
rence which Nicholas . offered him. That pope
employed him to paint his chapel, and obliged him
to do fomething in miniature in the books of the
church. There are fome grofs faults in his beft pic-
tures, which leften the praife that otherwife they
might have deferved: he never went to work before
he had done all the duties of his office: he did 
great many things in Rome and Florence; the fub-
jects of his pieces are always divine; whenever he
painted  crucifix, he could not refrain weeping.
His skill and his good nature got him many difci-
ples. He died in  aged  years, and was
buried at Santa Maria della Minerva, where his
tomb and his portrait are to be feen.
FIlIP PO  IP  
 Florence, made  quite different ufe of 
 monaftic life than Giovanni Angelico, of
whom we have been trearing; for after he had been
bred up in  convent of Carmelires from the age of
eighteen, and having been  monk at fixteen, it
happened that Mafaccio painted the chapel of thar
convent, and Lippi feeing him at work, concerved
 violent paftion for Painting. he applied himself
induftri-


TBe LI VE   to defigning. The great facility he
found in it awakened the talent he had for the art,
which hindered his ftudy of the belles lettres, and
the exercifes of his convent. Mafaccios praifes, who
was furprized at the progress of thisnovice, increafed
 temptation to quit his habit; and being no longe
able to refift it, he left his monaltery, and went in-
to Marca  Ancona, were he found fome of his
 with whom he rook beat to divere thi.
felves on the warer.  rower of Barbary bearing
near the thore, faw the boat, and took them. Lippi
lived in extreme mifery for eighteen months toge-
ther, when, to amufe himfelf one day, having de-
figned on the wall the picture of his mafter, wish
charcoal, of whom he had  fuil idea in his head, he
did it to well, that the likeness of it to the original,
was mightily admired. This foftened the heart of
his patron, who, after having obliged him to draw
feveral portraits, gave him his liberry. From Bar-
bary, Lippi paft over to Naples, where King Al
phonfo employed him; but the love of his country
drew him back to Florence. He worked there for
duke Cofmo di Medicis, whofe affection he gained,
and who made him abundance of prefents. The
love of women taking him off from his work, and
making him lofe his time, the duke, being im-
patient to have  picture he had fet him about
finished, locked him up in  chamber to force him
to mind his bufiness, allowing him plenty of every
thing that was neceffary. Lippi, after two or three
days, cut his sheets, and ried the pieces together,
by the help of which, he made his way down out at
the window, and fo got his liberty.
 citizen of Florence engaged him afterwards to
draw  picture of the virgin Mary for  monaftery,
where  daughter of his,  very beautiful young
woman, was  nun. Her father, and the nuns of
the convent, were willing to permit him to take this
 PA      .
 for his model. As he was drawing her picture,
having the opportunity of being alone with her, he
debauched her by his lafcivious talk, and, when the
picture: was finifhed, carried her off with her own
confent. He had . fon by her called Philip, who
was alfo  Painter.
Some time after, as he was at work in  church
of Spoleto, he again fell in love with  woman, and
being obltinately bent to gain her, contrary to the
advice that had been given him, her friends poifoned
him in the year  and in the  of his age.
The great duke ordered  marble tomb to be fet
up for him, and Angelus Policiahus, wrote his epi-
tuph in latin verfes,
Mritt
All the foregoing, Painters did ot know the fe-
cret of Painting in oil; they painted in frefco, or
in diftemper, and for this laft fort, they tempered
their colours with the white of egss: or with water
mixed with gun, or melted gluesere:


 Da MESSINH,
 
 called from the place of his birth, was the first
 of the Iralian Painters that underffood Painting
in oil. He had some bufiness at Naples, where he
law  picture King lphonfo had fent him out of
Flanders. He was furprifed, with the vivaciry, the
force and the fweetness of the colouring, and per-
ceiving it might be wiped over with water without
rubbing out any part of it, he left all his bufiness to
 to Bruges to find out John Van Eik, who was the
author of that piece. He prefented him with 
great many Italian defigns, and gained his good
graces to far by his complaifance, that he got out of
him the secret of Painting in oil. Antonio thought
himfelf to much obliged to him for it, that he would
not leave Bruges, as long as John Van Eik lived;
but after the death of that Painter he refolved to
make


 LI VE  of
make  four into his own country, and went to fettle
at Venice, where he died, and where an epitaph is
to be feen very much in his commendation.
 perfon, named Dominico, was, among others,
one of his difciples, to whom, out of grantude for
the love he bore him, he communicated his secret.
Some bufiness in his art called this Dominicoto Flo-
rence, where he found Andrea del Caltagno, who,
from  peafant, was turned Painter, and who feeing
in what efteem this new fathion Painting was, made
ufe of all forts of fattery and complaifance to gain
the good graces of Dominico, and by that means
got out of him this new invention. He obtained
his end. Dominico loved him, lived with him,
told him what he knew, and took him into his
bufiness. Coveroufness foon made Andrea uneafy:
he began to imagine, if no body elfe knew the fe-
cret, he should get prodigioutly by it, and all Do-
minico' gains would come into his pocket; where-
fore, not confidering that he wanted his benefactors
capacity, he refolved to make away with him. To
this end he waired for him one night at the corner
of  firect, and having affaffinated him, went home
to his lodgings, and fet himfelf to work, as if he
had not ftirred out: he wounded him fo privately,
that Dominico not fuspecting who was his murtherer,
ordered himfelf to be caried to the houfe of his cruel
friend to be relieved; and died in his arms. The
murther had been buried with Andrea, had he not
confeffed it on his death-bed. It was the fame
Andrea, who, by the command of the republic of
Florence, painted on the walls of the hall of juftice,
the execution of the conipirators who had conspired
to deftroy the Medici, which got him the name of
Andrea degl Impiccati. At the fame time Vitto-
Tio Pilano was famous in ltaly for ftriking medals.
Alfo cotemporary with ntonio, were Gentile da
Fabriano, whom pope Martin  employed ar
St


emment        .
St John di Lateran. He lived cill he was  years
of age. Lorenzo Colta, who painted at Bologna
and Ferrara, and whofe difciples were Doffe and
Hercules of Ferrara, and Colmo Roffelli, who paint-
ed in the Vatican for pope Sixtus IV. and died in
the year  aged  years.
DOMENICO CHIRLANDATO
 Florence, was at firft  gold(mith, but buty-
sing himfelf more in deligning than in working
at his trade, he at length gave himfelf up entirely
to Painting. He was  great mafter; however, his
reputation is not to much fixed by his own work:,
as by his having Michael Angelo for his difciple. He
died at  years of age, anno  He had three
fons, and they were all of them Painters, viz. Da-
vid, Benedict and Rhodolph.
ANDREA VERROCHIO
 Florence, was  good goldfmith,  graver,
 mufician,  geomerrician,  Painter, and 
tculptor. It is true, his pictures are painted very
drily, and his colouring is not artificial, but he un-
derftood defigning well, and gave his heads, parti-
cularly womens,  graceful arr. He defigned very
much with his pen, which he managed well, and
was the firft that found out the art of taking and
preserving the likeness of any face, by moulding off
the features in plaifter, after which it became very
much in ufe. He was not fatisfied with the refem-
blance of  thing, he would go to the bortom of it;
and to that end often made ufe of mathematical ex-
periments, being famous for drawing of horfes, and
underftanding cafting. The Venetians would have
employed him to have made  statue in brats of Bar-
tolomeo di Bergamo on horfeback: he drew  mo-
del of it in wax; but another being preferred before

him


 LI VE  of
him to cast the ftatue, he was to mad, that out
of fpite he broke off the head and legs of his ftarua,
and fled away. The fenate, in vain, fent out er-
ders to stop him, and giving out that they would
have his head cut off it they could carch him, he
ce If they should cut off his head, it would
antwered,

co be impoftible to make another; whereas he could
ce eafily make  head, and  finer one, for the model
 of his horfe.
This witty anfwer made his peace:
but he had not the pleafure to put the horfe in its
place; for, overheating himfelf in cafting it, he
fell ill of  pleurify, and died in the year  aged
 years. Leonardo da Vinci and Pietro Perugine
were his difciples.
FIlI  PO  IP PI
 Florence, was the fon of Filippo Lippi, of

whom we have fpoken, and the difciple of
Sandro Boticelli. He had  great deal of vivacity
and genius. He managed the ornaments of the
claro obfcuro after the manner of the antique, fuch
as is to be feen in the frifes of architecture, and
elfewhere. He painted feveral things at Rome, and

among the reft,  chapel in the church of the Mi-
herva, for cardinal Caraffa. He drew fome pictures
alfofor Matthias Corvinus, King of Hlungary. Lippi
was  very honeft man, and his life  great reproach
to his fathers. He died in the year  aged  have diftinguished himself by  new
&
kind of Painting, for befides the living co-
lours he made ufe of, he brought the baffo relievo
of architecture into his pieces, which is contrary to
the art of Painting, that always fuppofes  flat
fuperficies; for this reafon no body followed his
example. In the library at Siena is thewn, as  fine
thing
    .    .
 the life of pope Pitts II. which he painted.
Raphael coming our of the fchool of Pietro Peru-
gino, heiped him in this piece. Pincurrichio painted
feveralthings in the Vatican for pope Innocent Vill.
and Alexander VI. The caufe of his death is worth
knowing.  Wheffhe was ar Siend, the monks of the
order of St Francis, who were fond of having 
victured:from him, gave him  chamber, that he
might work with the piore convenience; and that
the room might not be encumbred with any thing
that had not relation tf his art, they took away all
the furniture, except ar old fuit of armour, which
feermed toe troublefome to remove. Pinturrichio
being nacurally quick and impacienf, would have
it: taken away immediately; but in removing of it
 piece happened to break off, in which were hid
 direats of gold. This furprized Pinturrichiofo
much, and vexed him to hearcily for letting the
friers have the advantage of the treafure, that he.
died  little after of mere forrow, in the  year
of his age, anno  NDRO BOT ICEL. . 
Florentine, was disciple of Filippo Lippi, who
 was Domenico Ghirlandaio' compecitor; he
was learned, and writ notes upon Dante, to which
he added figures. This work took up  great deal
of his time, and he died without the fatistaction of
feeing it printed. He departed this life in the  of his age, anno  EA MANT EGNA
   born in  village near Padua, and in his
youth kept theep; but it being obferved,
that inflead of looking after his flock he amuled
himself with defigning, he was put to  Painter,
Ciacomo Squarcione, who took fuch  fancy to
II . IVES of
him, that he adopted him for his fon, and made
him his heir. He became fo good  mafter in fo
little time, that he got  great reputation,, and
abundance of work: he was fcarce feventeen years
old, when he was fet about Painting the picture of
the allar in St Sophia' church in Padua,, and the
four evangelifts. Giacomo Bellini was to touched
with the picture, that he gave him his daughter in
marriage. Squarcione, who was always -jealous of
Bellini, and who befides, refented that his adopted
fon should marry his rivals daughter without con-
fulring him, was fo far from continuing his praifes
and profection of Mantegna' works, that he cried
them down for their driness, and for the too great
liking which his difciple thewed for the antique ita-
sues, instead of following nature in his imitation.
This reproach was of service to Mantegna, he cor-
rected that fault; however, he never quitted the
commendable inclination be had for the antique,
taying,
ce It was to the fine things he found there
so that he owed his advancement, and that they had
 drawn him at once out of the poverty of nature.
It is true, inftead of adding to his godt of antique
the truth and tendernets of nature, he contented
himself to mingle some portraits among his figures.
He painted for the duke of Mantua, and made that
fine  piece of the triumphs of Julius Cxfar, which
are engraved in the claro obieuro in nine Theets,
and which for their beauty may be called the triumphs
of Mantegna. Pope Innocent Vill. having invited
him into his service; before he went to Rome, the
duke of Manrua made him  Knight of his order.
Mantegna engraved feveral of his defigns on tin
plates; and the Italians fay, he was the inventor of
the art of graving. He died at Mantua in the year
 aged piture is at Hampton-court.
FR AN.


eminent   IN    .  FRANCIA

 Bologna, was born with to many rare qua-
Lo lities of body and mind, that he was efteemed
and beloved by perfons of the higheft rank. Atfirft
he was  goldfmith, afterwards  graver of coims and
medals, in which he was excellent; but his genius
finding itfelf too much confined in that exercife,
turned to that of Painting, to which his inclination
led him. The facility he found in it, gave him fo
much courage, that by conftant application and
Rudy, he became one of the greateft mafters of the
art in his time. He drew feveral pieces for feveral
places in Italy; chieffy for the duke of Urbin.
Raphael' reputation made him defirous to fee his
works, but his age would not fuffer him to take 
journey to Rome; wherefore he contented himfelf
to write his mind to his friends, who telling Ra-
phael of it, it began  friendly correspondence be-
tween thefe two Painters, the latter having heard
talk of Francia'smerit and  Raphael was then
painting the picture of St Cecilia, for  church in
Bologna; when he had finished it he fent it to
Francig, and by letter prayed him to place it for
him, and to be fo Kind as to correct its faults.
Francia was tranfported at the opening of the ler-
ter; he took the picture out of the cafe, admired
it, and was fenfibly touched with it; yer, at the
same time, his heart failed him to much upon the
fight of  piece to far above his own, that he grew
melancholy, and fell into  confumption, of which
he died some time after, in the  year of his age,
anno  


T LI
 
 SIGNORELL.
 Cortona, was disciple of Pietro della Fran-
cefca, and imitated his manner to exactly,
that their works are often taken the one for the -
ther. Luca was an artful deligner, and Michael
Angelo effeemed him to much, that he made no
tcruple in his piece of the day of judgment, to
borrow fome things from that of Luca, which he
painted at Orvicto with  great deal of fancy and
capacity. He painted alfo at Loretio, Cortona and
Rome.
His fon, who was  handfome young man, and
one of whom he had great hopes, was killed at
Cortona. The news of his death was  terrible
affliction to him; but arming himfelf with con-
ftancy, he ordered his corps to be carried into his
work-houfe, and without shedding  tear, drew his
picture to preserve the memory of him; finding no
confolation but in his art, which gave him what
death had ravithed from him. He went afterwards
to Rome, whither pope Sixtus IV. had fent for him,
and having painted feveral ftories out of Genefis for
his holiness, he returned to Cortona; and being
very rich, worked only for his pleafure. He died
in the year  at  years of agc.
PT ET RO CO   MO,
 called from Cofimo Rofelli, whofe pupil he

 was, and for whom he worked  long time,
chiefly in the Vatican, where Rofelli was employed
by Sixtus IV. and it was obferved that the fcholars
Painting was better than the mafters. His ability
got him many difciples, and among others, Andrea
del Sarto and Francefco da Sangalla. He loved fo-
litude, and his way of living was very extraordi-
Bary. He was to eager about his bufipess, that he
would


eminent        .
 often forget to ear or drink. He was to
fearfoul of chunder, that  great while after the clap
was over, he would be found thrunk up in  corner,
and wrapt up in his cloke. Nothing was more un-
ealy bo him than the noife of children crying. He
hated alfo to hear thote cough that had  cold, the
ringing of bells, and monks finging plaimis. He
delighted in rain above all things, and died delirious
of  paralepfy, in the Goth year of his age, anno
E BONAR DO da  INC 
   of anoble family in Tufcany, and did
not degenerate from the henour of his arr
ceftors. His morals were good, and his body and
mind beautiful. He had fo many talents for all
the arts; that he knew the very bottom of them,

and practifed them with care and exactness. Firs
great variety of Knowledge, inftead of weakning
that which he had of Painving, frengthened it to
tuch  degree, that there never was  Painter before
him that came near him, and there never will come
any after him, who will not look on him as  foun-
tain, from whence feveral good things are to be
drawn.. He and Pietro Ferugino were difciples to-
gether of Andrea Verrochio, who gave him an op-
portunity to awaken his talent; for the mafter and
the fcholar were both born with the fame genius,
except that Leonardo' was the mere extentive. He
painted at Florence, at Rome, and at Milan, and 
great many of his pictures are disperted up and down
throughout all Rurope. Among other things, he
drew  picture of our Saviour' laft fupper, for the
refectory of the Dominicans at Mlilan, which is of
exquifite beauty.. He did not finith the head of
Chriff, becaufe he could not find our  model
antwerable to the image he had formed in his mind,
before
HI       
 the war broke out in that dutchy, and
obliged him to leave Milan. He did the fame by
Judas alfo, but the prior of the convent being im-
patient to fee the piece finished, prefted Leonardo fo
carneftly to have it done, that he drew the head of
the importunate frier, and put it upon Judass
shoulders. He was inceffantly bufied in reflections
about his art, and fpared for no care or Htudy to
arrive at perfection in it, which he at laft attained.
He was chiefly folicitous to express the paftions of
the foul, which he believed the moft neceffary thing
in his profeffion, especially for thofe who would
have the approbation of men of fenfe. The duke
of Milan made him director of an academy of
Painting erected by him in the capital of his dutchy.
It was in that city he wrote the book of Painting,
which was printed in Paris in  and for which
Pouffin made the figures. He wrote feveral other
treatifes that are loft. When Francis . took Mi
lan, Lconardo retired to Florence, where he painted
the great hall of the council, and found Michael
Angelo sreputation very welleftablifhed, which raifed
 mighty emulation between them. Leonardo going
to Rome at the election of pope Leo . Michael
Angelo did the fame, and their jealouty grew to
such  height, thar Leonardo left ltaly, and went
to Paris, where he was very well received by
Francis . By his prefence and works he fupported
the reputation he had acquired, and the French
King gave him all poffible tokens of efteem and
friendship. The King had fuch  particular Kind-
nets for him, that going to vifit him in his latt
ticknets, Lconardo would have raifed himfelf up to
thank his majefty for the honour done him, and the
King embracing him to oblige him to hie down in
his bed again, he was taken (peechlets in the very
moment, and expired in the arms of that monarch,
in the
 year of his age, anno     . ER .
 on the works of  EONARDO
da VINCI.
THIE. pictures of this Painter, which are to be
feen in the cabinets of princes and private
men, contain but very few figures; and  confels
that  have not feen clearly enough into what re-
mains of his great compofitions to judge of the ex
tent of his genius. However, what hiftorians have
written of his works, which are now almoft entirely
ruined, is fufficient to inform us, that his vein was
rich, his movements lively, his fenfe folid, adorned
with variety of Knowledge, and his inventions very
beautiful: we may fee that by his defigns, which
are sill in the hands of the curious, and what we
have left of his productions thews that he was  great
Painter.
His defigns were very correct, and of  great
golt, though he feems to have formed it rather from
nature, than the antique; yet fo as the antient
fculptors did, that is, by judicious enquiries into the
effects of nature, and attributing to her, not fo
much her common productions, as the perfections
of which the is capable.
Lconardo da Vincis expreftions are very lively
and fenfible.  have in my cuftody  defign of his
own hand, of the famous fupper which he painted
at Milan; which defign only is  fufficient proof of
his having penetrated far into the heart of man; of
his vivacity, and with what variery and juftnets he
reprefented all Kinds of actions but rather than
peak my own opinion in this matter, it will be
more to the purpofe to give the reader Rubens' on
the merit of this great man.
He


TB     

 writes thus of him in  Laim manuscript, the
eriginal of robicb  have by me, and which 
have faithfully transtated as follows.
 da Vinei began by examining; all
ce As things according to the rules of an exact
ce theory, and then applied them to nature as it
ot was for his purpofe. He obferved decorum, and
 all affectation. He knew how to give
 every object the moft proper, the moft specula-
 and the moft agreeable character that was
cc poffible, and exalred that of majefty even to di-
ce vinity. The order and meafure of his expreffions
ce were managed fo as to fet the imagination at
sc work, and to raife it by the effential parts, rather
se than fill it by the minute; in which, however,
 was neither prodigal nor coverous. He was fo
EC
careful to avoid the confulion of objects, that he
sc chofe rather to leave fomething in his works to be
ie defired, than to furfeit the eyes with  fcrupulous
 But his chiefeft excellence was, as we
sc have faid, to give every thing its proper character
ce and to diftinguith them one from another. He
oc began by confulting feveral authors, our of whofe
co writings he made  common-place of what was
oc moft remarkable, and nothing efcaped him that
 to the expresfion of his subject and by
so the heat of his fancy, as well as by the folidity of
EC
his judgment, he raifed divine things by human,
 underftood how to give men thofe different
 that elevate them to the character of
CC
herees. The beft of the examples which he has
oe left us, is our Lord' Supper, which he painted
of at Milan, wherein he has reprefented the apoftles
E places that fuit with them, and our Saviour in
 moft honourable, the midft of all, having no
sc body near enough to press or incommode him.
co Iis


        .
of His attitude is grave, his arms are in  loofe and
oe free pofture, to thew the greater grandeur, white
if the apoftles appear agitared from one fide to the
 other by the vehemence of their inquietude, and
 in which there is, however, no meannefs, nor
 indecent action to be feen. In thort, by his
 profound speculations he arrived to fuch  degree
cs of perfection, that it feems to me impoffible to
co speak fo well of him as he deferves, and much
 to imitate him.
Rubens, after this, enlarges on Leonardo' skill
in anatomy. He adds  particular relation of his
Studies, and of all the defigns that he made, which
Rubens had feen among the curiofities of Pompeio
Leoni at Are He talks of the anatomy of
horfes, and the observation that Lconardo had made
on phifiognomy, of which Rubens had alfo feen his
defigns; and ends his difcourfe by the method which
this Painter took in meafuring  human body.
If  may be allowed to add any thing to what
Rubens has faid,  would take notice, that he has
not (poken of Leonardo' colouring, becaufe having
carried his remarks no farther than to things relating
to the perfection of his profeftion, and finding no-
thing good in Leonardo' colours, he paffed by that
part of Painting. Leonardo' carnations have too
much of the lees-colour in them, and the union in
his pictures is too much tinctured with the violet,
which is there predominant: this, in my opinion,
proceeded from the Painters of his time not know=
ing well enough the ufe of oil, and from the negli-
gence of the Florentines in the part of colouring.
PIETRO PE RUG INO.
OR  at Peroufa. His parents were poor, and
AD put him at firft to  Painter of that town, who
taught him very little, and ufed him very ill. His
poverty



 .    
 made him parient, and his defire to get
fomething to bring him out of his mifery, put him
upon deligning night and day, to advance himfelf.
As foon as he found he was able to ger his living,
he went to Florence to find out  better mafter, and
placed himfelf with Andrea Verrocchio. Lconardo
da Vinci was his difciple at the fame time. Peru-
gino became (Kilful, and acquired  graceful man-
ner in the airs of his heads, which his mafter
practifed, especially the heads of women. He drew
 great many pictures, and almoft all of them for
churches and convents. One day as he was working
in frefco for the monks at Florence, whofe mo-
naftery is near the Pindane gate, the prior, who fup-
plied him with azure or ultra-marine, would give
him no more than he ufed in his prefence. Peru-
gino feeing him fo miftruftful, dipped his pencil in
 pot of water, even before the prior himielf, and
wathed off the ulra-marine, which funk to the
Dottom. The prior wondered to fee his azure go
away to faft, and fearing he had not enough to hold
out, was going to get more, but Perugino empty-
ing the water out of the pot, and drying the ultra=
marine that was at the bottom, gave it to the prior;
Taying
co He should not another time miftruft 
 of honour.
Neverthelefs, he was himself very
covetous and miftruftful, and being alfo very labori-
ous, he got money at Florence and Rome, where
he worked for pope Sixtus IV. and retired to Pe-
roufa, in which city he made abundance of pictures,
by the help of Raphael and his other difciples. Pe-
rugino had  very handfome wife, by whom he drew
all his pietures of the virgin Mary; he loved her
paffionately, but he loved his money no less; and
when he ufed to walk in fome fields which he had
purchafed near Peroufa, he always carried the box
with him in which he kept his gold.  rogue
perceiving it, robbed him of his treafure, and Pe=
rugino


emment PA IN TE  .
 was fo grieved at it, that he died of forrow
in the  year of his age, anno   PHAEL  AN    born at Urbin on Good-Friday, in the
year  His father was an ordinary Pain-
ter, and Pietro Perugino his mafter. His chief works
are in frefco in the hall of the Varican, and his
cafel-pieces are difperted up and down in feveral
parts of Europe. Having an excellent underftand-
ing, he knew that the perfection of Painting was
not confined to Perugino' capacity, and therefore
he went to Siena to feek out fome other means of
advancing himfelf. Here his friend Pinturrichio
got him to be employed to make the cartoons for
the pictures of the library; but he had fcarce done
one before he was tempted to remove to Florence,
by the great noife which Lconardo da Vinci, and
Michael Angelos works made at that time. As
foon as he had confidered the manher of thofe two
illuftrious Painters, he refolved to alter his own
which he had learnt of Perugino. He returned to
Peroufa, where he had opportunity enough to exer-
cife his pencilz: but the remembrance of Leonardo
da Vincis works put him upon  second journey to
Florence, and after having worked there fome time
to Rrengthen his hand, he went to Rome, where
Bramante, his Kinfman, prepared the pope by 
good opinion of his merit, for his favourable recep-
tion, and he was fet at work to paint the Vatican.
Raphael began by the picture, which is called the
chool of Athens, the dispure of the holy Sacra-
ment, and the other pieces which are in the cham-
ber of the apoftolic fignature. His pains and care
were incredible, and they were fuccessful, anfwerable
to his induftry, for the reputation of his work car-
ries the name of Raphaelthroughour the world. He
formed


The .  VE  of
 the delicacy of his gout after the antient
Statues, and baffo relievos, which he defigned 
long time with extreme application. To this de-
licacy he added  grandeur of manner, with which
chapel at once in-
the fight of Michael Angelo'
spired him. It was his friend Bramante who brought
him into the chapel, concrary to the general order
Michael Angelo had given him when he trufted him:
with the Keys. Befides the pains that Raphael was
at in working after the ancient fculptures, he hired
people in Greece and Italy to defign for him all the
antique pieces that could be found, which, as op-
portunity offered, he made ufe of. It is obfervable,
that he has not left many, if any at all of his works,
imperfect, and that he finished his picturestoa nicety,
though he did them very quick. He was extreme
ly careful to give them fuch perfection that there
might be nothing to be faid againft them, and on
this account it is that we fee still some drawings of
pieces of pictures, as hands, feet, and bits of dra-
pery, which he has defigned three or four times for
the same subject, and our of which he chofe that for
his purpofe which was moft perfect. Though he was
very laborious, yet there are few pictures to be feen
done by his own hand. He spent moft of his time
in defigning, that he might find bufiness for the

& Pietro Bellori, in his book intitled, Defirittione delle Imagi-
ni da Rafacle nelle Camere del Vaticano, demes this fory with all
his might; and pretends, that Raphael did not owe his great goat
to any thing but his Hudy of the antique; yet Vafari, who knew
Michael Angelo and Raphael, and was never contradicted by
any author of thofe times; on the contrary; three other authors;
who have particularly writ the life of Michael Angelo, have con-
firmed what he fays; affirms, that he learned it of Michael An.
gelo: and what renders it very probable, that Raphael made his
advantage of Michael Angelos works, is  defign that  have of
his own hand, on the back of which is  crawing of his defigned
after one of the figures which Michael Angelo painted in the
Pope' chapel.
T        .
II number of difciples that executed his defigns
in feveral places, chiefly in the lodgings and apart-
ments of the Vatican, in the church of our Lady of
Peace, and in the palace of Chigis which were all
done by his pupils after his defigns, except the gal-
lery and one angle only, where the three goddeffes
are painted, which was done by himself. His good
nature got him the love of all people, especially of
the popes his cotemporaries. Cardinal Bibiano of-
fered him his niece in marriage, and Raphael was
engaged to her. But pope Leo . having given
him hopes of  cardinal’ cap, he made no hafte to
Marry her.
His paftion for the fair fex deftroyed him in the
flower of his age. For one day, after he had aban
doned himself to women with excels, he was taken
very ill of  burning fever, and the phyficians,
from whom he concealed the true caufe of his dif-
temper, having dealt by him as if he had  pleu-
rify, quite extinguished the little fire that was left
in his body. He died on the same day that he was
born, Good-Friday, anno  in the thirty fe
venth year of his age. Cardinal Bembo wrote his
epitaph, which is to be feen upon his tomb in the
church of the Rotunda at Rome, where he was
buried.  will mention only two verfes of it which
are admirable.
Hle bic eft Raphael, timnit, quo fospite, vinci,
Rerum magna parens, ES moriente mori.
His disciples were Julic Romano, Ciovanni Frant
ceico Penni, firnamed  Fattore, Pellegrino di
Modena, Pierino del Vaga, Polidoro, Caravaggio,
Matturini, Bartolomeo da Bagna-cavallo, Timo=
theo drbino, Vincenre di San Gemmiano, Gior
vanni dUdinne, and others. Several (Kilful Flem-
ings alfo where his disciples, and heiped him in the
CReCy-


T       of his great works, viz. Bernard van Orlay
of Bruffels, Michael Coxis of Niechlin, and others,
who going back into their own country, had the
care of executing his deligns for tapeftry: befides
his difciples, he had  valt number of Rudents and
friends, who frequented his houfe, and often waited
upon him abroad. Michael Angelo meeting him
Co
That.
one day thus artended, told him, en paffant,
 he marched like  provoft with his ferjeants
 about him; Raphaelantwered,  And you alone
 like  hangman. thefe two great Painters were
always jealous of each other, as it is ufual among
perfons of the same profeffion, when modefty is not
miftrefs of their fentiments.
Reflections on  APHAELs Works.

HER  has been no Painter fince the refto

 ration of the art in ltaly, who acquired fuch
 reputation as Raphael : his genius was fublime,
his thoughts fine, his vein fruirful, and would have
appeared much more fo, had it not been moderated
by the nicety with which he finifhed his pieces.
He was rich in his inventions, and his manner of
difpoting of the things he invented was very deli-
cate. If his figures were not grouped by lights and
Thadows, they were fo ingenioutly done by their
actions, that the groupes were always viewed with
pleafure. His attitudes are noble according to their
condition, contrafted without affectation, expreftive,
natural, and fuch as always expofe the beautiful
parts. His defigns were very correct; to the juft-
ness, the grandeur and elegance of the antique, he
added the fimplicity of nature, without affecting 
particular manner. There is  great deal of variety
to be feen in his figures, and more in the airs of his
heads, which he copied from nature, the mother of
diverfity, and always accompanied with  noble
How
character in defign.


emment      ER .
 expreffions are juft, ingenious, elevated and
touching; they are moderate without coldnets, and
lively without exaggeration. The manner of his
draperies was poor at firft, but had  great gollt at
laft, and were fetwith beauty and artifice; the order
of his folds are fine, and shews the naked where it
appears to the beft advantage, and chieffy about the
OInts.
However, he may be blamed for drefting almoft
all his figures in the fame ftuffs, whereas he might
have changed them with reafon, and for the orna-
ment of his fubjects:  speak of hiftorical ones, for
as to fabulous and allegorical, in which divinities are
introduced, the Painter ought to have more regard
to the majetty of the folds, than to the richness of
the Ruffs.
Raphael being nicely careful to defign correctly,
and it we may fo fay, jealous of his our-lines, he has
marked them fomewhat too hard. His pencil though
light and united, is however dry. His landlkips
are neither handfome, nor of  great goiit.
His local colours are neither fhining nor thock-
ing; they are neither very true, nor very falfe, but
his fhadows are  little too black; he never had 
clear understanding of the claro obfcuro, though it
appears by his laft pieces, that he fought after ir,
and endeavoured to acquire it, as may be feen in his
sapettries of the Acts of the Apoftles, and in his
pictures of the Transfiguration. but whatever Ra-
phael wanted in colouring, was over-looked in the
abundance of the other parts of Painting of which
he was mafter; and he has even done fome portraits
with respect to lights and colours to well, that they
may enter into the comparifon with Titians, as well
as the St John in Monfieur the Prefident' cabiner,
which for all the parts of Painting, deferves to be
reckoned the author'’ mafter-piece.
Pouffin


TBe LIVE  of
 he was an angel
Pouffin faid of Raphael, ce
 compared with the modern Painters, but an afs in
 comparifon of the ancients. Hisjudgment of him
relates only to his thoughts, his gollf, his juttness
of defign, and his expreftions: the thoughts of the
ancients are fimple, fublime and natural, fo are Ra-
phaels : the antique defign is correct, varied ac-
cording to decency, and of  great goit; Raphaels
is the fame. The antique way of the collocation
of the mufcles is learned, exact, and delicate in
their offices. Raphael was not ignorant of this part;
yet we muft confels, that thofe who have frudied
anatomy, as it relates to Painting, may obferve more
exactness in the antique, and more delicacy in the
actions of the mufcles in the ancient pictures, than
in, not only Raphaels, but in any other modern
Painter'’ whatfoever.
 allow that this great juftnets, and great deli-
cacy in the action of the mufcles, regulates the ex-
altness of the out-lines, but  do not fee that Raphael
was to much out of the way as to be reckoned an
ass in comparifon of the antiques. It is true, Ra-
phael formed the grandeur of his gout from the
fine ftatues of antiquity, and that when he came
from his mafter Perugino, they put him into  right
way; he followed them implicitly at firft; but at
laft, perceiving that the road of painting was dif-
terent from that of fculpture, he took from them
no more than was jutt proper for his art, and as
he grew older and wifer, he left off the reft. This
difference is eafily to be perceived in the pietures
which he painted at different times, the latter of
which came neareft the character of nature.
On the contrary, Pouffin and Annibal Caracci,
quitted their character of nature according as they
grew more and more fond of the antique; they
should have done as Raphael did, do one, and not
omit the other; for this excelient man not only
retained


eminent        .
 the good godt of the antique, its grandeur
and beauty, but alfo fpied out one thing which
neither Pouffin nor the Caracci ever faw, and that
was grace; which gift of nature was given him fo
plentifully, that he pread it over every thing that
came out of his hands, and no body can dispure the
preference with him in it, except Corregio, who
wanted his regularity of defign. Raphael made ufe
of grace to fer off all the other parts of Painting
which he poffeft, the poffeffion of which acquired
him the reputation of the beft Painter in the world.
GIROLOMO GENG 
 Urbin, was  disciple of Pietro Perugino
 at the fame time with Raphael. He parti-
cularly applied himfelf to architecture, and died in
the year  aged  ROMANO
  the favourite difciple of Raphael, as well
on account of his skill in Painting, as for
the agreement there was in their manners. He en-
tirely followed his mafter' golt, not only in the
execution of the defigns he gave him, but alfo in
thofe he made himfelf. Raphael treated him like
 father, and left him his heir jointly with Gio-
Vinni Francefco Penni il Fattore. After Raphael'
death thefe two Painters finifhed feveral pictures
which their mafter had left imperfect. Julio Ro-
mano was not only an excellent Painter, but alfo un-
derfood architecture perfectly well. The cardinal
di Medicis, who was afterwards pope Clement VIl.
employed him to build the palace which is at this
day called la Vigne Madame; and when he had
finished the archicecture, he did the Painting and
other decorations.
The
 LI VE  of
 death of Leo . was  blow to Julio Ros
mano, for had his fucceffor Adrian VI. reigned -
bove  year, the fine arts in Rome would have been
extinguished, and all the artifts had starved; but
Clement VIl. fucceeding him, Painting and Painters
began to revive. As foon as he was cholen pope,
he fer Julio Romano at work to paint the hall of
Conflantine, where Raphael had begun the hiftory
of that emperor, which he had defigned. This work
being finished, he drew feveral pictures for churches
and private perfons: his manner began to change
at laft, his colouring into black and red, and his
defign into the fevere.
Frederico di Conzaga, marquits of Mantua, hear-
ing of Julio’ capacity, inviced him to that city.
his good fortune directed him thither, for having
made the defigns of twenty lewd prints, which
Marc Antonio engraved, and for which Arctine
made the inscriptions in verfe, he had been feverely
punished for it had he stayed in Rome; as the treat-
ment Marc Antonio met with fufficiently proves.
He was thrown into goal, where he fuffered  great
deal, and it had coft him his life, if the intereft of
the cardinal di Medicis, and Baccio Bandinelli, had
not faved him. In the mean time Julio Romano
followed his bufinets ar Mantua, where he has leit
eternal proofs of his great ability. He built the
palace . and made the city of Mantua finer,
Rronger, and healchier than before. As to his
Painting we may affirm, it was at Mantua chiefly
that Julio Romano' genius took wing, and he
shewed himfelf to be what he was. He died there
in the fifty fourth year of his age, anno  to
the great grief of the marquits, who loved him as
his brother. He had  fon and daughter, who fur-
vived him; the fons name was Raphael, the daugh-
ter married Hercules Malarcica. Among his dif
ciples the beft are Prunaticcio, who came into
France,


emnent        .
 and one of Mantua, named Rinaldi, who
died young.
Reflections on the works of
  MANO.
Tlio Romano was the firft, the moft learned, and
the moft perfevering difciple of Raphael. His
imagination, which was, as it were, buried in the
execution of the defigns of his mafter, as long as he
was his difciple, when the faw herfelf free, took
wing at once; or rather, as  forrent, that being
penned up breaks over its banks, and runs with an
impetuous courfe, fo Julio Romano, after having pro-
duced feveral cafel-pieces, and painted great works
in the Vatican-hall from Raphael' defigns, before
and after the death of his illuftrious mafter, pre-
fently changed his manner when his genius was at
liberty, and fuffered it to take its rapid courfe, as is
to be feen in his Paintings at Wantua. however, it
was not that graceful vein, nor that foft fire of fancy
which, though borrowed before, yet made it doubr-
ful to decide, whether fome of the pictures were his,
or his matters. When he was entirely free, and
the piece all his own, he animated it with ideas more
fevere, more extraordinary, and even more expref-
five, but lets natural than the works of Raphael.
His inventions were adorned by poefy, and his dif-
pofitions uncommon and of  good goit.
His ffudies of police learning were of great service
to him in his Painting; for in defigning the antique
tculptures, he drew thofe proofs of learning which
we observe in his pictures.
It feems by his works, that his thoughts were
wholly taken up with the grandeur of his poetical
ideas; and that to execute them with the fame fire
that he conceived them, he contented himfelf with
the practice of defign, which he had chofen, with-
Out
 LI VE  of
 varying the airs of his heads, or his draperies.
Ir is vifible alfo, that his colouring, which was
never very good, became worfe at laft; for his local
colours, which were compofed of brick-colour and
black, were not supported by any inrelligence of
the claro obfcuro. His fierce way of defigning,
and his terrible expreftions, became to habirual to
him, that his works are eafy to be Known. This
manner is very great, it is true, being formed after
the antique baffo relievos, which he had care-
fully ftudied, and especially the Trajan and Anto-
nine pillars, which he defigned throughout; yer thefe
fine things, which are fufficient of themselves to
make  skilful fculptor, muft be accompanied with
the verities of nature to form  great Painter. The
draperies, which commonly contribute to the ma-
jefty of figures, are the shame of his, being poor,
and of an ill gout.
There is little variety to be feen in the airs of
his heads; that which is to be found in his works,
confifts only in the different Kinds of objects, of
which his compofitions are full, and in the adjutt-
ments which enrich them, and proceeds from the
univerfality of his genius for all fores of Painting;
he did all well alike, landskips and animals. by
which means his productions, for what they contain,
will always be admired by the judicious.
GIOVANNI FRANCISCO PENNI
Surnamed
 FATTORE.
IilS laft name was given him for his good
 hulbandry in managing Raphaels expences,
when he lived with him, which was to the time of
his death, Julio Romano being his fellow difciple.
He was very skilful, especially indefigning. He has
done  great many things from Raphael' thoughts,
which


eminent   IN    .
 pats for Raphael' own doing, particularly in
the palace of Chigi, as one may obferve by examin-
ing them with artention. Hle had  particular in-
clination for landfkips, which he painted very well,
and cnriched them with fair buildings.
After his mafters death, he affociated himfelf
with Julio Romana, and Pierino del Vaga. Thefe
three together finished what Raphael left imperfect,
as well the hiftory of Conftantine, as other works in
the palace of Belvedere. They feparated on Occa-
fion of  copy that the pope would have done of
the picture of the transfiguration, which was de-
tigned for the court of France; and Fattore went to
Naples, intending to work for the marquits del
Vafto; but his conftitution was fo delicate, that he
did not live long, for he died in the fortieth year of
his age, anno     
.  
  Giovanni Francifco' brother, whom we
have been speaking of he worked  while
with Pierino del Vaga, his brother-in-law, at Ge-
nod, and other places of ltaly. He went thence into
England, where he did feveral things for King
Henry Vill. and for fome merchants. He was alfo
employed by Francis . at Fontainbleau, and at laft
applied himfelf to graving.
ANDRE  del  ARTC
 Florence, was  taylor' fon: his father put
 him to  goldfmith, with whom he lived feven
years, during which time he minded defigning more
than his own trade. From the goldfmith he re-
moved to an ordinary Painter called Giovanni Ba-
rile, whom he foon left to go to Florence, and enter
himfelf with Pietro Cofimo. While he lived with
Birl
 .
him he fet apart all Sundays and holidays to delign
after the beft mafters, especially Lconardo da Vinci,
and Michael Angelo; which, in  few years, taught
him his art. He thought his own mafter too flow in
the execution of his works, for which reafon he left
him, and became acquainted with Francifco Bigio.
They lived together, and painted feveral things in
Florence, and thereabouts, for the monafteries. He
drew  great many Madonna'. He is cenfured for
making ufe of Albert Durers prints in  piece
which he did for the Carmelites. Baccio Bandinelli
would have learned to paint of him, but Andrea
puiting him upon difficult works at firft, it difgulted
Bandinelli, to that he applied himfelf wholly to
iculpturc. Andrea' reputation increating, he made
pictures for feveral places, and among others, one
which got him the praifes of the judicious, and is
one of the beft things he ever did,  mean,  St
Sebaltian, for the church of St Gal.
He came into France upon the invitation of Fran-
 He painted feveral things there; and though he
had begun the picture of St ferom for the queen,
he left that work, and got leave of the King to re-
Turn to Florence, precending to fetch his wife, from
whom, he faid, he had received  very prefting
letter to come to her; but inftead of recurhing at
the time apponned, he spent the money he brought
out of France, and even that he had received of the
King to buy pictures. At laft, having worked fome
time with Francifco Bigio for fubfiftance, he died of
the plague at Florence, abandoned even by his wife
and his friends, in the year  aged  years.
Hie left leveral pupils, viz. Giacomo da Pantormo,
Andrea Squazzella, who worked in France, Giacomo
Sandro, Franceico Salviati and Giorgio Valari. The

Andrea del Sarto copied
Taine Vafari reports, that 

The author has told this fory more at large, and in another
ianner, in the  chapter of the firtt book.
To


eminent   IN    .
 perfectly, that Frederic marquits of Mantua,
having on  time made him copy the picture of
Leo . with fome cardinals, becaufe Clement VII.
had defired that prince to give him the original,
he did it with to much juftness, that Julio Romano,
who drew the drapery of that piece under Raphael,
took his copy for the original, and told Vafars who
difabuted him, ce Do not  fee the firokes that 
co struck with my own hand  but Vafari thewing
him del Sarto' mark, he was convinced of his mif-
take.
GIACO MO da PANTOR MC,
 Tufcany, was at thirteen years of age put to

learn the art of Painting of Lconardo da Vinci=
he was afterwards removed to Mariotto Albertinelli,
from him to Pietro di Cofimo, with whom he staid
not long, leaving him to place himfelf with Andrea
del Sarto.
At nineteen years old he fet up for himself, and
followed his ftudies fo fuccessfully, that upon feeing
tome of his firft works, Michael Angelo faid of
 of He would raife Painting to the sKies. Pan-
torimo was never fatisfied with what he did, but the
praifes that were given him kept him in heart. He
did feveral things at Florence that got him reputa-
tion. Having undertaken to paint the chapel of
St Laurence for the duke of Florence, and aming
in that work, which lafted twelve years, to excel all
others, he on the contrary came thort of himfelf. He
was  man of honour, and very humble; he had
one quality, and the moft commendable one in the
world, which is rarely to be met with in his pro-
feftion, which was, that he would never fuffer any
one to (peak againft thofe that were abfent. All his
pieces were done in Florence, where he died of 
droply, anno  aged  years.
BACC   VE 

BACCIO BANDINELLI

 Sborn at Florence; his nname was Barte-
lomeo, hich was turned into the diminu-
tive Baccio. His father was  geldfimith, and his
mafter, Glovannr Francifco Ruftico,  good fculp-
for, whom Lconardo da Vinci ufed often to vifit,
for Ruftico was bred up by Andrea Verroechic as
well as Leonardo; Verrocchio being  fculpter,
Painter and architect, and underftanding the mathe-
maties very well. Though Baccio Bandinelli had
gone through all the ftudies neceffary for an excel-
lent Painter, his pictures were not liked, on account
of the colouring, which was worth nothing. His ill
success occafioned his abandoning Painting, and fol-
lowing fculpture, in which he became very skilful.
He had to great an efteem for his own works, that
he compared them with Michael Angelos, whofe
reputation was  great grief to him. His produc
tions are at Rome and Florence, where he died in
the  year of his age, anno  da CARAVAG called from the place of his birth,  village of

 that name, in the dutchy of Milan, He came
to Rome at the time when pope Leo . was railing
some new edifices in the Vaticah, and knowing not
how to get his bread otherwife, for he was very
young, he hired himself to carry flones and mortar
for the mafons, who were at work about that build-
ing. He did this till he was eighteen years of age.
At the same time Raphael employed feveral young
Painters in the fame place to execute his defigns.
Polidoro, who often carried them the mortar, with
which they made their frefco, was touched with the
fight of the Paintings, and folicited by his genius to
turn Painter. He at firft tied himfelf to the works
of Giovanni  Odine, and the pleafure he took to
fee


eminent        .
 that Painter work, firred up the talent which he
had for Painting. He was very officious and complai
fant to the
oung Painters, and made an acquaintance
with them, to whom communicating his intention,
they gave him leffons, which emboldened him to pro-
ceed. He heartily fer himfelf to defigning, and ad-
vanced fo prodigioully that Raphael was aftonished,
and fome time after fet him to work with the other
young Painters; but he diftinguished himfelf fomuch
from all of them, that as he had the greatelt fhare in
executing his defigns in the Varican, to he had the
greateff glory. The care which he had feen his mafter
take in defigning the anique fculptures, shewed him
the way to do the like. He spent whole days and
nights in defigning thofe beaunful things, and stu-
died antiquity to  nicery. The works with which
he has enriched the frontilpieces of feveral buildings at
Rome, thew the pains he took in fludying the an
tique.
He did very few eafel-pieces; moft of his pro-
ductions are in frefco, and of the fame colour, in
imitation of the baffo relievo'. In this fort of
Painting he made ufe of the manner, called foratch-
cd, confifting in  preparation of  black ground, on
which is placed  white plaifter, and taking off this
white with an iron bodkin, we difcover through the
holes the black which ferves for fhadows. Scrarched
work lafts longeft, but being very rough is unplea-
fant to the fight. He affociared himfelf at firft
with Maturino, and the conformity of their genius'
made them companions in their fludies and bu-
finess: they lived together like brothers, and their
friendship lafted rill the death of Marurino, who
died of the plague, anno  Polidoro, after
having, by Maturino' affiltance, filled Rome with
his pieces, thought to have enjoyed his cafe, and
the fruit of his labours, when the Spaniards, in the
year  befieged that ciry, and all the men of
 .  VE  of
art were forced to fly, or elfe were ruined by the
miferies of war. Polidoro refolved to retire to Na-
ples, where he was obliged to work for ordinary
Painters, and had no opportunity to make himself
taken notice of; for the Neapolitan nobility were in
thofe days more folicitous to get good horfes than
good pictures. Seeing himfelf therefore without
bufinefs, and forced to spend what he had got at
Rome, he went to Sicily, and underftanding archi-
recture as well as Painting, the citizens of Meffina
employed him to prepare the triumphal arches, for
the reception of Charles . coming from Tunis:
which work being finifhed, Polidorofinding nothing
to be done there anfwerable to the grandeur of his
genius, and having no temptation to stay, but the
careffes of  woman he loved, he thought of return-

ing to Rome. To that end he drew his money out
of the bank of Meffina; which his man underftanding
the night before his intended departure, he confe-
derated himfelf with other rogues, feized him in
his bed, strangled him, and stabbed him. After
they had committed this murder, they carried the
body to the door of his miftrefs, that it might be
thought he was killed there by fome rival: yet God
in his providence to ordered it, that the murder was
difcovered. The affaffins fied, and every body
pitied Polidoro' untimely fate; his man, who did
not fear any one' miftrufting he had  hand in his
mafter' death, came to make his lamentations over
him as well as the reft.  Sicilian count, one of
Polidoro'’ friends, obferved his grief was not at all
natural, and futpecting him to be concerned in the
crime, had him apprehended. He defended him-
felf very ill. He was put to the torture, confeft all,
and was condemned to be drawn to pieces by four
herfes. The cirizens of Meffina were mighty forry
for Pelidoro' death, and honourably buried him
        .
 their cathedral church. He was in his eight and
fortieth year when this fate befel him, anno  on the works of
POLIDORO.
DOlidoro, as defirous as he was to learn, thought
 he could not do berter than tread in his mafter'
Reps; and Knowing Raphael had formed his goiit of
defign after the antique ftarues, he affiduoully ap-
plied himfeff to ftudy them; and the principal bufi-
ness of his life was to imitate them, as may be feen
by fome beautiful remains of his works on the fron-
tifpieces of feveral houfes in Rome, were he has
painted fome baffo relievos of his own invention.
His genins, which was extraordinary lively and
fruitful, and his fudying the antique baffo re-
lievo', made him incline to reprefent battles, facri-
fices, vafes, trophies, and thofe ornaments which
are moft remarkable in antiquities.
But, what is altogether furprizing, is, that not-
withttanding his great application to antique fculp-
tures, he perceived the neceffity of the claro obicuro
in Painting, and was almoft the only Painter of the
Roman [chool, who made it  principle of the art,
and put it in practice: Indeed the great maffes of
lights and fhadows which are in his pictures, thew
he was convinced, that the eyes of the Spectator
wanted repofe to view  picture with eafe.
It is from this principle that in the frezes which
he painted with whice and black, his objects are
grouped fo artfully, that it is impoftible for any to
be more beautiful.
His love of the anrique did not hinder his Hudy-
ingnature; and his gout of defign, which was very
great, and very correct, was  mixture of the one
and the other. His hand was ealy and excellent,
and the airs of his heads bold, noble and expreffive.
His





 LIVE   thoughts were fublime;-his difpoficions full
of attitudes well cholen; his draperies well fety
and his landskips of  good gout. His pencil was
light and foft; but after the death of Raphael, who
employed him in the paintings of the Vatican, he
very feldom coloured his pieces; applying himfelf
altogether to work in frefco with the claro ob=
Icuro.
Polidoro' genius was very much like Julio Ro-
manos; their conceptions were lively, and formed
after the gout of the antique. Their defign was
great and fevere, and their way new and extraor-
dinary: The difference between them was, that
Julio Romano animated his poetical compofitions by
the impetuofity of his vein only, and Polidoro al-
ways made ufe of the contralt, as the moft powerful
means to give life and motion to his works. Poli-
doro' genius appears alfo to be more natural, more
pure, and more regulated than Julio Romanos.
 NDR   COS  MO
  
MORTVO da PEL  .,
ERE the firft that brought ornaments in
&
ufe in the modern Painting: They were
both very skilful, and worked in the claro obfcuro,
in the manner which the Italians term fgrafitti,
feratcht-work. Andrea lived  years, and Mor
tuo for want of bufiness turned foldier. He was
Killed in  battle between the Venetians and the
Turks, at  years of age.
      born at Florence, and had no mafter to
reach him the art of Painting. He ap-
plied himfelf to the ftudy of Michael Angelos
WOTks,


  IN  ER .
eminent
 but formed to himfelf  particular Htile. His
genius was fervile, and his manner of defigning,
though learned, was  little wild. He did feveral
things at Rome and Peroufa in Raphael' time.
His misfortunes brought him into France, where
Francis . gave him  penfion, and the fuperinten-
dency of the buildings ar Fontainbleau. He was
alfo made  canon of the chapel-reyal, and by the
King' favour, and his own merit, acquired  great
reputation. We may fee what  mafter he was by
his performances in the gallery of Fontainbleau.
Roffo was handfome, and had improved himfelf
by the knowledge of the fciences; but he fullied all
his rare qualities by his death, which he shamefully
brought on himfeif; for having caufed his intimate
friend Francefco Pellegrino to be apprehended on
sufpicion of having robbed him of  confiderable
fum, he was delivered over to the magiftrates, who
put him to the rack, which Pellegrino endured, and
was declared innocent. Being cleared, he publifhed
 pamphlet againft Coffo; who thinking he could
never appear afterwards with honour, fent to elun
for poiton, pretending to want varnith, and taking
the dofe it killed him at Fontanbleau, in the year
 in the  year of his age.
FRANCESCO MA MEGIANO
ROM the place of his birth. He was born in
 the city of Parma, anno  He learne
Painting of two of his coufins, and by the vivacity
and readinets of his wit, in  little while advanced
greatly in the art. The character of Raphael and
Michael Angelo' works, incired him to go to Rome
at twenty years of age. He Audied the beft things,
and


Tbe LI VES  particularly Raphael' Painting; with great car-
neftness: he drew feveral pieces which got him re-
putation, and the favour of pope Clement VIl. He
minded his bufiness fo ftrenuoully; that the very
day on which the Spaniards entered Rome; and
pillaged it, the foldiers found Parmegiano working
quietly, as Protogenes was of old at the fiege of
Rhodes. This fecurity furprized the Spaniards who
firft entered his houfe, and they were to touched
with the beauty of his Painting, that they left him
without doing him any harm; but fome of their
comrades came afterwards, and took away all he
had. Upon this he returned into his own country;
and paffing through Bologna was stopped there  good
while by bufiness that fell in his way; which having
finifhed, he went to Farma, and painted there very
much. He played well on the lute, and often spent
more time on it than on his Painting. He was
jultly blamed for giving himfelf over fo much to
chymiftry, that he not only left off his profeffion,
but alfo the care of his perfon, and became  perfect
Lavage. He engraved fome of his defigns in wood
with the claro obfcuro; and fome he etched, being
the firtt that practifed that fort of graving, at leaft
in Italy. He kept one AntonioFrontano,  graver,
in his houfe, whorobbed him of all his plates as well
of copper as of wood, and alfo of all his defigns,
which made Parmegianorun almoft mad; though the
beft part of them were recovered. At laft he fo
abandoned himself to chymiftry, that he walted his
time, his money, and his health; and died in 
miferable condition of  diarrhcea, accompanied with
 fever, in the g year of his age, anno  ..     .  on the works of PARMEGIANO.
 Armegiano' genius was altogether gay and ele-
. Gant, and though he invented things with cale,
yet he did not strive fo much to fill, his compofi-
tions with agreeable objects, as to defign his figures

with  graceful ;air, and to give them attiuudes
which might show the beautiful parts, and infufe life
and action into the whole.. But his understanding
being of no great extent, his intentiveness to finith
every particular figure, leffened very much the
beauty, of his exprestion in general. His thoughts
were befides too common, and we do not find that
he had perietrated very far into the heart of man, or
underffood the paffions; however, though the grace
of his works is but fuperficial, yet it  neverthelels,
furprifing and charming.
His invention was ready : his attitudes were very
graceful, to were his heads; and it is vitible that he
endeavoured more to pleafe this way, than by the
juft expreftion of his subject. He did not confult
nature much, who is the mother of variety. He
reduced her to  habit which he contracted; grace-
ful, it is true, but it was his own, and funk into
what we call manner. The Painter, who looks
upon nature as his object, ought to confider her in
the variety, as well as in the number of her effects;
and if we forgive him any reiteration in the fame
piece, it muft be only in his defigns, for which
there is no need of confulting nature to exactly, nor
to take the fame care as in  picture.  know alfo,
that whatever drafts the Painters in their ftudies
make after nature, their particular gout confines
them to certain things, which they fall upon infen-
fibly; it cannot be denied, but Parmegiano has
often reiterated the fame airs, and the fame pro-
portion, yet his choice is to fine, that what has

pleated


The LI VES of
 us in any one of his works, will always
pleafe us whereever we meet with it.
His goit of defign is loofe and learned, but has
too much of Idea and manner in it. He affected
to make the extremities of his members delicate,
and fomewhat lean. His attitudes are noble, lively,
and agreeably contrafted. His airs of the head
rather graceful, than of  great gufto. His expref-
fions general, and without character. His draperies
light, and well contrafted. It is true the stuff is al-
moft always the fame, and the folds are very carelefs,
yet being but  few they give  godt of grandeur
to the parts they cover. They are often loofe and
flowing, which adds  great deal of motion to his
figures, but the caufe of it is not always juft.
Notwithftanding the vivacity of his wit, and the
agility of his pencil, he drew very few pictures;
spending moft of his time in making defigns, and
engraving them upon plates. The little  have
seen of his Painting, gives me  clear idea of  tole-
rable claro obfcuro, but his local colour is very or-
dinary and common. It was this Parmegiano, who
by the means of two copper plates found out the
secret of printing on mezzotinto paper, the black
and white, and thus to give more roundness to his
prints. Yet he did not continue the ufe of this in-
veation long, it requiring too much care; befides,
his ordinary prints were fo much valued by every
body, and even by feveral able mafters of Painting,
that he did not think it worth his while to be at the
trouble of making others.
PIERINO del   
   born in Tufcany, where he was poorly
bred, and was hardly two years old when
his mother died. His father was  foldier, and his
nurfe  the-goar. He came young to Florence, and
WVaS


eminent        .
 put to  grocer, who afed to fend him to the
Painters with colours and pencils. He learned of
them, at times, to defign, and in  little while be
came the moft fkilful of all the young Painters in
Florence. An ordinary Painter, whole name was
Vaga, took him with him to Rome, and from his
living with him, he was called del Vaga, for his
right name was Buonacorfi. At Rome he worked
half the week for Painters, and the other half, to-
rether with all Sundays and holidays, he spent in
Hudy and defigning. He had fomething of every
thing that was good in his compofitions; fome
times he might have been found among the ruins,
feeking after the antique ornaments, or defigning
the baffo relievos, fometimes in Michael Angelo 
chapel, and fomerimes in the halls of the Vatican.
He alfo ftudied anatomy, and other fciences necet-
fary to his profeftion. He got fo much knowledge
by his induftry, that he was foon known to the beft
mafters; and Raphael employed him jointly with
Giovanni  Udine and others, to help him in the
execution of his defigns. Of all his cotemporary
artifts, none underftood the ornaments and decora-
tions of Painting to well as he, nor more boldly fol-
lowed Raphael'’ guito, as is to be feen by the pic-
tures in the Varican lodgings, which were per-
formed by him, viz. The paftage of the river for-
dan; the fall of the walls of Jericho; the barcle in
which Johhna commanded the Sun to fland Htill
our Saviour' nativity, baptifim and laft fupper. Ra-
phael' friendship for him procured him other con-
fiderable works in the Vatican, and Pierino thewed
his gratitude by his particular affection to him; but
the plague driving him out of Rome, he returned
to Florence, where having painted fome pieces he
went back to Rome. Raphael being dead, he joined
with Julio Romano, and Franceico il Fattore, to
finith the works in the Vatican, which were left
-
  . IVE  of
imperfect by their mafter: and to confirm their
friendship, he married Franceico' fifter in the year
 yet they were feparated two years afterwards;
when the Spaniards befieged Rome. Pierino was
taken prifoner, and forced to pay  large fum for
his ranfom. He went to Genoa, where he was
employed by prince Doria to paint  palace which he
was then building. In this work he made ufe of
cartoons, the convenience of which he difcovered
to one Geronimo Trevifano;  Painter who had
laughed at them, and to others who came to him to
learn the advantage of them. From thence he re-
moved to Pifa, intending at his wife' request to
fettle there, but after he had drawn fome pictures,
he returned to Genoa, and worked again for prince
Dorid. He then went  second time to Pifa, and
from thence to Rome, where pope Paul  and
cardinal Farnefe gave him to much work, that he
was forced to commit the execution of it to others,
and conrent himfelf with making the defigns.
At the same time the pope fent for Titian to
Rome, which made Pierino to jealous, and grieved
him fo much, that he did what he could to oblige
him not to stay there long, and to haften back to
Venice; in which he fucceeded. The multiplicity
of Pierino' bufinels, and his vivacity in his perfor-
imances, drained his pirits in the flower of his age.
At two and forty years old he spent his time wholly
in vifiting his friends, and lived pleafantly cill his
forty-feventh year, when he died of an apoplexy,
Anno  on the works of  IER INO del
 A .
& Fall Raphael' difciples, Pierino del Vaga kept
 the character of his mafter longelt,  mean
his exterior character, and as we fay, his manner of
delign-


emment.        .
 for he wanted very much of the fineness
of Raphael' thinking. He had  particular genius
for the decoration of places, according to their
cultoms. His invention in this Kind of Painting
was very. ingenious; grace and order are every
where to be met with, and his difpofitions, which
are ordinary in his pictures, are wonderful in his
ornaments: fome of them he has made little, and
tome great, and placed them both with to much
art, that they fet off one another by comparifon,
and by the contralt. His figures are difpofed and
defigned according to Raphaels gufto; and if
Raphael gave him, at firft, fome light skerches of
ornaments, as he did to Giovanni  Udine, he exe-
cuted them to admiration, and by the habit he con-
tracted, and by the vivacity of his wit, he acquired
in this fort of Painting an univerfal reputation.
The tapeftries of the feven planets in feven pieces,
which Pierino defigned for Diana de Poitiers, and
which are now at monficur the firtt prefident', is
 fufficient confirmation of what  have faid.

CIOT
ANNI

.UDIN ,
AS to called from Udine in Friuli, where
he was born, anno  When he was
very young he went to Venice, and his inclination
leading him to Painting, he pur himself to Gior-
gione, whofe disciple he was feveral years. From
thence he went to Rome, where Balthazar Cafti-
glioni, secretary to the duke of Manrua, prefented
him to Raphael. Giovanni  dine did figures
very well, yet his mafter-piece was animals, efpe-
cially birds, to the ftudy of which he particularly
applied himfelf, and wrote  treatife of the latter.
He carefully examined the antique ornaments, and
took delight in Painting after nature, thofe inani-
mate objects that ferve for the decoration of pictures;
  . VE  
 was the eafieft and readieft way to glory. For
this reafon Raphael employed him about the orna
ments of his pictures; especially thofe in ftucco,
which he underftood very well. The mufical in
Rruments in Raphael' picture of St Cecilia at
Bologna, were done by dUUdine; as alfo all the de-
corations of the Paintings of the popes lodgings,
and thofe of la Vigne Madame. We are indebted
to him for reviving the art of ftucco, and the way
of uling it. He found out the true matter which
the antients made ufe of in this fort of work, being
 compofition of lime and marble powder, very
fine, which the modern artifts have ever fince put
in practice. He was in hopes that pope Leo .
who was very well pleafed with his labours, would
have rewarded him, bur feeing himfelf difappointed
by his holiness' death, he took  diftafte to Painting
and retired to Udine. Some time after he quitted
his profeftion, he had  mind to go to Rome out of
devotion, and though he was difgiited like  pilgrim,
and mingled among the rabble, Vafari meeting him
by chance at the Pauline gate, Knew him, and per-
fuaded him to paint for pope Pius IV. for whomm
Giovanni  Udine afterwards did the decorations of
feveral pieces. He loved fports fo well, that he is
thought to have been the inventor of the Htalking-
horfe, which poachers now ufe to come at birds
with. He died anno  aged threefcore and
ten, and was buried, according to his defire, in the
Rotunda, near Raphael his mafter.
PELL EG INO da MODEN 
Orked with Raphael' other difciples in the
Paintings of the Varican, and made feveral
pictures of his own at Rome. After his matters
death he returned to Modena, and followed his bu-
finets with induftry and fuccets. He died of fome
wounds


eminent   INT   .
 he received in endeavouring to refcue his
fon, who had committed  murder in one of the
public ftreets of that city.
DOMENICO BECCAF IUMI,
Otherwife called
MIC ARINO da SIEN ,
    peafants fon, and born in  village
near Siena. His father' name was Pacio,
and he ufed to call his fon Micarino. His firft em-
ployment was keeping of theep, and it happened
that  citizen of Siena, whofe name was Beccafiumi,
coming by one day as he was fitting, by  river, his
flocks grazing about him, obferved that he drew
figures on the fand with  stick, which gave him 
good opinion of him, and he refolved to improve
the talent which he difcovered in him. He took
him into his service, and had him taught to defign.
Domenico' geniis affifting him in his ftudies, he
foon became  mafter. He at firft copied fome
pieces of Perugino, and then went to Rome, where
he encreafed in the knowledge of his art, by ftu-
dying Raphael and Michael Angelos works. Be
lieving he was now able to sland by himself, he re-
turned to Siena, did feveral pictures in oil and dif-
temper, and fome confiderable pieces in frefco,
which brought him into credit. But what fupport-
ed his reputation  long time, was his work of the
pavement of the great church in Siena. This per-
formance was of the kind of claro obfcuro, and was
done by means of two forts of ftones, the one white
for the lights, and the other brown for the fhadows;
and thefe fones being thus joined in the dimentions,
agreeable to the claro obfcuro of the objects which
were to be reprefented, the artift, by making deep
holes, and filling them up with black pirch, could
   . VES of
draw lines, and give union, roundness, and force to
his pictures. One Duccio,  Painter in Siena, in-
vented this fort of work in the year  but Bec-
cafiumi brought it to perfection. He engraved fe-
veral of his deligas in wood, was  good sculptor
and founder, of which he gave fufficient proofs in
Genoa, whither he went towards the latter end of his
life, and having left many proofs of his induftry
and capacity, died there in the  year of his axe,

anno   


BALTHA AR PERU .
 the fame city of Siena, was famous at the
 fame time He painted in the palace of
Ghigi, in the churches, and on the frontifpieces of
several houfes in Rome.. He underftood perfectly
the mathematies and architecture, and revrved the


ancient decorations of the liage, as he thewed in
 reign of Leo .
 
When cardinal Bernardo da Bibiena had the play
called La Callandra, one of the beft Italian dramatic
pieces, reprefented for the entertainment of the
Pope, Balthazar made the feenes, and adorned them
with fo many places, firects, and feveral forts of
buildings, that they were admired by all the world;
and, indeed, it was he that thewed the way to all
the engineers and makers of machines that came
after him in his bufiness. He was employed about

divers things, as well at St Perci  as elfewhere,
and prepared the magnificent ornaments for the
coronation of pope Clement VIl. He had the
misfortune to be at Rome when Charles Vth' army
facked that city. The foldiers plundered him, ufed
him ill, and to get out of their hands he was forced
to draw the picture of Charles duke of Bourbon,
the imperial general, after he was dead. As foon
as he got his liberty, he took shipping at port
Hercules,


emnent   IN    .
 and awent to Siena, whither he came,
after having been robbed by the way.. The citi-
 of Siend fet him at work to fortify their city,
which he did; and then returned to Rome, where
he drew defigns for fome palaces. He there began
his book of the Antiquities of Rome, and  com-
ment. on Vitruvius, for which he made the cuts,
according as he preceeded in the work, which death
put  Rop to in the year  being (carce thirty
fix years of age. It is thought the was poifoned by
his competitors. Sebaftian Serli had his writings
and defigns, which he made:great ufe of in the
treatife of archirecture that he publifhed.


MICHAEL ANGEEO BYONAROTI,

NON of Lodovico Buonaroti Simoni, of the an-

XS. cient family of the counts of Canofes, was born

in the year  in the caftle of Chinfi,, in the rer-
ritory of Arezzo inj Tufcany,, where, his father and
mother then lived
He was put to purfe in the vil-
lage of Settiniane,  place noted for the refort of
sculptors, of whom, his nurfes. husband was one,
which gave rife to the faying of him, that Mighael
Angelo fucked in sculpture with his milk. His, vio-
lent inclination to defigning, obliged his parents to
place him with Domenico Chirlandaio. The pro-
gress he made raifed the jealouty, of his fellow-dif-
ciples to much, that Forngiano, one of them, gave
him  blow on the nofe, the marks of which he
carried to his grave. He thought the beft way to
be revenged on him was to overcome him in his pro=
feffion, and by: his fudies and productions, to put
an end to the competition of his companions, and
acquire the efteem of perfons of the beft quality and
intereft, which he did effectually.
He erected an academy of Painting and sculpture
at Florence, under the protection of Lorenzo de
Me-


 LIVE   who was  lover of the fine arts. He was
bellowing his care and application upon it when the
troubles of the houfe of Medicis obliged him to
remove to Bologna, from whence he went to Ve-
nice, and from thence returned in  little while
to Florence. It was about this time he made an
image of Cupid, carried it to Rome, broke off
one of its arms, and buried it, keeping the arm by
him. He buried it in  place which he Knew was
to be dugup, and the Cupid being found, was fold
to the cardinal of St Gregory for antique: Michael
Angelo difcovered the fallacy to him, by shewing
him the arm he had preferved for that purpofe.
The works he performed at Rome, and Braman
tes advice, whom Raphael had intligated to it, put
the pope on Painting his chapel, and employing Mi-
chael Angelo about it. Michael fent for feveral
Florentine Painters to affift him, among whom were
Graunachio Bugiardino, and Giuliano di San Gallo,
the latter underftanding frefco very well, which
Michael Angelo Knew little of. The Painting being
finifhed, moft of the Painters, and particularly Ra-
phaels, expectations were baulked; for he had never
defired his friend Bramante to procure that em-
ployment for his competitor, had he not thought
the talk greater than he could gothrough with. Bra-
mante, as we have faid in the life of Raphael, was
entrufted by Nichael Angelo with the Key of the
chapel, and an order to let no body whofoever fee
his work: however, he once admitted Raphael, who
found the Painting to be of fogreat  gufto of delign,
that he refolved to make his advantage of it, and,
indeed, in the firft picture which Raphael produced
afterwards, and that was the prophet Haiah for the
church of St Auftin, Michael Angelo immediately
difcovered Bramante' treachery. This paltage is
the greateft praife that can be given to Michael An
gelos works, and is, at the fame time,  proof of
Raphael'


emnent        .
 love of his art; that he would make ufe
of what was good, even in the works of his ene-
mies, not fo much for his own glory, as forthe glo-
ry of his profeffion.
Upor the death of Julius II. Michael Angelo
went to Florence, where he made that admirable
piece of fculpture, the tomb of the duke of Flo-
rence. He was interrupted by the wars, the ciri
 obliging him to work on the fortifications of
the city; but forefeeing that their precautions would
be ufeless, he moved from Florence to Ferrara,
and thence to Venice. The doge Gritti would fain
have entertained him in his service, but all he could
get out of him was  defign of the bridge Rialto.
for Michael Angelo was an excellent architect, as
one may fee by the palace of Farnefe, by his own
houfe, and by the capitol, which is an edifice of 
great gout.
When he returned to Florence, he painted the
fable of Læda, with Jupiter turned into  swan,
for the duke of Ferrara, which piece being not -
nough effeemed, he fent it by Minio his difciple into
France, together with two boxes of defigns, the beft
and greateft part of his thoughts. Francis . bought
the Lxda, and put it up at Fontainbleau, and the
defigns were difperted up and down by the fudden
death of Minio. The amorous paftion of this Lx
da was reprefented fo lively, and folasciviouly, that
monficur de Noyers, nunifter of ftare, ordered it
to be burnt out of  fcruple of confcience.
By the command of Paul III. Michael Angelo
painted his famous piece of the latt judgment,
which is an inexhauftible ffore of fcience, for all
thofe that would dive to the bottom of it. The
defign is of  great gufto. He took an incredible
deal of pains to reach the perfection of his art. He
CC
loved folitude, and ufed to fay,
that Painting
 
was jealous, and required the whole Man to her-
 .  .
 Selt.
Being alked, why he did not marr
 he
 was his, wife, and his works
 children. Michael, Angelo had great ideas,
which he did not borrow from his, mafters : Flis
Rudying after, the antique, and the elevation of his
genius inspired him with them.His defigis were
learned and correct, and the gufto, if  may ufe
 phrafe, terrible; and if tome perfons cannot find
in them the elegance of the anuque, they muff al-

low, that his gufte is rich, and that common nature

in comparifon with it is poor.




Raphael, as we have gbterved; was obliged to him

for the altegation of his manner, which he learned
at the fight, of pope, Sixtus', chapel, for before that

he had still too much of Perugino' in his compo-
 There are feveral perfons, who though they
confels Michael, Angelofs thoughts are great, yet
 not allow them to be natural, and think they
afe. fomerimes extravagant. They fay alfo, that
 his defigns are learned, they are overcharg
ed; that he has taken too many licences againtt the
rules of perspective, and that he did not understand
colouring; of which we shall fay more in our refter

sions on his works. It is enough to let the world
know that this great man was; beloved and efteemed
by all the fovereign princes of his time, and that he
will be sill the admiration of pofterity. He died at
Rome, anno  at  years of age. Colmo di
Medicis ordered his body to be secretly unburied,
and brought to Florence, where he was interred in
the church of Santa Croce, in which magnificent
obfequies were performed for him, and his tomb is
to be feen in, marble, confifting of three figures,
Painting, Sculpfure and Architecture, all of his own

hand.








 
Re-
 
   ..
 on the works 
MICHAEE
  EL..

il
ICHAEE ANGEL  was one of the

  firlt that baniffed the little manner, and the

remainders of the Gothic out of Iraly. His genius
was of  valt extent,, and his temper made his guito
incline to feverity and caprice; yet among his capri-
cious imaginations, if there are fome things extra-
vagant, there are others fingularly beautiful; and
of what kind foever his thoughts were, they were
always great.
The crities of that age preferring the excellence
of defign to all the other parts of Painting, Mi-
chael Angelo ftudied it with incredible affiduity,
and arrived to  great knowledge of that art; as
may be feen by his pictures and fculptures; yet he
did not join the purity and elegance of the contours
or out-lines, to his grand gufto, for having made
his observations on the body of  man, as it is in
its greateft force, he drew the members of his fi-
Gures t powerful, and, as we fay, loaded his de-
lign; not that he neglected the antique, but he was
not willing to be indebred for his art to any thing

but himfelf. He alfo examined nature, whom he
looked upon as his object more than the antique fta-
tues, which he did not think fit to copy. He un-
derftood perfectly well the Knitting of the bones,
the joining of the members, the origin, infertions
and offices of the mufcles; and, indeed, he was fo
confcious of his own skill, that he took too much
care to let the spectator fee it; for he expreft the
parts of the body fo ftrongly, that he feemed to
forget that there was  fkin above the mufcles which
foftened them. however, he has obterved this more

in his tculpture, than in his Puinnings.
Flis


TBe .  VE  af
 attitudes are, for the moft part, difagrec-
able, the airs of his heads fierce, his draperies not
open enough, and his expreffions not very natural;
yet, as wild as his productions are, thereis elevation
in his thoughts, and noblenets in his figures: in
Thort, the grandeur of his gufto is  proper remedy
for the meanness of the Flemith. It was even of
ufe to Raphael, as we have faid already, to cure
him of that drynels which he learnt of Pictro Pe-
rugino.
Michael Angelo Knew very little of colouring;
his carnations have too much of the brick-colour
for the lights, and of black for the shadows; though
it is not certain whether he coloured his pictures
himself, or whether he employed fome Florentine
Painters, whom he fent for to help him in his great
undertakings. The pictures which Fra. Baltiano
drew after Michael Angelo' defigns, are not like
the others; the colouring is better, and has fomething
of the Venetian gufto. To return to the defigns of
Michael Angelo, which are the moft valuable part
of his productions, if they are not entirely perfect,
there is fo much fcience in them, that his works
will contribute  great deal towards making ftu-
dents mafters, if they have difcernment enough to
ufe them as they ought; nevertheless it would be
matter of wonder if Michael Angelos reputation
had lived till now, in cafe his knowledge of fculp-
fure, and of civil and military architecture, had
not been more celebrated than his skill in Painting.
SEBASTIANO da VENETlA,
commonly called
Fra BAST IANO del Pio MBO,
OOK his name from an office given him by
 pope Clement VIl. in the lead-mines. He
was born ar Venice, and his firft mafter was Cio-
Vazlli


eminent
PA INT ER 
 Bellino; whom he left on account of his ase,
to place himfelf with Giorgione, of whom he learnt
 sufto of colouring which he never quitted. He
had got  goodreputation at Venice, when Auguftini
Chigi carried him to Rome, where he applied him-
felf to Michael Angelo, who liked him fo well,
that he took extraordinary care to teach him de-
fign, that he might justify the choice Fra. Baltiano
had made of him for his mafter, rather than Ra-
phael; for the Painters of Rome were at that time
divided, fome were for Raphael, and some for Ni
-
chael Angelo. Fra. Baftiano would not only not
make choice of Raphael for his mafter, but he fer
up for his competitor, to which end he drew the
picture of the transfiguration at the fame time that
Raphael made his for Francis . In this picture he
reprefents the refurrection of Lazarus. The piece
is at Norbonne.
After Raphael’ death, Fra. Baftiano, by his own
merit, and the protection of Michael Angelo, be-
came the chief Painter in Rome. Julio Romano
only disputed that title with him. Certain it is,
Fra. Baltiano' manner was grand, and it is enough
to fay, that his works were like Michael Angelos
for the defign, and like Giorgione' for the colour-
ing. He was  long time about his pictures, which
was the reafon he left many of them imperfect.
There is  very fine one of his, the vifitation of
the Virgin, in the chapel royal at Fontainbleau.
Fra. Baltiano, notwithflanding his preference of
Michael Angelo to Raphael, quarrelled with the
former, who was angry with him for actempting to
paint  picture in oil, contrary to his opinion. Hlis
mafter faid that fort of Painting was proper for
WWomen, and that frefco was really the work of 
man. His office in the lead-mines bringing him in
tufficient to fubfift him handfomely, and being na-
turally  lover of cafe, he bent his thoughts only
 . VE. of
 make his life eafy, fometimes exercifing himfelf
with poetry, and fometimes with mufic, for he
play’ very well on the lute. He found out. the
way of Painting oil upon walls, fo that the colours
should not change, which was by  plaifter: com-
poted of pirch, maftic and quicklime.. He died in
the year  aged  years.



DANIELE RICCIGREL. 
da VOLT ERRA.

 laft name, by: which he commonly was
called, was given him from the place of his
birth, Volcerra in Tufcany. He was disciple firft
to Antony de Verceil, and afterwards to Balthazar
of Siena: but in the end he applied himfelf wholly
to Michael Angelo' manner, who, on feveral occa-
tions, was his protector. His finelt pieces are at
Rome, in the church of the Trinity on the Mount.
He left Painting to follow fculpture, and made the
horfe in brafs which is in palace royale at Paris.
This horfe was intended for the ftatue of Henry II.
but Daniel had not time to finith it.His extraor-
dinary application to his bufiness, and his melan-
choly humour, haftened his death, which put an end
to his labours in the  year of his age, anno
 PRIMATICCIO
AS of  noble family in Bologna. His
friends perceiving he had  violent inclina-
tion to defign, permitted him to go to Mantua,
where he was fix years  difciple to Julio Romano.
He became fo skilful in that time, that he made
bartles in ftucco, and baffo relieve, better than any
of the young Painters of Mantua, who were Julio
Romano' pupils.
He


eminent        .
 affifted Julio Romano in executing his de-
Ligns, and Francis . fending to Rome for  man
that underftood pieces in ftucco, Primaticcio was
the perfon cholen for this service. The King put
fuch  confidence in him; that he fent him to Rome
in the year  to buy antiques. He brought
back with him one hundred and fourfcore ftarues,
with  great number of buftos. He had moulds
made by Giacomo Baroccio di Vignola; of the Hta-
tues of Venus, Laocoon; Commodus, the Tiber,
the Nile, the Cleopatra at Belvidere, and Trajan'
pillar, in order to have them caft in brass.
After Roffo' death he had the place of fuper-
intendant of the buildings given him, and in  little
time finifhed the gallery which his predeceffor had
begun. He brought to many statues of marble and
brats to Fontainbleau; that it feemed another Rome,
as well for the number of the antiques, as for his
own works in Painting and Rucco. Roger of Bo-
logna, Profpero Fontana, Giovanni Battifta, Bagna
cavallo, and Nicholas of Modena, were thofe he em-
ployed moft under him: The sKill and diligence of
the latter were very extraordinary.
Primaticeid was fo efteemed in France, that no-
thing of any confequence was done without him,
that had relation to Painting or building. He di-
rected the preparations for all feftivals, curnaments,
and mafquerades. He was made abbot of St Mar-
tins at Troyes, and lived to great, that he was re-
spected as  courtier, as well as  Painter. He and
Roffo taught the French  good gufto; for before
their time, what they had done in the arts was very
inconfiderable, and had fomething of the gothic in
it. Primaiccio died in  good old age, having
been favoured and careffed in four reigns.

PEL.


 

The .
 TIFALDE
Called otherwife
PELEGRINO da BOLOGNA,
HERE he was born. He was the fon of
an archifect of Milan, and had fuch  genius

for the fciences, that of himself he defigned feveral
things at Rome and Bologna, and became one of
the beft mafters of his time in the arts of Painting
and architecture, both civil and military. He firft
shewed his capacity at Rome, and acquired  repir
tation there but whatever fuccess his works had,
the workman was very unfortunate, either for that
he did not know what price to fet on his pieces, or
that he could never be contenred. He was fo cha-
grined at his ill fortune, that he would often be
moan it; and one day pope Gregory KIIl. going
out at the gate Angelies to take the air, and hap
pening to leave the common road, heard  com-
plaining voice, which feemed to come from behind
 buth; he followed it by little and little, till he
faw  man lying on the ground under  hedge. The
pope came up to him, and finding it was Pellegrino,
oo You fee, Lays
afked him why he complained fo;
 Pellegrino,  man in despair; Ilove my profef
ce fion,  fpare no pains to underfland it;  work
ce with affiduiry, and endeavour to finith my pieces
ce to much, that  am never fatisfied with what 
so have done; yer all my pains is to no purpofe, 
so am to little rewarded for it,  have fcarce where-
co withal to live. Not being able therefore to bear
so this hard hap,  wandered hither with  full refo-
co lution to ftrave myfelf rather than endure fo great
 any longer. The pope chid him feverely,
and having at length brought him to himself, pro-
mifed


eminent
PAIN  ER .
 him his affiftance in all things. And Paint-
ing not turning to account with him, his holiness
advifed him to apply himself to archifecture, in which
he had already thewn his skill, giving him affurances
he would employ him in his buildings. Pellegrino
followed his advice, and became  great architect,
 great engineer, and built feveral ftately palaces
which might have contented him, had he been more
out of love with the world than he was.
Returning into his own country, cardinal Borro-
meo fent for him to Pavia, where he built the palace
da Sapienzd, and was cholen by the citizens of Mi-
lan to be fuperintendant of the building they were
about to add to their cathedral church. From
thence Philip II. invired him into Spain, to direct
the Painting and architecture of the Efcurial. He
painted very much there, and fo pleafed the King,
that he gave him one hundred thouland crowns,
and honoured him with the title of marquits. Pel-
legrino, loaden with riches and honour, returned to
Milan, and died there in the beginning of the pon-
tificate of Clement VIIl. being about threefcore and
ten years old.
FRANCESCO SALYIATI
Florentine, was at firft  difciple of Andrea del
-  Sarto, in whofe houfe he became acquainted
with Vafari, who was alfo Andrea del Sarto' dif
ciple. They both of them left Andrea to place
themfelves with Baccio Bandinelli, where they learnt
more in two months, than they had done before in
two years. Francefco being grown  mafter, car-
& dinal Salviati rook him into his fervice, and it is on
that account that he had the name of Salviati given
him. His manner of defigning came very near
Raphaels, and he performed well in frefco, diftem-
per and oil. He went to Paris in the year  LI VE  of
and did feveral things for the cardinal of Lorrain,
who was not over well pleated with them, which
difgufted Salviati as much as the favour and reputa-
tion of Roffo, at whofe works he had, it feems,
railed plentifully, when fearing the confequences of
it, he returned to Italy, where having finished fe
veral pictures at Rome, Florence and Venice, his
reftless, (plenetic, inconflant humour threw him into
 diftemper, of which he died in the sgd year of
his age, anno   ORN at Agnolo in Vado, in the durchy of

A Urbin, was the fon of an ordinary Painter,
who knowing his own weakness, and preterring the
reputation of his fon to his own profit, at fourteen
years old, carried him to Rome, to learn of the beft
Painters. But he was ill recommended; for he
placed him with Giovanni Pietro Calabro, whofe
wife almoft flarved Taddeo, and by her coverouf-
nets, forced him to look out for another mafter.
However, he went to no other, contenting himfelf
with Hudying Raphaels works, and the antique
sculptures, which, added to his own genius, foon
rendered him  mafter of his art. He was eaty,
abounding, and graceful in every thing he did, and
tempered the vivacity of his wit by great prudence.
He never worked out of Iealy, living moft part of
his time in Rome and Capraiola, where he left
many things unfinished, being taken away in his
prime, the  year of his age, anno  His
brether Frederic perfected his pieces after his death.
GTOR.


eminent        .
 VASARE
DORN at Are in Tufcany; was at firft  dif-
ADciple of William of Marfeilles, who painted
upon glats, afterwards of Andrea del Sarto, and at
latt of Michael Angelo. One cannot fay of him as
of tome other Painters, that he was hurried on to
Painting by  violent inclination, for it is moft like-
ly that he made choice of that profeftion, through
good fenfe and reflection, which led him to it more
than his genius. When the troubles of Florence
where over, he returned into his own country, where
he found his father and mother dead of the plague,
and two brothers and three fifters left upon him,
whom he was forced to maintain by the profits of
his labour. He painted in frefco in the towns
about Florence; but fearing he should not get
enough by Painting to maintain his family, he quit-
ted his profeftion and turned gold (mith, which was
no more beneficial to him than his own art.
For this reafon he again applied himself to Paint-
ing, with an earneft defire to become  mafter. He
was indefatigably diligent in defigning the antique
tculptures, and fludying the beft pieces of the moft
noted mafters; and though he very much improved
his defign, by copying entirely Michael Angelos
chapel, yet he joined with Salviati, in defigning all
Raphaels and Balthazar da Siena' works. And
not thinking the day-time enough for him, he spent
 good part of the night in copying what he and
Salviati had defigned. He thought, after all this
pains and care, he was qualified to undertake any
thing, and to perform it with fuccels. He did not
mind colouring, havingno trueides of it; and though
he was an artful defigner, his works were never in
the reputation he expected they would be, which
proceeded from his not underftanding colours, or
L LI VES of
 the fofiness of the pencil. But his great
ufe of defigning made it very eaty to him, and by
this means his performances were very numerous.
He was  good archirect, and underftood ornaments
very well. The works which he finished at Flo-
rence, as well in Architecture as Painting, procured
him the favour of the houfe of Medicis, by which
he got money, and married off two of his fifters.
He was  very moral man, and had fuch polite qua-
lities, as acquired him the efteem of perfons of the
higheft rank. The cardinal of Medicis was his par-
ticular patron, and engaged him to write the lives
of the Painters, which he publifhed at Florence in
three volumes, about the year   work, in the
opinion of Hannibal Caro, written with great ex-
actnets and judgment. He is taxed with flattering
the mafters of his own country, the Florentine Pain-
ters. But be it as it will, Painting is indebted to
him for an eternal monument, in having tranfinitted
to pofterity the memory of to many fkilful men,
whole names would have been forgotten had he
not taken fuch pains to eternize them. Befides his
lives of the Painters, he publifhed reflections on his
own pictures, of which the chief are at Rome, Flo-
rence and Bologna. He died at Florence in the
year  being fixty four years old. His body
was carried to Are where he was buried in 
chapel adorned with archirecture, which he had
builr in his life-time.
FREDERICO  Sborn in the durchy of Urbin, in  village
called Agnolo in Vado. His parents car-
ried him to the jubilee at Rome, in the year  put him to his brother Taddeo, who was then
one of the moft famous Painters in Italy. Frede-
fico, not liking his brother'’ corrections, and finding
he


eminent   FN    .
 was lrong enough in his art to sland by himself,
fet up for  mafter Painter. They both did  great
deal of work at Capraiola, and Frederico finished the
pieces, which his brothes, who died in his thirty-fe-
venth year, had left imperfect. Pope Gregory KIlI.
employed him about his Paintings, in whofe service
having;  difference with fome of his holiness' offi-
cers, to be revenged on them, he drew the picture
of flander, engraved afterwards by Cornelius Cort,
wherein he reprefented all thofe that had offended
him, with affes ears. He expoted it publickly over
the door of St Luke' church, on St Lukes day,
and left Rome to avoid the popes wrath. He
worked in France for the cardinal of Lorrain, and
in the Efcurial for Philip  without giving content
to either the one or the other. He was more for-
runate in England, where he drew the picture of
queen Elizabeth, and did fome others pieces that
were very much commended. At laft, returning
into ltaly, and having worked some time at Venice,
Pope Gregory recalled and pardoned him. Soon
after, making his advantage of the pope' protection,
he fet up the Academy of Painting, for which his
holinets had given him  brief. He was chofen
Prince of the Painters, and out of love to his art,
was at the charge of building  houfe for them to
meet in. He went afterwards to Venice, to print
some books he had written on Painting. From
thence he paft on to Savoy, and in  journey to
Loretto, died at Ancona, at  years of age, anno

 da RHEG   the fon of  peafant, who put him to
look after his geefe; but he ran away from
his father, and went to Rome, where he followed
the motions of the extraordinary genius he had for
.  .  VE  of
Painting, and placed himfelf with Frederico Luc=
chero, under whofe difcipline he was fcarce  year
before he made such  wonderful progrets in his art,
that he was almoft equal to his mafter. He did fe-
veral fine things in the Vatican, at Santa Maria
Magiore, and other places of Rome.  He was fair
and handfome; and it is faid, that falling in love
with  young women, his paftion was fo violent, that
it killed him. He had  companion whofe name
was Paris, whofe affifted him in his works.
.IC HAR .
Native of La Breffo, was one of the Painters
£ whom Raphael employed under him in the
Vatican, and who was not much talked of for any
thing elfe. Having on  time made  picture for
the Florentines church, wherein he reprefented Pon-
fius Pilate thewing Jefus Chrift to the people, he
alked of Raphael, which of the heads he liked beft,
tuppofing he would have antwered that of Chrift;
but Raphael replied, it was one that was in the
hindmoft part of the picture; by which he meant,
that all his expreffions were not proper to the subject
he reprefented, though his heads were otherwife
good.
FREDERICO BAROCCI
ORN at Urbin, went to Rome in his youth,
Ad where he painted feveral things in frefco for
Pope Paul III, and then returned to Urbin, living
there the reft of his days. He was one of the moft
graceful, judicious and Ikilful Painters that ever
was. He drew  vaft number of portraits and
hiftory pieces, and his genius was particularly for
religious subjects. One may in his works perceive
 great inclination towards Corregios manner;
and though he defigned more correctly, his out-lines
are not of fo grand  gufto, nor fo natural as Cor-
regios.


eminent   IN    .
 He expreft the parts of the body  and defigned the feet of  child after the same
manner as he would have done thofe of  man. He
made his firft, drawings generally in paftello, and
with the fame stile that he drew his pictures.
He drew his Madonna' after  fifter of his, and
the infant Chriff after  child of hers. He erched
feveral of his pieces himself, and died at Urbin in
the year  at  years of age. Vanni was his
ditciple.
FRANCESCO VANNI
 Siens, was disciple, and not inferior to
 Barocci. He had an extraordinary talept for
religious fubjects, and died in the  year of his
 anno  T   . INN 
 called, by contraction, from Giofeppe  Ar
 pino,  caftle of that name in the Kingdom of
Naples, where he was born in the year  His
father, Mutio Polidoro, was to ordinary  Painter
that he had nothing to do but to paint ex votos
of the village for the country people. Giofeppino
went to Rome, where he learnt  light and agreeable
manner of defigning, which in practice degenerated
into fomething that neither bordered on the an-
tique, nor on refined nature. Having  great deal of
wit and genius, he became in favour with the popes
and cardinals, from whom he had bufiness enough.
But he had  warm competitor in Caravagio, whofe
manner was quite oppofite to his. His battles, in
the capitol, are the moft efteemed of all his pieces,
In his other pictures he is fuperficial, and has not
dived to the bottom of his art. He died in the year
 at fourfcore years of age. Moft of the Pain
ters of his time followed his manner, the reft imi-
fated Caravasios.

PA-


 .  VE 
.
 dela MARC.
 only named here, becaufe he made fuch  pro-
 grets in Painting in one year, that he is looked
upon as  prodigy. There are fome of his pic-
sures in the Carthufian church near Dioclefian'
Baths.
The example of this man may encourage thofe
who, though advanced in years, yer find they have
genius, right underftanding, and health enough to
run the race of Painting in  little time.
PIET ROT EST ,
Native of Sacca, was, from his youth, car-
  ried away by  violent inclination to defign.
The renown of the Roman Painters tempted him to
vifit Rome he went thither in  pilgrim' habit,
and not being well enough verted in the profeftion
he was defirous to follow, he lived miferable to the
laft degree, spending his time in defigning the ruins,
Hatues and pictures at Rome. Sandrart rells us, that
meeting him one day defigning the ruins about
Rome in  wretched condition, having fcarce where-
withal to cover his nakedness, he took pity of him,
carried him to his houfe, cloathed him, fed him,
and empleyed him to defign feveral things in the
gallery of Juftiniano; after which he recommended
him to other mafters, who fet him to work. He
was fuch  man-hater, and fo wild, that Sandrart
could hardly have any of his company. He had
defigned the antiques to often, that he had them by
heart; but his genius was to fiery and licentious,
that all the pains he took ferved him to little pur-
pofe, and the trouble he gave himfelf about his pic-
tures fucceeded as ill, as may be feen by the few
pieces that are left of his, by the little value that is
fot onthem through his bad colouring, and the hard
RCIs


eminent        .
 of his pencil. Indeed he was only commen-
dable for his deligns and prints, of which he en-
graved part himfelf; part was done by Cefare
Tefta, and the reft by other gravers. There is 
great deal of fancy, gaity and practice in them,
but little intelligence of the clare obicuro, little
reafon, and little juftnets. Being on the banks of
the Tiber defigning  prospect, the wind blew off
his hat into the river, and as he was endeavouring
to regain it, he accidentally fellin, and was drowned
about the year  RO BERETT IN 
 Cortona in Tufcany, was bred up in the
Lo houfe of Sachetti at Rome, and proved to be
one of the moft agreeable Painters that ever was.
His genius was fruitful, his thoughts full of flowers
and graces, and his execution eaty. His talent being
for grand compofitions, and his imagination lively,
he could not put that conftraint upon himfelf as to
finith  picture entirely; for which reafon, his little
pieces, when they are examined nearly, feem to
want very much of the merit of his great produc-
ions.
He was not correct in his defigns, exprestive in
the paftions, or regular in the folds of his drapery,
but every where  mannerift: yet there is gran-
deur, nobleness and grace in all his works; not that
grace which was the portion of Raphael and Cor-
regio, which touches the minds of men of fenfe to
the quick. His was  general grace that pleafed
every body, and that confifted rather in  habit of
making the airs of his heads always agreeable, than
in  fingular choice of expreffions furtable to each
subject; for, as  have faid, he did not care to look
back upon what he had done, nor to enter into 
detail of each thing in his pieces. He endeavoured
only


 . IV:. of
only to make them fine all together, and was highty
applauded for the magnificence of his works in the
churches and palaces of Rome and Florence: He
has given undoubted proofs of his capacity in the
new church of the fathers of the oratory at Rome,
in the palaces of Barberini, and Pamphilio, and in
other places.
There was nothing ill in his colouring, especially
his carnations, which would have been better had
they been more varied, and more fiudied. As. for
his local colours, he never went out of the Roman
Ichool, but in giving them  union among them-
felves, and that agreement which the Italians call
Sage The ornaments of his works were ad-
mirable, his landlkips of  good gufto, and he un-
derffood Painting in frefco better than any one
who went before him.
His temper was mild, his converfation agreeable,
and his manners, fincere. He was charitable, offi-
cious,  good friend, and poke well of every body.
He was to laborious, that the gout, with which he
was very much troubled, could not hinder his
Painting; but his fedentary life; and too much ap-
plication to his bufiness, increafed the diftemper fo
far, that it killed him in the both year of his age,
Anno  


 



eminent
PA IN
  .
 


THE


 
TH 
 
  £    Mid



 A  .   .   IV ,




 Venice, was difciple of Gentile Fabri-
 and competitor with that Dome-



  
 who was affaffinared by Andrea del
Fesian




 He is not fo famous by his
 as by the good education which
he gave to his two fons Genrile and
Criovanni Bellino, who were the founders of the
Venetian school. He died about the year  DE...  IV Venice, eldeft fon of Giacomo, of whom we
 have been (peaking, was the most skilful of
all the Venetian Painters, his cotemporaries. Gen-
tils


TBe LI VE 
 painted the hall of the great council, and did
some other pieces at Venice, moft part of them in
diftemper, for Painting in oil was not then much in
ufe. Mahomet II. emperor of the Turks, having
seen one of his pictures, mightily admired it, and
defired to entertain the author in his service. He
wrote to the fenate for him, and they accordingly
fent him to Conftantinople, where Gentile was very
well received by the Grand Signior. He painted
feveral things for his highnets, which were extremely
liked, especially his portraits; and as the Turks
have  great veneration for St John Baptift, Gen-
tile painted the decollation, and shewed it to the
emperor to have his approbation of it: but the
grand fignior found fault that the skin of the neck,
which was feparated from the body, was too high,
and to convince him that his criticifin was juft, he
ordered  flave to be brought to him, and com-
manded his head to be immediately struck off in
the prefence of Bellino, that he might fee, that pre-
fently after the head is feparated from the body,
the skin of the neck fhrinks back. The Painter
was to frighted at this demonftration, that he could
not beat reft while he was at Conftantinople; where-
fore inventing fome excufe, he defired leave to re-
turn home, which the emperor granted. The Grand
Signior made him feveral noble prefents, put  gold
chain about his neck, wrote recommendatory let-
ters to the fenate in his favour, and on this account
he had the order of St Mark conferred on him, with
 confiderable penfion for life. He died at four-
fcore years of age, anno  BELL INO.
& Entiles brother and disciple, laid the foun-
& dation of the Venetian fchool by the use of
oil, and the care he took to paint every thing after
nature.


eminent        .
 There are feveral of his pieces to be feen
at Venice : his laft work was  bacchanal for
Alphonfo . duke of Ferrara; but dying before he
had finished it, Titian did it for him, and added 
fine landskip to it. As skilfal as this his disciple
was, he had fuch  respect for his mafter, that te
give him all the glory of the picture, he wrote on
it thefe words: TOHANNES BELL INUS
MCCCCC XIV.
Giorgione was his difciple at the fame time with
Titian. Bellino died in the year  aged  His and his brother' portraits are in the
King' cabinet.
Refections on the Works of  IOVA NNI
BEL.   N and Gentile Bellino had an ill
gufto in defigning, and painted very drity;
but Giovanni having learnt the secret of Painting in
oil, managed his pencil with more foftnels, and though
there appears  great deal of driness in his produc-
tions, yet he did better than his predeceffors of the
profeffion, and deferved to be diftinguished from
them, not only becaufe he tranfmitted freely to the
Pginters that fucceeded him, the ufe of oil in
Painting, but alfo becaufe he was the firft who en-
deavoured to join union to the vivacity of colours,
the latter being till his time the greateft part of the
merit of the Venetian Painters; but in Giovanni'

we fee at once  propriety of colours, and the be-
ginning of an harmony, which was enough to rouze
the talent of Giorgione, fo famous for his colour-
ing.
The wonderful progress of this disciple, as well
as Titian, opened even the eyes of their mafter:
for Bellino' manner, in his firtt pieces, was too
dry.


The LI VES.
 and that of his latter pictures is good enough;
both for defign and colouring, for which they are
admitted into the cabinets of the curious; and there
are fome at Vienna, among the emperor' collec-
tions, which have fomething of the boldnels of
Giorgione' lights and colouring.
The gufto of Bellino' defigns is  little gothic:
his attitudes are not well cholen; but the airs of his
heads are noble.
There are no lively expreftions in his pieces, and
the fubjects of which he treated, being, for the
molt part Madonna', gave him no occafion for
them. However, he did his utmoft to copy nature
exactly, and finifhed his pictures fo fervilely, that
he had not time to apply himfelf to give them 
great character.
Tbe DO   Os
 Ferrara, made themfelves famous by the

good gufto of their colouring, and especially
by their landlkips, which are very fine. Alphonfo,
duke of Ferrara, employed them very much, and
honoured them with his favour. They were not fo
in the court of Francefco Maria; duke of
hapi
Urbin, who fet them to work in frefco in the new
palace, which the architect Genga had built for
him; but that prince not being fatisfied with their
Painting, deftroyed it. It is true it deferved the
leaft commendation of all their productions, what
ever care they took about it; fo certain it is, that
let  man be at never to much pains in the execu-
tion of his work, he shall not fucceed, if the firtt
conception of it was bad. They kept up their re-
putation, notwithflanding this difgrace, and pro-
duced feveral beautiful pieces. The elder of them
being grown old, and his eyes bad, was not fit for
bufinels, wherefore the duke of Ferrara allowed him
        .
 pention for his fubfiftance. He died at  great
age; and his younger brother, whole name was Bar=
tifta, furviving him, performed many good pieces
after the death of his elder brother.
GTOR  TONE
 called by reafon of his courage and noble af=
 pect, was born at Caftel-Franco, in Trevifano,
 province in the flate of Venice, annd  and
though he was but of indifferent parentage, yet he
had  great foul. He was gallant, loved mufic,
had an agreeable voice, and played well on feveral
inftruments. At firft he applied himfelf induftris
oufly to defign the works of Leonardoda Vinci, and
then placed himfelf with Giovanni Bellino to learn
to paint. But his genius having formed  guito
superior to that of his mafter Giovanni, he culri-
vated it by the fight and ftudy of nature; whom
he afterwards faithfully imitated in all his produc-
tions. Titian was extremely pleafed with his bold
and terrible gufto, and intending to make his ad-
vantage of it, frequently vifited him, under pre-
tence of keeping up the friendship they had con-
tracted at their mafter Bellinos. But Giorgione be
ing jealous of the new manner he had found out;
contrived an excufe to forbid Titian his houfe as
handfomely as he could; upon which Titian became
his rival in his art, and was to careful to copy the
life exactly, that by his care and reflections he ex-
celled Giorgione, in difcovering the delicacies of
nature: however, Giorgione was ftill in reputation
for  gufto to which no body had hitherto arrived.
The moft part of his performances are at Venice;
and having painted very much in frefco, and not
living long enough to do many other pictures, his
cabinet pieces are extremely rare. He died in the
year  when he was (carce  years of age.

Reffec-


 LIV  
 on the works of GFORGFONE
 being but thirty two years
 old when he died, and having done few grand
compofitions, one cannot well judge of the great-
ness of his genius. The beft of his performances is
at Venice, on the front of the houfe wherein the
German merchanes have their meetings, on that
fide which looks tewards the grand canal. He did
this piece of Painting in competition with Titian,
who painted another fide of that building: but both
of thefe two pieces being almoft entirely ruined by
age, it is difficult to make  right judgement of
them, or of Gforgione' talent by that performance,
to we muft reft fatisfied with  few cafel-pieces, and
fome portraits that he drew. Every man painting
himfelf in what Kind of picture foever he employs
his pencil about, we may perceive by thofe of Gior-
zione, that he had  facility of understanding, and
 vivacity of imagination.
His gufto of defign is delicate, and has fomething
in it like the Roman fchool, though it is not fo
much exprefted as is neceffary for the perfection of
his art, he always being more careful to give 
roundnels to his figures, than to make them correct.
His gufto was grand, picquant, and his hand
eaty. He was the firft who found out the admi
rable effects of flrong lights and fhadows, and made
ufe of bold colours; and it is  matter of wonder to
confider how, all of  fudden, he foared from the low
manner of Bellino' colouring, to the fupreme
height to which he raifed colours in his art, by join-
ing an extreme force with an extreme fweetnels.
He underffood the claro obfcuro very well, and
the harmony of the rout enfemble, or the whole-to-
gether of  picture. For his carnations he ufed four
capital colours only, the judicious mixture of which
made


emment        .
 all the differences of ages and fexes in his
pieces. But in thefe four colours we ought not to
comprehend either the white, which ferves inftead
of light, nor the black, which is the privation of it.
It appears by his works, that the principles of the
art which he had found out, were fimple; that he
was perfect mafter of them; and that his greateft
artifice was to thew the value of things by compa-
Tifon.
The guft of his landskips is exquifite, both for
the colours and the oppofitions; and befides giving
 force to his colours unknown before his time, he
had  way to keep them freth, especially his greens.
Titian obferving to what degree of elevation Gior-
gione had carried his art, thought he had paffed
beyond the bounds of truth, and though he imitated,
in fome things, the boldness of his colouring, yet,
as one may fay, he tamed the fierceness of his co-
lours, which were too favage. He tempered them
by the variety of tints, to the end that he might
render his objects: the more natural, and the more
palpable: but notwithftanding all his efforts to excel
his rival, Giorgione Htill maintained his post, of
which no body has hitherto been able to dispoffees
him; and it is certain, that if Titian has made feve-
ral Painters good colourifts, Giorgione firft shewed
them the way to be fo.
 IT  ANO
EC EL. .  Sborn at Cadore, in Friuli,  province in
the ftare of Venice, anno  He was of
noble extraction, being defcended from the ancient
family of the Vecelli. At about ten years old his
parents fent him to one of his uncles that lived at
Venice, who taking notice of his inclination to Paint-
ing, put him to Giovanni Bellino. He ftudied
moftly after nature, whom he copied fervilely,
With
  .  VE 
of
without adding to her, or taking from her: but in
the year rgo obferving the great effect of Giorgi-
one' works, he followed his manner to far, that
without making lines, he imitated the living bequ-
ties of nature, whom he looked on with other eyes
than before, and ftudied her with extraordinary ap-
plication: yet this did not hinder his defigning
carefully at other times, by which he alfo became
an able deligner.
Giorgione perceiving what progress Titian had
made in his profeffion, by following his manner,
broke off all correspondence with him, and ever
after they were profeffed rivals: their jealouty of
each other lafted till death took off Giorgione at
thirty two years of age, and left the stage clear to
Titian. In his eight and twentieth year he publiff-
ed his print of the Triumph of Faith in wood;
wherein are reprefented the patriarchs, the prophets,
the apoftles, the evangelifts and martyrs. This
piece gave vall hopes of him, and it was faid upon
it, that if he had leen the antiquities he would have
furpaffed Raphael and Michael Angelo.
He painted  portico at Vicenza in frefco, repre-
fenting the hiftory of Solomon. He painted alfo
the palace of Grimani at Venice, and some pallages
of the ffory of St Anthony at Padus. The three
bacchanals, which are in the cultody of cardinal Al-
dobrandino, were drawn for the duke of Ferrara.
She of the three bacchanals, that has  naked wo-
man alleep near her on the fore-part of the picture,
was begun by Giovanni Bellino. When Titian
painted thefe three bacchanals, his miftrets Violenta
served him for  model. Befides this, he drew the
Portrairs of the duke Alphonfo, and his durchets,
which were graved by Giles Sadeler.
In the year  cardinal Farnefe fent for him
to Rome, to draw the pope' picture. He made
some other pictures and pieces of Painting, which
Were


eminent        .
 admired by Michael Angelo, and Vafari, who
lays he pitied the Venetian Painters, in that they
minded defigning no more than they did. Tirian
performed  great number of pieces, both public
and private, as well in oil as in frefco; befides an in-
numerable quantity of portraits. He drew the em-
peror Charles Vs picture three times; and that
monarch ufed to fay on this occafion, of that he had
 been made immortal by the hands of Ti-
 reward him, he knighted him, cre-
ated him  count palatine, and affigned him  con-
fiderable penfion. Henry III. coming from Poland
to France, couldnot go through Venice, without vi-
fiting Titian; and all the poets of his time fung
his praifes. His eafel-pieces are fcattered up and
down throughout Enrope. The fineft of them are
at Venice, in France and Spain. There never was
 Painter who lived fo long as Titian, nor to eafily
and happily, excepting only his jealouty of Porde-
hone, which neverthelefs turned to his advantage.
He was univerfally beloved and efteemed; and, full
of years, honours and wealth, he died at laft of the
plague, anno  being fourfcore and nineteen
years of agc.
He had  great many difciples; the chief of them
were his brother Francefco Vecelli, his fon Horatio
Vecelli, Tintoret, and other Venetians; befides
whom he had three Flemish difciples, that he valu-
ed, viz. John Calcar, Diteric Barent, and Lambert
Luftrus, who all died young.
Reflections on the works of TI IA .
Hough Titian' genius was not brilliant and
 lofty, it was, however, fruitfulenough to treat
of great subjects of all Kinds. There never was 
more univerial Painter, nor one who Knew better
how to give each object its true character. He was
    VE 
 up in the school of Giovanni Bellino, where his
education, his frequenting Giorgione' company,
his refolure fiudy of nature for ten years together;
and above all, the folidity of his underftanding and
reflections, difcovered to him the myfteries of his
art, and made him penetrate farther than any other
Painter into the effence of Painting. If Gieorgione
thewed him the end that he ought to aim at, he laid
the way to it on  folid bafis, wherein all that have
followed him have acquired efteem, and are indebt-
ed to him for their fcience and reputation. Had
there never been  Titian, there had never been 
Balfan,  Tintoret,  Paolo Veronefe, nor abundance
of Painters, who have given glorious marks of their
capacity, in all parts of chriftendom.
Vet, though Titian was very faithful in his imita-
tion of nature, he wanted fidelity in his reprefenta-
tions of hiffory; having hardly done any thing of
that Kind, wherein he has not committed some fault
or other.
There is not, it is true, much fire in his dispofi-
tions, yet they are well filled and very regular. He
was very exact in giving thofe. attitudes to his fi-
gures, which might thew the moft beautiful parts of
the body.
He was to careful to have the whole-together of
his pieces judicioutly concerted, that he often re-
peared them, to fave himfelf the trouble of think-
ing again. Thus there are feveral Magdalens of his,
feveral Venus and Adonis', wherein he has only
changed the Ground, to have it believed that they
were all originals. We may fuppofe that he was
helped fometimes by his difciples, elpecially the three
Flamands, who were excellent Painters, and of
whom Diteric Barent was his favourite. Afterthefe
difciples had done their beft to make their copies
like the orignials, and their mafter had touched
them over again with freth views, why should not
they


eminent        .
 be valued as much as if they had been all of
Tirian' hand? and why are not the copies as efti-
mable as the originals ? Titian formed his guft of
defigning after nature. He did, as Polyclerus of
old, fearch after what was fine in her; and he fuc-
ceeded in women and children. He defigned theim
with  delicate gufto. He imprinted on them  no-
ble air, accompanied with  certain pleating negli-
gence of the head-dreffes, the draperies and orna-
ments of habits, that are wholly peculiar to him.
He was not fo happy in the figures of men, which
he did not always defign with correctnets or elegance.
However, in this he did like Michael Angelo. He
propofed in his guft of defigning them, to imitate
nature in her greateft vigour, and made the mufcle-
ing flrong, to give the greater character to his
figures. The difference between him and Michael
Angelo, is, the latter was more profound in his de-
figns, and mingled  fenfible expresfion of the muf-
cles, with  guft of the antique; whereas Titian neg-
lected the anrique, and in his works rather increaf-
ed than diminithed the tendernels of nature, whom
he only imitated.
There is no exaggeration in his attitudes; they
are fimple and natural; and in his heads he feems
to bufy himself rather in  faithful imitation of ex-
terior nature, if  may be allowed the phrafe, than
in  lively expreftion of the paftions.
His draperies are fometimes mean, and favour of
 little gufto; and if he has imitated the Htufts per-
fectly, he has often difpoted of them ill. The folds
seem rather to fall by chance, than to be fet by
 good order and  good principle of art. All the
Painters allow, that none of their profeftion ever
came up to Titian for landlkips, his figures are
compofed of few objects, but thofe are admirably
well chofen, the forms of his trees are varied, their
touches light, mellow, and without manner. But
he
  .IVE  of
he carefully obferves in all his landlkips,; to thew
tome extraordinary effect of nature, and moves one
by its fenfiblenets, fingularity and truth. His co-
louring in all parts of it is wonderful; and though he
is not quite fo bold in it as Giorgione, he is more
exact and more delicate. He was very faithful in
his local colours, and placed them always fo, as to
raife the merit of one object, by comparing it with
another; and thus he, in fome meafure, by the
force of his art, fupplied the defect of colours,
which of themfelves cannot anfwer to all the effects
of nature. The truth that is to be found in his lo
cal colours is to great, that they leave no idea of the
colours which are on the pallet, and when we look
on his pieces, we ought not to fay his carnations
are made of fuch and fuch colours, but rather that
they are really ffeth, and that his draperies are the
real Htuff: fo nicely does every thing maintain its
character, and not one of the colours in the compo-
fition of them all is to be diftinguithed from the
other.
We cannot deny but that Titian underftood the
claro obfcuro, and when he did not thew it by
groups of light and shadows, he did it fufficiently
by the nature of the colours of his draperies, and the
diftribution of his objects, whofe natural colour al-
ays agreed with the place where it was laid, whe-
ther forward or backward, or wherever he thought
it molt advantageous to place it.
His oppofitions are at once bold and fwect, and
he learnt of nature the harmony of the colours, ra-
ther than from the participation of the claro and
the brown, as Paolo Veronefe did.
He finithed his piecesextremely, and had no very
particular manner in the managing of his pencil, be-
caufe his ffudies, and the care he took to temper one
colour by another, took away the appearance of 
free hand, though his hand was really free. It is cer=
tain


    :. . .
cain the fenfible marks of that freedom have their
merit; they are gay and pleafant to the fight, when
they are the refult of  refined habit, and  warm
imagination. But there are in Titian' works fuch
lively touches; fo agreeable to the character of the
objects, that they flatter the rafte of the true critics
much more than the fentible strokes of  bold hand.
Titian had in his time four manners; the firft
that of Giovanni Bellino, his mafter; the second
that of Giorgione, his competitor;  third, which
was very much ftudied, and was properly his own;
and  fourth which degenerated into  habit, and was
always folid. His firft manner was  little dry, his
second very bold, as is to be feen by his picture of
Se Mark, which is at Venice in the veftry of the
La Salute; by that of the five Saints in St Nicho-
las' church, and by others. His third manner con-
fifted in  juft and beautiful imitation of nature,
and was very much laboured by his exactnets in
touching his pieces over again here and there, and
fometimes with virgin tints, in the lights, and
fometimes with glazing in the fhadows. Hismanner,
on account of thefe things, as trival as they are,
feemed the less free, but it was the more ftrong, and
the more finished.
The fourth was  free manner, which he prac
cifed towards the latter part of his life; either not
being able to fatigue himfelf fo much as he could
before, or believing he knew  way how to (pare
himself the trouble, and do as well without it. Of
this laft manner are his pictures of the Annuncia-
tion, and the Transfiguration, which are at San Sal
vador; the St James of San Lio, the St Laurence
at the Jefuits church, the St Jerome of Santa Ma-
Tia Nova, the Pentecoft of La Salute, and feveral
others. There art fifty pictures to be feen in public
at Venice, in which Titian has thewn all the man-
ners  have (poken of,
To


 .  VES of
To conclude, if the Painters of the Roman fchool
furpaffed Titian in vivacity of genius, in grand com-
pofitions, and in  gufto of defign, :no body will
difpute with him the excellence of colourings and
he has been always in that part of Painting  guide
 all true Painters.
FRANC    
VECELL. ,
 TITLANS Brotber
  at firtt  foldier in the Italian wars, but


peace being reftored to Italy, he went to his
brother Titian at Venice, where, applying himfelf
to Painting, he became to great  mafter of defign,
that Tician grew jealous of him, and fearing he
might in time eclipfe his reputation, he fet him
againtt his profeffiohn, and put him upon taking up
another. He fell to making of ebony cabinets,
adorned with figures and architecture, which, how-
ever, did not hinder his Painting  portrait now
and then for  friend. His firft pictures, and thofe
which alarmed his brother Titian, are of Giorgi-
one' gufto, and pats for his, even with feveral men
of fenfe.
HORATIO VECELLL
ITLANs Jon, painted portraits after his fa-
 ther' manner. He did very little, being
more taken up with Chymiftry than Painting. He
died of the plague in the flower of his age, and in
the same year with his father, anno  MO RO BU ST 
 AL   
 INT . ET TO.
 Ecaute  dyer' fon. The quicknets of his wit
Dd was vitible in his youth, by his performances
in Painung and Biutic; but Paincing being what he
Cook


        .
cook moft delight in, he refolved to apply himfelf
wholly to it. Michael ngelo was his guide for
delign, and he learnt colouring of Titian. He
did not lofe his time whilft he was with his mafter,
for he penetrated fo far into Titian' principles,
that he raifed his jealouty. His ditciple perceived
it, and left him. He got  particular manner by
his continual exercife in his profeftion, which had
very much of Michael Angelo' guft of defigning,
and Titian' way of colouring. Tintoretto conti-
nuing, with  great deal of warmth and applica-
tion, the ftudy and exercife of Painting, became as
it were  prodigy in his art, as well for his extraor-
dinary thoughts, as for his good tafe, and for dif
patch in his bufiness. He did his pieces to fatt,
and folicited work to much, that there was little for
any one elfeto do. He worked very cheap, taking
what was given him for pictures, without making
words about the price. By this means Venice was
filled with his productions; and as there are some
among them, which muft needs be in fuch  num-
ber, that are but indifferent, there are alfo others
that are excellent. His pieces are finished or unfi-
nithed, according to the price that he had for them.
The fine crucifix of his, which is in the chamber of
the school of St Roque, was made on this occafion:
The brotherhood of St Roque being willing to
have  crucifix of the beft mafter' hand, Giofeppe
Salviati, Frederico Qucchero, Paolo Veronefe, and
Tintoretto, were each to give them  defign in con-
currence.  day was appointed by the brother.
hood for receiving their defigns; but Tintoretto,
inttead of  defign brought the picture quite done,
and very frankly hung it up in the place where it
was to hang. It was to no purpofe for the other
Painters to complain of this, or to fay they were
not required to bring  picture, but  defign. The
picture was in its place, and there was no more for
them


The . VE. of
 to do but to be fatisfied with it. The bro-
therhood of St Roque were willing to have  piece
of another manner than that of Tintoretto', and
ce That if he did not take it down
fold him,
so they would never pay him for it. Very well, re-
 plied Tintoretto, then  prefent it to you; to the
picture remains there to this day.. It is  wonder
that Tintoret, who worked fo hard, should live fo
long as fourfcore and two years, for he was of that
age when he died, anno  The diftemper which
at laft carried him to his grave, was  pain in his
ftomach, occafioned by his over-great application to
his bufinefs. He was buried in the church of Ma-
donng del Horto ar Venice.
Reflections on the works of TINTORETTO.
ONE of the Venetian Painters can be com=
pared to Tintoretto, for fruitfulness and fa-
 of genius. He had penetration enough to
comprehend all Titian' principles, which he prac-
fifed induftrioutly, but had too much fire to do it
exactly. from the inequality of his mind came the
incquality of his productions; upon which Ilannibal
Carrach writing to his brother Lodovico at Venice,
fays of Tintoret, that he is fometimes equal to Ti-
fian, and at other times inferior even to himfelf.
Out of love to his profeftion, he ftudied every
thing that could help to make him  mafter of it.
His carefulness to defign after the beft things, and
particularly Michael Angelo' works, taught him 
good gufto of defigning, but through the vivacity
of his imagination, he is often incorrect. His atri-
tudes are almoft all contrafted to excels, and fome-
times extravagant, thofe of his women excepted,
whofe attitudes he always painted graceful.
In the difpofition of his figures, he rather minded
to give motion to every thing, than to follow pature
and


eminent    NT   .
 verifimility, which he on certain occafions prac
sifed with fuccess. His subjects are for the moft part
well enough characterized. His heads are defigned
with  great gufto, but his expreffions are feldom
fine and piquant.
He underftood the neceffity of the claro obfcure,
which he ufually performed by
reat gleams of lights
and fhadows, that difentangled themfelves by op-
pofing one another; the caufe of which is fuppofed
to be out of the picture. This is  great help in
grand compofitions, provided the tranfition of the
oppofites are managed with underftanding, and their
extremities are sharp.
His local colours are good, and his carnations,
in his beft pieces, come up very near to Titian' in
my opinion, they are of  better character than
thofe of Paolo Veronefe,  mean, more true and
more Languine.
He drew abundance of pictures of different merit,
according to the time he spent about them, or the
money he received for them. The beft of them do
not fall very thoft of Tirians. His penciling is
very firm and very vigorous, his work eaty, and
his rouches lively. In  word, Tintoretto is  par-
tern for thofe young Painters, who would have 
good guft of colouring
,and an expeditious manner.
MAR IA.  INT OR ET  .
TINTORET' Daughter,
AS taught to paint by her father, and drew
 great number of portraits, both of men
and women. She delighted in mufick, and played
well on feveral inftruments. Her father married
her to  German; yet he loved her fo tenderly, that
he would not let her leave his houfe, but had the
affliction to lofe her in the thirtieth year of her age,
when the died, anno       of
 CAGLIARI VERONESE,
AS born at Verona in  Gabriel Cagli-
aris  fculptor, was his father, and Anto-
nie Badile his uncle, his mafter, whofe manner was
not bad. He drew his firft pieces at Mantua, and
some other cities of ltaly, but, meeting with more
employment at Venice, he fettled there.
He ftudied and imitated nature, very much, and
did what he could to regard her with the eyes of

Titian.

As he knew where to have patterns for his carna=
sions when he wanted them, to he had ftufts of dif-
ferent forts which he made ufe of opn occafion. Moft
of his public pieces were painted in concurrence with
Tintoret, and, the erities were divided in their
opinion of the excellence of thefe two mafters pro-
ductions: however, it was always allowed, that
there was more force in Tintorettess and more
grace and magnificence in Paolo Veronefe'. His
pictures are to be feen all over Europe, there being
 valt number of them.
There is fcarce  church in Venice which has not
tome piece or other of his. But the main proofs of
his capacity are in St Mark' palace; at St George',
and at St Sebaltian'.
The fenate fending Geronimo Grimani, procura-
for of St Mark, to Rome, to be their embaffador
in his holiness' court, Paolo waited on him thither,
but did not stay long there, having left feveral pic-
tures at Venice unfinithed.
He was an honeft, pious, civil, friendly man;
faithful to his word, and careful in the education of
his children; magnificent in his mien, and his dress;
and though he had got  great deal of money, his only
ambition was to be mafter of his art. Titian loved
and efteemed him very much. Philip II. King of
Spain,


        .
Spain, fent for him to paint the Escurial, but Paolo
excuted himfelf on account of his employment in
the palace of St Mark, and Frederico Qucchero was
fent to Spain in his place.
He had  great ides of his profeffion; he ufed to
fay it was  gife from heaven; that to judge of it
well,  man ought to underftand abundance of
things; that no Painter would ever do any thing
perfectly, if he had not nature prefent before him;
that none but mafter' pictures should be placed in
churches, becaufe admiration only excites devotion;
and that the fovereign quality of  true Painter is
probity and integrity of manners. He died of 
fever at  years of age, anno  His tomb and
Statue in brats are in the church of St Sebaftian.
Reflections on the works of      RON   .
ET  Painter' genius be never fo fine, and his
ad vein never to abounding; let him execute his
thoughts with never to much facility, if he does not
ferioully confider the subject he is to treat of, and
warm his fancy by reading good authors, he will
often produce trivial things, and fometimes even
such as are impertinent. Paolo Veronefe is  lively
inftance of this affertion: he had  marvellous talent,
he worked eafily, and his genius was fufficient to
have produced rare things, if it had been seconded
by care. He did an infinity of pieces, and according
to the places or perfons for which he worked, he
the more or the less ftudied his compofitions. St
Mark' palace at Venice, the high altars of the prin-
cipal churches, and fome noblemens houfes, pre-
ferve ftill what he did that was moft fine. But for
the altars of the common churches, and the pieces
he did for privace perfons who were fond of having
tomething of his in their houfes, inftead of being
careful


TBe   VE .
 to maintain his reputation, by taking the ne=
cellary pains about them, one would think he mind-
ed only to get them out of his hands as foon as pof
fible; by which means, his inventions are fomerimes
flat, and fometimes ingenious.
He had  particular talent for grand compofi=
tions. He performed them agreeably, and gave
them fpirit, truth and motion: whatever his ima-
gination furnifhed him with that was grand, he
brought it into his performances, as alfo every
thing he could think of furprizing, new and extra-
ordinary. in short, he was more ftudious to adorn
the feene of his picture, than to render it agreeable
to times, cuftoms and places. He often introduced
architecture, which was painted by his brother Be-
nedetto; and the magnificence of thefe buildings
gave  grandeur to his works,
He does not thew any great incelligence of the
claro obicuro in his difpositions. He did not un-
derfland it as  principle of his art, and fucceeded
well or ill in it, according to the different motions
of his genius. The fame thing might be faid of
his attitudes, which are, for the moft part, ill
cholen.
Nevertheless there is  great deal of fire and ta-
mult in his grand compofitions; but to examine
them nearly we shall find little delicacy in his ex-
preffions, either of the subject in general, or of the
paftions in particular, and it is rare to fee any thing
very moving in his productions. He had the com
mon fault of all the Venetian Painters, who walted
their time and application in imitating the exterior
part of nature. His draperies are all modern, and
according to the fathions in vogue in his time, or
elfe according to the modes he faw in the caftern
People, there being great numbers of them always at
Venice, of whom he made ufe for the airs of fome
of his heads, as well as for the dreffes. His drape-
Ties


eminent   IN    .
 are generally of different forts of ftuffs, and the
folds large and regular, and indeed, they are  good
part of the beauty of Paolo Veronefe' pictures. He
was to careful to imitate the ffuffs from the natural
cloch, filk or linen, that he acquired fuch  habi-
cude in his draperies, as would make one believe he
drew all of them after the real stuffs.
Though he liked Parmegiano' defigning, and en-
deavoured to fall into the fame manner, his own is
of an ill gufto, excepting that of his heads only,
whofe airs are fometimes great, noble and graceful.
His figures look well enough together under their
cloaths, but the our-lines of the naked have litrle
gufto or correctnels, especially thofe of the feet;
yet he feems to be careful to defign women ele-
gantly, according to his idea of beautiful nature, for
as to the antique he never Knew any thing of it.
 never faw any confiderable lankskips of Paolo
Veronefe. He has painted the heavens in fome of
his grand compoficions, and has done them admira-
bly well, but his diftances, and his earth, have an
air of diftemper.
He did not at all comprehend the art of the claro
obicuro, and if it is fometimes to be found in his
pictures, it is the happy effect of his genius, and
not the product of any principle; but as for the local
colours he underftood them well, and made them
valuable by the comparifon of one object with ano-
ther. Though his inclination led him to  loofe and
lightfom manner, though he often made ufe of trong
and dark colours, and his carnations are natural,
they are, however, neither to freth as Tirian', nor
to vigorous and languine as Tincoretto', and it
leems to me that  great many of them have 
incture of the lead: yet, notwithflanding all this,
there is in general  harmony in his colouring,
chieffy in his draperies, which are brilliant, diverfi-
tied, and magnificent. The harmony of his colours

Pro-



TBe .  VES of
 commonly from glazing and broken co.
lours which he made ufe of, and which imparting
their mutual influence one to the other; infallibly
produces union; yer there are fome pictures which
are faid to be his, wherein the colours are rough
and unharmonious, but  will not warrant that all the
pieces which are attribured to Paolo Veronefe are
really his, for he had  brother and  fon who imi-
tated his Hile.
We fee every where in his works  great capacity.
His execution is firm, his pencilling light, and his
reputation, in feveral parts of his art, fufficient to
maintain his rank among the firft order of Painters.
 muft not omit to relate here, that his picture of
the marriage at Cana, in the church of St Giorgio
Maggiore at Venice, is to be diftinguithed from his
other works, for it is not only the triumph of Paolo
Veronefe, but it wants very little of being the tri-
umph of Painting itfelf.
BENEDETTO CAGLIARE
 Painter and Sculpior,
 AS Paolo Veronefe' brother, and helped him
confiderably in his works, for he was very
laborious. His stile in painting was like his bro-
thers, and being not ambitious of fame, his pro-
ductions are confounded with Paolo'. He died at
threefcere years old, anno  and GABRIELA CAGLLARI

LRE Paolo Veronefe' fons- the elder had
 very fine genius for Painting, and at  of age had done fome rare pieces. It  he would have excelled his father had he
lived, but being of  render conftitution, and ap-
plying himfelf to his profeftion with too much in
rentuess, he contracted an impottume in his breaft,
and died of it in his  year, anno  His
brother


eminent        .
 Gabriel exercifed himfelf in Painting, but
having no extraordinary talent, he quitted the pro-
feffion of  Painter, and turned merchant. How-
ever, in the intervals of his bufinels, he made 
confiderable number of portraits. He died of the
plague, anno  aged  years.
GIOVANNI ANTONIO REGILLO
da PORDENONE,
  born at Pordenone in Friuli,  miles
from Udine. He was defcended from the
ancient family of the Sacchi, and his true name was
Licinio; but the emperor having knighted him, he
took the opportunity to change his name out of
harred to one of his brothers, who would have affaf-
finated him, for which reafon he called himfelf Re-
gillo. His love of Painring was his only mafter,
and his genius, together with his fludying the works
of Giorgione, his friend and comperitor, guided
him to that perfection in his art to which he arrived.
After he had learnt as much as he could from Gior-
giones works, he, like him, fet himself to imitate
the beautiful effects of nature; which, joined to the
force of his genius, and his amibition to excel in his
profeffion, rendered him one of the moft celebrated
Painters in the world.
He difputed the fuperiority with Titian, and their
jcalouty of each other was to great, that Pordenone
fearing to be infulted by his rival, was always upon
his guard, and when he painted the cloyfter of St
Stephen in Venice, he worked with  fword by his
fide, and  buckler tied about him, as was the
fathion of the bravo' in his time. He had  fruir-
ful vein,  good guft of defigning, and  manner
of colouring not far inferior to Titians. He pro-
duced feveral pieces in frefco. He worked with
facility, and gave  great force to his productions.
  . VE  of
His principal public pieces are at Venice, at Udine,
Mantua, Vicenza, Genoa, and Friuli. He was fent
for to Ferrara by duke Hercules II. to finith fome
defigns for tapeftry, which he had begun at Venice,
but he was fcarce arrived at that city, before he fell
ill and died, leaving this work unfinished, which
was the travels of Dlyffes. He was in his g year
when he departed this life : fome lay he was poifon-
ed. The duke of Ferrara was at the charge of his
Tuneral, which was pompous and magnificent. He
had  nephew of his own name, Pordenone, who
was his difciple, and another disciple, Pomponio
Amalieo, who married his daughter.
CIROL  Mo MUT IANO,
Native of Brefcia in Lombardy, ftudied some
£ time under the difciple of Romanani, whom
he left to apply himfelf to Titian' manner, but en
deavouring to frengthen his knowledge of defign,
he went to Rome, and worked with Taddeo Tuc-
chero. He there defigned much after the antique,
and good pictures, and made  confiderable num-
ber of portraits. He finithed the defigns of the baffo
relievos of Trajan' column, which Julio Romano
began. He had them graved, and Ciaconius affifted
him in it. Pope Gregory Kill. employed him,
and it was out of favour to him, that his holiness
founded the academy of St Luke at Rome, which
was confirmed by  brief of pope Sixtus 
Though Muriano underftood hiftorical Painting,
he was more fond of landlkips; and was more  mafter
of them. His manner had lomething of the Flemith
in it, in the touches of his trees, which the Italians
have not fiudied to much as the Flamands, though
they are very ornamental in landskips. He accom-
panied the trunks of his trees with every thing
which he thought would render them agreeable. He
COI


eminent
PA IN    .  imitated the chefnut tree, and was wont
to fay, that no trees were fo proper to be painted.
Cornelius Cort graved after his deligns feven great
landlkips, which are very fine. Muriano died in
the year  aged  years. By his will he lefe
two houfes to St Luke' academy in Rome, and or-
dered, that if his heirs died without iffice, all his
cftate should go to that academy to build an hospital
for the benefit of fuch young ftudents as came to
Rome, and wanted relief.
G MO PAL. MA,
 ALL  
PAL MA VECC HIO.
TWYHE old Palma was born in the territory of
 Bergamo, in the year  In his Paintings
he shewed  great ftrength of colouring, and  good
guft of defigning. Though he was born in Lombardy,
yet having been Titian' difciple,  thought it pro-
per, rather to place him in the Venetian than in
the Lombard fchool. His manner was fo like his
mafters, that the latter leaving  defcent from the
cross unfinithed at his death, Palma was cholen to
put the laft hand to it, which he did out of respect
to Titian' memory, as he shewed by the following
words that are still to be read on the picture.
Quod Litianus incheatum reliquit,
Palma reverenter persecit,
Decque dicavit opus.
Among his works which are thewn at Venice, the
fineft is the St Barbara in the church of Santa Maria
Formofa. He died in the forty eighth year of his
agc, anno  by which we may fee he was not
called old on account of his age, but to diftinguith

himm
 LIVE   from Palma the younger, his nephew, and Tin-
foretto’ difciple, whofe ftile very much refembled
that of his mafter Tintoret. He painted  great
many pictures at Venice, and died in the year r  CO MO da PONT , da
BA   ANO,
+
HE fon of an indifferent Painter called Fran-
 cefco da Ponte, who firft lived at Vicenza,
from whence he removed to Baffano, being charmed
with the fituation of the place where he fertled, and
was very careful to give his fon Giacomo  good
education. The youth having learnt the rudiments
of Painting of his father, went to Venice, and was
Bonefacios difciple. Here he copied Titian and
Parmegiano' works, after which he returned to Baf-
fano, and followed the natural bent of his genius,
that inclined him to draw every thing after nature,
whom he had always before him in the execution of
his pieces. Though he defigned figures very well, he
particularly applied himfelf to the imitation of bealts
and landskips, becaufe thofe things were more com-
ion, and more advantageous for Painting, in the
place of his abode, than others. Accordingly he
succeeded in them to perfection, especially in tub-
fects that treated of the fields, and if there are not
to much noblenets and elegancy as one could with
in his hiftory-pieces, there is at leaft,  great deal
of force, temper and fidelity. His love of his art,
and his tacilicy in his performances, made him pro-
duce  valt number of pictures which are disperfed
up and down thoughout all Europe. He worked
Commonly for merchants, who exported his pieces
into feveral countries. He died in the year  fourfcore and two years old, and left four fons,
Franceico, Leandro, Giovanni Bartifta, and Giro-
lamo.
FRAN


eminent. PA. 
  .
 da BASSANO,
PAHE eldeff, fetrled at Venice, and excelled his
brothers in his profeffion. He was very thought-
ful, and his melancholy was fo great, that at laft it
crazed him : he fancied often that bailiffs were at his
heels to arreft him; and hearing fomebody knock
at his door when he had one of thefe mad freaks
upon him, he thought they were come to take him,
and therefore leaped out of the window to efcape
them, as he imagined. By the fall his brains were
beat out againft the pavement, and he died in the
forty fourth year of his age, anno   AN  RO da BA   ANO.
 brother, followed his father Giacomos
  manner, as well as Francefco, but he did not
give to much force to his pieces as his elder brother.
He had an excellent talent for Face-Painting, and
made it his chiefeff bufinefs. He drew  portrait
of the doge, Marini Grimani, for which he was
Knighted. He loved to dress well, to live freely,
and keep the beft company, but it was always run-
ning in his head that fomebody or other would poi-
fon him. It is faid, that all the four brothers, fons
of Giacomo da Ponte, were subject to fuch fancies,
their mother being fomewhat inclined to madness.
He died at Venice, anno  Battifta and Girolamo, the two other
brothers, employed themfelves in copying their
father’ works: Giovanni Battifta died in the year
 and Girolamo, who, from  phyfician had
turned painter, in the year   
Reflections on the works of the      NS.
Iacomo da Baffano, the father of the four bro-
& thers, is the only perfon  shall speak of, be
caufe  look on his fons but as his copifts, for they
imitated him in all their pictures; and if they did
any thing more, it was rather the effect of their
memory, than of their genius. In  word, if they
had merit, it was purely an emanation from their
fathers.
Giacomo da Baffano, was, without doubt, born
with  talent for Painting, for of all the Painters
whofe productions  have feen,  never met with
one who followed less their mafter' manner, than
this Giacomo. He quitted it to give himfelf up
intirely to nature, who gave him what he had of
genius, and, in the place of his abode, the means
for him to cultivate it. Baffano confidered this
miftress of arts, by the characters which make her
moft fenfible and mott to be known. He fiudied
her with great application in particular objects, and
then compoted pietures of fingular worth. If his
talent was not for the heroic and hifforical Kind,
which require dignity, he has treated his paftoral
subjects well, and all fuch as was proportionable to
his genius; for of whatever manner his objects were,
he Knew how to difpofe of them advantageoutly, by
the good effect of the whole-together; and if fome
particular things are ill adjufted and ill rurned, he
has at leaft rendered them like and probable. His
defigns were not noble or elegant, neither did the
moft part of his fubjects require them to be fo, but
he was correct in his way. His draperies were dull,
and there was more of exercife than truth in the
execution of them.
His local colours maintained their character very
well. His carnations are very freth and very true.
   IN    .
 colours conform admirably well to thofe of na-
ture. His landlkips are of  good guito. His
prospects are well chofen. He thews  good intelli-
gence of the claro obicuro. His touches are lively,
and the colours of his diftances always true, but
fometimes  little too black in the neareft places,
which fault he fell into by endeavouring to preferve
the character of his luminous objects. He has
drawn  great many night-pieces, and the cuftom he
had acquired of making ftrong hadows, perhaps
contributed to the ill ufe he fometimes made of them
in his day-pieces.
His pencil is firm and fteady, and guided with
to much juftnels, that no man ever touched animals
to artfully and exactly. Ido not know whether there
are many of his pieces in France, but  am fure
thofe that  faw of his in the churches of Baffano,
have  freshnels and  brilliant, that appeared to me
to be extraordinary, and fuch as  have not feen
lewhere.
   
           
PORDENONE the TOUNGER,
 Venice, was  difciple of the great Porde-
 none. His uncle was  good defigner, and
underffood Painting in frefco to perfection. The
uncle' and the nephew' works are often confound-
ed through the conformity of their names. Juliowas
employed in feveral places. He painted the front of
 houfe in Augiburg, in frefco, wherein monficur
Chanterell now lives. This piece is very well pre-
served, and in honour of the author' memory, the
magiftrates have placed this inscription on it.
 LI.VE.  Julius Licinis civis Venerus er Auguftanus,
 adificium his Picturis infignivit, hicceque
 ultimammanum pofuit, anno   Julius Licinmus, acitizen of Venice and Augf-
sc burg, made this houfe famous by this Painting,
 which he finished in the year  was
contemporary with Baffano, and we know no more
of him, neither Vafari nor Ridolfi having mention.
ed him, we suppofe on account of the refemblance
between his name and merit and his uncles.
We should have placed Giovanni dIdine, of
whom we have (poken, page  and Fra. Baftia-
no del Piombo, .  in the Venerian fchool;
but the lives of thofe two Painters have fuch rela-
tion to Raphael and Michael Angelos, that we
thought we could pot reafonably feparace them.

   





eminent    
   .
 THE
    

 


   



AIV
TONIO da GORREG..

  called from the place where he was
  town in the dukedom of Mo
dena, anno  When Painting re-
 in ltaly, in the days of Cima-

 its beginning was but weak, and
DISC
it did not arrive at perfection on 
fudden; it reached it by degrees. The difciples al.
ways added fomething to the progrefs their mafters
made in it before them, and there is nothing in this
which commonly does not happen to all arts. But
we muft here admire and respect  genius, that -
gainft the ordinary courfe of Painting, without have
ing feen Rome, the antiquities, or the works of the
moft able Painters, without favour or protection,
or going from home for it, in the midft of poverty,
and


TBe   VE 
of
 without any other helps than the contemplation
of nature, and the affection he had for his bufiness,
has produced works of  fublime Kind, both for the
thoughts and the execution. His chief pictures are
at Farma and Modena, and his cabinet-pieces are
Very Fare.
Raphael' fame tempted him to go to Rome. He
confidered attentively the pictures of that great
Painter, and after having looked on them  long
time, without breaking filence, he faid, co Anch Jo
 all the fine
co fon Pittore, Iam Hilla Painter.
pieces that he had made, could not draw him out of
the extreme mifery he was in, his family being very
burthenfome, and his price fmall.
soing on  time to Parma to receive fifty crowns,
he was paid in  fort of copper-money called Qua-
drino'. His joy that he had got it to carry home
to his wife, made him that he did not mind the
weight of his money, with which he loaded himfelf
in the heat of the fummer, and being to lug it
twelves miles on foot, the burthen, the walk, and
the weather, threw him into  pleurify, of which
he died at  years old; anno  on the works of CORREGIO.

 do not find that Corregio borrowed any
& thing from other men' works, every thing
is new in his pictures, his conceptions, his defign,
his colouring, and his pencil; and this novelty has
nothing but what is good. His thoughts are fub-
time, his colouring delicate and natural, and his
pencil eafy and delightful, as if he had been guided
by the hands of an angel. His out-lines are not
correct, buttheir gufto is great. He found out cer-
tain natural and unaffected graces for the airs of his
heads, for his Madonnas, his faints and little chil-
dren; add to this the union that appears in his
WWorkss


eminent    NT   .  and his talent of moving the heart by the
delicacy of his expreftions, and we shall have no
difficulty to believe that the knowledge which he
had of his art was  gift of heaven, rather than an
effect of his studies.
Francefco Francia, who ought to have been placed
here, is put among the Roman Painters, page  alfo Polidoro Caravaggio, .  Parmegiano,
.  Pellegrino of Modena, .  and Pri-
maticcio, .  The reafon of our placing them
there, was becaufe we confidered the manner they
followed more than the country where they were
born; and perhaps the reader will not be difpleafed
to fee Raphael'’ difciples coming after their mafter.
The CARRACHS, Viz. LODOVICO;
AUGUSTINO, and ANNIBALE.
HE three Carrach', who acquired fo much
 reputation and glory by their pictures, were
all born at Bologna.
Lodovico came into the world in the year  was cofin-german to Augultino and Annibaler
being elder than they, and  Painter before them,
they were his disciples. His mafter was Profpero
Fontana, who, difcovering but little fire in his
Painting, would have diffcaded him from it, and
reproved him fo roughly, that Lodovico left his
school. His ralent kept him in heart, and he re-
solved to have no other mafter but the works of the
great Painters. He went to Venice, where Tinto-
retto feeing fomething of his doing, encouraged
him to proceed in his profeffion, and foretold he
should in time be one of the top of it. This pro-
phetic applaufe animared him in his refolutions to
acquire the mattery of his art. He fiudied Ti-
lan', Tintorers, and Paolo Veronefe' worksar Ve-
nice;


T   VES 
 La Paffignano', and Andreo del Sarto' at
Florence; Parmegiano' and Corregios at Parma,
and Julio Romano' at Mantua; but of all thefe
mafters, he who touched him moft fenfibly was Cor-
regio, whofe manner he ever after followed.
Augustino was born in the year  and An-
hibale in  Their father' name was Antonio,
 taylor by trade, yet he was very careful to give
his fons  good education. He bred Augusting 
Icholar, his inclination feeming to lead him to learn-
ings but his genius afterwards carried him away
more violently to the arts; wherefore Antonio put
him to  goldfmith, whom Auguttino quitted in 
little while, and went home to his fathers, where he
bufied himfelf about the knowledge of feveral things
indifferently. He gave himfelf up to every thing
that pleafed his fancy; to Painting, graving, poe-
try, mufic, dancing, and the mathematics, with other
commendable exercifes, which adorned, but divided
his underftanding.
On the contrary, all Annibale' thoughts ran upon
Painting. He ftudied it in company with his bro-
ther, but the difference of their tempers made them
quarrel perpetually, and hindered the fruit of their
Rudies. Augultinowas fearful and Hudious, Anni=
bale bold and venturous. Augultino loved the com
pany of men of fenfe and quality. Annibale was
always for converfing with his equals, and avoided
the society of thofe that were better born than him-
felf. Auguftino pretended to domineer by his right of
feniority, and the variety of his learning; Annibale
despited it, and minded only defigning. Augulting
was very folicitous to profit by his udies, and not to
let any punctilio of fcience efcape him; Annibale was
more lively, and made his way every where eafy.
Thus it being almoft impoffible to make them 
gree, their father parted them, and fent the elder to
 Carracci, who would alfo have his brother
Annibale


emment :  ..   .
 with: him; when by the expmple of his
zeal to reach the perfection of his art, by inspiring
them with the same love for his profeffion, by pro-
mifing to comfmunicate, all he knew of it to them,
and his knowledge was now very well (poken ofs
and in thort, by the sweetness of his deportthent
and his prudence, he mederaced the antipathy that
was naturally between them, and their ambision to
excel in the art encreating every day, they all three
entered into  very strict friendship, forgetring every
thing but their care to become mafters.
However, Augultino' udies of Painting were
often interrupted by thofe of graving, which he
learnt of Cornelius Cort, not being willing to quit
an exercife which he had thewn  genius for ever
fince he was fourteen years old : yet, though he ac-
quired an excellence in graving, his love of and his
talent for Painting, recalled him always to this art
 to his center.
Annibale, who never wandered from his profeffion,
to inform himself of all things neceffary to it, went
through Lombardy to Venice. He could not con=
tain his raptures at the fight of Corregio' works in
Parma. He wrote to Lodovico, and prayed him to
excite his brother Auguftino to come and fee the
wonders he had feen at Farma, faying, co He could
 find out  better fchool; that neither Ti
 Gicolini, nor even Raphael in his St Ce
ce cilia, had done any thing comparable to the ex-
 things he faw in Corregio' pictures;
 all was great and graceful; that Augultino
 he should with pleafure fiudy thofe beautiful
 and live lovingly together.
From Lombardy Annibale went to Venice, where
the new charms which he found in the works of
Tician, Tinrorer, and Paolo Veronefe, put him up-
on copying the pictures of thofe great men with
Care.
At


T  . VE : of
 laft thefe three Painters having made the ut
moft advantage of their reflections on the works of
others, united themfelves fo perfectly, that they
continued almoft always together. Lodovico com-
punicated his difcoveries to his cofins, and they
received them with all poffible eagernets and gratn-
tude. He propoted to them to unite all their fen-
timents, and their manner; and upon their objecting
to him, it would be difficult to penetrate into all the
principles of to profound an art, and to be enlight-
ened in all the doubts arifing in to copious  fcience,
he antwered that there was no likelihood that three
perfons who fought after the truch, and had feen
and examined thoroughly fomany different manners,
should be deceived.
They refolved therefore to purfue and augment
the method they had begun. They had performed
feveral things in feveral places, which, in spite of the
open and under-hand dealing of thofe that envied
them, got them reputation and friends : and thus
finding their credit to encreafe, they laid the foun-
dation of that celebrated fchool, which ever fince
has gone by the name of the Carraccis academy.
Hither all the young Rudents who gave great
hopes of their becoming mafters, reforted to be in-
strueted in the rudiments of Painting. Here the
Carracci taught freely and Kindly thofe things that
were proportionable to the qualifications of their
difciples. They eftablifhed certain models well
cholen, for men and women. Lodovico' charge
was to make  collection of antique ftatues, and baf-
to relievo'. They had defigns of the beft matters,
and curious books on all fubjects relating to their
art. One Antony de la Tour,  great anatomilt,
taught what belonged to the Knitting and motion of
the mufcles, with reference to Painting. There
were often disputations in the academy, and not on-
ly Painters but men of learning propoted difficult
questions


eminent        .
 to be decided, and Lodovico'’ judgment
was, in all cafes, their oracle. Every body was well
received; and youth being excited by emulation, the
young men fpent whole days and nights in Hudy
there: for though hours were allotted to treat of dif-
ferent matters, yet, at all times, they might im-
prove themfelves by the antiquities, and the defigns
which were to be feen there. The Conde di Mal-
valia fays, oo that the principles of Lodovico, the
 of Augustino, and the zeal of Annibale,
 supported this academy. The revutation of the
Carracci reaching Rome, cardinal Edvardo Farnefe,
who was going to have the gallery of his palace
painted, fent for Annibale to Rome to execute his
defign. Annibale was the more willing to go thi-
ther, becaufe he had  great defire to fee Raphaels
works, with the antique statues, and baffo relievo'.
The guito which he took there for the ancient
sculpture, made him change his Bolognian manner,
which had very much of Corregios in it, to fol-
low  method more learned, and more expreft, but
more dry, and less natural in the defign, and in
the colouring. He had occafion to put it in practice
in feveral works which he performed there; and -
mongothers in the Farnefegallery, whither Auguiti-
no came to affift him, both in the difpofition and in
the execution: but Annibale, either uneafy at Au-
guftino' pretending to direct the work, or willing
to have all the glory of it, could not endure to have
his brother continue with him, or be further con-
cerned in the performance of it, though Augulting
was very fubmiffive, and would have done any thing
to bring him into  good humour.
Cardinal Farnefe perceiving the mifunderttand-
ing between them, fent Augultino to Parma, in-
tending to have him employed by duke Ranuccio,
his brother. He painted one chamber in the dukes
Palace,


The LI  . of
 but had fuch frequent vexations given him
there, that he could not bear them, fo he retired
into  monaltery of Capuchins; to prepare himfelf
for death, which he was fenfible was approaching;
and it happened in the year r he being no more
than  years ald.
He left  natural fon called Antonio, of whom
Annihale took care, fer him to ftudy, and inttructed
him in the art of Painting. This Antonio has given
to many proofs of his capacity, even in the few
pieces which he left behind him in Rome, that it is
thought he would have furpaffed his uncle if he had
years of age, anne
lived longer. He died at  Conde di Malvafia writes, that Annibale had
 great deal of reafon to repent of his treating his
brother to ill at Rome; for having some pictures to
do afterwards, wherein his brother' advice and
learning were neceffary for him, he would have
been embarraffed without the affiftance of his cofin
Lodovico Carracci. But this is not probable, for
Aguechi, who always affifted Annibale with his ad-
vice in all the compofitions he made, would not
have failed him on this occafion; and the fruitfulnels
and beauty of his genius, are to be feen elfewhere
by his deligns.
Augultino was buried at Bologna with extraordi-
nary pomp, the particulars of which may be feen
in the Conde di Malvafia' description of his funeral.
In the mean while Annibale continued working in
the Farnefe gallery. He rook incredible pains and
care about it; and though he was  perfect matter of
his art, he did not do the leatt thing without con-
fulting nature, nor paint the leaft part of his figures,
till he had made  model of it on the fcaffold, and
had exactly defigned all the attitudes.
Boncontl, one of his difciples, being aftonished
at his uncommon care, and the little noice that was
takenn


emnent        .
 of it, among other things, wrote to his fa-
ther, that Annibale had but ten crowns  month,
notwithflanding his performances deferved  thou-
fand; that he was at work from morning till night,
and almoft killed himfelf with working. Iis
words are, as  have taken them from the Conde;

co Di Malvafia, voglio ch’ egli fappia che meffer
of Annibale Carracci, non altro ha del fird che fcudi
co dieci di mafter il mefe, & parte per lui  fervito-
co res & und Stanzietta ne  tetti dove lavora & tira
 la caretta tutto il di come un cavallo,  fa loge
co camare  fale equadri & ancone & clavori da mille
so fcuti eftenta  crepa & ha poco guito ancora di tal
C 
ervitu ma quefto, di gratia non fi dica ad alcu-
 laft after inconceivable pains and care,
having finished the Paintings of that gallery, in the
perfection we now fee them, he hoped cardinal
Farnefe would have rewarded him proportionably
to the excellence of the work, and to the time it
took him up, which was eight years; but one Don
Juan de Caftro,  Spaniard, who had  mighty in-
fuence over the cardinal, infinuated to him, that
according to his calculation, Annibale would be
well paid if he gave him goo crowns of gold.
The money was brought him, and he was fo fur-
prized at the injuftice done him, that he could not
peak  word to the perfon that brought it.
This ill ufage made  terrible impreftion on his
mind; his chagrin threw him into  confumption,
and shorrened his days. His melancholy did not
hinder his amours; and his debauches at Naples,
whither he was retired for the recovery of his health,
helped him forward to his grave in the goth year of
his age, anno  Annibale worked at Rome, Lodovico was
courted from all parts of Lombardy, especially by
the clergy,
to make pictures for their churches;
and we may judge of his capacity, and his facility,
by
 . VE  of
 the great numbers of pictures he made, and
by the preference that was given him to :other
Painters.
In the midft of his occupations, Annibale folicit-
ed him to come to Rome, and affitt him with his
advice about his work in the Farnefe gallery; and
he entreated him to earneftly, that Lodovico could
not put off the journey. He arrived at Rome, and
after having corrected feveral things in that gallery,
and painted himself one of the naked figures, which
Tupports the Medaillon of Sirinx, he returned to
Bologna, making  very short Hay at Rome. When
he had eftablifhed and fupported the reputation of
the Carracci, and fixed it to all pofterity, he died at
 years of age, anno  and died in  was born in  was born in  and died in  was born in  and died in  Carracci had abundance of difciples, the moft
famous of whom were Guido, Domenichino, Lan-
franco, Sifto Badalocchi, Albani, Guercino, nto-
nio Carracci, Maftelletta, Panico, Battifta; Cave-
done, Taccone, ecc. Had the Carracci had no re-
putation of their own, the merit of their difciples
would have rendered their name illuftrious in fuc-
ceeding times.
Reflections on the works of CARRACGI.

HEN Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, and
 Cavaliere Gioleppino were at the helm of
Painting, when the former, who defign’ ill, got 
great many pupils on account of his being an ex-
cellent colourift, and the latter fell into  manner
for expedition withour gufto and exactness, the good
genius of Painting raited the fchool of the Carracci
for the fupport of fo fine an art, which was in dan
  IN    .
 of falling into decay, both in compofition and
defign.
Nature gave the Carracci  wonderful ardor for
their profeftion, as well as furnifhed them with 
fine genius. They followed it by their talent, and
perfected it by the affiduity of their ftudies; by the
indefatigableness of their labour, and by the doci-
lity of their underftanding. The fame principles,
on which they founded the celebrated fchool we
have mentioned, were their guide in the execution
of all their works.. Their manners refemble each
other, and all the difference that is to be found in
them, proceeds from the diverfity of their tempers:
Lodovico had less. fire, but more grandeur, more
grace, more fweetness than Augustino or Annibale;
Augultino had more gaity, and nnibale more
boldness and fingularity of thought, than either of
the other two. His defigns were more profound,
his expreffions more lively, and his execution more
firm.
The Carracci took from the ancient fculptures,
and the beft mafters of their art, as much as they
could to form  good manner; but they have not
drained the fountain dry, they have left more in the
antiquities, in Raphael, in Titian and Corregio,
than they have taken from them.
Though Annibale' character was more for pro-
fane than pious fubjects, he has, however, treated
some of the latter kind very patheticly, especially the
Rory of St Francis. But Lodovico fucceeded in
thele pictures better than Annibale; he gave grace-
ful airs to his Madonnals after Corregio' manner.
Annibale' genius inclined him rather to fiercenets
than delicacy, and more to gallantry than modefty.
As for Augultino, his ffudies of Painting were often
interrupted by thofe of graving, of which he was
 perfect mafter. He alfo diverted himfelf with
other exercifes, by which means he made few pieces

of


LI VE:  Painting, and the greateft: part of thefe he did
make, pats for his brother'.
Annibale having ftudied very little, and applying
himfelf wholly to Painting, he in his grand compo-
fitions frequently made ufe of his brother Auguiti-
no' affiltance, and that of Monfignior Aguechis by
the instructions they gave him; informing and con-

firming his genius.
All the three Carracci defigned with  good guite.
Annibale' gufto mended and increafed by his abode
at Rome, as one may fee by his performances in the
Farnefe gallery. The defign is loaden, we, muft
confels, but that load is to fair, and fo learned, that
it pleafes even thofe who condemn it; for his guf-
to is  compofition of the antique of Michael An-
gelo' manner, and of nature: his affection for new
beauties making him forget the old ones, he quitted
the Bolognian manner for the Roman: the former
was foft and mellow, and according as he encreaf-
ed his guft of defigning, he diminished that of co-
louring; thus the defign of his laft works came to
be more expreft, but his penciling is not fo tender
and agreeable as in his firft.
This fault is cammon to almoft all the Painters
that defigned conrectly; they imagined they loft the
the fruit of their labours, if they did not let the
yorld fee how far they were mafters of that part of
their art; and that the spectators would forgive
them for what they fell short in other parts, fatif
fying themfelves with the regularity of their defign.
They were afraid it should be overlooked, and to
prevent it, havemade no fcruple to offend the fight
by the crudity of their out-lines.
Annibale had an excellent genius for landskips.
The forms of his trees are exquifite. The defigns
that he made of them with  pen, are wonderful
for their character and fenfe. His touches are well
chofen; they confift of  few Hrokes; but thote
that


eminent   IN  ER .
 are there exprets  great deal; and what  have
said of the landikips agrees with all his defigns. In all
his vifible objects of nature there is  character which
diftinguithes them; and makes them appear more
Tentibly to be what they are. Annibale knew how
to take his character, and has made tife of it in his
defigns with equal fenfe and judgment. Notwith-
standing he had  great efteem for Titian and Cor-
regios works, his colouring is not extraordinary.
He. did not underftand the doctrine of the claro
obfcuro, and his local colours are not much to be
valued. Thus, if there is any thing good in the
colouring part of his pictures, it is not fo much the
Inove-
effect of the principles of art, as the happ
ment of his genius; of the remembrance of Titian
and Corregio' works.
However, there never was  Painter who was
more univerfal, more eafy, and more certain in
every thing he did; nor that was more generally
approved, than Annibale.
.    
   
 AS born at Bologna in the year  the
fon of Daniel Reni, an excellent mufician.
He learnt the rudiments of Painting under Denis
Calvert,  Flerish mafter; who had then  good
reputation; but the academy of the Carracci at Bo-
logna beginning to be talked of; Gido left his ma-
tter, and entered himself in thar fchool. In his firft
pieces he followed entirely the manner of his new
matters, and chiefly imitated Lodovico, becaufe he
found more grace and grandeur in his compoficions
than in thofe of his Kinfmen. He afterwards en-
deavoured to find out  manner on which he might
fix. He went to Rome, and copied all forts of
thingsthere. He was charmed with Raphacls pic-
tures, and pleated with the fpirit of Caravaggio'.
He
 


The LI VES
of
 tried every tile, and at laft hitupon one againft
which nobody had any thing to fay.Indeed, it
was great, eaty, graceful, and got him vait riches,
and an equal reputation. Michael Angeloda Ca-
ravaggio, being angry that he had fuddenly changed
his manner, which was ftrong and brown, for one
quite oppofite to it, (poke very contemptibly of
his pictures; and his infolent expreffions might
have had ill confequences, had not Guido prudently
avoided disputing with  man of his impetuous
temper.
suido returning to Bologna grew famous for the
care he took in finithing his pieces. and perceiving
that the perfons of quality were eager to have them,
he fet  price upon them according to the number
of figures in each picture, and every picture he
valued at one hundred Roman crowns.
By thefe high prices Guido found himself, in 
little while, very well at eafe, and lived nobly, till
an immoderate love of gaming feized him.. He
was unfortunate, and his loffes reduced him to ne-
cefficies that he could not go through. His friends
ufed all imaginable arguments to diffcade him from
play, but he would not give it over. He fent his
pictures to be fold under-hand at . forry rate; and
took it for fuch as he had before refuled large fums
for. As foon as he had got the little money he
had for them in his pocker, he immediately, went
to look out for his gamefters to have his rewenge.
At laft, as one paftion weakens another, his love of
gaming leftened that of Painting fo far, that he
never thought of his reputation in what he did, but
only to rid his work, and get fubliftence-money.
His chief pictures are in the cabiners of the great.
He performed alike well in oil, and frefco. The
Glolt noted of his pieces is that which he painted in
concurrence with Domenichino in the church of St
Gregory. Except his vice of gaming, he was 
Mmai


eminent:  .  NT   .
 of good morals, and could he have corrected

that fault, would have been an accompliffied per-
fon. Hedied at Bologna, anno  in the  of his age.
 

.
 on the works of GUID.:



 Hough there appears no great capacity in Gufs
do' productions; yet one may fee by them,
that his making: but few grand compolitions, was
rather for want; of Opportunity than genius: how-
ever; it muft be owned; that his talent was not
equally proper to treat of all fors of subjects  fuch
as were devout and pathetic faired beft with his
temper; grandeur; noblenets, fweernets and grace,
were the character of his mind. He has pread
them to much over all his works, that they are the
principal marks which diftinguith him from other

Painters.
His thoughts are delicate, and the difpofition of
his objects in gehneral, and of his figures in particu-

lar, is good.
Guido being the firft and favourite disciple of the
Carracci, he, for  while, imitated their guito of
delign, and their manner; but at laft he formed
one of his own; which was neither fo firm, to ex-
prelt, nor fo learned as Annibales, yet it came
nearer to nature, especially in the extremities, be-
ing the head, feet and hands.
He had particular render strokes for certain parts,
which he defigned in  particular way; as, the
eyes great, the mouth little, the noftrils fomewhat
clofe, the hands and feet rather plump than fen-
fibly articulated. He made his feet too thort, and
the toes top clofe. It was not that he did not know
what he did, which was the occafion of his not ex-
preffing exactly the articulation of the members,
but to avoid  kind of pedantry, which he faid
there


The LI :ES: of.
 was in specifying them toe, muck: however
there was  mediut berween the que and the other
EstEme, which he ought to hase observed.
As for his heads, they yield no manner of prece-
dence to thofe of Raphael, either for correctnels
eSpecially the
of exprettions:
of defign, or delicsc
upper part of them; though he did not commonly

tyeat of fubjects that were capable: of furhifhing
him with to great variety of expreffions, as arein
Raphsels. Ilis,merit confifted in thet moving beawe
tys Which, in my opinion; did, not proceed to much
  regulanity of featuress as from.  lovely air
which he gave: the mottths that had: something; in
it besween  firtile; and fesibuffiets,and in the graces
 the mouths with  certain; medefry which he
 in theieyas


Iis drapesas ars well fElizand of  grand gu-
Ho, His, folds afs, large, and fometimes broken.
He employed them ingenioutly to fill up the void
places, and to agroup the members and lights
of the figures, chiefy when they were alone. In 
word, no body ever underftood how to adjuft the
Sraperies better than Guido, nor to dress his figures
more nobly than he; without the leaft affectation.
There are no, landikips of his to be feen; and
when he treated of  subject which required any ex=
rent, he made ufe of another hand.
His colouring is like that of the Carraccis in the
pictures he drew after his firft imanner. He has allo
 but
painted fome in the manner of Caravag
finding there was too much labour in it, and befides,
that it did ot pleafe every body,, he took to ano-
ther manner, which the Italians call Vaga.. Of
this kind he drew feveral agreeable pieces, in which
there is  great. union of coloers, though they ate

weaker than in his other manners;, for being by
little and little accuftomed to his weakness, he neg-
lected his carnations, or, perhaps, endeavouring to
make


eminent    NT . .
 them more delicate, he gave them  certain
grey call, which often fell into  livid colour:
Lewassbfolutelyignorant of the claro obicute, as
was all the fchool of the Carraccis yet, like his chief
mafter Lodovico, he. fomerimes :practifed it, more
through the greatness of his guito, than any princi-
ples of art; in rerrenching from his objects all thofe
 which divide the fight: & .
Iis pencil was light and eafy; and he was fo well
latisfied that  freedom: of hand: was neceffary;to
pleafe,; that he gave fome bold Hrokes to his work
after he had latioured it, to take off all fufpicion of
  time and pains it icoft:-him
At the latter end of his life, he was reduced se
fuch ftraits by garning; that he had no need to jute
this artifice, being obliged to difpatch his work, as
 as he could to get him fubfiftence, and this has
left  natural freedom on his laft pieces, which are not
fo finithed as: his former.. Inffhoft;: in whatever
manner or time he painted his pictures; his thoughts
ate fo delicate, his figures fo noble, his expreffions
to sweet, his dreffes fo rich, and every thing fo
graceful, that he was, and ever will be univerfally
admired.
DOMENICO  called

DOME NIG  INO,
  born at Bologna, anno  of an ho-
hourable family, and was  long time  dif-
ciple of the Carracci. His invention was flow, but
excellent. What he defigned while he was in the
school of the Carracci for his exercifes, was done
with fo much pains and circumspection, that his
fellow-difciples looked upon him as  perfon that
loff his time. They were went to call him the Ox,
and


Te LI VES of
 faid he laboured as if he was at the plow: But
Annibale, who knew his character better, told them,
of This ox, by dint of labour; would in time make
co his ground fo fruitful; that Painting irfelf would
co be fed by what it produced;   prophecy which
proved very truey for there are many excellent
things to be learned from Domenichinos pictures.
His works in Rome, Naples, and the Farnefian
grotto, are eternal proofs of hisability. . Hlis com-
munion of St Jerom, (in that faincs church at
Rome, pleafed Pouffih, the French Painter fo well;
that he ufed to fay, se Raphaells transfiguration, Da-
 di Volterrasdefcent from the cross, and Do=
sc menichino' St Jerom, were the three beft pictures
 in Rome.? He added, that for the expreffions,
Donenichino was the only Painter he ever knew.
Hlaving worked in: frefco very much, his pictures
 oil are painted fomewhat drily.
Fle was made chief archirect of the apoftolical
palace, by pope Gregory XV for his great skill in
that art. He loved solirude; and it. was obferved;
that as he went along the streets, he took notice of
the actions of private perfons whom he met in his
way, and often defigned fomething in his table book.
He was of  mild temper and obliging carriage,
yet he had the misfortune to be cruelly perfecuted
by his enemies, who were only fo out of envy to
his perfections; particularly, he was fo ill treated at
Waples, that it grieved him to death in the year
 being then about threefcore years of axc.



Refections on the works of DOMENICHINO.

Do not Know: what to fay of Domenichino' ge-
 ius, or whether he had any or not; or if the
goodness of his fenfe, and the folidity of his reffec
tions, did not ferve him inftead of  talent, and en-
able him to produce things worthy potterity. He
VV        .  born with  thoughtful temper, by no means
agreeable to the activity which Painting requires.
The ftudies of his youth were obicure, his firft
works contemptible, his perfeverance was condemned
for loss of time, and his filence reckoned stupidity;
yet this obstinacy of his in his ftudies,: was the only
thing that, fpire of the advice and laughter of :his
fellow-difciples, heaped him up  hidden treafure of
Knowledge, which he in time laid open. In short,
his foul, thut up like  filk-worm in her cod, after
having for  long time worked in  fort of folitude,
finding it had quite thrown off the ignorance that it
laboured under, and warmed by the activity of his
thoughts, took wing,
and made itfelf admired, not
only by the Carracci, who had fupported him, but
by their difciples, who had endeavoured to difhcart-
en him, and difficade him from  profeffion he would,
as they thought, never be mafter of.
His thoughts were judicious from the beginning;
they were afterwards elevated, and wanted but lir-
tle of reaching the fublime, if he did not reach it
in fome of his works; as the Angels of the dome
of St Andrew’ church in Rome, the Communion
of St Jerom, his David, Adam and Eve in the
King' cabiner, our Saviour carrying his crofs, in
the cuftody of monficur lAbbe de Camps, and
tome other pieces, feem to teftify.
His atticudes were well enough cholen, but he
underffood very ill the placing of his figures, and
the difpofition of the whole-together. In other
parts of his art, as the correctness of defign, the
expreftion of his subject in general, and the paffions
in particular, and the variety and fimpliciry of the
airs of his heads, he is not inferior even to Ra-
phael. Like him he was very jealous of his out-
lines,, and has expreft them ftill more drily; and
though he has not fo much nobleness and grace, he
loes not want either of thofe excellencies.
His


The LI VE  of
 draperies are very bad; wery ill fet, and exs
 siff::Flis landlkipsiare of the gufte of the
Carracci, but executed with  heavy hand. His ear:
nations have  grey caff, and have not the charac:
ter of truth; and his claro obicure is worlt of: all:
lirs  is heavy; and his Painfing;dry.
The progress he made in his art increafingionly
by his labour and reflections, the merit of his works
advanced with his age, and his laft pieces are moft
commended: from which we may lawfully affirm,
that as much as Domenichino poffeffed of his art,
it was rather the reward of his fatigue, than the ef-
feet of his genius. But whether it was fatigue or
genius, his pictures have been  pattern to all fuc-
ceeding Painters.
GIOTANNI LANFRANCO,
  born at Parma, on the fame day with
✓
Domenichino, in the year  His
parents were poor; and to eafe themfelves of him,
carried him to Placenza, to enter him in the service
of the count Horatio Scorti. While he was there,
he was always drawing with coal upon the walls,
paper being too fmall for him to fcrawl his ideas on.
The count obferving to what the lad' difpofition
inclined, put him to Augustino Carracci, after whofe
death he went to Rome, and ftudied under Anni-
bale, who fet him to work in the church of St
Tago, belonging to the Spaniards, and found him
capable enough to truft him with the execution of
his defigns; in which Lanfranco has left it  doubt
whether the work be his or his mafter'.
His genins was for Painting in frefco in pacious
places, as we may perceive by his grand performan-
ces, especially the cupolo of St Andrea de Laval,
wherein he has fucceeded much better than in his
pieces of  lefs fize. The guft of his defigning he
took


eminent PA. : . .  from Annibale Carracci: and as long as he lived
under the difcipline of that illuftrious matter, he
Was:always corrects but after his death, he gave 
loofe to the impatuofity: of his genius, without
minding the rules of his art Hie: joined with his
countryman Sifta Eadalocchi, in erching the hiftor
ries of the Bible, after Raphaels. Painting in the
Vatican; which work he dedicated, in conjunction
with Badalocchi, to their mafter Annibale. Lari=
france painted the hiffory of St Peter for pope
Orban VIII. which was graved by Pictro Santi. He
did other things to St Peter' church, and pleafed
the pope fo well, that he Knighted him.
Lanfranco was happy in his family. His wife, who
was very handsome, brought him feveral children,
who being grown up, and delighting in poetry and
mufic, made  fort of Parnaffus in his houfe. His
eldeft daughter fung finely, and played well on fever
ral inftruments. He died at  years of age, anno
 on the works of LANFRANC..
-
Anfranco' geniis, heared by his fludying Cor
 regios works; and above all the Cupolo at Par-
ma, carried him in his thoughts even to enthufiafim.
He earneftly endeavoured to find out the means of
producing the fame things; and that he was capable
of great enterprizes, we may fee by his perform-
ances at Rome and Naples. Nothing was too great
for him; he made figures of above twenty foot
high, in the cupolo of St Andrea da Laval, which
have  very good effect, and look below as if they
were of  natural proportion.
In his pictures one may perceive that he endear
youred to join Annibale' firmness of defign to Cor
regios gutto and fweetness. He aimed allo at
giving the whole grace to his imitation; not confi-
dering


 . : of
dering that nature; who is the difpenter of it, had
given him but  small portion of it,  His ideas in-
ar
deed are fomerimes great enough for the greateff
performances, and his genins could not ftoop to cor-
rect them, by which means they are often unfinith-
ed.. His eafel pieces are not fo much efteemed as
what he painted in frefco; vivacity of wit, and free-
dom of hand, being very proper for that kind of
Painting.
Lanfranco' guft of defigning refembled his maf.
rers; that is, it was always firm and grand, but he
loft ground at length in point of correctnels. His
grand compofitions are full of tumult; examine the
particulars, and you will find the expreffions neither
elegant nor moving.
His colouring was not fo well ftudied as that of
nnibale. The tints of his carnations are trivials
and his fhadows are  little too black. He was ig
horant of the claro obfcuro, as well as his mafter;
though, as he did, he fometimes practifed it by 
good motion of his underftanding, and not by 
principle of art.
Lanfrancos works came from  vein quite oppo
fite to thofe of Domenichino. Thelatter made hinm-
felf  Painter in fpite of Minerva. The former
was born with  happy genius. Domeniching in-
vented with pain, and afterwards digefted his com-
pofitions with  folid judgment; and Lanfranco left
all to his genius, the fource from whence flowed all
his productions. Domenichino ftudied to express
the particularpaffions, Lanfranco contented himfelf
with  general expreftion, and followed Annibale'
guit of defigning. Domenichino, whofe Hudies
were always guided by reafon, encreafed his capa-
city to his death; and Lanfranco, who was fupport-
ed by an exterior practice of Annibale' manner,
diminithed his every day after his mafters deach.
Domenichino executed his works with  flow and
heavy


eminent    NT   .
 hand, and Lanfrancos was ready and light.
To clofe all, it is difficult to find two pupils bred up
in the fame fchool, and born under the same planet,
more oppofite one to the other, and of fo contrary
tempers; yet this oppofition does not hinder, but
they are both to be admired for their beft produc-
tions.
 RA NC ESCO AL BANI
  born at Bologna in the year  His
father, who was  mercer, would fain have
had him follow his trade, but Albanis inclination
leading wholly to Paintung, he was put at firtt to
Denis Calvert, of whom Guido was then learning
the rudiments of the art, and being far advanced
in the knowledge of his profeffion, taught his com-
panion the principles of defigning. When he left
his mafter Calvert, he took him with him to the
chool of the Carracci. Having made  confiderable
progfets there, Albani went to Rome, where, by
Hudying the beft things, he became one of the
moft learned and agreeable Painters of Italy.
Returning to Bologna, he married  second wife,
who brought for her portion  great deal of beauty
and good humour. By this means he had quiet at
home, and  perfect model for the women he was
to paint. She had very handfome children, by
whom he ufed to draw little Cupids playing and
dancing, in all the variety of poftures imaginable,
and by his wife he drew all his naked Venus' and
nymphs. He made ufe of his knowledge of the belles
lettres ingeniouly to adorn the subjects he treared
of, with the fictions of poetry. He is cenfured for
not varying his figures enough, and for giving al-
moft all of them the fame air and the same likeness,
occasioned by his defigning them after the same mo-
olels with the ideas of which his mind was filled.
There


The . VE  of
 are few great figures of his drawing extant;
and painting ufually in little, his pictures are dif-
perfed all over Europe, and valued as to many jew-
els. He was well paid for them, especially in his
latter days; they became very much in fathion, and
being learned and agreeable, every one was taken
with them. He lived peaceably and happily four-
fcore and two years, and then changed his life for 
better, in the year  His moft famous difci-
ples were Francefco Mola, and Giovanni Battifta his
brother.
Refections on the works of  .   NI.
f being pleafing to the greateft part of man-
 Kind, and Albanis pictures infpiring that pat-
Lion, they were as well received on that account, as
for their ingenious thoughts. His talent, fupport-
ed by the ftudy of polite learning, enabled him to
enrich his compofitions with the ornaments of po-
etry. His vein was fruitful and eafy, and he has
done  great number of pictures full of figures. He
underffood defign well; and drawing always by the
same patterns, he fell eafily into the fault of repeat-
ing, chieffy in the airs of his heads, which were
very graceful. By this means Albanis manner is
the eafieft to be known of any mafter'.
The subjects he treated of, did not give him oc-
cation to thew how he could exprets different paf-
fions; thofe that he has touched tend all to joy, and
his expreftions are not over delicate. We may be
bold to fay, the grace which we meet with in his
pictures, is not to much the effect of genius, as the
habit of his hand.
His attitudes and draperiesare well enough chofen.
He was  univerfal Painter, and his landlkips, which
are more agreeable than learned, are like the airs of
his heads of the fame defign, and the fame touch.
His


Eminent    
   .
 colouring is freth, and his carnations of 
fanguine tint, but not very much studied. He was
very unequal in the force of his colours; having
drawn fome of his subjects in the open field, fome
with  very ftrong colouring, and others with  very
weak. As for the claro obfcuro, and union of co-
lours, though he did not know them to be principles
of his art, yet good fenfe or chance, fometimes di-
rected him to the ufe of them.
His works feem to be finithed to the latt degree;
and though his pictures were drawn with facility, yet
there are very few free touches to be feen in them.
PRANCESCO BARBIERI da CENTO,
Commonly called
 
       born near Bologna, anno  and
learned the principles of his art of  Bolog-
ian Painter, whofe capacity was not extraordinary.
He left him and others afterwards, to enter into the
academy of the Carracci, where he defigned with 
great manner, and great facility, but rather with 
natural than with an ideal guft. When he was about
to form to himself  manner of defigning, he ex-
amined thofe of the Painters of his time. Guido 
and Albanis feemed to him to be too weak, and
without cenfuring theirs, he refolved to give his
pictures more force, and come nearer to Caravag-
gi Hile, with which he was more pleafed, than er-
ther with Albanisor Guidos. Hethought  Painter
could not imitate the relievo of nature, without the
help of frong Thadows and flrong colours: never-
thelefs he was Guido' very good friend, and would
never live at Bologna as long as Guidelived, to pre
vent their compention or rivalship, for which rea-
fon he always refided at Cento, cill the death of his
    .ES of
 He painted for  long time after this frong
manner, but in the declention of his age, he alcered
his stile, not out of his own judginent, but, as he
said, to pleafe the ignorant and get money; for,
Guido' and Albanis reputation had drawn the mul-
titude after their manner. Indeed, of all the Carrac-
cis difciples, he was the leaft agreeable in his ftile;
and it is to be withed, that to the fierceness of his
manner, he had joined more noblenels in the airs
of his heads, and more truth to his local colours.
His carnations have too much of the lead in them,
though in general they do not want harmony; and
whatever there feems to be wanting in his pictures,
he will always be reckoned  great Painter by the
Critics.
He was as much to be efteemed for his moral vir-
tues, as for his skill in Painting. He loved work
and folitude; he was true to his word, an enemy
to railing, humble, civil, charitable, pious, and
eminently chafte. When he went abroad he was
always accompanied with feveral Painters, who fol-
lowed him as their matter, and respected him as
their father; for he affifted them with his advice,
his credit, and his purfe upon occafion. Though he
was very humble, there was nothing mean in his
behaviour; and joined to the uprightness of his mo-
rals  noble boldness, which made him be beloved
by the great. Being laborious, he got abundance
of money, which he laid our for the public ufe and
diverfion. He gave large fums to build chapels,
and founded feveral fair hospitals at Bologna, and
elfewhere. He died at threefcore and ten years of
age, anno  and made two of his nephews his
heirs, having lived  fingle and  chafte lite.
Re
  IN  ER .  on the works of GUERCINO.
VWER CINO Rudied  while in the fchool
XT of the Carracci, yet it does not appear that he
has any thing of their character in his works. His
gufto was fingular, his genius eafy, but not elevat-
ed; neither were his thoughts fine. It. is rare to
meet with noblenets in his figures, and his expref-
Lions are not over moving.
His gufto of defign is grand and natural, but
not very elegant. His inclination led him always
to  Hrong colouring. At firft he was very willing
to follow his friend Guido' Htile, but feeing that
Painter quitted one which he had then, for another
more clear, and as the Italians fay, more loofe, he
immediarely took to Caravaggios manner, which
he tempered as he thought fit.
He gave union to his colouring by the unifor-
mity of his red fhadows, but his carnations were
not very fresh, and yet his gufto naturally inclined
him to imitate life, which he has often done with
fuccefs, though fometimes too fervilely and without
choice. He drew his lights from above, and af-
fected to make ftrong fhadows, to attract the eyes,
and give the greater forca to his works. This is
more remarkable in his defigns than in his pictures,
which keep up their reputation by the ftrength of
the shadows, the harmony of the colours, by the
great guft of defign, by the fofiness of the pencil,
and by  character of truth, which reigns every
where through all of them.
MICHAEL ANGELO MERIGL
Commonly called
MICHAEE ANGELO da CARAVAGG born at Caravaggio,  village in the
&
Milanefe, in the year  and made him-
telf famous by  manner in Painting extremely
Arong
   VES
 true, and of  great effect, of which him.
telf was the author. He painted every thing he
did in  room where the light defcended from on
high. He followed his models to exactly; that he
imitated their defects as well as their beauties, hav-
ing no other idea than the effect of nature prefent
co That thofe pictures
before him. He ufed to fay,
ss which were not drawn after nature, were but as
co to many rags, and the figares of which they were
 compoted, but as painted cards.
His manner being new, was followed by feveral
Painters of his time, and among others by Manfredi,
and Valentine  Frenchman. We mult own the
likeness of this manner is very furprizing, and has 
very powerful effect on the moft judicious spectators.
He drew after him almoft the whole fchool of the
Carracci.
For not to name Guercino, who never left his
inanner, Guido and Domenichino were tempted to
follow it; but it was accompapied with fuch an ill
gout of delign, and the choice of his lights being
the fame in all forts of subjects; they fell off from
it in  very little time. His pieces are to be met
with in moft of the cablners in Europe. There
are feveral of them at Rome and Naples, and one
picture of his drawing is in the Dominican' church
at Antwerp, which Rubens ufed to call his mafter.
He often brought himself into danger by his con-
temptible difcourfe of his cotemporaries, especially
of Giofeppino, whom he had made  jeft of public-
ly. One day the ditpute between them ran to
high, that Michael Angelo drew his fword, and
Killed  young man called Tomafino, who being
Gioleppino' friend, would have parted them. Up-
on this Michael Angelowas forced to fly to the mar-
quis Juftiniani, to prorect him. While he lived in
his houfe, he drew the picture of St Thomas' un
belict,


eminent        .  and  Cupid, two admirable pieces, for the
marquis.
suftiniani obtained his pardon, and reproved him
severely for being to outrageous; but Michael An-
gelo, as foon as he was at liberty, being not able to
command his paffions, he went to Giofeppino and
 WaS  him. The latter antwered,
ce Knight, and would not draw his fword againtt his
 nertled at this antwer,
inferior.
haftened to Malta, performed his vows and exer-
cifes, and received the order of Knighthood as 
ferving-brother. While he was there, he drew the
decollation of St John Baptift for the great church,
and the portrait of the grand-mafter de Vigna-Court,
which is in the King' cabinet.
Being dignified with the order of Malta, he re
turned to Rome, intending to force Ciofeppino to
fight him; but, happily for his competitor,  fever
took him and put an end to the dangerous difpute
with his life, anno  on the works of MICHAEL
ANGELO da CARAVAGG AVAGG ideas were like his tem-
 per, very unequal, and never lofty. His dif-
politions were good, and his defigns of an ill gout.
He had not underftanding enough to choofe well, or
to correct nature. All his application was to co-
louring, and he fucceeded wonderfully in it. His
local colours are very much ftudied, and by the
great Knowledge he had of lights, joined to the ex-
alt variety with which he mingled his colours on
his pallet, without breaking, or as we fay, Cortur-
ing them with his pencil, the truth that appears in
all his works is equally perfect and furprizing.
His attitudes have no choice in them. His dra-
peries are like, but ill fet, and his figures are not
agreeably
  LI VES of
greeably adjutted, nor as becomes their characters.
He knew nothing of grace or noblenets, and if ei
 of them are to be met with in his pieces, it was
not done out of choice but by chance.
However, he drew feveral pictures which deferved
the name of grand compofitions, and he finifhed
them with extraordinary nicecy. If he was not ma-
Rer of all the parts of Painting, we muft own that
his portraits at lealt are not to be cenfured. His
exprestions are not very lively. By his works one
may eafily perceive he did not fo much confider what
would contribute to make his pictures agreeable, as
what would render his objects fentible, in which he
was fuccessful by the claro obfcuro, by an excellent
gufto in colouring, by  terrible force, an agreeable
tweetnels, and the melloweft pencil that ever was.
BARTHOLOMEO MANFREDI,
  Mantua, was Caravaggio' difciple, and imi-
 tated his manner very exactly. The subjects
of his pictures are generally perfons playing at cards
or dice. He died young.
   .      
     
 PAGNOL    ,
Native of Valentia in Spain, was Caravaggios
£ difciple, and like his mafter had  ftrong
manner, imitating nature very faithfully. but his
pencil was not fo mellow as Michael Angelo'.
Spagnoletto delighted in Painting melancholy fub-
eits. His works are disperfed over all Enrope, but

chicny ar Naples, where he lived  long time, and
drew abundance of fine pieces
 HE





  AI
   .
 




OF THE
JL RWiHL Gnd IL.. WLINHI




 
 

VI.

 
HUBERT and
OHN FANETE,
 natives of Maffeyk on


the Meufe, were the firft Painters in
 Low-countries that did any thing

 taking notice of; for which
 we may reckon them the foun-

ders of the Flemith fchool. Hubert
was the elder brother, he bred up John, and the
latter ftudied to affiduoully, that he equaled his maf-
ter and elder brother, Hubert. They had both of
them genius and skill; they worked together, and
became famous by their performances; they drew
feveral pictures for Philip the Good, duke of Bur-
gundy; that which was fet up in St John' church
St Gaunt was univerfally admired. Philipl. King
Of


TBe .  VE . of.
 Spain, not being able to obtain the original, got
 copy of it, which he carried into Spain with him.
The subject of this piece was taken out of the Reve-
lations, where the old men adore the Lamb. This
picture is, to this day, looked upon as  wonder,
and there being  great deal of care taken to pre-
ferve it, it is still very freth. It is covered, and
never expoted to view but on holidays, or at the de-
fire of perfons of the firft quality.
After Huberrs death, which happened in the
year  his brother John removed to Bruges,
and living altogether in that town, he was thence
called John of Bruges. It was this John,, who, in


fearching after  Varurth that might give more force
to his colouring, found out that linfeed oil mingled

 colours, had  very good effect without spak-
 him the art of
Varnifh at all
ing ufe of any
ai





Painting is indebred for the perfection to which it is
arrived by means of this new invention: and thus
John of Brugess works encreafing in beauty, were
bought up by the great, and had one of the firft
places in their cabinets.
The picture which he fent to Alphonfo, King of
Naples, was the occafion of the difcovery of the fe-
Cret of Painting in oll in Italy;  we have thewn
John of Bruges
in the life of Antenio da Mieffina.
was efteemed as well for the folidity of his judg-
ment, as for his skill in Painting. The duke of
Burgundy had t good an opinion of his merit, that
he made him  counfellor of ftate. He died in
Bruges, anno  and was buried in St Donatus'
church. His fifter Margaret would never marry,
that the might be the more at liberty to exercife her-
felf in Painting, which the paffionately loved.
ALBERT


eminent    
   .
 BE RT 
UR ER
  born at Nuremberg on Good-friday,
anno  the same day of the year which
gave birth to Raphael Urbin. Albert Durer,  cu-
rious jeweller and goldfmith of that town, was fa-
ther of Albert whofe life we write, and taught him
his own art, and that of graving. At fifteen years
of age he put him to Michael Wolgemuth,  good
Painter in Nuremberg, Van-Mander being in an
error when he fays he was Martin Schon'’ difciple.
It is true Albert would very fain have had him for
his mafter, but Martin' death prevented it.
After having spent three years with Michael Wol-
gemuth, he travelled to Flanders, and from thence
through Germany to Venice. At his return he mar-
ried, being then near three and twenty years of age;
about that time he began to publith fome of his
prints. He graved the three Graces, fome Deaths-
Heads, and other bones of dead men, and  Hell
with diabolical spectres, after the manner of Irael
of Mechlin. Above the three graces there is 
globe, on which thefe three letters are to be feen,
. . II. as much as to fay in the German Congue,
 Gort Hurel God defend us from enchantments
He was then about  years old, for it was in the
year  that he graved this piece. Having put
his genius in motion, he applied himself to the ftudy
of defign, and became fo great  mafter of it, that all
his cotemporary countrymen of the profeffion made
his works their rule, and even feveral Italians bene-
fited themfelves by his prints, as they have done
fince, though with more addrefs and difsuife.
He was careful in all his plates to put down the

year in which they were graved,  very commend-
able thing, for the curious may judge by that how
old


The . VE  of
 he was when he did them. In the picture of
Cur Saviour' paffion; he difpofes the Lord' fupper
according to the opinion of Occolampadius. That
of Melancholy is his fineff piece, and the things
that enter into the compofition of his subjects, are 

Proof of Alberrs skill; his Madonna' are fingular
ly beautiful.
Albert put down alfo on his pictures the year in
which they were painted; and Sandrart, who faw
more of them than any ope elfe, fays he did not fee
any one of an older date than the year  by
which he gives us: to underfland, that Albert did
Rothing of that kind till he was thirty-three years of
 the emperor, gave Durer for the arms
of Painting three crowns, two in chief, and one in
pOint.
The character of  man of honour, which he al-
Ways maintained, his good fenfe, and his eloquence,
gifts beftowed on him by nature, procured him  feat
among the Counfellors of the ciry of Nuremberg.
His genius was fo univerfal, that he followed the bu-
finess of his profeftion, and, at the same time, with
cafe minded the affairs of the public. He was labo-
rious, of  sweet difpofition, and his fortune to good,
that he might have enjoyed  pleafant repofe, if his
wife had not disturbed his happinels. She was of
fuck  covetous, greedy temper, that though they
had no children, and were rich enough, yer the was
always teazing him to get more. Her clamours were
to troublefome to him, they diftracted him in his
Lnbours, and made his life uneafy. To get rid of
her he went into the Low-countries, where he con=
tracted  clofe friendship with Lucas of Leyden. His
wife' trouble, her tears, and promites to behave
herself better for the future, prevailed on his friends
at Nuremberg to advife him how much the was al
tered, and to invite hum to return. He was perfuad
Cl


PA IN.   .
eminen
 by them to try her once more, but the foon grew
as bad as ever, and though he was one of the moft
prudent and beft natured men in the world; the
ifed him to ill, that he broke his heart with forrow,
in the fifty-feventh year of his age, anno  himfelf wrote his fathers life four years
before he died; Sandrart has given an account of it
after that of Albert the fon, who wrote moft of
the things himself which we have faid of him.
He talks very freely, and with  great deal of hu-
mility of his father' poverty, how hard it was for
him to get his bread, and of the mifery he lived in
while he was young. The moft furprizing thing in
his whole life is, that he could work fo much, and
finith fuch  vaft number of pictures, when his
circumftances were to low as they were at firft, and
his wife fo great  shrew He wrote . treatife of
scometry, perspective, fortification, and the pro-
portion of human figures. Several authors have
poken of him with honour, and among others,
Erafmus and Valari.

Reffections on the works of ALBERT DURER.
 man ever shewed to valt and univerfal 
 for the arts as Albert Durer. After
he had rried almoft all of them, and exercifed him-
felf in them fome time, he at laft refolved to con-
fine himfelf to Painting and Graving. Though by di-
viding his time between the one and the other art,
one would think it would have hindered his perfec-
tion in either, yet he maftered them both by an ex-
traordinary application, and became perfect in both
Graving and Painting. Bur example, and the firft
things that prefent themfelves to ours eyes when we
apply to any profeftion, being apt to incline our
gout to the same way, and to give the fame turn
to our thoughts, Albert fuffered for want of being
put


   VE   into  right method at firft, by the fight of the
moft beautiful pieces, by  good education, and by
the ftudy of the antique. His vein was fruitful,
his composition grand, and though the Gothicguito
prevailed in his time and country, yet his produc-
tions afforded matter enough, not only for the Ger-
man Painters, but even for the Italians to learn by.
He was bold in the execution of his deligns.
He did whatever he fet himfelf about, and was fo
clean and to exact in all his performances, that one
may perceive he was entirely mafter of the prin-
ciples of his art, which he had laid down as fuch in
his mind, and which related chiefly to defign: how-
ever, it is furprizing, that having been at fo much
pains to know the structure of human bodies, he
should make fo little ufe of it; for in moft of his
orks, except his virgins and virtues, which accom
pany the emperor Maximilian' triumph, his defign
is poor and of an ill gufto. He imitated nature on-
ly according to his own ides of her, and was fo far
from encreafing her beauty, or feeking out the
graces that may be found in her, that he very rarely
copied thofe beautiful places which fortune often
furnifhes  Painter with. He was more happy in
the choice of his landskips, which are generally fet
off with agreeable and extraordinary prospects.
In short, his performances, as much as they were
admired by his countrymen and cotemporaries, do
not deferve now to be examined according to the
rules of the feveral parts of Painting; for, if there
is one good property in them, there are  great
many bad ones. Neverthelefs, we muft do that ju-
Rice to Albert' memory, to own, that though his
defigns were of  Gothic guito, they were learned,
and the novelty of his prints acquired him  great
deal of reputation; upon which Vafari faysof him,
cc If this excellent and exact artift, whofe genius was
 univerfal, had been bornin Tufcany, as he was
CC
  .   ER .
 in Germany, and had had the opportunity of ftu-

 dying the beautiful pieces that are at Rome, as the
of reft of us have done, he would have been the beft
co Painter of Italy, as now he is to he reckoned the
 rare and moft celebrated genius of the Fle-
 school.
 EOR . .
.   Nuremberg, Hudied Raphaels works very
much, and underffood the art of graving on
copper, as well as that of Painting. He affifted
Marc Antonio in divers of his performances, and
when he returned to his own country, he drew  many pictures, and graved feveral plates on
subjects of his own invention, which are to many
proofs of the beauty of his genius and of his skill.
He put down the letters of his name on his pieces
thus, . . and was an artiff very famous in his
time.
 ET ER   ND IT .

 Munich, was  man of skill; he painted al-
moft all the palace of Munich, for Maximi-
lian, duke of Bavaria, who had taken him into his
service. He drew the defigns of the hermits of Ba-
varia, which were graved by Raphael and John
Sadeler, as alfo feveral other things of his defigning.
The four doctors of the church, which he defigned,
were engraved by Giles Sadeler.
At the fame time flourifhed Matthew Grunewale,
who painted after the manner of Albert Durer.
CORNELTUS ENGEL BERT.
 Leyden, was cotemporary with Candito and
 Grunewalt. Several very good pieces of his
drawing


 .  :  
drawing are to be feen at Leyden and Utrecht. He
had two fons, who imitated his manner very exact-
ly, Cornelius Cornelie, and Lucas Cornelis. The
latter finding there was nothing to be got by Paint-
ing; to little was it encouraged in his time and
country, was forced to turn cook; but his genius
would not let him abandon an art in which he might
eafily arrive to perfection, fo he returned to his firft
profeftion, and became  mafter.
He went to England, and was employed by
Henry VIIl. who took him into his favour as well
a into his service.
   NA   Vahn   .  ,
 Bruffels, was Painter to Margaret, gover-
 ness of the Low-Countries, for whom he did
feveral fine pieces, as alfo for the churches in that
and other cities in Brabant and Flanders. When he
drew any picture of confequence, he laid some leaf-
gold for his ground, and painted upon it, which
kept his colours freth, and in certain places added 
luftre to them, especially in  celeftial light, which
he painted in  picture of the day of judgment, that
is in the chapel of the alms-houfe at Antwerp. He
drew  great many defigns for tapeftries by order of
the emperor Charles . and the chief of the tapeftry-
work which was done for the pope, and other princes
at that time, after Raphael’ defigns, was committed
to his care to fee them well execured. He was one
of Raphael Urbin'’ difciples.
MIC HAEL CO   ,
 Mechlin, learnt the principles of his art of
 Bernard van Orlay, after which he went into
Italy, was Raphael' difciple, and generally made
ufe of his ideas in the pictures he drew, for his own
invention


emment        .
 was barren and brought forth with diffic
culty. His defign and colouring were of Raphacls
Golt. When he returned to Flanders, he had the
inanagement of the execution of fome of Raphaels
defigns for tapeftry. He died at Antwerp, anno
 being fourfcore and fifteen years of age.
LVCAS   ET DEN
AS taught the firft principles of Painting
by his father, but nature had beftowed on
him to many advantageous qualities for the art; that
at nine years old he began to engrave, and at four-
teen publiffed leveral plates, as confiderable for their
beauty as their number. His knowledge of Paint-
ing was as forward as that of graving, and his per-
formances in both were exact and clean. He fol-
lowed the ftudies neceffary to his profeffion with ex-
treme diligence; and if the time he spent in look-
ing after the effects of nature, had been employed in
Rudying the antique, what was faid of Albert Du-
rer on the like occafion; might have been faid of
him, viz. that his works would have been admired
in all ages. He was magnificent in his way of liv-
ing, dreffed well, and spent his money freely.
Lucas and Albert carried on  friendly correfpon-
dence together, and were emulous of each other'
works, without jealouty. When Albert put forth 
plate, Lucas publifhed another, and leaving it to the
worldto judge of their merit, they were the firft that
did juftice to one another, praifing each other' per-
co bafe
formance; without either envy or jealouty
oe paffions in fome men of art, for which no excel-
 lence can atone.
The friendship between Al-
bert and Lucas encreafed very much at their inter-
view in Holland, whither Albert went to vifit his
competitor and friend, two names which are very
iellom to be reconciled. Some time after Alberts
return
 LI VE  of
 to Nuremberg, Lucas made  tour to Lea=
land and Erabant, to vifit the Painters of thofe pro-
vinces; which journey not only coft him  great
deal of money, but his life alfo, for it is faid  Flush-
inger, of his profeffion, out of jealouty of his me-
rit, poifoned him at an entertainment to which he
had invited him. He lived in  languithing con-
dition fix years after, during which time he almoff
always kept his bed. What troubled him moft was,
that he could not work at eafe; however, he had
fuch  love to his art, that, ill as he was, he could
not forbear working -bed; and being told; that
his application to it in the condition he was in

Be it fo; 
would haften his end, he replied,
co will have my bed to be  bed of honour, and
ce cannot die in  better pofture than with my pen-
 was fcarce forty years old
co cil in my hand.
when he departed this life, anno  and per-
haps the poifon that did him moft hurt, was fol-
lowing his bufinets with too much earneftness in his
tender age, when nature would have formed  better
conftiturion for him, had the not been prevented by
other employments, about which he fet her to work.
 INT IN MAT   ,
Otherwife called,
The FARRIER of ANTWERP.
FTER having followed the trade of  farrier,
  or blackfmith, near twenty years, he fell fick
of  diftemper, which hindred his working to much
that he could not get his bread, to he was forced to
go home to his mother for fubfiftence; but the being
both old and poor, had much ado to maintain her-
felf. While he was at his mothers,  friend of his
coming to fee him, by chance shewed him  print,
which  frier had juft then given him. At the fight
of it, he felt within himfelf  violent inclination to
COpy


eminent PA      .
 it, which he did with some fort of fuccels, and
this begot in him  defire to learn the art of Paint-
ing. He began to ftudy it, and finding himfelf, as
it were, in another element, both natural and plea-
fant, he grew well, and made  confiderable pro-
grets in his new profeffion. An accident happened
foon after, which quickened his zeal to arrive to 
perfection in the art. He fell in love with  Pain-
ter'sdaughter, who was very handfome, and belov-
ed by  Painter much more  mafter than he was.
Love and emulation puthed him on in the profecu-
tion of his ftudies, and made him leave nothing un
done that might contribute to render him more
KKilful, in order to fupplant his rival.
This ftory is told in another manner by some who
will have love to have been the fole agent in the
matter, and that Cupid took the hammer out of his
hand, and put the pencil into it. This is the com-
mon opinion, and his epitaph is much to the fame
purpofe, as alfo feveral epigrans written on the fame
subject. There are  great many pictures of his
drawing at Antwerp, and among others  defcent
from the crofs, in our lady' church. He generally
did half figures and portraits, by which means his
works being to be removed with eafe from place to
place, are difperfed throughout all Europe. His
manner was fingular, and had nothing in it like
that of other Painters. It was finithed, and his co-
louring ftrong. He lived  long time, and died
Anno  of CALCAR, or CALKER,
Ative of Calcar,  town in the dutchy of

Cleves, was  very excellent man, but his un-
timely death hindred his thewing himfelf to the
world as otherwife he would have done. In the
year  he entered the fchool of Tirian, and
made
 LL    of
 fuch progress in it, that feveral of his pic-
tures and defigns have paffed for Titians, in which
many good judges have been deceived, and it is pro-
bable many more will be fo. From Venice he went
to Rome, where, having made himfelf very well
acquainted with Raphael' manner, he staid  while,
and then proceeded to Naples, in which city. he
died, anno  It was this Calcar who defigned
the anatomical figures for Andreas Vefalius' book
of phyfic and anacomy, as alfo the portraits of the
Painters, that are before the lives written by Valari,
which is enough to ferve for an encomium upon
him. Among other pieces he drew  nativity, re
prefenting the angels around the infant Chriff, and
has fo ordered the difpofition of his picture, that
the light proceeds all from the child. It is an ad-
mirable piece. Rubens who was owner of it, would
not part with it as long as he lived, but after his
death Sandrart bought it, and fold it again to the
emperor, who fet  high value upon it.
 ET   ROUC
AS born in the town of Aloft, and difciple
to Bernard van Orlay, who had lived with
Raphael. He went to Rome, and having  happy
difpolition of genius, improved himfelf fo much by
the fight of the beautiful things he faw there, that
he formed an excellent gout, and became  very
correct defigner. When he returned to his own
country, he undertook the charge of directing the
executing of fome tapeftry work after Raphaels de-
figns; and burying his wife, after he had lived with
her ten years without having any children, he was
perfuaded by fome merchants of Bruffels, to under-
take  voyage to Conftantinople; but when he ar
rived there, finding there was nothing for him to
do but to draw defigns for tapeftry, the Mahomme
dan


eminent .      .  religion not allowing the Turks to reprefent
any figure, he spent his time in defigning the parti-
cular prospects in the neighbourhood of Conttanti-
hople, and the manner of the Turks living, of
which he has left many wooden cuts, that may -
lone fuffice to give an idea of his merit. In one of
thefe pieces he has reprefented himfelf under the
figure of  Turk, flanding upright, and pointing
to another Turk who holds  pike. After his voy-
age to Conftantinople, he went and fertled at Ant-
werp, where he drew feveral pictures for Charles .
and in the latter part of his life, he wrote  treatife
of fculpture, geometry and perspective. He alfo
tranflated Virruvius and Serlio into the Flemith
language, being himfelf  very good architect. He
died in the year  ALDEGRAEF,
 the city of Louft in Weltphalia, where he
 painted  great many fine things for the
churches, and among others,  nativity, worthy the
admiration of the curious. He did very little elfe-
where, bufying himfelf more about graving than
Painting, as we may guets by the vaft number of
prints which are every where to be feen of his, and
by which one may fee he was  correct defigner,
that his expreftions were graceful, and that he would
have made an excellent Painter, had he travelled in-
to Italy.
   
AF  BUS ,
OR  in  village of Hungary called Mabufe,

AI was the cotemporary of Lucas van Leyden.
After having in his youth worked very much, he
went to Laly, from whence he came to Flanders,
and was the firft that shewed the Flemish mafters
Noty
 LIVEiS of
how to treat of hifforical fubjects in their compofi-
tions, and to expofe the naked, which had not till
his time been put in practice.His pieces are very
common in the Low-countries and in England. Hc
was in his younger days fober and studious, but in
the latter part of his life, too much addicted to
drinking. The marquis of Verens entertained him
in his service many years; and this nobleman be-
ing informed that the emperor Charles , intended
to come and lodge with him  to receive him more
nagnificently, ordered that all his dometties should
be dreft in white damalk, and Mabufe among the
reft was to be fo arrayed : but Mabufe, inftead of
giving meature to have  fort of robe made for
him, that he might make his appearance with other
of the marquis' fervants, defired to have the da-
malk, pretending he would contrive  whimfical
Shape with it, for the diverfion of the spectators;
whereas his true meaning was to fell it, to raife mo
ney for the tavern, which he accordingly did; for
knowing that the emperor was to come by night,
he thought he could manage the matter well enough,
by the help of the dark; wherefore when the day
appointed by the emperor for his vifit came, Ma-
bufe, instead of filk, fewed white paper together,
and painted it like damalk, with great flowers, mak-
ing it up as  robe should be made, and to took his
place in the train of the marquis. He was put be
tween  poet and  mufician, whom the marquis
Kept alfo in his houfe.
Though the emperor faw his train of domefties by
Hambeau-light only, he was to pleafed with it, that
the next day he would have them march before him
again, to view them the more attentively. He
ftood at  window to fee them pats by, the marquis
Htanding near him when Mabufe appeared between
his comrades, the emperor took particular notice of
The Painter' robe, faying he never faw fo fine 
Gamalk


eminent        .
 The marquis fent for him, and the
cheat being difcovered, the emperor laught heartily
at it : however, the inarquis fearing it would be
thought he had dreffed up his men in paper for the
emperor’ reception, was fo angry with Mabufe,
that he threw him into prifon, where he remained 
long while, minded his work very affiduoully, and
drew abundance of defigns. He died in the year
 SC HO REL.
  born at  village called Schorel near
Alkmaer in Holland. He was Mabufes
disciple, and worked some time with Albert Durer.
While he was travelling up and down Germany he
met with  frier, who was  lover of Painting, and
then going to Jerufalem; which made him defirous
to accompany him. He defigned in Jerufalem, on
the banks of the river Jordan, and in feveral other
places fanctified by the prefence of fefus Chrift the
Saviour of the world. His fubjects were fuch as
piety and curiofity fuggefted. In his way home
he Ropped at Venice, worked there  while, and
having  defire to fee Raphael' Painting, went to
Rome, where he defigned his and Michael Angelos
works, after the antique fculptures, and the ruins
of the ancient buildings. Pope Adrian the IV,
being about that time advanced to St Peter' chair,
he gave Schorel the charge of fuperintendant of
the buildings at Belvedere; but after the death of
this pontiff, who reigned little more than  year and
an half, Schorel returned to the Low-countries. He
said  while ar Utrecht, and drew feveral rare
pieces there. He paffed through France as he re-
turned home, and refuled the offers which were made
him on the part of Francis , out of his love to eafe
and aquict life. He was endued with feveral virtues
and
  LI VES of
and fciences, being both  mufician, poet and orator.
He underffood four languages well, the Latin,
French, Italian and German. His good humour
and good qualities, got him the love and efteem of
all that knew him. He died anno  in the fixty-
feventh year of his age. Two years before his de-
ccafe, Anthony More, his disciple, drew his picture.
  MB ERT . MBAR ,
 Liege, was very induftrious to learn every
thing that related to his profeftion. He ftu=
died the antique very much, and was the firft that
brought into his country  method very far from
the Gorhic and barbarous guito, which was then
predominant there. He fet up  fort of academy
at his houfe, where, among many more, Hiubert
Goltius, Frans Floris, and William Kay, were his
difciples. The prints which were engraved after
his works thew what his godt was. Sandrart and
others pretend that Suavius and Lombard were
the fame perfon. He fays, that Lombard in his
youth was called Lambert Suterman, and that af-
terwards he changed his firname into Suavins, as
more harmonious than Suterman. Thus he put
down on his prints, . Suavius Inventor. Sand-
Fart adds, that Van-mander miftakes in making
Lombard and Suavius two perfons. The curious
may exercife their criticifins on this matter, by
comparing the prints marked with each of their
names one with another, which Sandrart affures us
were done by one man at different times. Domi-
nick Lampfon, secretary to the bishop of Liege,
very well known to the learned world, wrote the
life of Lombard, who was his intimate friend.
The fame Lampfon wrote  copy of verfes on
Lucas Caffel,  rare landlkip Painter at that time.
He was very idle, and lived and died at Bruffels.
OHN


emnent   IN TE  .
 HOL BE IN,

Atter Known by his German name Iians Hol-
 bein, was the fon of John Holbein,  skilful
Paipnter, who lived at Auglburg, where he worked 
long time, and then removed to Bafil in Swiffer-
land. Here Iians, or John his fon, was born in
the year  He learnt of his father the firft
rudiments of the art, and followed his Htudies with
extreme eagerness; but the elevation of his genius
foon raifed him above his mafter. His productions
had  great deal of force in them, and were of 
great character. He painted our Saviour' paftion
in the town-houfe of Bafil, in  picture confifting
of eight parts, and containing as many fubjects of
Chriff' fufferings. He painted alfo in the fish-
market of that town  dance of peafants, and
death’ dance thefe two pieces are engraved in
wood.
Erafimus, who was his friend, and had had his
picture drawn by him feveral times, imagining that
Swifferland was  very improper country to de juf-
tice to Holbein' merit, propofed to him to ge to
England, promifing, by means of Sir Thomas More,
to prepare the way for his favourable reception by
the King. Holbein readily accepted the propofal,
and the rather, becaufe his wife was fuch  terma-
gant, the would never let him be ar reft. In Eng-
land he drew  valt number of admirable portraits;
amongothers thofe of Henry Vill, and his children,
prince Edward, the princess Mary, and the prin-
cets Elizabeth. He painted hiftory-pieces in feveral
places, two of which are grand compofitions, viz.
the Triumph of Riches, and the Condition of Po-
verty. Frederic Qucchero, whom the King of
England fent for out of Iealy, was mightily far-
prized at the fight of Holbein  works, faying they
WWere


TBe .     of
 not inferior to either Raphaels or Titians.
Holbein painted alike in every manner, in frefco,
in water-colours, in oil, and in miniature. He de-
figned with crayons, or the pen, with wonderful
facility, and the great variety of his defigns are
without number.
There happened an accident in England which
would have been fatal to him, had not the King
profected him. On the report of Holbein' cha-
ratter,  lord of the firft quality came to fee him;
but it being at  time when he was drawing  figure
after the life, he entreated his lordship to put off the
honour he intended him to fome other day. The
lord taking this for an affront, broke open the door,
and very rudely went up ftairs., Holbein hearing 
noife, came out of his chamber, and meeting the
lord at the ftair-head, fell into  violent paftion,
pushed him backwards, and flung him down ftairs
from top to bettorn. The nobleman was very much
hurt, and the croud that came about him being wit-
nefies of his fall, it was  terrible mortification to
him. His men would have revenged their matters
quarrel, but Holbein having barricadoed his door,
had time to fave himfelf on the top of the houfe;
and making the beft of his way to court, told the
King what had happened to him, before the lord
could come to make his complaint. His majefty
promifed to procect him, and the lord arriving
fome time after, the King commanded him not to
actempt any thing againtt Holbein. This Painter
died of the plague at London in the year  about tifty-fix years old. It is amaring to
think that  man born in Swifferland, and who had
never been in Italy, should have fuch  guito, and
to fine  genius for Painting. Sandrart relates, that
Rubens having been to fee Hontorft, at Utrecht,
and thence proceeding in his way to Amfterdam,
was accompanied by leveral Painters, and by Sand-
Fart


