

  ra HE
Translators Preface to the Reader.
th Vy
+HE Author'’ known Abilities and great Reputation in
 having juftly recommended him to the Esteem of
 .
the most knowing there,  thought it very proper to make
him speak Englith; and the ratker, (to uje his own Rea-
son) for that, the many excellent Authers hove writtin

on Painting, yet, in Bulk, they seem rather to cry up the
Art and Artiff than lay down solid Rules for Attainment: To which .
may add, that those Authers are moftly useless to an Englifuman, and
few, or none, copious enough to answer general Purpole; nor at beft are
of absolute Service in England, where fresh and fair Natureis preferr’
before the brown and warm Colouring of some other Countries, especially
italy, where the beft Books have been written on the Subject: But princi-
pally, for that  think, nothing has been publissed here so learned, full
and compleat, and so well explained by Plates and Examples, as tbe
Auther will be found to be; ner perhaps, wherein Portraiture ( Branch

which England mightily affects) is so copioufly bandled.
The Author learned the Rudiments of his Art under his Father; and
at Amkterdam (whither be came Toung from Lurtich, the Capital of
 Bishoprick of that Name in Germany) where be settled; lived and.
died, gave early Proofs of the Skill and Eradition for which be was
afterwards famed : Accordingly, be pursued Hiltory and irs chiof Or:
nament Emblematic Learning; and, having made some Proficienty in
thefe two capital Branches, he conceived, that otber things must be eafy
of courte, as being but Rivalets flowing from those main Springs:
Wherefore, tis probable, by what he writes, that, in their Tuins, pe
prattifed Pertraiture and the otber Parts in such manner as to quali
 to criticife on all of them.
  TEANSLATORS PREFACE
Rut bis Tbirff for the Arts sopp’ not bere: He was perfuaded, tbat
so inquifitive, so laberious  Genixs as bis, was as proper for  Plate as=:
the Pencil, and therefore, at Times, be etch’  great Number of Prints
from his own Defigns, which have met with good Reception Abroad, ef-
pecially in Germanr, where  Set of them have been copied to geod Ad.
Tutuge.
As his Praitice was as useful, laberious and univerfal as that of
any Painter of the Age, so alfo was the Theery whereon be built it. It
dees nit affear, that he ever vifited France or ltaly, or any other Acade-
my: Neverfbeless, Rome, France, England and Germany know him in
his Werks; and at Home be made himself Maffer of such  Fund of Claffic,
Embleratic, Iiferical and Discriptionary Learning, Prints and Books
en Painting, freeifecture, Antiquities and other Requifites, and was so
will acquainted with the Works of the bet Mafters, that he became 
gotd Critic. By this Means and thro' his great Induftry, his Ourline ap-
pears irue and easy, his Colouring warm, foft and expreffive, and his Com-
potitions nable, Earned and jup.
Amid,? tis Fatigues, be preferved the pleafunt Humour which reigns in
feveral Parts of this Work; particularly, in the odd Desription of the
Flood, Book II. Chap. . and the Conteff between Anuque and Modo,
Book iIl. Chap. .
 Bat what render’ him mot dear to the dge be lived in, was his: kind
and futherly ixpraction and Encouragement af joung Artiffs, and his com-
aunicairve Advics to Painters in general, (who made him frequent Vi-
 which they acknowledged, in often causing him the Umpire of their
Diffates on Art, eteeming his Decisions as Oracles.
: This publick Spirit, this Lice for his Art, as they were aluays con-
fricuous in him axthent Mercenariness, to they remained with him to the
lat: For, not with landing his Loss of Sight, (the Effect of too close an
Application to Etching by Candieligat, as many imagine, and as be him-
Ilj almot acknowkidges) he, as Monj. Gericke, Recfer and Proseffor in
the Rojal cademy of Arts at Berhn, and Painter to the King of
Prosha, obferves in the Preface to his Verson of the futhor', Drawing:
book, made weekly, ( Thing not to be parallel’ in any other
Mafter) the Genter of  Circle, contifting of young Students, whom he
inftruted in Drawing (by which he got  Mlaincenance) and like the
Son difpented his Beams to all around him.
Under his great Affiction, the Painters, his Cotempararies, knowing be
bdffored  large Collellion of Remarks on the Art, for his private
antement, almol generally intreated him to reduce them to some Or-
der






or mo
 the KE ADE .
 for public Betrefc; which, not withffanding his Less of Sigbt. and
Age, tbey thought him still capable of deing.
His Inability for Painting, an Amusement to his Chagrin, his Friends
Requefts and  Defign to be thereughly informing to promising Tjres;
fvay’ him to  Compliance; and how well the Werk was received may up
pear from the commendatory Copies of Verfes penn’ by the beft Peets of
that Time, and prefix’ to each of his thirteen Books; which  have
omitted in the Translation, as being of no Significancy to an Englith
Reader.
The aforefaid Remarks and Observations were originally in French; and
in compiting, the Auther made several Additions to them, even while the
Sbeets were printing off; which may possibly make the Work seem, in some
Places, less smooth than otherwife it would be, the certainly the better for
them; judging with Piato:
Non chim txdet bis dicere quod bene dicitur.
He tells us, that if Connexion in general be not so well observed as might be
wished, it was occason’ by his doing the Work prece-meal, and taking Things
as they arese: And that, if he be thought to speak too freely and censure otber
Nens Works too rably, it should be considered, that, as  Man, he has bis.
Failings in common with others Nevertheless, if his Reasons be impar-
tially examin’, be questions not an Acquittal: For, says be, if any Works.
be read without Love and impartialiry, the Labour of Inftruction is
loft; wherefore, he, who would reach Fundamentally and Well, mult
avoid Prepoffestion, wergh duely what feems odd to him, and inquire
and reafon throughly before he fix either his Thoughts or Opinion of
Things. He also says, that if he be any where found to preseribe Rules
which he has not aleays followed, tis oxing to his dark Condition; where
in his Memory and Ideas became more rigerous, bright and intent; and coh-
sequently his judgment more sirong, acure and refined; by continual Re-
fections on the Art, than wben he had his Sight and was bussed in his.
Imployment. For further Satisfaction in this Point, see Chav. Vilts of

 st  
 Book of Colouring.
 now remains to be obferved, that as his chief Talept lay  Pifiety,
the nobleff Branch of Paiating, and allowing the greateft Freedoms; to the
Heat of his Zeal, and the many Inconveniencies attending Portrainure,
might possibly indace him to spedk  little too. Ireely of the latter; in Dook
VII. However,  hope, he will be excused, since he notwithstanding fails:
not afterwards to be very particular in his Infiructions on that Head. And.
if what be advances, in Book  Chap. XIl. reuching the Reprefentation of
 

The THANSLATORS PR EFACE
IV

 frk Perfon in the Trinity, give any Offence,  enly observe, that, the
bis Reasons are plausible, yet be modeftly concludes, that herein  Painter
muft be very difcreet, and not abute the Liberry allowed him by Scrip-
ture, and the Confent of the Fathers, Coc. Wherefore, since such Thing;
are not allowable by Proteltants, (of whose Communion the Auther profef=
fes to be) Ino farther maintain the Point than to say,  could not, in Tuffice
to the Wark, leave eat the Chapter whichtreats of it.
Bat  grintigal Satisfaction  think necessary to be given, touching the
verbal or delcriptionary Tables, occurring in several Parts of the Work.
Teefe, tho or fir  View they may pesfibly seem dull and tiresome, yet, when
daely confidered, will appear to be Mafer-pieces in their Kind, and not
only di play the uther' solid Learning, but aijo his great Induftry in in-
forcing his Precegts by every Methel. For, as it is evident that he bas
spared for no Pains, beth by Difcourfes and Examples, to evince the Dec-
trine of Dilpolition, Morion, Paltions, Contraft, Colouring, Harmony,
Light and Shade, Reffexions, Draperies, Grounds, Ornaments, and
generally every Thing which can contliture  good Compofition; so
 but objeree, how wenderfully be reduces all those Parts to Pratticein
the said Tables, and thereby illugrates divers Things and effential Circum
Rances, which coull not be so well done either by Discourfes or in any other
Manner. In  Word: Theyare Summaries of the Whole, and the beft Instructi-
ons for Performance, and to inferm the Judgment of  Lover of Painting,
and therefore the Work would have been incompleat without them. It is cer-
tain, that by such Precepts as the Auther lays down, the greateft Mafters in
Hiftory bove mude themselves famous; and by thefe, even Face-painters
have artained tbe Leofeness and Freedom,  may jay, the hiftorical Ma-
nagement we difcover in their beft Pieces. But the uther stops not here:
For be sails not every where to inculcate emblematic and hieroglyphic
Learning;  Part of Knowledge which, though much overlook’, is very
belpful and necesfary in almoft every Branch of Painting.
On the Whole, as his great Reading appears by the Number of Au-
tbers be quates on this Occasson, and as be endeavours to be generally useful,
even to the Handling of Architelture, Statuary, Engraving, Etching,
and Mc so it is hoped, the Werk will prove here, as it bas
done abread,  Srftem of the Art of PAINTINC. And  may poffibly,
in due Season, alfo publish the Drawing book of the same Auther  as entertaining as profitable to Lovers and Artiffis.
 in   REEREMR MRREAREEEEMRERE
The Aubers INTRODUCTION.
BE HOEVER will Rudy Ares and Sciences, mutt: expect
both Trouble and Labour, without repining becaute his
Expectacion is not immediately antwered, or the knd juft
in View: This is to true, that even the greateff Maffers
 are not always alike fuccessful. But if Delays seem tire

 let us duely ponder where the Obfiruction lies, and
whether  Mafter cannot help us over it: Surely, if we be not too full
of ourfelves, we may meet with fuch an. Aid; according to Cato.
Ne pudeat, qua nescieris, te velle deceri:
Scire aliquid, Laus off, Culpa eff, nil difcere velle.
Engliffd,
Neer be afhamed to learn what may be taught,
Since the Refusal is  greater Fault.
Experience has taught me, that ee mult feek the Sciences, not they
us. Ovid thews us, by the Fable of the Nut tree, chat the more it is
beaten, the more plentiful the Fruit: Bur Men mull not polipone
Things to the Decline of their Lives, in Expectation that the Fruit will
fall of itfelf. Therefore feek you  Friend, and  Wafter early and in
Time; for he will, in both Capacities, fatisty your Purpofe: Always
confidering, that as it would be ungenerous in him to deny his Help when
asked, to it would be worle in you to refule it when offered; if you
think, that for this Reafon you are under an Obligation to inttrult others,
- Do as you would be done by.
He, who finds the true Friend in the good Mafter, ought to think
him an invaluable Treafure; fuch an one should have Returns in the
higheff Marks of Gracitude, which the leaft Unthankfulness mult not
fully : Difdain not to impart to him your Difficulcies: For tho' in other
respects he may be your inferior, yet fuch inferiority can never re
proach yen.
But, above all Things, be not prefumptuous; becaute fuch  Weak.
nets cruthes our Attempts, and at laft leaves us in Ignorance. The Phi
lofopher (poke great Truth, in faying, That many would have artained
Sciences, had they not thought that they poffeffed them already. Contrari-
ly, you mult not be difmayed at rifing Difficulties; for others have are
rivedar the Art under greater: Their fure Paths we tread, their By-
ways we avoid: Which is certainly  thort Means of getting more.
Knowledge in lefs Time: In which  with thefe my following Labours
RH
may be some Help and Furtherance


TEERELRRRALERRREEEARERE
Emblematic Table of the Aur orP AIN..ING.
 AI NT ING, in  grand Apartment, as  beautiful Virgin in
 her Prime, of  majeftic, modeft and atcentive Countenance, fitson  black Piece of Marble, adorned with geometric and optical Dia-
orams: Her Hair Chelmur, and on her Head  golden Diadem: Her
Drets confits of  blue Breaftornament, red Gown, whice UUnder coar,
and  black Girdle embroidered with Silver.
Nyrure, with her five Breafts, flands before her; which the reprefents
with the Pencilin her Perfection.
Theary isnaked, being only girt with  blue Scarf, and flands on the
right side of Painting, whofe rocks the lifes up with her lefe Hand;
and, whifpering in her Ear, points to  Picture with her right Hand:
On her Head,  Pair of Compaffes, with the Points upwards.
On the left Side of Puinting is Praftice, in the Form of  fedate Ma-
tron, Kneeling on one Knee: She holds in her left Hand  Line and
Pencil, and Compaffes with the Points downwards; and with her right
direlts the Handof Printing to the Picture: Her Head drets, yellowith
Whire; and her Garment, darkith Vellow, with the right Sleeve turn-
ed up to the Elbow: Her Uppergarment, of dark Green inclining to
Plack, lies by heron the Floor.
Behind Puinting flands Judgment, fomewhat exalced, lighting her
with  large Torch: He is adorned with  purple Garment, powdered
with golden Stars, and lined with gold Stuff: By his side an Esgle.
Above him is fris, liting on  Cloud, and refting her leff Armon
the Rainbow, the Extremity of which reffelts on Painting' Pallet;
Her Garment is Whire, and Head dress Bluc.
To the left of the Apartment is Interos, feen lifting up  dark Gur-
tain; from behind which, thro'  Window, some Rays of the Syn dart
on Narare: He is crown’ with Lawrel; has  imall bloodiffred
Garment, and holds  Torch: Before him lies  Palm-branch.
 the further End of the Apartment, rifing  Scep higher; we fee,
thro'  large Gateway, into another On the fides of this Gateway fland
in Niches, Hifory on the Right and Poefy on the Left: Over the Bate
is  whice Marble Buft of Pallas, refting on  Pedeftal, on which Is



Icarred  Sphinx.
This latter Apartment is hung with dark-grey Stuff, and fer out with
Pictures, in round Frames, of Hiffery, Archstetfure, Landskif, Per-
i Seas, Cattle, Floaers; Fruits, Still Life; &:.



  
  RLA NATL.ON
At the End is Fane, feen dying thre  large open Window, fogud.
ing her Trumpet And, - in the Offskip is raifed  Pyramid.
 XPL AN AT  .
DAINTIIYG is here reprefented as  beautiful Virgin in her Prime,
 of  majeftic, modelt and attentive Countenance; becaute at thole
Years the Mind exerts its greateft Vigour and Perfeverance, and lets
nothing elcape unheeded. She tits on  square black Piece of Marble;
becaute that Colour is unchangeable and naturally artillant to the others:
And the Geometric and Optical Diagrams on it, point our her Building
on the infaliable Mathematies. Her Hair is Chesnat, becaute that Co-
lour is the moff laffing, and beft befits thefe Years: Her Head attire is
 golden Diadem, alluding to Vellow, one of the three capital Colours.
Her Breaft-ornament and Cownarered and biue, fignifying the two other
capital Colours, which by their fweet Mixture, and Exprestion of Light
and Shade by the Girdle, charm and entertain the Eyc.
Accomplith’ Natare, with her naked Secrers, is the Object of her
Imitation, by confulting Tbeery; who, naked, is partly girt with 
blue Sears, as thewing, by her concinual Contemplation, that the pat-
feffes fomething Divine, and  perfelt Knowledge of all Things vifible.
She flands to the right of Painting, and, lifting up her Locks, inspires
her with fuch exalied Thoughts as bring the Art to Perfection, and fir
it for great Things: Prompting her furcher, with the right hand Figure
on the Picture, to go to the Depth of the Sciences. The Pair of Cam-
paffes on her Head thew her continual Round of Thoughts, in con-
templating divine Secrets.
Praftice holds in her Lefe hand  Line, Pencil and Compaffes with
the Point downwards; fignifying the conflant Service the offers to
Painting. Her Sedatenets thews that thes foldom found but in Age:
With her Right hand the directs that of Painting to the Picture, there.
by to animate her to continual Praftice. Her yellowith -whire Head
dress and darkith yellow Garment lignify, that, thro' Age and clofe
Application to the rt, the lirtle heeds outward Attire, and therefore
negletts to fhift her Drefs: Her right Steeve furned up thews her Reach-
incls for Butinels:. tier dark green upper Garment on the Flear. tells is,
ethat the bringsall Thingstolight out of the Obfcurity of Nacure. Flie
Tools in her Left hand are the Neceffaries for Painting. The open: Ciam-
passes pointing downwards thew, that the meafures terretrial Things.
Judgment; ready to brins Painting to Perfection, enlightensher with
the Rays of his divine Lkill; repretented by the Torch; as : burning
Light,



  PLANAT IO .
Light, by which the Ancieats expressd Divinity. His purple Garment lined
wirh geld Stuf, and powdered with Stars, fignifies the heavenly Inluen-
ces, contantly keeping their due Courfe and Order. The Eagle by his

Side rells us, that as is Tugiter' Bird, and foars highelt, and bears
Thurder-bolls
tris on  Cloud, and her Arm on the Rainbow (the various Colours
thereof reslect on Pxaring' Pallet) recommends to her  careful and
artfal Tempering and Cfe of the various, yer gradually uniting Colouss.
Her wiste Girmint, and Fise Head-Lross thew, that the ought to execute
neatly her heavenly Conceptions.
Anteros, handing to the left of the Apartment, and lifring up  dark
Cartain, with  Palm-branch at his Feet, denotes, as Brother to Cupid,
Love for the Art. The Poets feign of this Palm-branch, that he, being
long at Variance with his Brother, ar laft got it out of his Hands. Ihis
opening the dark Curtain fhews, that Love for the Art dispels Dark
nets and Confulion; to that the Rays of the Light illuminating Nature
rendersher more agreeable. His Crown of Laurel, Garment and Terch
fignfy hisardent Love and Zeal for the Art; which, being arrived at
Perfection, merits an everlalting Laurel.
Hifory and Peess, fanding . Niches on each Side of the Gate, tell
us, that they are the principal ids to Painting, lupplying her with
rich Thoughts and proper Marerials for Praltice and Ornament.
The Buft of Pallas reprefents the Goddets of Wifdom, the Promo-
terof Art: And the white Marble, the Purity of her Knowledge.
The Sphing on the Pedefal thews, that as this wife Montler is feigned
to devour thofe who could not folve his Riddles; to the Art, futters
thele to die in lgnorance, who do not penetrate her Secrets.
The further Apartment is hung with dark-grey Staf, the better to
Hing off the Compolition.
The Piftures with Figures, frebitefture, Landship, Coc. are the Perfor-
mances of the Art. Their hanging in round Frames raifes our Attention,
as well for their nice Dispoficion as the Contraff they caue in the Archi-
relture; their Placing, with respelt to the Subjects, is alfo very agree-
able; and their Roundness implies moreover infiniry, and that the Names
of the Profeffors of Painting, in their respective Choices, are borne with
immortal Praifes and Honours on the Wings of loud Fame, which is. to
crown them in Affcr-ages
The Pyramid in the Offship is raifed, according to the Cullom of the
Ancients, to the eternal Memory of excellent and great Men; with this
intription—Eterna Memoria facra; — Sacred to eternal Memory.
ACA





      it 
 CATALOGUE of The PAINTERs and other ARTisTS
mentioned in this Work.
Cademy, Fr. Kalf
Veronefe
Architerts.
Kneller
Vouct
 Albani
Rgyplians
Laireffe,
Se.
Apelles
Babylonians
Bakker, old and Lallman
Statuaries.
Cadmus
Lely
young
Cstaneo
Affrrianse Chal.
Lievens, John
Bamboccio
deans
Greeks
Van L  Orme
Mantegaa
Barocci
Palladio
Dxdalus
Martys, Quintin
Bartholet
Romans
Jews
Metzu
Berchem
Keyzer
Santoritio
Michael Angelo
Bloemart
Lylippus
Scamorzi
Mieris
Bol, Hans
Serlio
Michael
Angelo
Mighard
Bril
Vigrola
Phidias
Mola, Fancifco
Browwer

Vitruvins
Fraxiteles
Moller
Brengel
Promethens
Moucheron
Le Brus
MVYNAKYEKAHPENE
Quellin
Vander Neer
Caracci
Quenoy
Nettcher
Caravaggio, Poly.
 Catalogue of the
Ofade
Carlot
 UTHORS
Engravers.
Fran.
Penni Gio,
Correggio
quoted in this
Audran
Polydore
DaCortona, Beret.
Work.
Berry
Pouffin
Dominichino
Bitchop
Damantius
Pynakker
Dou, Gerard
Bloteling
Elopas
Raphael
Durer, Albert

Boulanger
Alcinous
Rembrant
Van Dyk
Edelinck
Alex. ab Alexan-
Rottenhamer
Everdingen

dro
Goltzins
Rubens
La Fage
Marc, Antonio
Ambrofius
Ruyldaal
Da Fiori
Van der Neulen
Ammianus
Savry, Rowland
Nia
Du Gardin, Char.
 Segers
Genouille

Perelle
Anacreon
Spagnolet
Georgione


Perrier
Antifihenes
Gollzius
Teld
Aphrodifius Hicx,
Pietro Santi
Guido
Tintoret
Apollodorys
Le Potre
Titian
De Heem
os   Vapr
DelVaga; Pierino Schoonebeck
Hemskirk, Mar.

Seths Children
Appianis
Verelll
Jordaan
cise
Appion
Vermander, Ch. Viffcher, Senior
Julio Romano
 Lp of HOTHORS, &.
Proverrius
Dionyfins, Halie. Juffinas
Aphims
Pythagoras
Juvenal
Dorotheiss
Apuleins
Qintilianus
Labeo, Cornelins
Eliezer, Rabbi
Archias
Ripa, Cxfar
Laclantius
Epicharmus
nofo
Leon
De Salgado, Fran
Eralmus
Afiftides
Salfultins
Linichor
Lucherius
Ariftophanes
Scholaflicus
Liplius
Euripides
Arifforle
Seneca
Longinus
Euicherus
Atconilis
Servins
Lucianus
Euicbrus
Athanalius
SeXTUS
Lycurgus
Euthrmins
Atheraus
Silius Iralicus
Macer Bebins
Fabius, Pictor
Avoultipniis
Socrates
Macrobius
Feffus
Bafilius
Solinus
Martial
Fellus, Pompeins
Bede
Solon
Merian
Flatrus
Bidloo
Muretus,
Suctonins
Florus
Anton.
Blondus
Sindas
Mulxus
Frutchins
Boccaius
Tacitus
. Niceron
Frontinus, Julius
Bolle
Galtruchins
Nigidius
Taffo, Torquat.
Le Brun
Terence
Gellins, Aulus
Olaus Magnus
Cxlar, Julins
Tertullian
Origenes
Goeree
Callimachus
Theagenes
Grammaticus,
Orolins, Paulus
.
Carprovius
Theophilus
Gregorius, NaTl. Orpheus
Cartari, Vincent
Thucydides
Ovid
Groenewegen
Cate
Tibullas
Papinius
Carullus
Grouus, Hugo
Timans
Paufanias
Hingens
Cenforimus
Titus Livins
Perfins
Hygimus
Dela Chambre
Valerius Maxi.
Petronins
Hehodorns
Chryfippus
Varro
Pherecydes
Herodorus
Cicero
Philo
Heliod
Valquins, Ferdi.
Clamlianus
Vegetius
Philofratns
Clandins Saturns. Hefychins
Veramus
Phurnutus
Coeverruvias, DiHlicronymus
Vermander
Pindarus
Concilium, Nicx. Hirrus
Vincentins
Plato
Cojaciuus, Jacobus Homer
Pling
Virgil
Hooft
Carrius, Quintus
Plutarch
DaVinci, Leonar.
Cyrillus
Horace
Vitruvins
Polemon
Democritus
Hortentius
Vondel
Pollux, Julins
Demophoon
Jamblichus
Polybius
Kenophon
Demoltheres
Jolephus
Lenodotus
Porphyrius
Iidorus, Hifpa.
Diodorus, Siculas
LOrOARler
Proclus
Eon
Hocrates
ATa
Benyfius, Arcop. Junius






 

  of the ooks and Chapters.
Book . Of Penciling, secand Tint, and IX. Remarks on some Mistakes in Hiftorical
Beauty.
Compofitions
 . Of Richness and Probability in Hiftory

 handling the Pencil  IA
II. Of Painting affer the Kl. Of the Ordonnance of Hieroghyphic
Life
Figures
 Of Dead-colouring;
KIl. Of the Order or Succestion of the Mo-
and how to perform it
tions proceeding from the Paftions
 Certainty and Expedition
KIII. Of the Ufe and Abufe in Painting
 Of the second Colouring and its Requi-
XIV. Of particular Inclination for
OrIC
Branch, whether Figures, Landlkips,
fites
 Finifhing
Buildings, Seas, Flowers, (oc.
. Of Retouching,
 Of the second Tint, and the Relief it
XV. Of the four Sorts of Tables, and what
 are
Occalions
 Of the Ufes of Ovid’ Mctamorthesis;
VII. Of Beauty; and the Proportions of the
 what is further neceffary to the sKetch-
Members in an human Body
VIII. Of the Motion of the Members  and executing  Table or Ordonnance
IX. Of paffionate and violent Motions  Rules for the Management of Small
. Of the different colouring of the Naked,
in  Child, Man and Woman; in Health,
Figures in  large Compats, and the con-
trary
 and affer Death
 Of the Colours and their Ufes, with
XVIII. Of the Ordonnance of Hiftories,
 to bock the Sexes
Portraits, Still Life, (. in  small Com-
Pats
XII. Of agrecable and beautiful Colouring  Of the Divifion of Hiftory
 Of the Obfervables in  Frontiffiece-
Book II. Of Ordennance, or Compostion.
plate,  Of the Reprefentation of
Chap. . Of the Qualities necelfary to the
Dreams, Apparitions, unufual Thoughts,
and Fictions, at leifure Times
firft Idea or Sketch
 Of Ordonnance
XXL. Neceffary Observations in continuing
 Of he Ordonnance of Hillories
an Hiffory in feveral Pieces for Halls, Gal-
 E Of the Vles of fine Prints, Academy-
 and Models
. Of Probabilicy; and what is Painter-like
Book III. Of Things Antique and Medern.
in an Ordonnance of few or many Fi-
Gures
 . The Difference between what is
VI. Of the Difference between Vouth and
 and Modern
Age, in both Sexes
II. Method for reprefenting what is City-
 Of the Property and Choice in the Mo-
Like or elegant Modern
 of the Members, in order to exprets
III. The Nature of Ciry-like Subjects, which
the Paffions
 afford plentiful Marter for  medern
VIII. Of the Hfue or Refik of Thoughts
Painter
 Hiffories
 Hiads of the CHAPTERS
 XIV. Of the Naure of the Sun; with re.
IV. Conumntion of the Lame

thed to differein Countries
 Of Dxfes
XV. Of the Sun' Light upon Objects at
Rifing and Setting
 IV. Of Caryg.
XVI. Of the Application of Sun-fhine, and
other Lights
 . Of the Colours, and the ordering
XVI. Of the Properties of the Sun and -
them
 Lights, in their eitential Reprefents-
II. Or the Propery, Nature and Colours of
cions; and of the chief Times of the Day
Dreffes
 Of the Colsers of Dreffes, and their
XVIII. Of the Moon, and her Repreten-
 with each other
 Of the Difoftion of Chady Objects, er-

KIK. Of the Effeets of artificial Lights, as
EET  : . Hear, agant  light Ground
of  Torch, Lemp, Candle or Fire  Neceffary Hiats in the Ufe of Perfpec-
. Of eHLSDr Of .Ts
 Of the Dispeficion of irregular Objects,
 
XXI. Of the different Colouring in great
COn-
andL.:  sgginl DrKncE, and the
ETArT
and small Pieces
 Of the Difference of Force in large
VII. Of Arrceablenes in irregular and con-
wellins Objects
and small Painting; and the Efects of
 and diminithing Glaffes  Offfrong Obicets agaimft faint Grounds,
and the conrarr; or Darknets againft
XXIII. An Enquiry into the Difference be-
Liskt, and Light ssainft Darknets
tween  large Landskip ornamented with
 Of the peimting Objects duffity
small Fisures, and  small one with large,
with respect to the Air; the Day being
suppoted clear in both
Book  Of Lifors and Shades.
 Of the Lights within Doors  . Of the different Lights of  Pic-
XXV. Of the Application of Lights to the
ture
different Species of Hiftories; with  Ta-
 Of the Condition of the An or Sky
 or Ordonnance of all the Lights  Of Reffections in the Warer
 Of Ground-Chades, according to
the
Book VI. Of Landkips.
Difference of Lishes
 Of Reffections in general
Chap. . Of Landlkips in general
 Thar Sun -thine has no more Force
than
II. Of the Lishe, Form and Grouping of
common Light, with respect to Shades
Objects in Landlkips
 Of the By-ornaments in Landlkips  Of the Ground-shades in Sun-fhine  Of immoreable Ornaments; as Tombs,
VIII. How San-ftime is to be reprefented in
Houles, Ec.
 Piece having  common Light
 Of beautiful Colouring in Landskips
 That the Shades of Objects in Sun-thine
VI. Of the leating of Trees
 not more glowing than in common
VII. Of the placing and fellowing of Land
Light
KKips
 Of the Difference of Ground-Thades,
VIII. Of the Lights in  Landskip
 cither from the Sun of radial
IX. Of Landlkips in  small Compats
 Of Painting Rooms with Landlkips
 Of the Reprefentation of different Lights
XI. Of ornamental Painting without Doars
in the fame Piece
 Currous Obfervations on Sim-Thine
 Tables or Ordonnances of Pansand  Of the Suns three Qvalities
 for the Embellithment of Landlkips  The


TH HULSSOT THe CHAPTERS.
XIII. The Eable of Dryoge, for the Embe. VIII. Of the Pictures proper to various .
partments
lishment of Landikips
 Table or Ordonnance of Erifebion; IX. Description of feveral Pictures adapted
and the Emblem of  Satyr' Punishment:
to the five Orders in Architecture
 ferving for the Embellifhment of
. Of the Pictures in the second Story,
 afiet the Deric Order
Landlkips
 Of the Word Painser-like
KI. Of the Pictures in the third Story, buik
 the lonie Order
XVI. Of Painter-like Beauty in the open
 Of the Pictures in the fourth Story,
Air
XVIl. Of Things deformed and broken,
buill after the Roman Order
 called Painter-like
KIII. The Fable of Califfe, adapted to the
 Order in the upper Story  VII. Of Portrairure.
KIV. Description of the inward View of the
Temple of Apolle
 . Of Portraits in general
II. Of the Defects in the Face, and other
Book IX. Of the painting of Cielings or Pla-
 The Obfervables in  Portrait, particu-
larly that of  Woman
 . Of Cieling-painting in general  Of the Choice of Lights, Draperies
II. Of the ufual Difficulties in Cieling-
painting
and Grounds in  Portrait; and of the
 of Sight
 Offore thortening Objects in Cielingsibid.
 Of Porrrains in litle
IV. Of the Sizes of Cieling-figures
 Of the Application of Requifites,
. Method for viewing  Cieling-piece on
Per-
respect to the different Conditions of
the Eafel, as if on the Cieling
 Of defigning after the Life, for the
VII. Of the fuiring of Colours in Draperies
Ufe of Cieling-paintings
 Of the colouring of fying Figures
 Of the Imitation of great Mafters in
VIII. General Obfervations in painting
the
painting Pourtraits; and of copying their
Cielings of Halls, Galleries, &.
 in general
IX. Method for drawing fore-Chortened
Buildings, Figures, Trees,  after the
Book VIII. Of Archsetture.
Life
 Of the Harmony and UUnion of Colours
in Cieling-piecear
Chap. . Of Architecture in general
 Of the Rifes of the Ornaments,,
XI. Of the Deins in =ered and protane
humns and their Pedeftals
Hiffory and Falies; and fifft, of the Dift
 Of the Properry of  Building,
and
ference between  facred and profane Re-
.
Obfervations thereon
 Of the matching of the various colour-
KII. Dilquifition touching the Repretenta-
ed Marbles, as well without as within 
tion of the Trinity
 ; with the Management of
KIII. Of the Glories proper to Angels and
Tombs, Vais, and Bacchanalian Terms
 Dcities
 Of the Reprefentations of Angels
. Of the Veins and Eyes in Stones ufed in
Heachenith Crenii
 as well without as within;
XV. Of facred Emblems
 how to difpofe them
 Of the Penates, Lares and Capids
VI Of Ruins
 Devotional Actions of Nations
VII. Principal Direltions for painting
Na-
the
XVII. Of the different Offerings of
:naments of Halls, Rooms, ( and their Rifes
 .


TH HEANT TH ATLAP.FEKS
KIK. ; the scerdetol Dcfe: Velchiaml PII. Or dis mittery Dreffs and Arms of
several Nations, piriicidarly of the Greeks
other Marerial, pertaining to Offerings s Rmens
 Of the Origin of the feveral Enfigns
Book . Of Sistuary.
and Shields, and their Devices, for Diffincti-
on of Nations and particular Pertons  . Of Stanary in genersl
 Of the Execution of Statuary
 XII. Of Fowers.
III. Of Ralsrelicts
IV. Of the Force, Property and Manage-
 . Of Flowers in general
ment of Bats-relicts
 Of Painting Flowers in Halls,
. Of the Draperies of Statues and Bass
Apart
 Galleries, but principally on Ciel-
reliess
ings for Ornament
 Of the Atcifudes of Statues
 That  Flower-painter should under-
 Of the placing of Figures upon
Jeftk, Fronciffieces, in Niches and other
stand Perspective; allo the Miltake of re-
Phees
prefenting Things improperly
 Ofthe Ufefulnes of Aisdellins
IV. Of Flowers on all Sorts of Grounds
 Of the vifual Decerion of  Starue with
 Pedeffal, as well within as without
. Of the Dispofition of Flowers and their
Colours in Feftoons and Groups
Doors: As allo the fuiting of Vafes and
 Continuation of the ordering and plac-
 the Flowers
. Of the Ornaments of the Frontifpieces
 Temples, Houtes, Gr.
 KIII. Of Engraving.
Book XI. Of Srilllise.
Chap. . Emblem touching the Art of En-
graving
CEsp. . Of Still-life in general
 Designs for Bats relicts proper to Still-life
II. Of the Art of Engraving in general
 Of the general Elegance requifife in  Rprefnations of Sill-life,
applicable
good Print; and of the Difference be-
to particular Pertons
tween Book and other Prints
 Of the Origin, Nature and Quality of
IV. Of the Difference between Engraving
the Reman trumphal Crowns, and other
and Etching
 of Honour
 Remarkson Hatghing
 Of the Solemnities of the Remen Tri-
VI. Curious Remarks touching Stipping
 Of eiding Bats-relicts
 Of the Manner
of the four principal
VIII. Of Engraving; and the Managemept
of the Strokes.
and publick Greaias Cames, and to whofe
 inffirured
. Of the black Art, or Me  
THE


  
 th     IVL
L     PENCILINC, SECOND IINT, and BEAUTY.
WNEMMWWNKNHMHAMKNMNNERNALNNMELNNRNYNFNNNRNRYYNEN


CHAP. . Of Handling tbe Pencil.
  Handling the Pencil is twofold, and the two
Manners very different from each other; the one slix=
ent and smooth, the other expeditions and bold; the
former is proper for copying neat and claborace
Painting, and the latter for copying hold Compoti
tions, as big as the Life. But he, who practifes the
former Manner, has this dvantage above theig
 ther, that, being accuses
alle gncts, he can
eatily execute the bold and light Manner, in rangataerrife difficutt
to bring the Hland to neat Painting; the Reafon of which is, that: ot
being ufed to confider and imicate the Fullnets of small Objects, be
muff therefore be  Stranger to it; befides, it is more eaty to leave put
some Things which we are Mafters of, than to add others, which ye
have not fiudied, and therefore it muft be the Artiffs Care to finith pis
Work as much as poffible.
Tis ridiculous to hear the Disciples of great Maffers boat, that .
copying great Things, they certainly obtain  great and firm Wianner,
and



 Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty. Book .
and  fat and bold Pencil; and therefore are induced to difrelith every
thing that is neat and elaborace; but, after all they can fay, tis cer-
tain, that he who would handle beff, muff Rudy that Manner which
moff exactly exhibits the different Narures of the Objects which he is
to reprefent; for thereare no other flandlings of Advantage to  Paint-
er, than the two before mentioned
But further, to convince any one, that  great and bold Handling
contribures nothing to the Art, let us place  Piece thus painted, at 
due Dillance, and then fee whether the Penciling makes it took more

natural:  his Advantage it may perhaps have, it may bring in more
Money, fince to happy  Mafter can difparch double the Work of -
nother, through the Bent of an imagination firted to the Expedition
of his Hand Each Branch has  peculiar Handling adapted to the
Narure of the Objects to be reprefented; as, the Landskip-painter, in
the Leafing of Trees; the Cartle painter, in the Exprestion of Wool and
Hair; the Ornament painter, in Foliage, Branchings, Coc. and the
Flower-painter, in thin Penciling.
Painters are allo obferved to ufe, fome, long-hair’, others, hort-
hair’ Pencils; this thin, that fliff Colours; but, notwithttanding any
fuch Differences, all is reduceable to the two Handlings aforefaid; yer
in fuch Manner, as that neither of them ought to appear but for the
Advantage of the Arriff only, the Art being  Theory of the Mind,
and the Handling,  manual Praltice, confitting of  Penciling in an
orderly and decerminate Matter, for reprefenting an Object certainly
and quickly, and without muddling.
Many are of Opinion, that this is  Cift of Natme peculiar to some
only; and tho'  cannot incirely dilown it, yer muft fay, that it lies
more in Pratice: And tho' we fee many Painters, in the decline of
their Lires, fall into an hard and muddy Manner, yet that argues not
againtt my Polition, fince it happens either through in-lination, or Want
of better Foundation in their Vourh.
How offen do we fee Mafters known by their Disciples? Little and
flovenly Mafters never bring upneat and curious Painters, tho' it fome
times happens, that  neat Matter may rear  flovenly Dikciple. And
the Reaton is plain; for good Inftrultion is not alone fufficient, without
 doe and perfet Apprehention of it; Carelessnets being the ulual Pa-
rent of  bad Pilture; and to infelting an Evil will continue, as long
as the Artiff remains in this lgnorance.
It is certain then, in order to obtain  good Handling, that  right
and early Apprehention of Instruction, and thorough Sight of Faults,
  Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty.
are ablolutely neceltary: When thefe Points are gained, the Artiff
mult endeavour at the three following effential Qualitications.
 Boldaets of Hland, in the Dead colouring.
 More Care, Circumspection and Labour in the second Colouring,
nd,
 Thorough Pacience and Attention in the Re-fouching or Finithing
 Pilture; the nigher to Perfection, the more Care.
Thefe three Qualities are as effential to  Painter, as the three Graces
t Venus.
Our firft Work then mutt be, to lay both Lights and Shades bold;
with  broad and full coloured Pencil, one by the other, even and
without muddling; and then, gently moving the Pencil to and fro, up
and down, as the Nature of the Object requires, we thereby unite the
Colours, and fetch out the Relief: Wich this Caution neverthelets, that
the Lights mull not be fcumbled too much into the Shades, or the
Shades into the Lights. Thus the Work will have  good Effect.
By proceeding in this Manner, we shall perceive no very particular
Handling in our Work, and therefore it mult be  good one; for the
firlt Colouring is hid by the second, as that is by the third, wherein
les the Neatness.
Having hitherto fpoken chiefly of Painting in little, and its Man-
ner of Hlandling,  shall, in the next Chapter, lay down Inftructions for
Painting as big as the Life.

CHAP. II. Of Painting after the Lise.
 who paints after the Life, and finds it difficult, through
  Years and Inability, to make  good Compolition, muft pot
undertake Things beyond his Strength; if ten Figures be toe
much, let him take hve; if thefe be two many, two or one, nay.
an half Figure; for little and good is preferable to much and bad
Again, if he have no Genins for Draveries, let him fiudy the ik-
ed, as Spagnolet, Carlet and other Mafters did; but then, like tham,
he muft labour to excel in that Branch; for  middling Arciff will
neither get Honour nor Gain.
 let me advife you
 To
  Eo

 



 Of Penciling, Secmd Tint, and Beauiy. Boonrs
 To gain  thorough Knowledge of Form or Preportisn, and tbi
Pations, that vou may not only give your Figures their potaral Moti-
ops, but that it may allo well appear what causes those Motions.
 Express properly the Condition and Dignity of your Figures by
their Carriage; whether they be private Perfons of either Sex, great
Rich, or Deries
 Seck the Colouring, not in Spagnolet or Carlet, but in Natarr
Eerfelf; let your Carnations be as natural as possible; the freth and fair
you muft paint fo; and the yellow or ruffet mult be of thofe Colours.
But, above all, induftrioully avoid inclining to  particular Man-
her; do not maintain that warm, glowing or brown Colouring is beft;
( Bat is, in his Kind, as beauriful as  Parrot) for then you will cer-
fainly err; and, fince Aen are too apt to hug their Faults, your
Care muft be, to be known by  good Manner and Handling.
Now, for our rrifts fafer Conduct, we shall lay down the following
Precepts for the right Ordonnance of  Piece.
 Let him chiefly confider, where the Piece is to be fixed; in order
to place right the Herizon, and Point of Sight.
 Let him contider, what Force the Light has in that Place, and
thereby, whether the Painting mult have frong Lights and broad
Sbades, as bring near  Window or, mere faint and melting Light, as
riioved fumber into the Room. This we may foon perceive in  Land
skip, of other within door Painting, and whether the Shades should
be ftrong, or not; fince it' certain, that the Objects, whether great or
tmall, have different Efects in thefe two inftances. And now, if the
Perspettive be also well managed, and the Colours laid fresh and proper,
and well bundled, by gently uniting them with large Pencils, the Piece
will be good
If this Hindling and Meling of Colours be not yet underftood, 
Hill clear the Point in the following Inftance: Take what Colours your
Objed requires, be they Red, Blew, Green, Violet, Coc. lay them
Fread and diffintt by each orber, without scumbling; then, viewing them
  Prece of Lantern horn, you will perceive  perselt Union
of Corours, and that none of them he diffintt, the, in Fatt, tbey do.
This folly ifaltraces what  fay of  ffuent or fimooth Pencil: Now
Te Effed is the fame when we paint in Vernith, or tough or fac Oil;
becaute painting with ftarved Colours, on  dry Ground, can never of
fell this Smoothness

Ih painting after the Life, we ought to ule large Pencits; and tho'
to tome, this may seem an ufelets Admonition, becaute great Paincings
require


  Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beanty.
 fuch, yet  mult recommend it, becaute some ule common-fiz’
and worn ones, which to muddle the Work, and fill ir to full of Hairs,
that it will bear fcraping. This Evil is to ftealing, that ar latt it be
comes habirual, and then the Painter neither minds or fees it himfelf.
Becaule there are two Sorts of Piltures; the one moveable, the 
ther fixed; the former hung at pleature in Halls or Rooms, the latter
for Cielings, of far above the Eye, each of them calls for  diftentt
Management. Niches in Galleries, as near the Eye, mult be ranged in
the Class of moveable Pictures, as well as Pourtraits; wherefore
they ought to be neater handled, tho' fometimes placed higher; at 
ther times lower.
If it be asked, whether an upright Piece,  or go Feet deep front
Floor to Cieling, ought to be imoothly handled, and finithed through-
out!  fay, No; but rather to be to painted, as high as you can reach;
less finithed in the middle, and less than that as it advances in Height;
and yet with fuch general Care, that all Parts seem to have  like Ferce
and Einissing. And tho' we find  different Condult in Ferdaan' magi
nificent Triumphal Piece in the Houfe in the Wood; neaf the Hogue,
yet that can be no Rule; becaute the Painting being large, the Eve
cannot diffinguith, whether the upper Parts be less fnished than the
under; moreover the Firures are bigger than the Life.
But here, methinks,  Difficulty may be started: Suppofe, in  Keont
where fuch  large Piece is, another were to be painted by it fmalter;
(as  fingle Figure no bigger than the Life) how shall we manage, in
order to give this latter Picture the same Force as the former?  antwer,
That Force and Warmth he in the Colouring, not in the Roughness of 
Picture; whence it is, that the small Pifture muft be handled in the same
Manner as the great one, to make them look agreeable; for heighten
ing and shading it with the fame Force, will produce the fame Eiffect:
And if not immediately by the pure Strength of Colours, yet by icum-
bling and glazing we fetch it out. But then, lay fome, it cannot
have  due Conformity with the Life; becaute, on comparing it with the
large Picture, it feems lels than the Life:  antwer, That this Objecti-
on muft not make us exceed the common Size of Narure, fince no fach
large Men, as in the great Pilture, are to be found in Natare; and
if any fuch were, their Parts would look too big, their Skins rougher.
Pores coarler, Hair more buthy and Rrong,  than we fee in Nar
ture: But the contrary may be practifed in  Cieling-piece, where the
Compolition is moftly hieroglyphic and filtitious.
 proceed now to thew more amply  good Manner or Handling.
CHAP.


 Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty. Book .

CHRP. III. Of Dead-colouring; and how to perform it with Certainty
and Expedition.
HE moll certain and regular Way is, to begin the Pilture
from the Depth or Lointain, (especially when  Landskip is
introduced) lnce all Things muft juit and fall in with the
Lightafand Darkeff the fir, and the several Tints of the Piece be
modifed and governed by it; as indeed muft alfo the Light on the Fore-
ground, and the Force of the Figares; otherwife the Effelt will be dif-
agreeable and uncertain.
But if the main Compofition contill of Figures, or other large Ob-
jelts only, is better to begin where you intend the greateff Forct; whe
ther it be on the firft or second Diltance, and then work to the Off part
of the Picture.
Now, in order to proceed with Certainty, we muft take Care that
general Harmony of Parts be well obferved; that the Tints and Colours
be justly managed, according to the Laws of Depth and Diltance, to
that nothing appear offentive to the Eyc; and then the Work will

be in  fit Condition for second Colouring, with little Trouble.
Many Painters indeed err, in not knowing where to begin rightly,
and, only confulting what Objects they like beft, heedietly tall on them
firft: For Inftance, if it be  gold Vafe, they begin with that, and
then proceed to  blue Drapery, then  red one, toc. Others begin
with the Nudities, and to run thro' all the Nakeds in the Picture; by
which ftrange Disjunction the Work becomes mif (hapen, and the Paint-
or made more uneaty, than by an ill-primed Cloth.
But fuch Painters never think on any Means to extricate themfelves
ot of this Labyrinth: To what Purpofe is it to thew them their Er-
for ? They are fatished with what they have done; and falve all by
laying
- The Picture is but dead coloured; on Finishing it shall be -
tberwife; what is now too light shall be brought down, and what teo
dark beigbtened — But all this while, the Work does not go for
ward; the rifing Difficulries pall the Fancy, and the Work is in  bad
Condition for second Colouring.
CHAP.







ESshap.  Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty.

CHAP. IV. Of the secend Colouring, and its Requifiies.
  Piece be well deadcoloured, and have  good Harmony and
Decorum, we certainly render the secend Colouring the more eaty;
for then we can unbend our firfl general Thoughts, and apply them
folely to lay neatly and finith particular Parts, and to to work on the
former good Ground. But, to do this in the bell Manner, we mull, as  laid, begin from the greateff Lointain, the Sky, and werk forwards
from thence: By this Means we have always  wer Ground to mell in with
the Outlines of the forward Figures, which otherwife they would not
have; befides another pleafing Advantage, that the Piece goes forward,
all Parts well supported, and  good Harmony in the whole: Whence the
Rye mult be fatisfied, and the Mind concinually spurr’. This Manage
ment is one of the prime Qualities of  Painter; for what can encou=
rage him more, than an Affurance that he works on  fure Bafis, and
which he finds without feeking it: But unhappy is he, who works
diforderly; for muddling on one Thing as long as his Fancy for it lafts,
and then thoughtlefly proceeding to others, and dwelling on them in
the same Manner, he miffes the necellary, becoming Air of his Piece;
and, at laft, all appears out of joint, and difrelithing.
Having come thus far, we proceed to the Manner.
CHAP. . Of Retouching, or Finishing. The French call it Recov-
cher; we, Revile.
  fure  Painter is, having got thus far, let Experience and
 his own Reffection be Judges; for the Figures having their pro-
per Dillances, Strengths and Effects, and all Parts due Harmo-
ny and Keeping, nothing remains but to give the Piece the laft Force
of Light and Shade.
Todo which well, rub your Piece (or to much as you think you can
paint of it at one Time, and before the Vernith grow dry) with  good
thin Pifture-vernis, mixed with some fat white Oil; then work on
this wet Ground, by clapping your Lights on the lightef Parts, and,
by



  Secend Tint, and Beauty. Book)
by  ventle Scumble, unite them with the wet Ground aforefaid, ann

the Tenderncts of the Nudities and Draperies, in foch Degrce, as is
neceffary for each; then put in the Vellow, or Glow of the Reffecti-
ons. If, after all, the Lights of the Nudicies should be here and there
too frong, reduce them, by mixing  little light Oker, Vermilion,
brown Red, Lake, or Afphalcum (according as the Colour is tender or
Rrong: under the Vernith,) glazed thinty over them; then heighten
upon this with fuch  Colour as you thirk fir: Do the same by the
Draperies. Thus the Work will fucceed, and the Colours be prevent-
ed from going in, in drying
CHAP. VI. Of the secend Tint, and the Relief it occasions.
HER  are many who, whatever Pains they take, cannot be
brought to relith  Thing, in which they find to much Diffi-
culty. They, who have long practifed after Nature, are vexed
to fee the Works of other Mafters beter coloured, and more pleating
than their own: Infomnch that, with Difficulry, they re-affume their
Profeffions, and thea, eagerly hoping to do Wonders, find their old
Veration fill return.
Would thefe Menrightly fearch the Caute, their Trouble would end;
for, tho' we are narurally better pleated with great Maffers Works
than our own, becaute of our inferiority in Knowledge, yet we muff
not be therefore difcouraged; but (as  faid) fludy where the Fault lies.
Let us then make good Reffeltions on neat Piltures, in order to profit
by them; and alfo converfe with better Mafters than ourfelves.
Tis to be lamented, that thefe Men fomerimes fee fine Things in
another Mafter, but can give no Reason for it, becaufe they work ra-
ther by Accident, or Chance, than on fure Principles: As was the Cale
of  young Painter some Vears ago, who, shewing me fome of his
Pieces, faid, — This Piece  painted fix Tears age; this four, and
thot less; yet can perceive no Difference between them in Goodness:
Now, tho' the Difference was vilible, the laft Pieces appearing hetter
managed, in all Parts, than the former, yet he would not believe me;
trying, Thar, notwichilanding all his Endeavours, his Pictures were
grey and muddy, when others were clean and pleafant, and their Lights
broad:—Ilay on my Colours, tays he, fine and warm as they do, and then
expediciously scamble thew into eack other; now, pray tell me, what mus
 p Mast
 Tint, and Beauty.
Chap.  Of Penciling
then eccason this Foulness?—  teld him, —Certain Painters, with
whom you daily converfe, spoil you; and, as long as you follow them, all woy
Advice is to no purpose: As jor your Thoughts and Ordennances,  like
them very well, but dislike your Handling; you de not lay on your second
Tint clean enough; (by the secend Tint,  mean that which is laid on
the light Parts, cowards the Out line, by means of which, all relieved
or round Parts are forced to unite with the Ground, and to go off round.
ing) this you mult lay on clean and beautiful, in the same Colour as.
that of the Light; but it mult not be muddy, and like Sbade; for be-
ing alfo lighted by the Day, the Darknels, and its Grey, can have no
Effelt upon it; Relief, or Roandness, being nothing elle than  Light
receding, or geing of, which ought to partake more or lets of Blue,
in Proportion to the Colour of the Carnation; which, if yellowifh,
the second Tint mult be greenith; if Red, the Tint mult be Violet;
and if  Whice Colour, the Tint is  Medium between the two Co-
lours aforefaid. From all which Premifes tis ealy to apprehend, that
this second Colour is to be got and mixed with Bine; but not with 
foul Colour becaute it then lofes it' Fleshiness. — Here he asked me,
In what Manner then he should make it darker!  antwered, that, as
the Diftance of Objects caules Faintnels in Colouring, and what we
call ir makes  bluiss Interposition between us and them, to he mult
mix nothing with his Tint, but fine Blue, or Small, in Proportion to
such Diftance: This is  Colour, if  may fo fay, which gives no Co-
lour, or does it without much Alteration. This Conduct relaces not
only to Nudities, but allo to Landskips, Grounds, Stones, Draperies,
and, in fine, to every Object, having either Roundnels or Diftance.
Moreover, another Perfection, neceffary to this Tint, is, that we muft
not let it be too dark upon the Relief; becaute  broad Light looks ma-
jeflic, and fipne, when, between it and the broad Shade,  tender Diffe-
rence only appears. —He returned me Thanks, and  went off.
There are many, who know not the importance of the Things they
Rlight, and, in Comparifon with others, think them of no great Mo-
ment: As was the Cafe of another Painter, who, copying  Piece of
Poutin, obleryed nicely the Colouring, tempering even the half Shades
and tender Tints exactly on his Pallet; but, having finithed the Piece,
he, in other Pictures, fell again into his old Road: He himfelf law
very well  great Difference between this Piece and thofe others, and
was forry for it. But the Mifchief lay in not retaining the Manner

which



 
 Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beanty. Book .
which he had before imitated with to much Pains; and this occafion.
ed his Stigbtness.
We find even Painters who believe, that the second Tint mult, upon
Excremines, be quite dark, mixing in it the Colour of the Ground;
and fay, the great Mignard did so; which  intirely deny: It is true,
that once  read  fmall Trearife, written by the famous Bofe, ehti-
iled, Le Peintre Converti, or, The Converted Painter; in which, among
other Things, he precends to prove, that Mignard made his secend
Tist too dark, on the Extreminies of his Objects: But  fay, that it
muft not be underftood from thence, that he muddled the Tint with 
foxter Groundcolour; but rather, that, in Proportion to the Lightnets
or Darknels of the Ground, he made it either lighter or darker, with-
out uting any Red, Vellow, or Black in it, as they prerend. Moreo
ver, we know the vall Difference between  foreright Face, and afore-
Chortened one; that the one on the near Side grows larger than the 
ther; as the Faces in Plate . plainly thew: Which, by observing or
regleding, gives the Painting either great Elegance or indecorum.
The greateff Difficulty fome Painters meet with, is, that one of
the Quanties of  good Picture lies in  broad Light; this they ima-
gine to confift in  Fiarness, reafoning thus: If it be Truth that  Pic
ture, with fuch Lighes, is beft, more round ones mult needs be worle.
 very loofe Argument certainly ! Since Narure and daily Experience
of round Objects teach us the contrary, especially when it is not Sun
Thiny Weather.
 have faid before, that the Contour or Out line ought to wwite in the
Tints of the Groand, that, going off from the more enlightened Parts,
iI say sof appear to much as the others: To illultrate which, we ex-
hibir here in Placel. aforefaid,  round Pillar . againtt  Ground,
half light, half shade; to that the light side of the Pillar is fer off
by the Shade of the Ground, and the shade of the Pillar by the light
Side of the Ground. Now, it muft needs follow, in order to ovtain
the Relief, that the Shade of the Pillar ought to be made lighter on
the Excremity, that it may round off towards the light Ground; 
therwife it would be but  Semicircle. On the oppolice Side Tis the
tame, except that the Light does preferve itfelf, and its own Colour;
becaute the Air, which interpofes, caules the Our-lme to recede and fall
back; and in the Shade the fame, with this Difference only, that
there


Fn 
Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.
IF
there it is deubled by the Lighiness of the Back-ground, partaking
more of lefs of its Colour.
if this be not well apprehended, let the next Example explain it:
Place  globular Body againlt  light yellow Ground, as in the said
Plate; then, viewing it at some Diltance, you will perceive the Out-
snderly to melt into the Ground, without any
line on the haded
Hardnels This relates to the Roundaets only.
Now let us obferve, how much the Colour partakes of
If this
Ball be of  blue Colour, the Extremities will be greenith apainn the
Vellow; if the Ball be Violet, they become purplith; and if the
Ball be Vellow, as well as the Ground, they will be more yellow in
the Shade, as we have already taught in treating of the Naked: The
fuperficial Roughness or Smoochness of the Ball caufes litle Alle-
tation, except with respect to its Nearness to, or Dillance from, the
Ground.
Looking now on the light Side of this Ball, we shall find, that if
the Ball be lighter than the yellow Ground, the Colour of the Ground
cannot then have fo much Force on it; fince the fuperficial Colour of
the Ball cannot be overcome by  leffer Colour than it, and therefore
the yellow Ground cannot add to its Colour; whence it happens, that
the meer Interposstion of the Hir caules the Relief, or the Ourline to
round and go off.
Again, were the Ground darkith or black, yet the diminishing of
the Coloar, cauted by the interposition of the Air, will be nither
less nor more, but will be more or less fet off by the Ground, and feem
lets round
Arcifls err in thinking, that the balf Tint, which is laid next to the:
Excremity on the light side, and called Mezzo-fint, is the fame with
that placed between Light and Shade, under the Name of middle Tinr;
for this laft is  whole Tint, and the other but an half Tint, and not
to broad as the Mezzotint, which more than half mixes with the
Shade, and confequently is olser; altho’ some give it upon the Edge
of the light Side another Colour, more like Shade than the Colour
of the Objecl. The Mistake of which we have already thewns.
Bur when the Light is froncing (or comes directly from before);
then this Merzoint is half mixed with the middle Tint. Let me.
not here be mifunderflood; for  speak not of the Side light, which
Bainters generally wtc.
From
  Of Penciling; second Tint, and Beauty. Book .
From all which Premifes his plain, that this Tiat, though: called
Mer of broken Tint, cannot be confidered as Shade, fince it
partakes of the Light.
Again, it happens frequently, that, in the fame Piece of Painting,
. Than athers;
tome Objects are rounder or darker upon the
may gdid Till da
She Point
which ought to be fo, when, by means of
of Sight, we can difcover more than the Semidiameter, of their Round-
and but  Semidiameter or less, in others; as in the
Dets
two Pillars in the Plare aforefaid: For if the Point of Sight be in
the middle of the Piece, and the Light fall in it obliquely from the
right side, then the Objects on the right Side will have  broader
Shade, and thofe on the left  broader Light; as thefe two Pillars
plainly evidence.
But if now, on each Side of thefe two Pillars, were fome other
Pillars placed alike diltant from the Point of Sight, and both cut from
Top to Borrom through their Centers, parallel with the Horizon, it
is certain, that, at the proper Diftance, we thall fee, not only the in
ward Splitting, but alfo some Purt of the hindermoft Half, as in Pil.
lar . Now obferre (as the Pillar to the left thews) that the Part
which is feen beyond the half on the light Side, rounds off fo much
the further, and confequently becomes darker than where the main
Light rounds off; on the contrary, viewing the light side of the
right hand Pillar, you fee as much less of the foremolt Diameter,
or half, as more of that on the shaded Side; wherefore the
Our-line cannot round off to far on its light side, nor the Extremi-
by be to dark, as on the other Pillar, where more than the Half is
vifible.
CHAP. VIl. Of Beasty; and the Proportions of the Members in an bu-
man Body.
  VT  being the moft valuable Part of Painting, it muft
 therefore be the firft and chief Object of our Work; but my

Derign is not to mention all that can be faid of its Power, and In-
finence, fince daily Occurrences furhith us with fufficient Examples.
The wifel of the Ancients venerated it, as we fee in Plate, who
defines it to be, an Fuman Brightness of  fovely Nature, having Power
is attraft the Mind, by the Help of the Eyes. Nay, Cate valued it to
highly,




Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. Is
highly, that he publickly faid, it were as great  Sin to burt it, arte
rob . Temple.
Neverthelels it mult be confelt, that it lies moft in an Ides cenceived
in our Senses and Judgment; whence tis impoftible to think, that it
should center in any one fincle Object: The moft we can fay then is
this, that thermas miny Beauties as different Objects. The Pro-
verb fays well,  So many Minds, so many Beatties. Paris imagin-
ed, according to Hemer, that Heling, Wife to Menctanc
 Woman. Apolle boatted the fame of his Dapone. Har
ciffes, on the contrary, thought no body handlomer than himfelf.
Stratonica, amongtt the Persans, was accounted the greateft Beavty,
and her Starue worthipped. The Neck and Breaft of the Arbemars
Tbeodota were fo amiable in Socrates' Eyes, that he fell in Love with
her. Many more inftances might be given; but feeing its Standard is
no where fixed, in order to know it certainly, we can only obferve,
that each Country, each Lover thinks it has the greatell. The Gre-
cians think the brown Complexion the moft agreeable; the Latins, the
fair; the Sponiords think black Hair, and the Germans, brown Hairs
the moft pleafing: This loves fall and well-fet People; that eftcems
Stendernels; this,  modet Carriage; that,  wanton one. From
all which Premifes is plain, that Beauty depends moft on Imagi-
nation.
Beauty is three fold.  Common.  Uncommon.  Perfell.
The Commos, depends much on the Fashion, and fatishes Common
fente.
The Uncommon, is fingled out by our Judgments from amongtt many
others. And,
The Perself is that, as we have faid, which fublifts in the lmagi-
Ration.
But we mult nevertheless fix on some Standard, or Model, for Beair
ty; which therefore we have drawn, to the bett of our Skill, our of
the many Patterns left us by the Greeks.
The Beauty of  Nudity in either Sex, confilts herein.
 The Members mult be well haped.
 
 They mult have  fine, free and eaty Motion.

  found and freth Colour.

 The


feland Tint, and Brauty. BookL
 Of Penciting,)
 The Members mull be perfectly jeined, in  Manner beft befieting.
their Narures and Qualities; the Head and Face duely proportionate;:
and the Eyes, Nofe and Mouth to have their exall Syminctry; the
Hands, Fingers, Feet and Toes, and other Parts of the Body, to be of
an agreeable Length and Thickness.
 By cafy Alotion we mean, that all the Members, from the great-
At to the leaft, exert themfelves moft beautifully, and without Pains,
performing their ction in  graceful Manner; as we shall illuftrace
by Exampies.
 By Coloar, we underfland, fuch an one as is vifible in perfelt
healthy Perfons, not fubject to Impairs, and not inclining too much
to Redness or Palenets; as we shall thew in its Place.
Thefe are the three Qualities requifice to  beautiful Naked, and nam-
ed by the Poets the three Graces; affirming, that they were all to be
found in Venus Uranig.
Now, in order to inftruct the Arriff fully in the beautiful Divifion
of the Members,  shall here fubjoin the Meafure, as  took it from
 Mans Skeleton, when, for Profeffor Bitz,, Phyfician to the King
of Great Brifois,  according to his instructions, drow the Figures for
his famous Book of Anatomy.
For Eafe in this Meafure,  have placed by it in Plaresll.  IV..
 perperdicular Line, marked with Sol and Lune, which is the Length
of the Figure; and is divided into four equal Parts, ralleck raugh
Ferts, marked ABCD, for the quarcerly Divifion of the Figures from
the Head to the Arm-pits, Privicies, Knees and Soles of the Feet. This
ing is divided again into feven equal Parts and an half, called Headparts,
and numbered,     .   : The firft of which is for the
Bead; which is again fubdivided into four other equal Parts, marked
abed, for the Fore-head, Eyes, Nofe and Chin: And, by thefe laft
Dinthous, we shall afcertain the feveral Parts of the Figure; afoend-
hg from the Mark Lans to Sol According to which the Length will
be
Parts.
Parts.
rom shetokD, to the Ande joint  , the middle of the Body
  Thene  the inward CalfofcheLegzl
 of the Knee
 of the Stomach.
 pa
Arm-pit
 Jupper Part of the Knce
 Whigh
Pit of the Neck
 Ftr

-

Chap.  Of Penciling

socond Tint, and Beaury.


 (Note
 Sfthar
LEyes
 Crown of the Head
 (Forehead
 Bregdsh of  Man in Prosile.
Foot is long
 At the Navet
Hip
Joint
 of the Stomach
 of the Leg
 Part of the Knee
  Shoulder
upper Part of the Knee
 of the Neck
 of the Buttocks
Head is Square.
 Member
 Breadth of the same Figure from before and behind.


Hip
 next the ourward ncle

Foot-joint
  [Pit of the Stomach
inward Calf of the Leg
 At the Arm-pits
 Calf
 of the Knee
Pit of the Neck
 of the Knee
 of the Buttocks
 the privy Member
Beginning of the Hair
The Navel
 Length of  Woman
From the Sole , to the Joint
Pit of the Stomach
 to the inward Calfof thelegzf
(outward Calf
Shoulder
 Part of the Knee
Pit of the Neck
 Part of the Knce
 of the Hair
Middle
 of the Head
 Penciling,
fecond Tint, and Beanty. Bock .
The Breadih of  Woman in Profile.
Parts.
Parte
Foor is long
 At the Navel
  Stlip
Jomt
  Pir of the Homach
Calf of the Les
 the Arm pir
under Part of the Kince
 Part of the Knee
 of the Neck
 of the Butrocks
 The Head is (quare.
 Breadth of this Figure from before and bebind.

 THip
 on the ourward Ancle

 F Pir of the Htomach
 Calf of the Leg
 the Arm-pits
 Calf
shoulders
 Part of the Knee
EGPir of the Nock
 Part of the Knee
 the Nofe
 the Fyes
End of the Burtocks
 sForehead
Middle
  Beginning of the Fair
At the Naret
 now  question not, but he, who governs his Figures by, thefe
Proportions, will find his Advantage in it; especially if he obferve
the Gracefulnels of the Statues.
For Instruction in the second Part of Beauty, the graceful Motion
of the Members, ler the Tyro confult the Figures in Plate VI. where-
:in he will find the principal Dilpolicions for beantifid Action, contifting
in raifing and finking the Shoulders and Hips, and their contraffing
Motions; as allo thofe of the letter Members in the fame Poffure;
from whence arifes not only the Grace of beautiful Figures, but allo
advantageous Shades; which give the laft Hand co. Grace.
 This Iattruction is of to yniverfal Importance, that ic ought to be
obferved as well in dead as hring Nurre; in pailionate, as meek Men;
:taging, as quiet; forrowful, as joyful; thofe in Pains or dying, as in  Body: Nay, tis impoffible, that any parcicular Moyun or Po-
Jre ofthe Body can be good, which is not naturally expreft, and
condulted by the three following Qnalines.   fine Oueline.  
free



Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. 
 Sway in the Motion. Laftly,  beautiful Colouring: For, ta co
lour  living Figure as  dead one, or the contrary;  raging   quiet one, hot; or  mourning one, in  merry Air, would be
egregious, and againtt the Truth; and all Lyes being hareful mult be
unworthy of Painting.
if  feem unintelligible in laying, that fine Aftion and Colouring ought
to be observed in  dead Body, void of both; it mult be Known, that
peak of  painted dead Body, not  natural one; becaute this latier
has neither the Power of Motion, nor Difpolition: However, when re-
quired, we mult difpole the Model for our dead Figure in such Man-
ner as looks moft beautiful; the Face in front; the Breaft fwaying
fidewars; one Hip riting; one Leg clofe, the other fiung out; one
Arm ffung this way, the other that way, and to forth: This is called
 fine ftron, and the whole,  beautiful Figure.
As for the Colouring, it mult not be like Wood or Stone, but
Resher, as we fee it in Nature.
If any object, that, becaute there are three principal Stages of Life;
Touth, middle Age, and old Age; each having its particular Attiop, Co-
louring and Proportions, is difficult to chule perfect Beauty out of 
n of them;  antwer, that all Three ought to be reprefented alike
beautiful, according to their Natures; the Toung, tender, gay and freth;
the Middle-aged, ledate and flethy; and the Aged, flow-motioned and
decayed: For, notwithflanding Age, each of the three has his com:
mendable Qualities—That is an handfome Vouth— Theres 
Mind the Gravity of that old Man—and to forth.
comely Man
But  pray confult Perrier' Statues, and carefully mind the Vouth of
Ganimedes; let Antinous, or Apollo, reprefent the lecond Stage of Life;
and the old Founus, the third; and you will thereby fee, that each of
thofe Figures is, in his Character, perfectly beautiful; to which add
their fine Colouring, agreeable to their Vears: All which confirmsimg.
Affertion, and the Figure muft be beautiful.
Altho’ now  beautiful Figure confifts in  good Proportion and PE
potition of its Parts, with relpect to Action and Paffion, yet it cannot
be said to be abfolucely perfelt till further improv’ by beautifil Lightss
for we often fee, that too faint Lights render Objects dilagreeable; anot
produce an Effect contrary to our intention; which makes us unealy,
becaute our firft Purpofes are fpoiled, and we know not the Reafor
of it. But fo it will happen, when, without minding the Effect of
our Objects, we chufe an improper Light; as  violent Paftion in 
Light, which loofes at once its Effect and Motion: Contrarily,
 ter

falat


 Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. Book .
 tender and pleafant Object may, by teo prong and broad  Light,
and Shades  Burg, be quire broken, and its Grace gone.
Hence it is of the laft Moment to confider thoroughly, before we
begin our Work, the Nature and Effects of the Subject we intend to
handle: As, whether it be the Murther of Tulius Cafer in full Se-
nate; of the Death of Cato; or the Nuptials of Stratonica with An.
fiectus; or the Reception of the Qucen of Sbebs, with her Retinue of
Ladies, by Solemon, &cc. Becaule different Pustins are to be incroduced
in those different Subjerts: in the former we mul (uppoie great Hurry
and Conttenation, Frght and Confuion, nay all is in Motion: In
the latter, nothing is feen but tender Beauty, eaty Carriage, graceful
Modelfy and Auchoriry.
And now who will not agree with me, that the two former Sub-
jeltsought to be handled with frong and sirp Lights; and the two latter
with joft and more tender ones? This Effect lies alfo in the very Na-
tures and Qualities of Lights themfelves; fome producing Strength
and Sharfnes; others, Sweetness, Softness and Pleasure: But  contra-
 Manarement renders Things fulje and contradistory; becaute then
our two former Examples may be called  graceful Confussm, and the
two latter,  fevere Amour. Wherefore  conclude, that  Figure well
Proportioned and ditpoted, having  graceful Motion and Sway, and
 Light agreeable to its Out-line and Motion, may be called  perselt
Figure.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Motion of the Members.
ET us proceed now to the second of the Parts wherein Beauty
 contifls, namely, The Motion of the Mfembers.
This depends chiclly on  contraring or Oppesstion of all the
Members of the Bodr, and on their Lights and Skaass; which give 
Figure Morion and Life: And this is chiefly obtained by  Winding,.
 S as when the Face is froncing, the Body mult turn  little
fidewars, and the Legs again fronting. See Fig. . Plare VII.
 lecond Obfervation is,  Contraft in the inclining Poise of the Bo-
. from Hend to Foot For Inftance, if one Shoulder rife, the other
mull fink; the Hips, Knees and Feet, the fame, as in the fame Fig.
. Wherein  The right Shoulder rifes.  The right Hip falls.

 At



Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.  The right Knee or Foot rifing again: And the contrary on the op
pofite fide of the Body.
 third Obfervation is, that when the right Arm and left Leg at
vance, the left Arm and right Leg fall back.
But this Motion doubles, when the right Shoulder is feen fronting;
for then the Head and under Part of the Body muft be the fame,  fame Figure thews. When the Breaft rifes, the Headought to fink;

and the contrary. See Fig. .
The Head mult always meline to the upper Shoulder, as in Fig. .
in an erect Pofture, the Feet mult make  Rectangle, to wit, the Heel.
of the one with the inward Ancle of the other, as in Fig. .
Hunds mult always have  contraping Motion; if one be seen inward-
ly, the otherought to be ourward; if one hang down, the other should
be railed up. The under Purt of the Arm being forethortened, the
upper Part should be feen direct. If the Thigh be forehortened, the
Lee should be direct, as in Fig. .
The Motion of the Legs is almolt like that of the Arms, comparing
the upper Part of the Arm with the Thigh, and the under Part with:
the Leg: If the upper Part of the Arm fink, the Thigh mult rife, and
contrall it. When the right Arm is raifed, and the left depretsd.
then the Knees or Feet mult be contrary. If the Hip fwell, the upper.
Part of the Body finks into the under Part. If the Shoulders heave,
the Neck finks into them.
Here take efpecial Care, that the Hand and Arm be not on  Line;
but that each Contraft the other in an opposing Turn, as we fee in the
good and bad Examples, Fig. .
The cross Line of the Face is never parallel with that of the Body,
either fronting or profile wife: Nor the upper Part of the Body with
 lower.
in these Motions confift, in my Opinion, the Beauty of the Body,
 respect to
As for other Afotions, thefe three are the principal:
 That of the Head.  That of the Hunds and Fect. Laflly, That
of the Body.
Thole of the Head are foursold; forward, backward, and on each
Side. Thole of the Hands and Feet are the fame.
The rms and Legs have but one Motion; to wit, one on the Et
bow, the other on the Knee; the Arm bending, and the Leg drawing
back.
The Motions of the Body are threefold; foreright, and on both
Sides.
  
 Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.
Befides chefe, there are yet four other Sorts of Motions proceeding
from the fame Members; to wit, the simple, the active,
the paftive
and the violent.
 The Simple is, when the Members move naturally; as in Walking,
one Foor is fer before the other; in Drinking or Earing, the Hands
are lified up to the Mouth; the Head turns, and the other Members
are made tubfervient to the prefent Altion; and to which Children,
as well as aged Perfons, naturally incline.
 The Active confilts in carrying, pulling, thrulting, puthing, climb-
ing, and the like; which is done by Knowledge and Judgment. This
is only in part proper to Children. See Plare VIIl.
 The Paffric arifes from Difquiets of the Mind, or what the Soul
thews by the Body in the Paffions; as Love, Hatred, Anger, Sorrow,
Por. Spite, Scorn, and fuch like
The Effelt of thefe, tho' morly inward, yet is feen from without the
Body; chieffy in the fmall Members, as the Eyes, Nofe, Mouth,
Fingers and Toes See Plate IX.
 The Vielent, proceeding from Fright, Fear, Defpair, Rage, Cor.
or any thing that is nufual and fudden, and perturbares Nature either
by hearing or feeing; fuch as  fudden Thunder, Spectre, or frightful
Sight: Thefe caule  shrinking, fretching and winding of the Mem-
bers; to both which, Voung and Old are subject. See Plate .
But all thefe Paftions together cannot produce  perfelt Figure,
without the Affiftance of the Members; becaute we can go up Stairs
with Hands in Pockets; or lift  Weight with both Hands, and yet
the Legs may be clofe:  Perfon can be affrighted by fomething sland
ing or lying before him, without shewing it in the Face; we can allo
be in love, and it shall not appear in our Mlotion. But my principal
Intention is, to express thefe Puspons by the Motion of the Members; and
to sbew bee each Member contributes towards them. As when the
Body rurns of winds, the Members fir, one advaing, another fall
ing back; one raifed, others finking.
But fince it is very rare to fee all thefe Motionx and Paffions, as hap
pening very feldom and unawares: And fince no Model can be to let
as to give them,  did, for Certainty, fland for them all; exprefting 
very one, even to the leffer Members, Eyes, Mouth, Nole, Fingers
and Toes; and thefe were nimbly and dextrouly, as you fee, delign
ed by my Son
CHAP


Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. a IX. Of passionate and violent Motions.
  ought to obferve in the firft Place, that the greatelt Part of
thefe Motions are but in part to be apprehended, and moftly
by reprefenting the Caufe of their Motion by the Relation
which they have to each other, whether in their Beginnings or Conclu-
Lions: For the End of one oftentimes begins another, as Anger is 
Step to Madness; Sorrow to Faint heartedness, and this produces De-
pair or Folly. This is the Effelt of moft of the violent Troubles of
the Mind, and Pains of the Body; for this Smart flirs the Members
violently, the Mutcles fwell, the Sinews, Nerves, Coc. fretch out of
meafure, nay, fometimes beyond their Power; as for Inflance, in
burning, wounding, and the like: Which Pains, tho' they produce par-
ticular Contractions in the Face and other Members, yet they would:
not be plainly Known, or diftinguished, if fomething of their Caules
did not at the fame Time appear; as Pyramus ftabb’ with  Sword;.
Eurydice and Hisperia bit by  Smake: Procris kill’ with  Javelin;.
and the Centaur Neffus thot with an rrow; Hippolytas wounded by
the Overturn of his Chariot; and more fuch. By whom we mult
needs, as before hinted, reprefent fomething of the Caule; as by Py-
framus, either the Veil of Thisbe, or the naked Sword; and by Eary.
dice, the Smake, living or dead; by Procris, the Weapon gored with
Blood: And thus of any others. Moreover, we ought to pow the
Wound, and bow it happen’; two Circumflances equally necelfary.
The same is allo to be obferved in Neffus, who is thot from behind;
Earydice and Hisperia bit in the Heel; Acbilles wounded in the Came
Part: All which Circumftances  skilful Mafter ought to dispofe pro-
perly. But, left thefe hints be not plain enough,  shall make them fo,.
in the following Description reprefenting,
The Death of HISPERIA.
Hisperia, Daughter of the River Sebrenus, being purfued by Esacus.
Son of Priamus, is bit in the Heel by  Smake; of which Wound the
died.
This young and beautiful Maid is in the middle, lying on the Grats,
and furrounded by some Nymphs, who mourn her Misfortune. Her
Father, flanding difpirited againlt  Piece of Stone-work, and weeping
for


 Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. Book 
for her Dearh, is artended by some other River gods, who endeavour
to Comfort him; but in vain.
Her Garment is airy and thin, and her Breaft open; hergold colour.
ed Headdrets comng loofe over her Shoulders; her Gown curn’ up,
which difeovers her Thigh fiained with Blood.  Boy, lying near,
points at the poifon’ Hound, and at the fame Time puthes away  who is liting up the Gown, and flooping fees the Wound.
Another Nymph, coming by, with  thort-flick in her Hand, thews to
the former the Fore-ground where the Snake lies killed by Come Boys
With Sticks and Stones. Thefe Boys, in lively Altion, beat the Snake
with Sticks and Thorn-butkes; one of them tramples on its Neck;
which makes it gape; another, affrighted by it, feems to run away;
at which,  third talls  laughing.
 Wood is on the right side of the Piece. In the middle, on the
chird Ground, are feen tome ruing Willows and other Trees of the
watry Kind; behind which, runs  River cross the Piece, flowing on
the left Side forwards, wherein floar Reeds and other watry Productions.
On the Banks of this River are some Veffels and Urns, some fallen
down, others lying partly in the Water; and one flands upright by the
Stump of  Willow.
Some Veils, Reeds and his-feares, bundled together, are fcattered
up and down. Several Satyrs, Driades, and other Wood and Field
Gods appear out of the lood; tome with Pineapples, others with
Torches of the same Tree; fome threiking outragioutly, others view-
ing the Snake, others, the dead Body: Moft of them are ornamented
with wild Plants of Oak-leaves about their Heads; fome are array’
with Goatskins, others with Deer.
On the left Side of the Piece, in the Offskip, an high impending
Rock is feen, and level with it, in the middle of the Piece, Tbetis
driving her Sea-chariot towards the Rock, in order to fave EJacus,
who has thrown himself from its Top: Here we fee him ffounce into
the Sea, and, full of Sorrow, beating the Waves with his Wings, and
heaving his Breall towards Heaven, with his Head funk in his Neck,
feems to complain to the Gods of his hard Fate.
Some who are curious, run in haffe to the Rock, with lond Cries
and Irerc’dout Arms; at which, the foremoff Figures look back,
pointing : the Sea, to give them to underfland that is already over
with him.
 do not queftion, but he who is fomewhat acquainted with Fables
and Hiffory, and lees fuch . Picture, will prefently apprehend the
whole


ChaP. Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.  drift of the Story: Nay,  dare flatter myfelf that  Perton,
not converlant with them, will obterve the Paftions in it, and the Ca-
talrophe, tho' he cannot tell who the Perfons are.
But to return to the Motions; it is certain that all upright Figures,
whether of Men or Women, mull, for Grace-fake, poife bst on one
Leg, never on both: By which means, one Hip will always rife. The
Legs ought not to be further apart than the Length of  Foot.
Walking, the Hlip can rife little or nothing; the Breaft ought to bear
perpendicularly over the Leg, which fupports the Body: If the right
Leg advance, the left muft draw back; by which means, the Body
is puthed forward: The right Arm or Elbow falling back, the lett
Arm or Hand, as alfo the Face, muft appear foreright.
The Weight of the Body of one ranning, is intirely fupported by
the Leg which advances; the Breaft projects; the Head finks into the
Neck; and the other Foot is off the Ground.
 Perfon climbing, finks his Head into his Neck, and the Neck is
crelt: If the lefe Arm rife, the right ought to incline: Contrarily,
the right Leg is climbing, and the left hangs down; the Body bend-
ing over the climbing Leg, without any vilible Swell of the Hips.
Thole who push and pult, have  different Action from each other;
and are thewn here fufficiently with thofe who curry; wherefore we
hall fay little of them: Tho' this mult be obferved, that no body can
carry any great Weight in his Hands, otherwife than on the Side where
the Hip riles; nor, on the contrary, pull down any great Weight, or
therwife than with the Hand of the Side where the Hip inks; the
Head ought to bend over the riling Shoulder.
There are still remaining two Sorts of Afotion of no lets Import-
ance than the others; namely, Befeeching and Steoping; yet this latt is
not confined to the Bed at Night, but occafioned by Accidents in ther
Day; in old Men, thro' Heaviness; others, by Exercife of Mind and
Body; Women, by domeflick Labour; and Vouth, by their Play.
And tho' we cannot properly call thefe Mctions, but rather  Celfaci-
on of Motion, yet  thought proper to exhibit them in Plare Xl.
Wherein, No. . thews  flumbering young Man, with his Arms and
Legs wantonly (pread.  is  fleepy Woman, with her Head fome-
what inclining to her Side; but her Arms and Legs more modeftly
idifpoted than chofe of the young Man.  Shews an old fleeping Man
with his Head on his Breafl, his Arms clofe to his Body, his Legs
drawn in, and Body finking.

Among;


 Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. Book .
Among the Bescecbing, No.  we fee  Figure praying cagerly and
inceffancly. No. . is praying in the utmolt Diflress. And No.   imploring the Gods for Help.
 think thefe Examples fufficient for finding infinite others flowing
from the Palfions, according to Occafion, and as the Matter requires
more or less Force, Zeal and Pleafure. Bur think not thefe here offer.
ed, to be drawn in their greateff Force, or the moff expreffive: No,  not to prefumptuous, but rather like the Wreftlers, who challenge
the beff Mafters, not to overcome them, but, to fland the Chance,
who shall be the Victor.  afpire at the Prize; but not with arrogant
Thoughts, that all muft give way to me. Twere foolith to think,
that what  have learnt by Practice and Obfervation, another should
not learn, nay improve, by his Indultry. One Light fprings from ano
ther, and, from  little one, becomes greater; this daily Experience
thews How many Things do we know, which were hid from our
Anceftors?  hence we may believe, that our Succeffors will be more
knowing than we. As Arts and Sciences are much improved in latter
Ages, to we may hope for their Furtherance in the prefent polished Age.
if Hercales carried his Valour to the fixed Gelumns (Herculis Columna)
Ibesexs, his Succeffor, went far beyond them, and yet followed the
Same Path.
This  hope allo to thew to the Arciff, withing, that by my Ls
bours, or his own Induftry, he may find  fhorter or more fure Way
to attain the higheff Perfection in the noble Art of Painting.
CHAP. . Of the diferent Colouring of the Naked, in  Child,
 and Woman; in Health, Sickness, and after Death.
 VIN  carefally ffudied this Point,  find that one Chaptes
is too little to comprehend it; neverthelets  shall here lay dow
the principal Parts of it, hoping to handle the reff in this Work
 it comes in the Way.
Having already treated of Two of the fixed Beauties of an huma
Figure, we shall (Keeping Nature Hill in our Eye) proceed to the la
of them.
The different Coloars of the Waked are as manifold as the Objed
themfelves; nay, almoff innumerable: But we shall confine ourfelv


Chap.io. Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.  the three Conditions of an bealthy and fick Person, and  dead Body;
applied to  Child, Man and Woman.
The Child, being in Health, is of  roly Colour; the Man of  warm
and glowing Colour; and the Woman of  fair Colour.
But in Sickness, the Child inclines to yellowith Pale; the Man to dark
Pale, or Fallow; and the Woman to  milkith or yellowith White Colour.
Being dead, the Child is violet; the Man more grey. yet fome-
what yellowith; and the Woman like the Child, but more beautiful,
as having the whiter Skin: The Reafon of which is, that the Child,
having  thin Skin, and being full of Blood, mult appear ruddy; the
Man, being more yellow, and his Skin thicker, mult appear more grev,
fince the Blood can thine less thro' it; and the Woman, having  white
and fmooth Skin, mult therefore thew herfelf fomewhat ruddy. Hence
it is, that  Child, in its tender Parts, is more violet,  Man more
grey, and  Woman blue, yet more upon the Green than the Violet.
All this is demontirable by the Colours themfelves; for mixing Blue
and Red it becomes Violet for Children; Blue, Red and Vellow make
 Grey for  Man; and yellowith White mixed with very lirle Red
and Blue gives  Greenness for  Woman.
Now, in order to Hrike the right Colour for each, take thefe; for
the Child, Whice and Vermilion, it being prety ruddy; for the Man
the lame, with the Addicion of fome yellow Oker, which makes it
more warm, and alfo more fiery; for the Woman, take Whire,  lirtle
Vermilion and some yellow Oker. And to know perfectly the proper
Tint of the Tenderness of each of thefe three Perfons, you murt, in
Finithing, take some Small or Ultramarine alone, and, with  foft
Fitch, icumble your Blue over the moft tender Parts of your Figure,
to that it hie foft and tranfparent: And you will perceive, that this
Tendernels produces in each Figure,  particular and natural Colond
So much for healthy Nature; that of the Sick and Dead shall be spok-
ten of afterwards.
Here methinks  can fcarce underfland (tho' nothing more common)
the perverfe Opinions of Painters about Colouring; they feek after
Art, but do not underfland Nature; make large Enquiries to lictle
Purpole; and, as it were, traverfe the Earth, without moving  Step.
They talk faxever of this or that Mafter' Colouring; of one they fay
Ay, that is beautiful and freh, — of another, — That is like Fleftt
and Blood. — Another lavs, — That is very fresh and glowing.
Others, after having prauled  long Time, and ftupified themfelves
with Enquiries, give up the Caule, faying, — Such  Colour is not
No.  second Tint, and Beauty. Book .
 Of Penciling
in tee Warll;  canneither findner imagine it; it cannot be nitoted.
And more fuch Talk. But what fine Thoughts are thefe! If our
Sents cannot apprehend  painted Nudicy, what muft Narure herfelf
be ? is not the Original better than the Copy? Had Titian and Geor-
gione  beautiful Colouring: Ler us follow their Manner: They chole
Narure for their Partern, withour imtating other Mlafters, becaute in
Whatever other Respects Nature may be deficient in relation to the
Art, the is certain in Cclouring; therefore the Life muft be the beft
Model; and whar is not intirely like her, tho' never to flattering, is
falle and of no worth.
As  have defcribed some Weakneffes in Painters, to the following
are no lets Evils: They precend to correct Nature, tho' the be, in Co-
louring at leaft, not to be correlted; incredibly difficult are their
fruinlets Attempts, and as difficult their Mieanings, thro' the Neglect
of effential Methods for doing Things rightly and truly.
Another Mischief proceeds from Tyro' themfelves; thefe, falling
upon the Life at firtt letting our, can hardly endure to be debarr’ by
their Matters: Bur  defire luch may know, that, by this Hindrance,
till they can copy well, their Alafters act prudencly: After this let
them proceed to the Life, fince irs certain, that they muft firtt get 
thorough Knowledge of the Alixtures of the Colours; without which,
they will make but poor Work of the Lise; belides it is far more
caly to imitate an Object painted, than one neither deligned per. co.
loured
The better meaning Artifts mult therefore not pretend to arrive at
fhe Colouring, without conjalting Nstare; for the greatelt Grace lies in
Iis Variety, vis. in Rofinels, Vellowness and Blueness, as well in Old
 Toung, principally when each Colour is rightly applied and paty
ally reprefenced: But this Variety cannot be feen in the Academj.
Rgure by Night, but in the Day-ligure at the Drawing Schools
Now, for the docible Arcilts Sake,  shall, in the next Chapter
great of fuch Colours as  have made ule of in the dead Colouring,
second Colouring and Finithing; not with Delign to contine him 
thofe, hst to open  Door to farther Enquiries; for one Country afe
thefe, another other Calours, and yer both good, if they at latt an
fwer the same Purpofe: Some again may have been taught other Co
Eeuring. Bur  fuhmit all to Praftice, and their own Judgments.
CHAP


Chap Ii. [Of Penciting, second Tint, and Beauty.  Xl. Of the Colours, and their Ufes, with respect to both
the Sexes.
 AlR and tender Woman is dead coloured with Whice and
brown Red; in the fecond Colouring, with Whire and  little
  voung Man the fame; except that we allo mix  little light
Oker with it.
in  Soldier, brown Red, and  lirtle Whice in the dead Colour; fe-
cond Colour as the others.
For  fallow or Sun burnt Peafant, White, brown Red and Un-
ber for the dead Colour; light Oker and White for the second.
For  fick Perfon, White,  little Vermilion, or brown Red in
the dead Colour; light Oker and Whice for the second, yet but little
ruddy.
The Figures being brought thus far, retouch or finith them in this
Manner; bruth thinly over your Figure some Vernith mixed with  light Oker; then clap on your main Lights, fcumbling them
foftly and gently into this wet Ground, as far as is neceffary: Fer 
Child mix, under the Vernish,  little Vermilion; some light Oker
for  Man; and fomewhat lels light Oker for  Woman.
But chiefly oblerve, that the shaiph Tenderness mult not be mixed of
laid on in the two firft Colourings; but, on Finithing, is fcumbled in
with the main Lights, and meked into the wet Ground of Vernifl
not with Grey or Blue mixed with White, but with pure and thief
temper’ Small or Ultramarine only, touched with  Firch-pencil, as
have already intimated.
Thus alto the Reffexions are to be managed, whether they be Rrong,
or apparent, or of what Colour foever they be; Of which, more in
its Place.
The Tints of the Naked are but three; namely, the Light, the Mex-
 or second Tint, and the broad Sbade: But  except the Ruddi-
ness, which if ffo divided into three Degrees or Parts.
The three former Tints ought to be made and proceed out of one
Colour, in Shades as well as Lights, but  reckon not among them
kither the greatell Shades, or main Lights ufed in Retouching.
. Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty. Book  Colour of  dead Body, could, by this Interpofition, have no
Place after thofe others; in fuch  Figure ule brown Oker, and White
in the Deadcolouring; which being thinly glazed with Lake, more
or lefs according to the Age and Condition of the Perfon it reprefents,
thereon paint with light Oker and Whice for the second Colouring; in
which, have  due Regard to Fingers, Toes and other imall Parts
both of Body and Face, which ought to be grey and violet, as in
living Nature chofe Parts appear roly and bluthing.
II any ask, why  expretly affign light Oker, Vermilion, or brown
Red to this or thar Body; and be not content with recommending
Red and Whire, or Fellow and Whire; he mult know, that there is
 vall Difference between Red and Red; for Inftance, take Vermilion
and White, and brown Red and Whice, and obferve how much the
two Mixtures differ in Force and Beauty; thus it is allo with the Vel
low; which makes  great Difference in the Colouring of the three
Nakeds aforefaid, and allo in their Tints.
Bur  do not abfolurely contine mytelf to thofe Colours;  name
them only as my Opinion touching them, and that  may be the bet-
ter underitood in what  fay about them.
Has the Arciff  mind, in the second Colouring, to put in the ten-
der Tints) Let him do it; but they will, on viewing the Painting at
some Diltance, appear like Spers. He will alto find more Work and
Trouble, becaute the Colours he too thick; whereby he is convinced,
and obliged to work it over again another Time.
Before  end this Chapter,  mult propofe one familiar Queltion,
frequently flarced; Why many Ditciples give into  worfe Manner,
than that of their Mafters? Which  refolve thus; their bad Manner
he joint Fault both of Mafter and Disciple; the Mafter' chieflj,
being tomerimes negligent in his Inftruction; for tho' he understands
the Grounds, he does not reach them his Pupils: The greateft Care
he takes, is, to put them on copring all Sores of Pieces, as well of
old as later Mafters, each handled in  particular Manner, fomerimes
quite different from his own. The Difciples, on the other side, being
conment with  fupericial Likeness, viz. this Parr as red, that as yel
low, blue or green, as the Original, (which they themfelves mul
find our by tempering and re-tempering) thence it follog
 that in one
fart or other ther generally fall into Extravagancy, Irter they hare
left their Marters. Is the Mafter' an hard Mianner? Theirs will be
harder. Was he rough? They will be rougher. He, warm and glow
ing! Ther, herr. Did he colour flaring! They will exceed him
Wtas his Mlanner to paint young and old Women alike? They wil
pain


Chap.  Of Penciling, second Tint, and Beauty.  both Women and Men, young and old, after one Manner; and
make their Wives or Maid-fervants their only Models. As for Paint-
ing worle, this lies at the Difciples Door, thro'  Propenlity to
some particular Parts, without regarding the Whole: One affects Dra-
peries; another likes Nudities; another delights in By-works. But
luch mult not take it amils, if  compare them to Thiflles, which,
where they fall, Rick.
But  Mafter, who feeks Honour and Efteem, mult not only be
acquainted with what  have now delivered, but many more Things,
if he will be valued for Hiffory, the univerfal Paincing.
CHAP. XII. Of agreeable and beautiful Colouring.
  Piece cleanly and beautifully Coloured muft needs be
 very pleafing, as well to the Ignorant as the Knowing; and the con
trary ones be difpleating; we shall treat of it as  Matter of great
Importance: But many miss the Mark herein; some knowingly, others
againt their Wills;  fay, knowingty, in taking  Fancy to this or that
Manner, whether good or bad; and, againt their Wills, when they
are palt Recovery, and Cultom is become habitual. Sometimes it allo
happens thro' Carelessness and Fear of doing worfe: Thefe, tis true,
give good Ear, but neglect right Methods.
As  pure Light caufes Objects to appear clean and beautiful, to it
mull needs be, that the more it is broken, and fullied by Darknets,
the Objects will alfo become darker, and lels beautiful: Many oreat
Mafters have, in this very Particular, been much miftaken; as aff
the Flemiss, Rubens; and in Helland, Rembrant, Lievens, and in
others of their Followers; the one, in endeavouring to paint too bedly-
tiful, is fallen into  flaring Manner; and the other, to obtain Soft-
nets, got into  rotten ripe Manner; two Excreams, which, like two
dangerous Rocks, ought to be avoided. But Prudence obferves  Mean
in every thing; and  skilful Mafter will make  judicious Ufe of the
Colouring in general, whether in Nudities, Draperies, Landship, Stone
ork, or wit elle.
 have often wondered, how some have tormented themfelves in the
different Colouring of  Man and  Woman; painting him warm and
fery; her, tender and fair without reffeeting whether fuch Colouring
was proper to their Condition, or not: Nay, without making any
Diffinction.


 Of Penciting, second Tint, and Beanty. Book  between Deities and Men; the Nobleman and Clown;
which  think very filly. Now, whether they incentionally do it, to
thew how mafterly they can match fuch  Colour, or whether they
are fond of fuch Extravagancies, or hid Defiance to thofe who Colour
the Nakeds of Men, Women and Children with little or no Diffe-
rence,  will not determine: But mult at leaft obferve, that tho' good
Colouring in general is very commendable, yet what we moft thew our
Jnagment in, is, the giving every Object its proper Colour, according
to its Asture and Quality; for the Difference among Objects on the
fore Ground ought to be much greater than thofe of the second or
third Grounds, becaute the Diftance or Medium of Air between, 
nires every thing leis or more, as welt Colours as Objects.
The End of the Firft Book.

  

Ll    
L    II.
Of ORDONNANCE, or GoMPOSITION.
KKFNEMEENKEEMGNYEANANNNEARTAENNKKEEENKENEENEKEFEEG.
CHAP. . Of the Qualities necefary to the firft Idea, or Sketch.
  order to give the curious Artift  previous Notion.
of every thing  think necellary to the main Matter.
to the end he may duely weigh his Qualificatians
for it,  fay, that he ought in the firft Place to have
 good Alemory, to confider well what he is to rephe
fent, and to retain it in his Thoughts; and next, 
free and nimble Hand to execure instantly on Paper..

what he does conceive, lett it flip out of Memory
again.
But thefe Cuslifies will be of little Service, unlets he obferve Or-
der in his Proceedings; the more impartant the Composition, the lets
Delay; becaule  bright Thought lometimes comes unawares, and is.
as fuddenly lolt; and tho' perhaps it may be rerrieved, yet with
meaper Circumftances than at firfl. In fine, as we take more or lets
Pains about the Matter, to the Loss will be the greater, especially to
thofe of weak Memories, to whom we may apply this Emblem. 
Man


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
 embracing the Smoke of  burning Pile of Wood, with both
rms, with this intcription, — He who embraces too much, retains
 often do we find, that when we betake ourfelves to Thought,
 are, by fome outward Caufe, interrupted, and our Projelts poilt by
the Confution of our Senfes; to obviate which, is beft to be alone;
and then, having Paper, Pen and ink, or  Crayon, and fettled the
Scheme of your Ordonnance as to Height and Length, you mult mark
out the Plan or Ground, and fix the Pomt of Sight, whether the Delign
he Landsk: , or for  Chamber, Palace, Grotto, or what elfe: After
this, weigh well your whole Delign; then, what Sort of Perfons mult
enter ir, and who ought to have the firft and most visible Place; which
mark in antly, and their Bigness, not in Figures, but Strokes; here on
the firth Ground, there, on the second, according to their Charalters
and Meries; beginiing with the King or Prince, and next, his Reti-
nue, or other proper Perfons: If there be sill another Party to be
incroduced of less Moment than thefe, and yet as effential to the Or-
donnance, mark it with Points in its proper Place, without more
ad brought your Delign thus far, you may, some Time after-
wards, reaffume the Thoughts of it, beginning with the principal Fi-
gures; and now confider by what Passions your Figures are moved; how
they ought to fand, ft or he; what they are doing, whether they fy
or run, and whether before or againft the Light; how they contraft,
and how they shall be fer of againtt each other. Skeich all this on
another Piece of Paper, and tho' in to doing fome Circumftance may
have been omitted, ver the Confequence cant be great, fince the let
fer. like  River, flows from the greater, without Burthen to the
Memory.
Go to your Sketch again at some other Time with freth Thoughts,
and then contider what Charafters muft be naked, what cleathed, what
beautiful, what common; together with the proper Colouring, and its
Agreement and Order. Thus the Delign is brought to bear, and this,
in my Opinion, is the fureft Way to help and eafe the Memory.
Thus much of Ordonnance in general, proceed we to treat of each
Part in particular.
CHAP




Of Ordennance, or Composition.
  

 

 II. Of Ordennance.

WONDER at nothing more, confidering how many Hiftories
can be collelted from Sacred Writ, than that we fee to few of them
½ and thofe fo little different in Delign. Fer in  rately
publifhed, moft of them are on Subjects which have been reprefented
before, without any Artempts on hich as have been left undeligned,
as if no Ordonnance could be made of them: It is the same with Ovid,
Hemer Virgil and many others, tho' from them might be gathered
a for above three limes as many Compolitions. The Caule of
all this,  find, after much Pains and inquiry, to be Ignarance and
Carclessness, thole two impotent Silters, who check the Senles and ob-
Rrult Inquiries; an Evil to be cured only by diligent Exercife,
We need not doubt, but that the ancient Painters have pick’ fuc
the beft Hiffories; but tis Felly to think they therefore delpited all

the reft. It were unhappy, if the Secreis still remaining had pfen ye=
fore all difcovered; for then we might bid adieu to an future Endea=
yours. But suppoling, that the beft Subjects are cholen, it falls out
neverthelels that thofe which are flighted are ofcentimes the imott


painter-like; and have the sirongeft Passions; and at the lame.  fbe
most clegant Ry-works; to that we need not defpair of sufficicat Masies

to handle.

But we fee in Cattle that they will follow one Leader; and to it 

with fome Painters, who think they have done enough, when between
 Compolitions, and old ones on the fame Subject, the Differeace
 in Figures litting inflead of flanding; the Action in the open far
intlead of being Within doors; or by fome Alieration in the Arna
 and By-works: But nobler Souls foar higher; they do nog fit
down contented with what others have thought, but frive to ecel
in Things better, and new, or at leaft as good as the others.

Sys
What Praife-worthy Pieces mult thofe be, which are built on other
Mens Thoughts! The original Deligners taxed with ignoraice and Lieg
tle Senfe, becaule their Works are seen thus corrected in Acliopg,
Draperies, Colours and Ornaments: But let fuch Artifts contanse to
forment themfelves as long as they pleafe, Men of Senfe will always

think meanly of them, and give the Praile to the firff Inveators.
  Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II.
 Souls are always ambitious to Chare equal Honours with hap-
pier Mafters; for who of the Poets would not be equal to Hemer  the Philolophers, to Ariffotle? Of the Painters, to Raphael? Of
the Statuaries, to Michael Angelol Thole great Nen have done as
great Things to acquire  Name:  Defire of Glory has fed the Fire
of their Labours; and this has fecured them both Honours and Rich-
es. They did not vouchfafe, when the Day was thut in, to spend their
Time in Company, but ardently fired their Lamps for Nightim
provements; and ths they actained the greateff Happinels.
Thefe Things  judged preliminary to what follows; and therefore
we shall proceed to the Management.
CHAP. III. Of the Ordennance of Hisfories.
HE Management of Hiffory will ferve for univerfal Condul
throughout this whole Work; for no one can be faid to be 
good Mafter, without  perfelt Knowledge of it: It is foge-
eral, that it affelts every Branch of the Art; as the grouping of Fr
gures; placing of Colours; Choice of Light and Shade; laying Grounds;
nay, even the Difpofition of each fingle Figure: But  shall neverthe-
lets be brief, and to proceed
When now you have cholen your Subject, whether in Hiftory,
Filtion or Emblem, make  rough Sketch of it, and to imperfecdly
as only to underfland your own Marks and Strokes: Then read with
Ritention the beft and exafteff Writers of the Stery, in order to conceive
it well, and fix it in your Nemory; marking immidiately what you have
reid
On your next Return to this Sketch, you mult principally confider,
in whot Country, in what Season, and what Time of the Day, the Aei
on happened; and whether within or without Deors; whether in state
 Places, or common ones; and lattly, the Quality and Dignity of the
Perfons concern’; thus much for Circumftances: Now mind exactly
the Efence of the Story, and then the Accidents proper to it. The
Event of the Story mult always fill up the chief Place in the Compo
fition; and the Beginning of it to be dilpoted in the Ofship; as  Can-
mon hall, fhor from  Diftance, batters  near Bulwark, and fcatters
whatever opposes it; by this means the Driff of the Matter will ap-
pear at firft View: Note all thefe Things in your Pockecbook, that
 Ordennance, or Composition.
  may remember them; and be fure to confult them often for that
Purpofe.
Some Day afterwards, early in the Morning, when your Head is
caty and clear, re -confider the whole Matter: Imagine yourself to be the
Figure; which (one after another) you are to exhibit; and so proceed to

the most inferior.
Next, extend your Thoughts to the Places where the Attion happen
ed. This will bring you to apprehend the Nature of it; and you will
quickly perceive all your Figures in Order, and the Quatities of
each, their Distances and proper Places: Mark this in General with
Strokes enly. Put each principal Perfon' Name to his Firure, that
you commit no Miltake in them, for the Difpoficion slp our of
your Memory. After this, you mult mind every other particular Fi-
gure: And lattly contider, by what Passions they are all moved.
By this Method it is certain, that we are far advanced in General,
but litle in Particulars; the Delign is as yet no more, than as if 
Perfon, flanding on an Eminence, or the Top of  Steeple, were
viewing, in an open Country, the Preparations of  great Army. I all neatly divided into Troops and Regiments, here the Horfe,
there the Foot, there again the General, and further off the Officers;
yonder again, the Carriages for Provifion and Ammunition, and to forth
Now, fuch an one only knows the Objects to be there, and the Place
where; but having  good Order, and following it, he can the more
calily reprefent the reil
But he muft fill go further, in confidering from what Side, and, in
what Place, all is to be feen, and whether the Herizen mult be low
or bigh; place your principat Object as much as postible in the middle.
on  rifing Ground; fix your Point of Sight; determine your Light,
whether it mult proceed from the left, or the right, from bebindior
before; and whether the Story require Sun-sine, or  common Light;
next, difpole the reft of the Figures in Groups, fome of twe or three,
others of four or five, more or lets, as you think proper. But of this,
we shall fay more in  particular Chapter.
in the mean time; to help thofe who may not prefently apprehend
this, we shall give an Example from off the fore Ground:  lay then,
that you mull place your principal Figares confpicuous and elevited
upon the fore Ground; give them the main Light, and greateff Force
of Colouring, in one Mass, or Group; the less Objects must be fome
what lower, and their Force of Light and Colour more fpread THe
second Ground ought to be in Shade, or filled with shady Objectss and
behind
  Ordenngnce, pr. Compasstien,
 them, on the third Ground (which mult be Light again) dispose
the Objects of fmalleft Confequence; obferving always, that large Ob.
jxts are placed behind small ones, and fmall Objects behind large ones;
as allo flrong Lights againt dark Shades; if you cannot find it by the
Shade, endeavour to effect it by dark Colours, as we shall thew more
amply in another Chapter.
Having got this far, make your Skerch apow, on another Paper,
wherein deagn all the Nudiries after the Life, and the Draperies from
Tee Laymss, Figure after Figure, as finithed as poffible; dilpoling eve
by thing to to the Light, that nerther more nor lets Shade appear, than
the Whole requires. Forget not to place your Figure and Layman 
greeable to the Point of Sight in your Sketch.

Now contider the Aletions and Passiens; which, to reprefet natu.
rally,  hhall here thew  proper Method; flanding before  Looking-
plais, make, with jour own Body, fuch Actions and Motions as your

Figures require; the Passions you, muff conceive from the Hillpry
fox Initance, for  Figure in  Fright, obferge how. you: fland,  what

joh are doing with the right Hand; and where the left, isq: hew. you
turn your Head; what the left Leg is doing, and what, the right; how
you bend your Body, and to forth: Skerch all this with their Circum-
Dames, without heeding Proportion, but the Motion of the Members
. Then fet your Layman is that Skerch, difpoling it, to, as. you
hallneed it in your Ordoanance, chuting the moft begutifid Side, bef
Light, and moft advantageous Shodes for the Purposes. If the Figure
mull be cloathed, caft your Draperies as fine as poffible, accerding to
his Charafter. Then delign it curroutly on blne or Drawing-paper; but
fwith the Natel fram the Life only. Take the same Methad in other
Paltons and Figures, as we shall thew further in the Exch Charter.
from
elkshe mean Time, begin your general Deliga on the Clott,.

roor latt Sketch, and compleat it after your knifhed Drawings, or
Models As for Byiorks, and other proper Decorations, we shall

feat of them in another Chapter.

  illin:
ngene



FTRSTT

-


CHAP. IV. Of the Ufes of fne Prints, Academy-figurgs and Models.
WrI few Parts of the Art are greater Abufes committed than in the
Ule of fine Prints, aod Compofures of great Mafters; for masy
xcultom themfelves to much te them, as feldem, fo: de anyithing
which


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap.  is not borrowed from Prints, or other Mens Drawings. Are they
to compofe an Hiffory, Emblem or Fable, they bring it together
Piece-meal, and by Scraps; and fearching their whole Store of Prints,
Drawings and Academy-figures; take an Arm out of one,  Lee eut
of another; here  Face, there  Drapery, and out of another  Body
in order to make of the Whole an Ordonnance: But towhom does the
Honour belong! Has fomebody uted an Ordonnance of Poufin, is the
Delign that Perfons, or Poufins? This is like Duck-eggs harched by
an Hen, and we are puzzled to know to whom the Praile is due; but
its certain, that if the true Owners of fuch borrowed Goods were each

to take his own from fuch Painters,  fear their genuine Offspring
would be but fmall; it would even fare with them as with Eresmnss
Cuman Ass, who, with the Lion' Skin, look’ terrible, but his Ears
difcovering him, he was sript of his borrowed Cloaths, and feverely
bantered by every one.
But another Mifchief attending this Method of Proceeding is, that
it makes them flight the Life, nay, oftentimes forget it; whereby,

and the Neglect of Rules, they never become good Deligners.
The necelfary Ufe of Prints confills herein, that next to what has
been laid in the preceding Chapter, and the Skerch fetrled,, we in-
form ourfelves what great Mafters have thought and done in the fame

Subject; how they chofe their Objects, and with what By-works of
namented; this will improve our Thoughts. The next Thing we hre
to obferve, is, the Grace of their Actions, Faces, Lights and Shades;
and if any thing be for our Purpofe, sock it in the Life, or if Draper
fies, take them from the Layman; thus we may call the Work our own
But above all, we mult make ule of Academy-figures of our own Do=
Lign, especially thofe done in private. No Figure muft be painted
twice in one Ordonnance, without urgent Necefficy: But the following
Ornaments, whether our own or others, we may lawfully ufe; fuch as
Trees, Stones, Tombs, Fountains, Urns, Statues, Ruins, all Sorts of
Architecture, and other Ornaments, as much as we pleafe. He who
goes further, bigots himfelf fo much to Prints, and other Mens
Thoughts, that he thinks himfelf under  Necoffity to exprets every
Thing their Way: But it' certain our im in viewing Prints is twe
fold; firfl, to footh and pleafe the Eye; next, to enrich our Thoughts
when we are about  Compofition of our own; for then they prove of
the greaseff Advantage to  Tyro, in giving him not only fine Thoughts
bit alfora pleafant and beautrful Manner, agreeable feffures, gracefid
Actions, well-call Draperies, and, whats above all,  Quickness of
Thought,


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II
 and  warmer iaclination; as is more amply thewn in my
Drawing-book.
CHRP. . Of Probability; and what is Painter- like in an Orden
nance of few or many Figures.
ROBABIL IT , as operating on the Mind and Imagination
by the Helo of Sight, ought chiefly to be obferved in the Par-
fition and Representation of Hiftories, and is next in Confideration
to the three Branches wherein Beaury confifts; of which we have al.
ready fpoken.
it ought to appear not only in general, but in each single Object;
and we mull take Care to rejell every thing repugnant to it.
in order to it, contider what Charafters the Subjett confifts of, whe
ther of People of Fathion, or ordinary People, or of both mixt; let
this appear in their Carriage, Shape, graceful Motion and pleafant
Colouring, as being People of Education.
If the Figures be ruffical, let Rufficity be vifible in them, not on-
ty in Dress, bu: in their Behaviour, Colour and Motion; and if
therein fome Agreeableness appear, let it Hill favour of Rufficity.
By this Means, and what follows, your Thoughts will appear natural
and likely, to wit, by giving mere or less Beauty to Pertons of Condition,
and more or less Simplicity to meaner Perfons; one may be thort, ano
ther tall; one fquab and corpulent, another thin and flender; one
fomewhat crooked, another of  brown or pale Complexion; one of
 quick, another of  flow Motion: Nay, in three or four Figures
there ought to be at leaff one quite unlike the reft;  might fay, that
hardly any two ought to be alike; among  or  one at leaft should
be hunch back’: And tho' this may feem to contraditt what we
have before faid touching Beauty, yet it gaintays it not in reference
to Condition, fince an Hunch back, wry Shoulders, difforted Hips, 
bigger or lets Head, have as good an Agreement with the other Mem
bers, as the moft handfome-made.
If it be asked, what would be wanting if the Figures were all well
proportioned, yet some inferior to others in Beauty!  antwer, that
thele laft but in fome meafure partake of the Agreeablenets of the
others, and one in  lets Degree than another; and as it is  Truth
tha




Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  great People are subjelt to Deformity of Body as well as firtle
ones, to their Deformity is not to vifible as in meaner Perions.
Hence,  think my Opinion not ill grounded, that chieffy in refor-
tual Compoficions, fuch as Plays, divine Services, Courts of Juflice,
and Concourfes of all Sorts of People, all Sorts of Shapes are to be
introduced; as crooked, thort, tall, awry, fat and lean, and even fome
same and crippled, as Occation requires; but then they mult be to
diffected, that, without Offence to the Eye, they do by Comparifon
infentibly fet off other Figures near them; which is  main Proof of
the Likelihood or Probability of an Hiffory: But to make this Point
the plainer,  shall thew the Difference between one old Perfon and -
nother, and one young Perton and another, each in  lets or greater
Degree of Beauty; and confirm it by Examples.
As for the handling of Fables and Emblems, thefe, leing not Falts,
but Fictions, confifting moftly of Virtues and Vices, require  quite
different Management; for in reprefenting Virtue no Blemith muft ap-
pear, and in Vice no Perfection.
As to Deities, who ought to be perfect in every Respect, we
shall, as Occafion offers, write more at large, and treat of them
throughly in  felect Chapter; and in the mean Time thew here fome
different Hlandlings of the fame Thing in Perfons of different Conditi-
ons, as in Plate XII.
EKAMPLE 
No.  Shews the different Grace in taking hold of  Glass, the one
takes it with  full Fill.
No.  Takes it lower with some Manners.
No.  Is  Princess holding  Cup with the Tips of her three
Fingers, drawing warily and agreeably the little Finger from it.
No.  Isa Lady’ Woman, who, fearful of spilling, holds the Glats
handily, yet lels agreeably than the other.
No. .  Prince holds it handily and cautioully below on the
Fgot.

EKAMPLE .
Here you fee again the Effelts of Edncation between People of
Condition and more common Perfors, very worthy  Painter'
Votice.
Non


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II
 . Shews  clownith Pealant, and how greedily and diforiterly
he eats out of his Porrenger; he fits, and leans with both Elbows on
the Table, embracing his Dith with both Arms, felt fomebody should
take it from him; he helds the Spoon with his Thumb and Fingers
under the Porrenger; his Mouth ever the Dith, and his Chin advanc
es to meet the Spoon; his Head is funk in his Shoulders, and he bends

forwards with His upper Parts.
No.  Sits upright, and, being better bred, holds the Porrenger by
one Ear, and the Spoon with three Fingers by the End of the Shank;
he opens his Mouth but litle. Again appears  Difference in
No. - Reprefeating  Gentlewoman holding the Spoon with the
Tips of three Firgers, and the Hand over the Shank, in  very 
greeable Manner; and in
No.  Vou fee  Lady managing  Spoon with lets Grace than the
other.
This pleating Air is admirably obferved by the great Rapbael and
Correggio, and particularly by Barocci, as we may fee in  find Print
afier one of his Paintings, where Mary is reprefented with  Spoon in
her Hand, taking some Spoon meat out of  Dith, held by an Angel,
in order to give it to the Child Ixsus, who, half fwaddled, flands
in her Lap: This Print is, in my Judgment, to admirable for
Grace, and to natural, modeft and great, that nothing could be bet
ter exprett
Tho' the two preceding Examples might be fufficient to thew all 
ther Handiings, and the Difference of Action in particular Conditions
of Persons, we shall nevertheless add  third.

EKAMPLE III.


Shews how attentive the two Peafants fland liftening; the one, with
an High Back, advances his Chin, and ftares at the Speaker as if hei
look thro' him; he hugs himfelf, and refts on both Legs; which, witt
the Toes, are fradling; the Knees fomewhat bent, and the Feet tun
ed inwards: The other flands freight, poiting his Body moftly off ofn
Leg; has one Hand by his Side, and, with the other, takes hold 
his Garb on his Breaft; the other Leg,  little turned, is fomewha
more forward, and his Belly fomewhat slicking, out; his whole Car
 more agrecable than thar of the other.
 again we fee Lrepumble Gendewoman of  lnottell Gace; he
Carriage lofty and agreeable, one Hland refts under the Breaft colfard
 . Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 Body; the intide of the Hand turned upwards; Fingers loofe and
airy bending downwards; hearkening with Attention, the, with the
other Hand, lifts up  Part of her Garmert. She flands flreight; her
Head turned fideways,  little forward; her Knees and Feet ciofe, and
one Heel turned towards the inward Ande of the other Foot: Now,
on comparing the other Woman flanding by her, likewife liftening, we
may fee what  Difference Education makes in People' Attions;
both her Hlands reft on her Hips; the flands on both Feer without any
Sway; the upper Part of her Body bends  little forwards; her Brealt
and Chin advance; her Head fomewhat toffing; her Morth  lirtle
paping; but her Hlips fwell not.
In tuch Obfervations as thefe, confiff the very Nature and Grace of
 Compotition, be it of many or few Figures, in reference to Persons;
and therefore  cannot too much enforce the Enquiry into to important
 Point:  fpeak here of grand, majefic and most agreeable Action;
for the contrary is naturally and daily to be found in us; and tho' ma-
ny would be better thought of, yet they thew the contrary by daily
Converlation with mean People, whereby they slip the Opportunity of
getting better Ideas of genteel Carriage, contenting themfelves with
thooting at Random only. However, they excule themfelves, by fay-
ing, that they have no Opportunity of getting into fine Company; 
weak Shield to defend their Sloth! Do not the Church, the Playhoule,
and the Park give them Hlandle enough to fee fine People, and to ob-
ferve how they behave? As for me, before  had the Happinets to
which we may fometimes arrive by the Smiles of Friends,  mift no
Opportunity of making Obfervations, and noting them in my Pocket-
book; which an Hiltory-painter ought always to have about him,
wherever he soes: And with good Reafon; for Thoughts are often fo
volatile and llippery as to be retained with Difficulty, as  have before
intimated in the firff Chapter about Ordennance. Nay, when  faw an
handlome Gentlewoman walking in the Street,  made it my Bulinets
to enquire into the Recson of ber Grace, and in what it contifted, and
wby she appeared more agreeable than others; and on the contrary, why
ych Refealches as thefe, we come to the
lothers are less agreeables;


and 
Tas well by the one Sort of
Knowledge of what is

People as the other; but beft by fludging what is mofl fublime and
rand. Let me then perfuade the Arcift to this Method, not as 
Whink it the only true one, or to diffuade him from any other, but as
 Inlet to to ufeful  Knowledge, and by which we obtain the finell
Thingss
No II
Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 which, as  have faid, when once loft, may perhaps never be
retrieved.
Many miltake, who think that magnificent Garb and rich Ornaments,
as Jewels, Pearls, gold and filver Stufts, Cc. are infallible Marks of the
Greatness and Power of People: But can the moft Difcerning certainly
conclude them to be fuch by thefe Tokens, without enquiring whether
their Education be equal to their Grandeur? Even then allo they may
be deceived, fince fome mean People have naturally, or by Imitation,
fuch an Air and Carriage, that, were their Dress anfwerable, they
would be taken for great ones: The Reafon of which is, that at firtt
Sight there appears uttle Difference between falfe Jewels and true, tho'
on  nice Enquiry may be found; as in the Jewels, fo in their Altions
and Behaviour, fuch  Difference as points out their true Character.
Again, if thefe different Conditions depended only on rich Cloaths,
nothing would be more ealy to  Painter than this difficult Part of rt;
fince at that Rate there could be no Fathion; or  Broom-sick might
become  Lady' Hood Nevertheless there have been, and sill are,
Painters enough infelted with this Opinion, and follow it as  Law;
thinking that Drvid, Solomos and Abasucrus would not be known for
Kings, did not their Crowns thew it; thefe forfooth they mult always
have wherever they are, and as well in the Bed-chamber, as on the
Throne; and the Sceptre as well at the Table, as at the Head of an
Army.  fay nothing yet touching their royal Robes.
He who duely weighs what  have been faying, muft allow, that
State and Carriage are two fuch excellent Qualifications, that  Picture
cant be faid to be good without them; nay,  think them the very
Soal of  geed Piftare: But as  noble Soul, in  well-haped Body,
without the Addision of Ornaments, vifibly shews itself, to of Courte,
tirch are needlets in exprefting true Greatness: indeed, when Ornaments
are introduced with Judgment and Caution, they add to the Splendor
of  Pixture, but nothing to Charafter, nor can cause any Passions;  fee in Raphael, Pouffin, Deminichine and Barecir, who, far from
approving it, have, by the very Simplicity of their Figures, Thewn
the extraerdisary Greatness  have been (peakipg of.
If any object, that Rapbait himself has,not obferved this Condult
in his Story of Bathsbeba; where he reprefents Duvid in  Window
with  Crown on his Head; or, where Abrabam courts his Sarab in
Sun thiny Weather, which afar off is feen by Abimelech leaning on 
Balluftrade. As for the firtt Composition  mult fay, if . may speak
 Mind, that  do not over like it, or indeed apprehend it; buu

Father


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap. .
 believe it to have fard as some faulty Things did with me.
which being done in my Apprenticeship  am ftill under some Conterr
for; but by the Incroduction of the Sunfhine, his Thoughts may poke
fibly be finer than they appear at firft View, becaute, had not the Sium
thone on that amorous Couple, Abimelech could not, at his Distance
from them, have feen their Courthip; and if he had reprefented them
in any other Corner of the Room, than that where they were, they
could not have been ficting. However, fince great Malters have their
Failings, tis probable, that Raghaets Bible-prints were fooner or lat-
er either deligned or painted by his beft Ditciples, viz. Tulie Romano,
Gie Francesse Penni, or Pierine del Vaga, from his Skerches, and after-
wards retouched by himfelf, fince tis impoffible that one Mafter could
disparch to much Work in fo short  Time, tho' he had  quick Pen
cil; befides, his Cuftom was to keep his Works long by him for the
fake of Improvements, and to give the laft Hland, and the urmoll Per-
feltion to them: But as for this Bible, if it be obferved with Attenti-
on, there will be found  great Difference between one Ordonnance
and another, tho' in some, the Greatness and Likelibood are well pre-
served.
But to conclude the Matter of this Chapter,  mull lay, that my
Precepts ought not only to be obferved in an Ordonnance of many,
but of few Figures alfo, fince it is very difficult to bring them all into
one Story: But if the Subject be Courtly, as of Solemen, Abaswerus,
or fuch-like, it muft be Known, that the Perfons, to whom Majetty
and Grace are moft proper, ought to exceed in it, viz. The King 
mong his Courtiers; the Queen among her Ladies;  Governour among
Citizens, and thus the greater above the lets, according to his Quality,
Office or Dignity; this caules  proper Diltinction of Superiority, and
exalts the prime Perfon above the reft.
Even Peafants, who are  little converfant with the Towns, and Know
tomewhat of good Manners, are obferved to turpals others worfe carriaged
than they, in their Difcourfes, Holiday-mirths, and Church-ceremo
nies; but Clownithness mult appear in them, tho' with respect to the
Paffions, some may appear to excel others; except that if  Burgo-
mafter, or topping Citizen be mingled amongft them, he mull appear
tuperior to them all by his handsome Carriage, and City-behaviour.
  Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II.
 VI. Of the Difference between Touth and Age, in both
SexeS.
HE Artiff ought not only to mind nicely the Actions, but allo
the Difference of the Perfons who are to compofe his Ordounance;
and he mult have great Regard both to univerful and parti-
:uler Differences, as well in the Sexes as their Ages.
Children alter commonly every three Vears, and till they are
fix Vears of Age, have always thort Necks and round Fingers. The
Difference between Boys and Girls is vifible in their outward Parts,
without opening their Legs, as Tefa does.
In the imall Members the Difference is not very vifible, tho' Girls
are fomewhat thinger, have fmaller Ears and longer Heads; their
Arms are likewife more round next and above the Wrift, and their
Thighs thicker than thofe of Boys: But the upper Part of Boys Arms
is thinner and fmaller.
Thofe of Francefco Quefneyare incomparably fine to paint after; nay,
nobody has attained his Perfeltion; we fee his often reprefented either
without Hair, or but very little; whether he thought it more beauti
ful, or it was his Choice in making Models,  cannot determine; yet
methinks Boys may very well fomerimes be allowed Hair, and that
frequently curled: Girls may have theirs twifted and wound on their
Heads, with flying Locks, ferving not only for Ornament, but Diftinc
tion of Sexes
Boys of or  Years old may have Hair finely curl’; Girls more
thick and diplayed; another Difference in the Sexes may be this
that Girls Hair is more foft and long, Boys more curl’ and short.
Children of ,  or more Vears old ought feldom to be reprefented
with clofe Mouths; their upper Eye-lids are generally hid under their
fwelling Brows; they have commonly  quick Look.
Voung Damfels have  vigilant and lively Look; raifed Forehead;
Nofe  little hollowed;  small but almoft half open Mouth; round
:ps and small Chin, in which, as in the Cheeks, is  small Dimple;
tney have no under Chin.
Virgins we lee feldom open -mouth’; their Eyes are more fedate
and compoted than the others.
Old


Of Ordonnance; or Composition.
Chap.  Women ought to have  more fet and heavy Look, and hollow
Eyes; their upper Eye-lids large and loofe, yet  little open, the un-
der Lids vifibly fwelling; Noftrils fomewhat contracted; Mouth clofe,
and fallen in: And when they are very old and without Teeth, their
under Lip comes over the upper; they allo have Rifings under the
Cheeks on each Side of the Mouth;  long but little crooked Nofe fuits
them; but in Men  more crooked one is proper.
People in uchority become  grave Look,  Forchead fomewhat
raifed, and large heavy Eyelids, and thofe half open; their Aspect
fettled and calm; their Faces turned  little fideways; the Nofe alike
with the Forehead and Eyes; Mouth thur, and  double Chin
it is necellary to take particular Notice of the different Make and
Form of Persons, to far as they are defcribed in Hiffory, in order to
exprets the better the Nature of the Matter; as Alexander and He-
phestion in the Tent of Darins; wherein Hephetion ought to be taller
than Alexander: in Saul and David, the former tall, and the latter
less and ruddy. And thus of any other Circumftance of Hiftory.
We should here have brought in some Examples of Phyfiognomy;
but as there is lately publifhed, on that Subject,  fine Treatife written
by Mr. le Brun, and trantlated by . de Kaarfgieter, we think it not
necellary to fay any thing about it, but refer to the Book, fince its of
Service not only to Painters, Statuaries and Engravers, but allo to Po-
ets, Hifforians and others.
in the Obfervations about taking and bolding any thing,  have taken
Notice that Infants are very fickle and harmlets in it, and becaute
their Members are very feeble, and commonly ply any Way, they
all as if half lame; their Hands are always fquab, and therefore moll
Open.
Toung Girls are wanton in their taking and holding; as in the Man-
Rer of Goltzius.
Virgins and payed Women are modelt and mannerly in their taking
and holding; as  have shewed before.
But aged People have fiff and dry Hands; for which Reafon they
are moft Times thut, and they cannot extend their Fingers.
Altho’ different Accidents caule an Alteration in the Face and Polture,
thole Alterations are neverthelels very unlife each other, therefore
each ought to be handled in  diftint Manner; chieffy when any par-
ticular Passion moves us to this or that Action, whereby the Features
and Lincaments of the Face are deubled by the faid Unlikeness.
Suppotes.


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II
 for Inflance, that all Faces were call in one Mould, and
euch governed by  particular Passion, as Sorrew, Gladnels, Hatred,
Envy, Anger, Madnels, Coc. Hence its certain, that they will be
very unlike and different; as well as the Actions of the Body: And if
now you give each  particular Make, and Lincament, this will ang-
ment their Difference.
This Obferration is of great Ule to Face and Hiffory-painters, and
the contrary as ufeful when Nature and Circumflances induce us to
make fue or three to be like each other in one Compofition; name-
  Company of Figures all of one Family, who therefore may
well take after one Person in Likeness, as the Sons of Tacob; the Ho.
rotis and Caracis; for thus we evince the Truth of the Story.
Again, in handling the Fuble, where the Daughters of Gecreps open
the Basket, in which was Ericbtonins, here we are obliged to make
their Fares alife, to thew that they are Sifters; for otherwife who
would know them to be fo, tho' reprefented alike beautiful? And it
would be asked how the Affinity appears, feeing tis not enough to
tay they are Sifters; or that Pallas is Tupiter' Daughter; or the long:
bearded Esculagins, the Son of young Apello. But if you give thele
three Sifters one and the same Aspect, yer to each  diffintt Passion, they
will then differ very much; for Inftance, let the youngeft, who opens
the Basket with Surprize, flart back, as if the were laying - Good
God, what is this? The fecond, full of Fear, runs away, calling out
Dear Siffer, face me from this Monfter! And the third, being
elder and more ftayed, fepring back, with Amazement, fays, 
What! this is  Monfer. Thus proceed three different Motions from
one Aspect of Likeness; for tho' the Retemblance is fomewhat alcered,
yet the same Proportions and Features Hill remain.
The Cafe is the same between Parents and their Children; for In
france, if the Father have  crooked Nofe, or that of  Cafar, the
Child will, in some Degree, have  Nofe fomewhat longith and rifing;
has the Mother  long and Rreight Nofe, the Daughter will have the
fame; except, that in tender Vouth tis lets or more bending, as in old
Age Tis thicker and broader, but little different in Length; as Expe
fience thews.
We fee in the twelve Heads of the Roman Emperore, their Natures
and Inclinations well expreffed, and agreeable to the Hiffories of their
Lives; yet  doubt, whether they all agree with the true Aspects of
thote Emperors; or, whether the cotemporary Mafters (who were
well-skill’ in Phyfiognomy) have not thus alcered them according to
their



Char.  Of Ordennence, or Composition.
 Natures, father to reprefent their innate Faculties, than their
outward Appearances.
It is admirable to contider how our Senfes are furprized, when all
the particular Aspects are well oblerved according to the Passions which
they reprefent; methinks, we thereby difcover Mens inmoft Secrets;
that this Perfon fings an high Tune; that  low one; that one bellows
with Pain; another inwardly laughing; the Teeth of one chatter with
cold; another parched with Heat and Thirf; thus  fmall Line can
let you into  whole Countenance; less or more Fatness alto much al.
ter  Face.
But, for the Artiffs Benefit,  think proper to thew him  Way of
finding out all Sorts of Aspects after  certain and ealy Manner.
Ler him take  Looking-glats, and draw himself by it in fuch 
Paston as he defires, as joyful, forrowful, painful, (piceful, cec. and
imagining himself to be the Figure be wants to reprefent, draw this nicely
with red or other Chalk on Drawing-paper; obferving nicely the
Knitting of the Brows, Look of the Eyes, Swell of the Cheeks,.
Contraction of the Noftrils, Clofenets or Openness of the Mouth; Jurt
of the upper of under law -bone, according to his Pofition, whether
Rreight or bending: Then let him take  Plaifter-face, and make .
Mould from it of Lead, or other hard Matter, in order to make af-
terwards as many impreffions of Clay as he pleafes; thefe let him al-
ter to the before mentioned Drawing, either with his Fingers, or mo-
delling Sticks, as he thinks proper, taking away fomething here, and
adding fomething there; but full preferving the general Likeness: Thus.
they will ferve inftead of the Life, chiefly when the Face, on which
the Mould was made, comes to be like the Drawing, that, by the  Alterations, the rtift can allo fee how much the Features.
likewife alter..
Thus all Sorts of Paffions may be moulded with little Trouble,, and
the Moulds ufed in as many different Manners as he pleafes, whether
they are to be viewed from below or above; or in Profile.
He, who is provided with Store of such Models, will find great Helfe
from them; fince we cannot be furnished with them from the Life it-
felf; nor from our own Perfons, otherwife than in  lingle and fronting
 in  Lookingglats.. As for knowing how to make them,.
 few Days and  little Inftraction will teach us as much as is neceffa-
hy, if we can draw well.. If to thefe the Arriff add  Mould for. ar
Khild and  Womas, the Sett will be the more compleac.

Fra


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 II.
Ere we conclude this Chapter, is neceltary to fay fomething of
the Disposstion of both Sexes in  Sketch of  capital Ordonnance; as
in  Concourfe of all Sorts of People, at an Offering,  Play, Coc.
where we, fee, that thofe of  Sex get together, and Vouth to
Touth, Age to Age, Men to Men, and Women to Women: Bur
voung Women, our of Curiofity, are observed to crowd under the
Peopie, and tho' notwichllanding they join themfelves to their Sex,
yet they are afraid of Mithap, and therefore, for Protections Lake,
often take Children in their Arms; but  Man of Judgment will ne-
verthelets distinguith theie Maids from others by their Breafts, Head
attire, of Dress, tho' arteaded with gor  Children.
Iis improper to let Cildren of zor  Tears old run into Crowds,
without Mother, Brother or elder sifter to guard and hold them by
their Hlands.
in Places of publick Pleadings, firm and high Places should always
be affigned to Women; as againtl Stone-work, Walls, and the like;
becaule their Bafhrfulness makes them timorous, and their Repurations
ought to make them cover rather old Mens than young Mens Com
pany, to guard them from the infolence of the Mob, Soldiers or 
thers, who, on fuch publick Occations, intrude any where to rum
mage, rob or play Tricks.
The Tulgar commonly prets clofe to the pleading Place, light We
men are moftly found in the middle of the Croud, and People of Fasssion
sland behind
CHAP. VIl. Of the Property and Choice in the Motion of the
Members, in order to express the Passions.
REVIo US to the Matter of this Chapter,  shall infiff on
an Obfervation, which, in my Judgment, is worth the Artiffs
Notice, as being for his Advantage, as well as his Diverfion; it
is, in affigning the Reafon why many make to little Progress in their
Studies; now  imagine it to proceed from their Inconflancy, and
Inkewarm Affection, which tie up their Hands, unless Neceffity
drive them to work: They often fay, — was to lucky as to do
it; or —It fell out better than  expected, — as if the Buliness
depended on Fate, not on Marhematicks: But its quite otherwife
with thofe who puth on with Zeal and Good will, and confider ear
pelily


.


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  and fedately, not accidentally, what they are about; thefe are not
facisfied with having painted  Picture well, and being as well paid for
it, but reflet how much they are furchered in the Art by it, and cor
fider, if they were to do the fame again, what lteration and Im-
provement they could make in it, fince its certain, that tho' we ir
prove by Practice, yet by shorter Ways we can artain  perfect Know-
ledge, and in  lets Time too: Our own Faultsmake alfo  deeperimpref
fion on us when dilcovered by ourfelves, than if obferved by others, be
caule we naturaily hate Reproof.
Nothing affected me more than when  found my Errors, or morere
joiced me than when  had corrected them; which nevertheless did not
fully fatisfy me; for  endeavoured sill to make what was good better.
About  Vears ago  had  Mind to paint in little the Story of Stra:
tenica' paying Antiechus  Vifit;  took abundance of Pains in it, and
it was extremely liked. Some Vears after, an Opportunity offered of my
doing the same Thing again, but fix Times larger;  did not think it
proper to govern mytelf by my former Thoughts, tho' much approy-
ed, but diigently confulted the beft Writers on the Subject, rejelting
the trivial ones, and then proceeded as carefully to finith my Work;
which got me more Reputation than the former, becaule executed with
more Simplicity, and less pempous Circumfances; it reprefenting only
King Selencbus, Stratenice, Antrecbus, and the Phyfician; whereas, in
the other  had introduced  train of Courtiers about them, and, in fine;
every Thing  could think of to make it look pompous and gaudy.
Thus, out of  fingle Flower we may by Care and Induflry produce  one, as was the Cale of another Picture of Scipie and the young
Bride, which is in the Apartment of the States of Holland at the Rague;
this Picture was of my firft Thoughts; but handling the same Subject 
second Time, this latter, as better compoled, got the Preference tho' done
but  Years after the other; which  fubmit to any one' Judgment who
compares them: Now, if any one ask the Reason of this great Difference,
and in to little  Time too, lanfwer, that having perceived my ignorance
and Errors in the firft Compofition,  doubled my Pains, informed my-
felf better, madenicer Reffections, and (pared no Trouble in order to
exceed myfelf, if posfible, in the second Performance.
This Circumftance alfo attended my firft Afexander and Rexana; for
that which  painted afterwards, and is at the late Major Witzen'
Houle in mferdam, is of  much better Tafte, and very unlike the
FirR
No.  Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
  think  have fufficienly shewn, by my own Example, the
great Difference between fitting down contented with what we Know
and do, and feeking further Improvements. Nothing delights more
than to find what we feek, and to improve daily; in order to which,
 shall give the Arciff the following Examples.
 XAMPL  . Plate xin. Of mutual or reciprocal Love.
Two Children are feen to exchange lighted Torches, which each
gives with the lefi, and receives with the right Hand, thereby figni-
fying, that what is given with  Good will, ought to be received and
required with Thankfulness; the right Hand denoting mutual Kind
nets, or Help and Tuition.
Decency teaches, that the Giver should hold what he gives at the
upper End, and the Receiver to take it underneath, or in the middle.
The Giver offers it with an Arm freiched out; contrarily, the Re-
ceiver takes it bathfully, with his Arm clofe to the Body: Both in
cline the upper Parts of their Bodies; their Hleads lifted up, and in
clining over the side of their Giff in  friendly Manner, and Mouths
open, giving the Torches crols wife to each other; they are in all
Circumftances alike, in Beauty, Shape, Motion and Aspecl, except
 Difference in their Mouths, with respect to the Priority of In
Heatj.
The Giver holds his Torch with  Fingers, the other accepts it
with  full Hand; now, after each has received his Gift, they may
be supposed to exchange right Hands, and their Shoulders to meet,
their left Ears croffing each other, that is, their Heads come crols-wife
over their left Shoulders; and, if you pleafe, each Kilies the others
left Cheek; their right Feet advancing come clofe to each other.
EX AMIPL . II. Of voluntary Submistion.
Here we fee  Coward furrendering his Sword to another; he holds
it by the Blade clole to the Hill; the other receives and takes it at
the Hilr. As thefe Actions are twofold, to are both the Paffions, the
one thews his Pulilanimity, the other his Courage.
The Giver ftoops his Head very low, with Eyes call down at the
others Feet; he flands on both Legs alike bent, as if he were faint
ing away; the left Hland open he is putting forth, or prefting the out-
fide of the Hand againft his Breaft, as if he were faying, — Theres
all


Of Ordonnance, or Compofition.
   have, my Life is at your Mercy: The other contrarily flands fet
and upright, his right Foot advancing, his left Hand on his Side and
turning hindwards; has  ftern Look, his Mouth thut, his under Lip
and Chin Randing fomewhat out, looks with Scorn fomewhat over his
Shoulder on the Civer.
EX AMPL  III. in Plate xiv. Of Liberality.
This reputable Man, who, in palting by, is giving an Handful of
Money toa poor one, holds out his right Hand ldeways, infide down.
wards, beholding the poor Man with  calm and fet Look; he lands
upright, and, with  fwelling Belly, is flepping forward; the Rec ex
er, on the other hand, makes up to the Giver, bowing his Bodp
retching out both Arms as far as poffible, with his two Hands ho
lowed like  Bowl-dith; looks on the Gift with Joy, Eyes Haring, 
pen Mouth, as if he were faying, —  po!
 AMPL  IV. Of Benevolence.
He, who prefents an Apple to any one, holds it from underneath
with  Fingers, as friendly intreating, prefting his left Hland, intide
upwards, clofe to his Breaff; his Breaft and Chin advancing; his Head
bending fomewhat over one Shoulder. The other contrarily receives
it with Respect, taking it on the Top with  Fingers; advancing the
upper Part of his Body, and fomewhat bowing his Head; he difcovers
 modeft Gladnels, looking on the Gift; in the mean Time the other
is watching his Eyes.
EXAMPLE . Plate xv. Of the same.

He, who offers his Friend  fine Flower, holds it with  Fingers,
at the lower End of the Stalk; the other takes it with the Thumb
and fore Finger, next the Flower, with his Head over it in order to
smell. The Civer, as having lmell it, draws back his Head over one
Shoulder from it, his Face lifted up, Eyes fomewhat thut, but one
more than the other, his Mouth half open; his left Hand, clofe to his
Shoulder, he holds wide oven, as in Surprize; he refts on one Leg.
advancing with the other: The Receiver contrarily is standing on both
Legs cloled, with his left Hland behind him: The Giver fands firm;
the Receiver wavering.
 Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
 XAMPL  Vi. Of Fidelity, or Friendpig.
The Perfon, who is prefenting  King to  Virgin, as  Token of
Fidelizy or Friendhip, holds it upright, with his Thumb within it,
and the Stone upwards; he advances his Body and Face, and looks
direlt, clapping his left Hand to his Breaft: The Virgin, on the other
hand, flands or firs ftrail up, her Breaff fomewhat heaving clofe to the
King; her Head fomewhat bending and fwaying to her right Shoul
der; her leff Arm hangs down, the Hand open; receiving the King
with  Fingers of her right Hand. The Giver looks not at her Eyes,
but her Mourh, fpeaking with  Look between Hope and Fear: She,
with  modell and ferene Countenance, looks down on the King; refts
on one Leg; her Feet clofe. The Giver advances with his left Leg,
his Knce bent, and refts on his right Toes
Thefe three laff Examples  exhibic but half-way.
fince the Dispoliti.

ons of their lower Parts may be eafily underflood.
to the Sentiments
As the Gifts in all the Examples are different,
are offen very various as well in giving as receiving.
Whether it be done in Sincerity, out of Iypoerify, or for the fake
of Decency, the Metions in either Cafe differ very little; becaute in
them all the Parties endeavour to alt with as much Dexterity as poffi-
hle; nar, fometimes to far, that thinking to impofe on each other,
both are frequently deceived: in such Cafe we mult take ppearance
far Trurh, and the contrary.
Bur firxh Reprefentations would not anfwer right Purpofe, as having
falfe Meanings; for inflead of Diffimulation or Decencr, we should
take it for pure Love, fince in all three, as  fay, the Motion is the
Same; therefore, to remove all Doubt and Incertainty, we mult have
Recourfe to emblemaric Figures, which will clear the Meaning, and
point our Hypocrity, Falthood, Deceit, c by proper lmages,
Beal, or hneroglrphic Figures: Which By-works  prudent Arcil
 to to difpote, that, tho' inactive or myfterious, they may ye
andwer their Purpote; for they who are deceived or mifled should not
perceive the leaft Tittle of it
Some may think that the Deceived as well as Deceiver ought to be
fot off with fuch Emblems; but this is fuperffuous; for as bosh Par
his feem to profels Sincerity, nothing but Hypocrity muft be thewn.
Ovid rells us, that Morcary, having stolen fome Oxen, and perceir
ing that one Butins law it, and fearfus of being betrayed, defired him
 Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap. .
 keep it fecret; which Batras faichfully promifed: However, in order
to try him, Mercary difquited himself, and  lttle after came to him,
in the Shape of the Owner of the Cartle, and asked him whether he
could not give Tidings of them. Battas pointed to the Cave wherein
they were hid; which incented the godly Thief to much, that, reaf
fuming his Form, he beat the Traitor, and turned him into  Touch-
Rone. Now irs very probable, that in the Difquife Afercury hid his
winsed Cap and Feet, and Caduceus, that he might not be Known.
The same we find related of Tupiter and Catiffe, when he, in the
Shape of Diana, deceived her: But here the Matter would not be
Known, did not fome Tokens make it evident, that it was Tupiter
and not Diana, tho' he appeared like her.
The Cafe of fuch  Picture is the fame with  Theatrical Repre-
tentation, where every thing is exhibired as if it really happened;
the Charalters deceive and belye one another fecretly, without know-
ing it; but the Spectators perceive all; nay, their very Thoughts
ought plainly to be feen and heard.
CHAP. VIIl. Of the Ifue, or Refult of Thoughts, touching His.
tories.
 there are Grounds and Principles in all Arts and Sciences;
whereon we mult build, and we cannot, without exactly Keep-

ing to them, either execute or gain true Knowledge of Things,
to they ought chiefly to be obferved in the Arr of Painting, and efpe
cially in the Ordennance; and fince the Memory cannot furnith out .
Story, with all its Circumftances, in fuch due Order as  regular Sketth
requires, we muft eftablith certain Rules in order to fupply that De-
felt, fince, tho'  Perfon should be to happy as to have  firong Me-
mory, and brisk Conceptions, yet the Hands are not to quick at the
Execution; no, the Thoughts excced them: Some Things allo muft

neceffarity go before, others follow which implies and requires Fime.
Could we but draw as fall as think, Memory would be ufelets; where
as irs certain, we can defiga nothing but the Ideas which Memory firft
conveys to the Senfes.
However, let no one imagine by whar  fay, that  Maffer muft
firtt sketch what he firf thinks, and run thro' the Defign as Things
occur to his Thoughts; for Conceptions never obferve Order, and
therefore.


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II.
 by fuch Irregularity, the Performance would be abortive,
as in the following Inftance: Suppofe  Reprefentation of Cain and
 and the Frarricide; the firft Thing that offers, is, Cain flying
from Gods IIrath; next is Abel lying dead; next the Burnt offering
on the Alcar; and laftly, the Weapon lying by it. Now the laft be
ing furthell in your Thoughts, it is firtl feratch’ down with your
Pen; then the Alcar appears; afterwards Abel; then Cain; and then
the Almighty; and ar lat the Landship, which is to determine the Big-
ness of the Compofition. Judge now what fuch  confuted Method of
deligning mult produce; tis therefore  Matter of no indifference how
you begin  Delign; for the principal Figure must be firft considered,
and thin the Incidents: As Gold is feparated from the Earth, and clear-
ed by refining. We ought then to proceed orderly in the defigning,
making arid the Plen, nest the Stone -work, and then the Figures or
By-works. However, we handle this Subject, in the Chapters of Or-
donnance of Hillories, hieroglyphic Figures, coc. Where we main-
tain, that the Principal ought to be placed firft; then the Figures of
lets Contequence; and lattly the By-works.
But whar  incend now, is, to thew  short and certain Method of
commodioully apprehending and retaining Things, whether they be
given in Urting, or by Word of Mouth, prolix or brief, together
with their Circumstances, be they many or few, that you may sketch
them exactly in all their Particulars perfectly agreeable to the Relaci-
on as well in Motion, Colour, Dress and Probability, as By-works; of
fingular Ufeto thofe of Chort Memories, but who are neverthelets skilled
in the Exprestion of Action, the Paftions and their Effeets, Ufes of Co
lours and Draperies according to Sex and Age, laying of Colours .
gaintt proper Grounds, Difference of Countries, Sun-Chine and ordi-
nary Light; and more fuch.
Having confidered well of the Subject, and where the Action hap
pened, firft make  Plan or Ground; next, determine where to place
the principal Figures or Objects, whether in the middle or on the
right or left Side; afterwards difpole the circumftantial Figures con-
cerned in the Matter, whether one, two, of more; what elfe occurs mull
fall in of Courfe: After this, to each Figure join its Mark of Dif
rinction, to thew what it is; as, whether  King, Philosopber, Baccbus,
of River-god.
The King mull have his Minifers, Courtiers and Guards.
The Philesepher mult be attended by learned Men, or his Dif-
sifles.
Bacchus


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap. .
 muft have Sotyrs and Bacchanals about him.
The River-god has his Nymphs and Naiades.
The King excels by his reyal Robes, Crown and Scepter.
The Philofepher is to be known by  long and grave Veftment, Cap
on his Head, Books, Rolls of Vellum, and other Implements of Study  him.
Bacchus is adorned with Vine-sprigs; crowned with Grapes, and
armed with  Tbyrsis.
The Water-gods are fet off with Urns, Flags, Reeds; and crown
ed with Water-fowers.
All which Badges are naturally proper, tho' not defcribed in the
Story; nay, if they were, you need not heed them, fince their Cha-
ratters remind us of them, when we are handling them: As if we
were reading about the Goddefs of Hunting, every one knows that the
has  Retinue, and is equipt with Accoutrements for Sport: And that
the charming Venus is actended with her Graces. This may fuffice for
personal Charafter.
As for Motions.
 King is Commanding.
 Philolopher Contemplating.
Bacchus Rambling. And
The River-ood in his Station.
When the King commands, Alls in an Hurry and Motion to execute
his Will; his Retinue are obsequious to his Words and Nods.
When the Philofepher is exerciting himfelf, he is eitber reasoning.
writing, or contemplating.
When Bacchus is on his Ramble, the Menades, Bacchanals, and Satyrs
madly attend his Chariot, sbreiking and bowling; and with Tabers, Pipes,
Timbrels, Cymbals, &.
The River-god in his Station, either refts on an Urn or Pot sbedding
Water; or is sitting among his Nymphs on the Bank of  River.
Thus each Charafter is occupied according to its Nature; and to we
deduce one Circumftance from another without feeking it, or being at 
Hand, having fuch  Fund of Macter in our Heads, that on the bare
Mention of  Perfon we muft conclude that fuch and fuch Properties are
effential to him.
The next Bulinels, is, The Efects of the Passions: When the Gene-
ralmoves, the whole Army is in Motion; when the King threatens, the
Accuted is in Fear, and the Minifters and others remain in Sufpence
When the Philosopher ditcourfes, the Audience is attentive, and each
Perfon


 or Composstion.
Book II
Perfon moved in Proportion to his Apprehention, or Actencion; one
has his Finger on his Mouth, or Forehead; another is reckoning by
his Fingers; another feratches his Head; another, leaning on his El.
bow, covers his Face with his Hand,  When Bacchas (peaks, the
Noife ceafes. When the Water-gods are taking Repofe, every one is
Huth, firting or lying promifcuoully at Eafe.
If thefe Examples be not fufficient to eftablith my Purpofe,  shall
add one or two more; and the rather, becaute no one before me has
handied this Subject to methodically; nay,  may fay, hardly touched
on it.
We read in Scripture that Quces Eftber, over-awed by the Frowns of
King Apajuerus, twooned away. That Betthazzar, perceiving the
Handwriting on the Wall, was, with his whole Court, troubied in
Hind. Again, in Ocids Mecamorphols, Arinane, in Defpair on the
Thore, was comforted and made ealy by the acceptable Prefence of Bac-
rtas, who offered her his Aid. Fromall which, and the like Circum-
itances, we are enabled to conclude with Certainty, that  simole Paffion,
handled according to the Manner before laid down, can alone furnith
Marterenough to enrich  whole Ordonnance, without the Aid of other
By-works, fince many Things and Circumftances do proceed from that
one Faffion only. For let us luppole two Perfons paffing by each other,
as in Plere XVl. and one feen in Front the other in Rear; he who
walks on the leff Side, and is going off, has  Bundle on his right Shoul
der, from which, fomething drops behind him; he has  Boy and  Dog
with him. The other coming forwards, and perceiving what falls, calls to
cell him of it; whereupon he looks back, and the Boy runs to take it
 Now  refer to any one' Judgment, whether my Thoughts, by
to fimple  Relation, be not prefently conceiv’, fince tis all the Sto
Iy;  fancy they are, but yet fill better, if keeping within the
Bounds of the Relation,  were to make  Sketch of it; for tho' the
bare Description of the Thing eatily makes an Impreffion on the Sen
fes, yet he who is not converfant with the fine Motions and Beauties
of Action, (which confift moftly in the contrafling of the Members)
can never hir the Writers Mleaning.
 place then, the Man calling our foreright; and the other Man
pall by him, looking back and hearkening to what he fays: In thete
Poftures both look over the left Shoulder. Now if any one ast
whether he, who is pafting on, could not as well turn to the right as
the left in looking back, and the other do the fame!  fay, No; un
lebs


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap.  we will run counter to Nature; for  fuppofe, that he who is ap
proaching has  Stick in his right Hland, and with his left points to
the Cloth which is dropt; and the other having the Bundle on his
right Shoulder, his left Hand refts on his Side, by which alfo the
Child holds him: Now, becaute each other' leic Side meets, and one
fees the Cloth dropt at his left, his Kindnels compels him (peedily to
call over the fame Shoulder to the other Man; who plainly hearing,
turns to the Side of him who calls; whereupon they behold each 
ther; the Boy, being nimble, runs quickly to the Cloth, and the
Dog outstrips him in getting to it firft: From all which Premifes is
impued  natural Motion, and furning of the Members, without our
-the upper Part of the Body fronting; the left or right
laying,
Legthus or thus. —If weknow the Place of slanding, towards whom,
and what they have to fay, the reft mult follow of courfe.
Such Reveries as thefe give us  Right Judgment of  Picture,
make us retain it, and help to remove Difficulties; and if to this be
alded fome certain Strokes to point out either the Place of Actions
of Figures, it would fill be more eafy and helpful to the Memory.
 know  Painter who made each Letter, or Mark, have its parti-
cular Signification: For Inftance, an  was  Figure fitting on the
Ground;   Chriff crucified, and to forth: Moreover he had ano-
ther Secret, whereby he exprefted certain Figures he made ufe of;
as  decumbent Figure of Caraccr,  running one of Rephael,  flying
one of Berettini da Cortona,  Child of Quefnoy, Light and Shade of
la Fage, and many others.
If now the preceding Example, of the two Men paffing each other,
should feem infufficient,  will fubjoin one other of the Jame Nature,
but Falt;  mean, the Story of Tudah and Tamar, (fee Plate XVil.)
when coming from his Country-dwelling, he is in the Way accofted
by her in the Habit of an Harlot;  put the Cafe thus: Yudab comes
forward, and the Road lying on the left Side of his Houfe, along
which fome of his Servants are going off in order to theer Sheep,
Tamer fits on the right side of the Road, on the Grass, airily and
wantonly artired, and with  Veil over her Head: Now it' probable,
that having  lewd Delign, the firft accofted Yudab, who, like  Man
of Repute, paft her; but when the lifted up her Veil and beckoned
to him, he stopt to hear what the had to fay; thereupon,  fuppole,
he food still, refting on one Foot, and advancing the other to make
an hall, to fee who calls him; he turns to the left, opening his left
Hand like one in Surprize, and then claps it to his Breaft, to thew that

No.  Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II.
 is ftruck there; and laftly takes hold of his Beard, as pondering
what he is going to do: In the mean time the rifes and lays hold of
his Garment. The Servants are feen either in Profile, or backwards,
as the Road turns and winds to the Houfe, having Sciffars or Sheers
with them. The Houle may he as the Road thews it, tho', accord
ing to Ordonnance, the middle fuits it better than  Side: This is fuf
ficrent for underflanding the Meaning of this Story, and the right Me.
thod for handling  great Work by  thort incroduction.
If any one fuppole, that if the Road were to he cross the Piece,
and the whole Dilpolition alcered to as to make the Man go from
right to leff, and not place the Woman on either Side, it would be
all the fame, fince then the would still be on his left Side?  fay, No;
for the calling him, we should then, of both their Bodies, fee but one
of their Faces; and what were fuch  paffionlets Statue good for
Again, we could not thew his principal Motions, which are very ef
fencial to the Fact; wherefore the other Way is beft.
But let no one deceive himself by my Manner of relating this Hif
cory; for, confulcing the Scriptures, he will find, that  have inverted
the Senfe to  Subject thewing how to give two Persons diffinct Passions,
and thereby to embelith  Picture; for by the Scriptures it will ap.
pear, that Tudst is going to the Place whence  make him come, in
order to fend Tamar  Lamb or Goat to redeem his Pledge.
 leave it to any one' Judgment, whether it cannor be plainly infer
red what Morions thefe two Figures muft have, to make thereon
three diffinct and probable Reprefentacions, which  thus deduce.
Firtt, in the Alam' Perfon, an unexpected Rencounter.
Secondly, An Enquiry who the is, and what the wants.
Lally,  criminal Paffion.
Firft, He is grave, asking and underflanding what the Matter is, of
at least imagining it, he withes it may be true; then begins to mate
Love; at laft, being fully perfuaded, he gives loofe to his Paffion,
grows bold and venturefome. Thefe three Periods produce peculiar
Pafftions in borh, different from each other; the firtt, grave and mo
deft; the second, kind and loving; and the third wanton and bold.
The Woman contrarily is moved by three Paffions.
Firft, She is friendly and lovelv.
Secondly, Wanton, with  diffembling fland off.
Laflly, They both agree.
Firft, the accorts him with an enticing Air, overcoming his Grs
vity.
Secondly


Of. Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap. he approaching, addreffes her in  friendly Manner; but
altering her Speech, the antwers him roughly, and will not be
touched.
Lally, He, being transported with Paftion (at which the fecretly
laughs) the puthes him coyly from her on one Side, and lays hold of
him on the other. From all which Premifes we may find three Pe-
fitions fpringing only from the Words which we fuppole mull naturally
pals between them.
Perhaps some may lay, — Know nothing of fuch Effects, fince
they never happened to me.— But it' certain, there are very few
who never fell them; and even they can fomerimes account for them
better than others who have known them. Many know the Virtues
of Medicines and Poifons, without taling them; arguing with Judge
ment improves the Performance, otherwife Art would be impractica=
ble, or at leaft attainable by few, if it confified in Inquiry only; for
who rua mad, and could afterwards tell how the Frenzy leized him  Truth is, we can only guess at it. But this laft Story is propot
ed by me for no other Reafon than to make it plain and evident hew
the Members are moved by the Impulfe of the Senfes, and the ins
tercourte of Talk, and how by such Motions we express our inward
 are many fuch Occurrences in uthors, chiefly in Ovid; as
Phabus and Lence
Tupiter and Califfe, Salmacis and Hermaphroditus,
Vertumnus and Por
the, Mercurius and Aglaura, Tupiter and Semele,
mona, Venus and Adoms, Apelle and Daphne, Exc. Belides fome others
in Hiftory, as Apelles and Campaspe, Alexander and Rexand, Scipie and
the young Bride, Tarquinius and Lucretia, Antiecbas and Stratenica;
and in Scripture, David and Abigail, Hagar with the Angel; Chriff
and Magdalen in the Garden, Chriff and the Samaritan Weman at the
Well, Marys Annunciation, the Vifst of Mary and Elizabeth, and ma
ny others; all which ought to be treated in the fame Manner, accord
ing to the Nature of what they are doing;  at each Word exchanged,
what Notions throughout the Body must fellow, and what Lineaments of
the Face, how the Carnations must change either to red or pale, more or
less serce, and to forth. By this Mieans we may defign any thing,
and come to Perfeltion the thorteft and furell Way.
CHAP.
H Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II.
 IX. Remarks on some Mistakes in Histerical Compositions.
 will not be amiss, as  Caution to others, to cenfure some Mif
takes of Mafters in Hifforical Compositions, in order to thew of
what great Contequence it is to reprefent plainly the true Nature
and State of Things, that we may improve, and not meet with Rebuke
inftead of Glory.  Man of good Seafe may freely exercife his
Thoughts as he fees good, but many think they merit much by sol.
lowing the Letter of  Stery, tho' at the fame Time they overlook
above half its Probability; which frequently happens, when they are
got into Effeem, and hove  Name. But, alas! what rich Man would
not be thought fuch ? What valiant Man do  cowardly Action! Or
wife Man commit Folly? Only thro' wilful Carelessness; truly it
feems unnatural, and  think, that no body of but moderate Sente
would ftrive to excel in this or that Art, without being tickled with
the Detire of Fame either in his Life-time, of after Death: And al.
tho' some Inttances may contradit this, yet you muft obferve that  ipeaking here of pure Firtue; for he who built the Temple of Di-
and, and he who tired it, tho' infligared by one Defire, to leave  laft-
ing Name bekind kim, have been as different in Praife as Action; from
whence  infer, that no Arciff can be void of Inclination for Praife and
Honour, which otherwife he mull not expect; and if fo, who would
blaft his Credit by an imprudent Act)
Raphael, in his Adum and Eve, has reprefented him receiving the
pple of her, and refting on  withered Stump, and that fmoothly
fevered as with an Ax or Saw; which is  double Miltake, and if done
wilfully, not to be excuted; for how is it likely, that  Tree, which
has hardly received Life, and placed to near the Tree of Life, should
to toon be withered; this muft be an Overfight like that of Cain, who
Kills his Brother Abel with  Charp Pick ax; and in another Piece
Fre has  Diltaff; what Improbability and Impertinence is this? For
when Fie has fpun her Flax, whence mutt the Weaver come, and who
make the Sciffars to cut ir? But perhaps thefe were not Rapbaels riper
Thoughts, but rather thofe of his Vouth, wherein the greateft Wits
Tometimes miltake.
Charles Termander, tho'  Writer, Poet and good Philolopher, has
miftook as much in his Consusson of Bubel; for the Tower and Scaffold
ing


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
  are reprefented unfinished in the middle of the Piece. divine Wrath
with Flames wavering over it; moreover are feen the Children of
Iral marched off in Tribes, and here and there diftinguithed by
Troops; they with their peculiar Standards, fif or lie all about, not
like People confounded by  Diverfity of Speech and  straying Con.
fulion, but as met together from all Quarters only to form  Congrels;
for there we fee Egyptians, Persians, Arabians, Moors, Apaties,
Americans, Europeans, Turks, nay, Swiffers, all in their modem Ha-
bits: Surely we need not ask them whither they are going, becaute
the Love for our own Country prevails above all Things; and there-
fore every Man is returning to the Region whence he took his Cha-
racter, Manners and Habit. What this Painter' Meaning was, 
Know not, but, in my Opinion, tis  true Confulion.
 cannot omit another Piece of Rowland Savry, reprefenting Para-
dife; wherein we fee that facred Garden replenished with all Kinds
of ravenous Beafts and Birds, as Elephants, Rhinocerofes, Crocodiles
Bears, Wolves, Unicorns, Offriches, Eagles, (oc. which mull incire-
ly lay it wafte: Now  appeal to any Man, whether fuch  Crowd of
Bealts and Birds of Prey, contribute any thing to the Circumftance of
eating an Apple, which might as well have been done by an Ape,
Squirrel, or other imall Creature; which makes it look rather like 
Deer- park than  Garden of Pleafure. Had more People been created
than Adam and Eve, the Cherubim need not have guarded the En
trance to keep the favage Creatures out, fince they were already entered,
but rather to keep them in, in order to fave the refl of the Earth from
Incommodity.  have feen more such Compofitions, but to avoid Te-
dioufness shall not mention them here; it' fufficient, by few Exam-
ples of great Mafters, to Know how eafy it is to commit Miltakes,
thro' ignorance or Want of Heed.
Inthe firft of the aforefaid Examples,  would thew how it fares with
thofe who amule themfelves more with  small Part than the whole of
 Story; and with an Arm or Leg which no ways concerns the Mat
ter, without being in dny Pain for forcing Nature, or turning the
Senss. Of the second Example  shall fay nothing here, fince it may
be gueffed what  mean by the lron of the Pick-ax. Of the third.
that fome Men feek five Legs on  Sheep, as we fay, whereby, in
Read of clearing, they make the Matter more obfcure and intricate.
As for the fourth, fome make no Difference between an Kulian Floor
and  green Field, if they can but have an Opportunity of shewing
their Wit, introducing every thing whether congruous of not.



Of Ordennance, or Compasition.
Book II.
 to Surry' Piece, my Thoughts are, that all Beafts are created
by God, bur not in the same Manner with Man; and that each Clime
Prodined it' proper Species of Anmals, which came from thence to
Adim to give them  Name according to their Natures; which was
 fooner done, but they returned to the Countries they came from;
tome to the Exl, others to the South, according to their natural In
clination to this or that Climate; to that the Garden, wherein the
Spirit of God dwelr, was only for Adam and his Confort; in it they
lived happily, and befides them no irrational Creatures, except fuch
as could delight their Eves and Ears: Moreover its my Opinion, that
this Garden could not hartour any Uncleannels, Purrefaltion of nox-
ious Creatures; wherefore my Compolition is this
Thefe two aiked Perions  place as Principals in the middle of
the Piece, on  lmall Riting, clofe to  fine tufced Apple-tree of larg.
or Size than ordinary, and of  found Body; Adam lits with Eve in
his Arms, who half in his Lap directs the Apple to his Mouth; he,
with his Face towards her, with  ftaring Eye, and raifed Brow, looks
Iurprized, and feems to put the Offer away with his Hand; to the
Acceptance of which, the, with  lovely and enticing Air, feeks to
perfuade him; at the tame Time, with her other Hand behind him,
the is receiving another Apple, which the Serpent, hanging on  Bough,
reaches out to her. Behindher is  Peacock with its Tail (pread, and  pawing her; befides  fine Hound, who looking back is going away.
 introduce alfo Cocks and Hens, and other tame Creacures proper to
the Region for embellifhing the Landskip.  plant there all Sorts of
Trees, except the Cypress, to gracify the Sight and Palate. Small
Birds are flying abour to pleafe the Ear: The Snow-white Swans fwim
in the Brooks and Rivers which water the Garden. On the right side
of the Piece  thew the Entrance into the Place, and on the Sides, two
Square Pillars of green Leaves, befer with Melons, Pumpkins and the
like; befides  long and high green Wall, running up to the Horn-
 and uniting with the Offskip. The Horizon is level; along the
green Wall are feen Orange and Lemon-trees, intermixed with
Date trees. The whole Piece is enlightened with an agreeable Sur
Chine.
To this Compolition  shall add another


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
  the Flight of ADam and EvE.
 was formerly of Opinion, that when this Pair received their Doom
and were driven out of Paradife, and both subjected to the fame Fate,
the Beafts mult fly with them, having learnt to know their own Narures;
wherefore  intended to make my Ordonnance accordingly, to wit,
the two naked and afhamed Perfons flying from the fiery Sword which
threatens them; and for Embellishment,  great Confution of Beafts
each attacking the Enemy of its Kind; as the cruel Wolf fetting on the
innocent Sheep, the Charp-fighted Eagle on the timorous Hare, and to
forth. But as by this Violence the main Action would intirely lofe
irs Force, and fall into  perverted Senfe,  deifted till  had better in
formed myfelf of the Matter, especially feeing no Bealt fayed in the
Garden, but each recurned to his Country.  thought again, how
can this be like the Flight of Adum out of Edenl It looks more natu
fally like two condemned Malefactors driven into  Foreff to be de
voured of wild Bealts; which their Fear and frightful Looks make
more probable; and therefore afterwards contrived it thus.
in Adam' Flight the labouring Of accompanies him to help him in
tilling the Ground; the fealy Serpent moves before, turning and wind-
ing on her Belly; by the Ox are the long-bearded He, and wanton She-
goat; the woolly Sheep; the crefted Cocks and Hens, and other fuch
like Creatures for Sultenance. As allo the faithful Dogand pawing Cat,
and luch other tame Animals as are proper in an hieroglyphic Sente; af
ter thefe, follow noxious Creatures, as Rats, Mice, Coc. No Sun-
hine appears, but all is gloomy, and the Wind blows hard, whereby
the Trees thake, and their Leaves drop; all is walte and wild as if Win-
ter vere at Hand; the rugged and dry Ground, parted by the Heat,
makes here and there Ups and Downs; the Water in the Fens being
dried up, the Frogs gape for Breath; the Sun being quite hid, the
Moonor North-ffar appears: Such were my Thoughts of this Story.
 will end this Chapter by skerching  third Composition of my own,
for the ftudious Cattle-painters Bencht, being the
Story of ORTHEUSs Death.
 lay the Scene in  defolate Place, yet filled with Men, Bealts,
Trees, Hills, Rocks, Warerfalls, and Brooks full of Fith, and
What can be more proper to the Macter, all being in Diforder? Ovid
relates


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II.
 that this ingenious Poct and Singer, Son of potto and of the
Mute Calhiope, did, with the Charms of his Harp, bewitch this Crowd,
but it laited not long; for the mad Baccbanals, enraged becaute he de-
spited them, flew him, cailing his Head and Harpinto the River He.
bras, called by the Greeks, Marifias, as the Poet fays. Now we fee
the unhappy Body of this excellent Mulician, thrown from  fmall
Hill arthe Foorof  Tree, which moved by to fad  Cataftrophe bends
its Boughs with Sorrow, endeavouring to cover the Body with its
Shade: Next we behold the mfalting, mad and intoxicated Women girt
with Skins, mocking run awar, after having finne the Head into the
River running on one side:  young Girl, who Kings in his Harp, is
likewife driven by the fame Frenzy: Behold now  Gurzler who (tho'
to much in Liquor as to want Support, yet) mull vent her Spleen by
Kicking the Body, and flinging  Drinking-pot at it, which makes her
teem to tumble backwards: Here hie broxen Thyrfes, Pottherds, bruit
ed Grapes and Vine-branches feattered round the Body in great Difor.
der: The long-lived Stag makes to the Cover; the dreadful Lyon and
ported Tyger grimly pats each other; each Creature feeks and attacks
its Enemy; the hurtful Moufe, cill now ficting quietly by the party-
coloured Car, hangs in her Mouth; the greedy Wolf feizes the Sheep
by its Throat; the faithful Hen elcapes the thiewith Fox, who near 
fallen Fir-tree carches the latcivious Dove; the Hills and Rocks retire
clathing againft each other, whereby they tumble; here we fee an huge
Stone; there  flying Tree; nay, the Water itfelf feemsto flow back-
wards; the Frogs and other marthy Creatures, afraid of being devour
ed by the Vulture and other Birds of Prey, dive under Water, but yet
the white Stork ffies with one of them in his Bill; the cautious Hare,
runing from the [wiff Dog, fops thort, whereby the Dog ooes over
him, and the Hare, to make her Elcape, takes  fide Courfe. The black
Raven and folicary Oul chatter in the Tree at one another, beholding
the murthered Body, which they defire to ear; and by it lies the faithful
Dog howling, regardlets of any thing elfe. The Piece has no agree
able Sun thine, but the Air is fformy, and full of driving Clouds fore
boding  Tempelt; the principal of the Compolition is fhady, and
fung off by  light Lomtain, which is almoft in the middle.
Thus  enquire into the genune State and Nature of Things, like
an Huntlman, who tracing the Courfe of  Deer finds at lail his Cover;
not that  do it for Curiofiry’ Sake as  Philofopher, but becaut
thefe, and no other Means, can help me; and as long as  keep this
Path


 Of: Ordosnances or Composition.
Palk, thope asver to err or commit the before thentioned Faults, espe=
cially feeing pnoching argiues Sinpidity more than antimely Simplicity,
whereas errical inquiry is the Key of Nauire' Treafure, and of her
deepeft Secrees; being not unlike what the witty Greets have feigned
of Afinerva, whom they exhibit with  Box and Key, and difpenting
the Soichtesto Mon according to their Abilitres.)
Iuted formerly to imitate the Unthinking; in not leffening or oug-
mehting the facred Stories; but adhering to the Letter of the Scriptures
without more ado, and withour making any Diflincdion between heaven-
ly and earchly Things; between Soul and Body; or, in thort, between
fomething and nothing;  know, that as to our sternal Happinels nothing
is wanting to compleat ii, but many Things, with resped to Arc;
mull  therefore remain in Ignorance or dull Simplicity? in the Scripr
tures they fay, all is written that is to the Purpofe, but then how
came the Bealls into the Garden of Edenf Where gets Cain an Iron
Pickax, and Kve . Dillaff, or the Babylenians their particular Dref-
fes? Since no Mention is made of such Circumftances. But when you
read, that the Kingwent to vifit fuch and tuch Perfons, that does not
imply that he went alone; as when you find that Human was carried
to the Gallows, some body mull attend him befides the Executioner;
Toshea, in Claying many Thoulands, did it not alone, withour the Help
of his Army. As for me, my Opinion is, that in frue Hiffories, er
ther lacred or profane, no improbable or impossible Things ought to
enter into the Compolition, nor any thing left dubious, but that every
thing cend to the clearing up and better understanding them in their full
Senle and Force.


CHAP. . Of Richness and Probability in Hiftery.
 by the Courage and Curiolity of Sea-faring Men, many remote
Countries, pay  new World, have been difcovered, to in Paint

ing, when Artifls (pare neither Trouble nor Pains, they will like-
wile, but with less Danger, difcover & new World in the Arr, full
of Variety to pleafe the Ejc.
We want not  new Hoter, Virgil or Ovid; and theirinventions; the
prefent have left us Materials enough to work on for  thouland
Years, and that not fufficient for the Execution of  renth Part of
their Thoughts; and if we do hor mend our Pace; ten thoufand Fears
 be too lirle; the Reafon is, that we content ourfelyes with paich-
No.  II
Of Ordonnance; or Composition.
 up old Houles with new Materials, and yet they are old Houles;
if some Parts decay, the worff are repair’, and the reft rather left
mfinished than the whole improved. But leaving Similes we will ufe
other Means, tho' uncultomary, to forward us in the Art; Curiolity is
reprefented with Wings, to thew its Eagernets to attain Things un
known to her; let us not then slop in barely inquiring into old Things,
but enrich them with new Thoughts.
As an Example, let us open Ovrd, and fee his Fable of Descation,
fet down in his firft Book of Metamorphesis. Deucalion was King of
Thefsls, who, with his Confort Pyrrba were the only Perfons remain.
ing alive of human Race after the Flood: thefe were enjoined by the
Oracle of the godly & Themis to caft the Stones of the Earth over
their Shoulders, whereby human Race was propagated anew, and the
World re-peopled.
 well grounded Thought leads the Way to many others; even to
it happens here in this Poers Fable, laid down as  Truth; nay to
agreeable to the Truch of the Flood, and Noabs Prefervation, that
there is lirile Difference between the Truth and the Fable; for what
is in the one is alfo contained in the other; and the Circumflances of
the Flood are the fame in both; the Matter lies now in  probably
Expreffion of the Damage which the Earth fuffered by to total an in
undation, and to execute it Skerch-wife as  conceive it.
Ordennance of DEUCALION and PYRRNA, after the Flaed.
 fuppose thefe two aged Perfons walking on  level Ground, the
Man' Head covered with  Corner of his Garment, and the Womans
with  Veil knorted behind; with his left Hand he -holds- his-Car
ment full of Stones; her Lap is empty; Cupid conducts them by the
Flaps of their Garments, with one Hland, having allo  lighted Torch
in II, and holds them falt, that in turning or winding they may not
hurt or go before one another; the Stones which they have slung be
hind them all the Way as they walked, reprefent human Forms per
felted in Proportion as they are firft fiung, and furcheft from them;
the Man walks upright, with his right Arm lified up, and Hando
pen, as having jutt flung  Stone, which is feen skimming  little abov
the Ground; the Woman  reprefent fomewhat flooping in her Walk
receivin
 She is rightly to caiel, as proceeding, according to Hefied, from Calum the Heaver, in
Piffs the Earit, whe appointed her to pretide over Rgbiceusness: And by Taplter the was till
the Moiber of Cirif Scleares.





  Of Ordennance, or Composition.
receiving the Stones from Capid, which each Time the cafts away,
and he, walking along, takes up before her; Dencalion’ Garment is 
fullied Purple; her Drets old and dark, and her Gown violet; Cupid
is adorned with  red Diadem; the Grass, full of Mud and Sand, lies
fat.  little from thefe Figures is Tbemis' Temple, built on an -
minence, and supported by Columns, or  clofe Wall quite over- grown
and full of Moss; this Temple is furrounded with fine and blooming
Trees, and near behind it is feen the two headed Mount, pafting by
the Point of Sight, and encompaffed with Water.
On the left Side, in the Offckip,  reprefent the Ocean full of Tritons
and Wercides fwimming about the Mount. To this Hill  fatten an
Anchor, the Rope whereof is tied to the Boat, which, being left by
the Water, remains hanging Keel-upwards.
Thefe are the principal of my Conceptions; as for the leffer Cir-
cumflances,  shall not limit them here; fuch as the difperting of the
rainy Clouds by the Eaff Wind; Re-appearance of the covered Hills
and Rocks, Difcovery of Buildings damaged by the Water, Pieces of
Wrecks, Statues, Sea-monfters, Bones of Men and Bealts, Ornaments
and other Remains appearing here and there out of the Mud, Plath-
es, and infinite other Things removed by the Force of the Waves from
one Part of the Earth to another, and wathed from Eaft to Well; all
which  leave to the Artiffs Difcretion.
But now it may be asked why  introduce Capid, who, in Nasos
Description, is not mentioned; and  give this Reafon, that he being
the eldeft of the Gods, and, according to Hefsod, brought forth of
Chaes and the Earth, by him contequenly all Things are produced,
according to the Poets; therefore it' probable, that in this second Cre-
ation he can be (pared no less than in the firft: Love was alto the Prin
cipal, nay the only Paffion, which thefe People preferved to each -
ther after their great Misforcune, and which they cherifhed by their
Simplicity and Uprightness.
Again, tho' they were aged, and near their Ends, yet they were
Hudying Means to efcape Death, and to render their Race immortal;
and who, of the Gods, can contribure more to it than Cupide Mutt
not Tupiter himself own his Sovereignty ? Therefore, tho' the Poet
makes Mention but of two Perfons, yer Reafon permits, nay, would
have us bring this God into their Company; especially fince Painters
have the Liberty to add new Matter, and more Figures for Orna-
ment take, when they are pot repugnant to Nature and Likelihood;
for
 Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
for which Horace gives them full Commiffion in his Lyfcrsong on
Poetry.
 Pifteribus atg; Poetis
Quidlibet audends semper juit aqua Poteffas.
Thus Paraphrafed by Mr. Dryden.
Pects and Painters free from servile Hwe,
May treat their Subjects, and their Objects draw.
Add then freely, when the Writer is filent, one or more Figures to
your Work, not to gain Maftery, or to excel, but to make the Matter
more plais and evident; which in Fubles is very neceftary, tho' in Hifto
ries it muft be done emblematically only.
Affer having entertained you with my Conceptions of this Stery,
give me Leave to exhibir  Reprefentation of the fame Subjet
handled by another Painter, not to thew the Oddnets, but the Super-
ffuicy, Impropriety and ill beffowed Time, and the Ignorance of pre
fuming Pedants, especially fince contrary Arguments frequencly pro-
dace Iruth, and thereby thew the Validiry of  Rule, which is level
led at Ablurdines. This Painter' Friends paying him  Vifit, he put
his Piece on the Eafel, and thus entertained them.
Behold, Gentlemen! here is  Proof of my Judgment and Art;  call neither the Learned, nor the Virtuofi to unfold its Mleaning; no,
an ignorant Pealant can tell it you at once. There is the World
& after the Deluge, as nacural as if it were alive; but no Wender; for
& the Ark is plainly difcovered on the Top of Mount Parnaffus. Here
 rou fee the Wirdows of the Heavens thut up, and the Fountains of
 the Earch sopped with  Cork: There the Sea runs high in  Val
& ley, and full of all Sores of Woodwork, as Tables, Chairs, Bench
:es, Paper-mills, and what not; befides some dead Bodies, as well of
Women as Men, one of them has  Learker-apron, another  Crown
 on his Head, and another  Night cap: This, Gentlemen, concerns
only what is carried away by the Water: But there on the Land
:les  Camel, next him  Silver Salver, and by it  dead Nightin
gale in  Cage: Here again you fee the Grave of Mabomet, and  it some featered Rolls of Virginia Tobacco: And before, or
& that Hillock, fome Cards and Egg-fhells; but  had almoft forgot
the Cardinal' Cap, which lies there, and,  affure you, was painted
:with Carmine; as allo  Scorpion, as natural as if it were alive:
 There, on the third Ground, is  Gallows, and under if three Thieves,
with


Of Ordonnance; or Composition.
  the Halters still about their Necks: Vorder is  Child in his
 Gocart, half buried in the Sand: And there  Sea-calf entangled
:in the Boughs of  Thicket; befides tome pickled Herrings: More
over you lee there  Smuth-pot, with some Pencils and Crayons; as
allo  Mass-prieft in his surplice; nay even the great Turtiss Horfe-
tail: Behold all the Toys blown out of  Naremberg Toy-hop, fcac-
:cered here and there: There, by the old Lantern, lies  Drum,
with its Head rurned to Jelly by the Water:  fay nothing yer of
that lron cheft in which are kept the Records of the Imperial Cham-
:ber of Judicature at Spire; nor of an hundred other Things, betides
Houles and Monafteries; nay, the Vatican irfelf; for all is turned into
Ruins and Rubbish; no living Creature is to be feen but Deucalion
and Pyrrba, and their three sons and their Wives, all done to the
Life. Now who will not take this to be  Flood, and believe that
all happened in this Manner! Look there,  myself am fitting on the
:fore Ground, on an Hillock, and modelling every thing after the
Life; and there is my Name and the Date.
Having faid this, he ffood much furprized to fee they did not extol
his Fancy, and approve it, fince he thought it to well executed For
my part,  think that no one before him ever reprefented fuch our of-
the way Thoughts; many indeed have now and then erred, but being
made fentible of it, they have rectified their Mistakes; whereas this
whole Compolition was but one Miltake; Scripture jumbled with Fa-
ble; Moses with Ovid; Anriquiry with Novelcy;  Cardinal' Cap.
Vatican, Cards, Things found out  thouland Vears after, with An
tiquity; what is all this but  Chaos of Folly? Methinks luch an Ar-
till is like common Chymifls, who, to extract Gold, King any thing
into the Crucible that will mell, drudging Night and Day, and walting
their Sabliance to find ar latt, in the Bottom of the devouring Crucible,
nothing but  little Scum of  cannot tell what, an anknown nothing,
without Colour or Weight; when  good Chymitt will get the crue
Knowledge of Mctals, and their Natures, Colours, Volability, Fix-
ednels, Coc. in order to obtain the precious Gold by Art and Labour.
Even to ought  Painter allo to obtain the Knowledge of Objects, and

their Natures, aimes, Propercies and Ufes, or elle the Subltance of
his Art will evaporate.
 have often obferved, that Superflaity, inflead of rendring  Thing
more forcible and confpicuous, has leffened and obfcured it; and that
too large  Greund, thinly filled, has no better Effett; we maft there-
fore


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
 II
fore avod this Scylla and Charibdis as. two dangerous Rocks:  can'
compare fuch Proceedings better than to exceffive Poverty and Pro-
futeness of Wealch, whether the one arife from an indolent, dull and
melancholy Temper, or the other from  lively and too fercile an one,
or that fome Men arg fuperflicious imitators of other Mens Works;
as we fee daily, in one the Greatness of Caracor; in another, the fine
Colouring of Titian; in this, the graceful Simplicity of Raphael; and
in that, the natural Expreftion of Gaido. This Method is indeed whar
some Men are prone to, but let us confider the Difference between mo
delling in Clay, and cutting in Marble.
To return to our Subject about the Floods, let us make  Compa-
rifon between them and Ruphaels, in order to form  judgment;
Regboel makes Noab and his Fumily the principal Charalters in his
Compotition; we do the fame by Deacution and his Wise; and the -
ther contrarily exhibits them very dubioutly, and too much out of
Sight in the Offship; in Rephaels nothing is feen of what is laid walte
by the Water, or dead Bodies, Beafts, Coc. in ours fo much is vifible,
that the Caufe and the Effects plainly appear; and in the other, to
great  Superfluity abounds, as if the whole World were contained in
the fingle Picture; in Raphaels is feen Weab' going forth of the
Ark; in ours Deaculion and Pyrrba are landing out of the Boat; but
the third has no Name, fince to much as  Draining of the Wa-
ters is fcarce perceived; wherefore
In medio secure.
that is,
Secure we tread when neither Feot is seen,
Too high or low, but in the golden Mean.
Let us therefore ponder and weigh thoroughly what we are about
in fuch an important Compofition, and then proceed to work as quick
 poffible.
CHRP. XI. Of the Ordennance of hiereghphic Figures.
 VIN  before said curforily, that an Excess of luch Figures
often obicures their Meaning, nay, renders them unintelligible,
 think it proper to treat of this Subject here, fince they are of
tuch


 Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap. II.
such frequent Ufe and Service, not only in handling Fables, Hiffories
and Emblems, but in carving Statues and Bas-reliets for great Men and
their Palaces.
Cafar Ripas Treatife of Iconology is queltionless an excellent and
wteful Book for all Perfons whole Art has any Relation to Painting;
but altho'’ it treat copioully of Hicroglyphies, Manners, Paftions,
Zeal, Virtues, Vices, coc. yet fomething is ftill required to the right
Ufe of that Book, according to the Occation, and Difference of the
Subject, which by that great Writer is not laid down; fince its with-
out Dilpute, that each Figure muft express no other Paltion than its
own; but when they are uled for By-works or Ornament, to illuftrate
someprincipatreal Charaffer, chey muft then subferve the Ends for which
they are introduced; for inftance, in  Fight, Victory should attend
the Conqueror; Honour or Fame, an excellent Man; Love, or Cupid,
an amorous Man; the Vindictive, Revenge; the Hypocrice, Fallhood;
the cancrous Man, Envy; the Innocent, lnnocence; and fuch like.
omit others, as Anger, Madness, Sorrow, Modefty, Boldnels, utho
rity, Charity, Temperance, Cruely, Pain, Coc. becaute thefe have
no Share in some Acts, nor come into play unless they are ufed alone,
and without the Company of living Perfons; as the Elements againt
each other, Virtues againft Vices, and to forth. lis therefore of the
greateff Confequence for  Painter, Staruary, Poet or Orator to Know
thefe Things thoroughly, and keep them in Memory; which Praltice
will make eaty.
 remember, that when  was under my Father' Inftructions, and
Rudying Delign, my Gulto was for Emblems, which  collected from
his and other Mafters Works, and then made intire Compofitions of
them; which, tho' triffing, becaute of my Vouth and Inexperience,
yet furprized many, who advifed my Father to let me purfue that
kind of Study; but whether he thought me too young, or that  ra-
ther inclined to Hiftory, he diverred me from it as much as poffible;
especially fince it drew other Mafters Disciples to fee my odd Producti-
ons; which he much difliked. But when my eldeft Brother brought me
out of Iraly, Cafur Ripr’ Book aforefaid, (which hitherto we were
Strangers to, or elfe was locked up as  Secret) then my Flame for
Emblematic Learning broke out again. By the Help of this Book 
produced many and Rrange Deligns, which, for their Singularity, were
accounted as Prodigies of Dreams, by fome out of Spite againtt me,
others thro' Ignorance; however my Proficiency was fuch, that it
jielded me an annual Profit, becaute the Tefuits Scholars yearly be-
Ipoke


Of Ordonnance, or Compositian.
Book II.
 of me the embellithing of above  of their Potfions or
Theses, with Emblems, Hiffories or Fables in Watercolours. " Judge
now, whether thefe my Studies tended not tomy Advantage and improve-
ment, and whar Honour was thewed me in preferring me to the imploy,
before my Cotemporaries and Fellow-ditciples, and what lictle Skill
they mut have in heroglyphrical Learning, tho'  doubilets then made
many Miltakes.
let us return to our Subject, and illuftrate
Bur leaving Digreffians,
it in the Story of Didgs Death; which we shall handle two different
 Aatural.  Embaratical.
in the firit Manner, we reprefent the Queen in Defpair, and pal
Hopes, on  Pile of Wood, and, after Sacrifice, ftabbing hertelf;
when Iris cuts off the fatal Hair; her Sifter attends the Solemnity in
Tears anl Lamentacion; all is in Confution, and every one affected

Thus far Virgil.
with Sorrow in  greater or less Degree.
In the lecond Mlanner we thew how Defpair, accompanied by Rage,
is drasging Love to the Grave, with this Inscription,—Didg' Death.
And to  deligned  for the Fronciffiece of Monfieur Pets Tragedy on
that Subject.
Now irs eaty to fee why, in the former Manner, neither Rage,
Despair nor Love attend the Princets; and in the later, why neither
Princels, By-Handers, Alcar nor Pile of Wood are introduced; fince
in the firtt Manner no Aid is wanting, becaute each Figure fufficient
ly acts its own Part, and thews every thing which its Paffion natural
ly leads it to; wherefore it would be redundant, nay obfcure the
Story, to double all the feveral Motions, with the fame Paffions and
Senfes, by thefe Figures; whence it is that they can have no Place.
But where the Subject is purely Emblematic, and Emblematic Figures
the principil Characters, as in the fecond Mianner, they muft come
into play; becaute each Figure then expreffes its natural Quality, in
order to clear and illuftrace the Sente of the Storr, without the Addi
tion of any body elfe.
in this Manner Apelles contrived his Piece, on his being accuted by
Antiftilas; wherein he reprefents innocence purfued by Rage, Vice,
Lies and Slander, and dragg’' by them before an ignorant Judge;
thus many Things are couched under  fingle Allegory: But when .
ny pirticuler Perfon, Man or Woman, and their Charalters, Shapes,
Countenances, Cr. are burlefqued in this Manner, then fuch  Delign

may be called  Pasquil.


Chap. II. Of Ordennance, or Composition.
 is without difpute, that every Man has but one predeminant Past
on at  time. which moves and governs him; wherefore  prudent,
generous and valiant Man, when he is doing  prudent Alt, may be
accompanied by Generofity and Valour, but not with Prudence, becaute
that Quality appears in his Act: Again, if in an Attack he perform 
valorous Action, such mult appear in his Perfon, and Prudence and
Generofity only must accompany him; if: he thew his Generolity, as in re-
Roring Captives without Rantom, Prudence and Valour are sufficient to
attend him, without the Addition of Generesity. The Cafe of  famous
Mafter is the same; for he being pofieffed of feveral good Qualities.
as Judgment, Affiduity, quick Conceptions, Coc. if he be reprefents
ed employed at his Eafel; these Characters may all illuttrace him, ex=
cept Assduity, which thews itfelf by his Motion and Pofture. If  Phir
lolopher do  foolith Thing, all other good Qualities should ornament
him, except Folly, becaute he is committing it.
Such Obfervations as thefe, are worthy of Notice, and without them
an Emblens cannot be good. This Part of the rt is very
Lable to Cen-
hire, but yet few underfland it, becaufe the Falts being
always couch-
ed under uncommon Appearances, are Secrets to the
Vulgar, with-
out Explanation; nevertheless they should be to handled that People of
Judgment at lealt may Know their Meanings, and the Arrift not be re-
proved.
 remember to have feen  Piture of Bocchus and Ariadne, wherein
obferved  Miltake, in placing Sorrow and Defpair about the Princels,
the latter was feen flying from her; which, in my Opinion, was right
and proper in the Mafter; but our Difpute was, whether the Figure of
Sorrow had any Bufiness there. He juftified it by very plautible Rea-
ons, laying, that altho, by the Prefence of the compaffionate God,
her Sorrow was at an end, yet it abaced nor. luddenly; becaute the
Was to give him  Relation of her Difaffer, and then to wait for 
favourable Anfwer; and to long Sorrow mult be with her.  have.
lays he, reprefented her with  forrowful Look; and Tears in her Eyes,
pointing towards the Sea at the perfidious Thesens, the Occation of her
Sorrow; Baccbas is attentive, whofe upper Garment is opened by
Cupid;, and becaute frisdne knew not whom the had with her, Man
or God, Love difcovered his Godhead, and made her fentible of his
Power.
This Piece was, in my Judgment, fine; yer  think Sorrow should
have been left out of the Compofition, becaute, according to our Poli
tion, no Pasfion can aft in two Places at ence; for tho' the Princelss

No.  Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
 fufficieatly thewed it; yet, as being overcome; it is taking
its Flight.  have feen more fuch Mistakes, but tis no Wonder; for
We are not born wife.
in the Ufe of hieroglyphic Figures for expresing the Passions, con-
fider, in an especial Manner, whether thofe Paffions work internalty or
externally;  mean, whether the Action and Metion of the Body alfo shew
fofficiently irs predeminant Passion; for  good natured, fedate Man needs
no auxiliary Action to thew he is fuch; becaute his Countenance does it
effectually. But when we defire to make known Love and Sorrow,
which are internal Affections of the Soul, thefe mult be exprefted by
means of Hieroglyphic Figures; and yet if the Body be difturbed and
moved by thole Paffions, the afting Passion may be clearly perceived
without the Help of Hieroglyphies.
Notwichftanding the Necefficy of this Knowledge in all who have
any Relation to Painting, yet many young Statuaries imagine, that
being generally concerned in carving fingle Figures only, it does not
affect them. But they mistake; for suppofe they should be required to
fet off  Figure with Emblems, whether on  Pedefisl, or in 
Niche, in Bats or whole Relief, in order to blazon the Qualities and
Virtues of the Perfon it reprefents, they would be at  sland; and the
rather, as we fee Painters exhibir moft of their Emblematic Figures in
Stone-work, in order to make an Hiffory clear. Now the Statuary,
not able to truff to his own Sirength, relies on the Painters: Aid to
Defign him fuch and tuch Thoughts; to which he fets his Model, and
to proceeds to work.


CHAP. XIl. Of the Order, or Succesfion of the Motians proceeding
from the Passions.
  ER having fuffxiently fpoken how  Figure ought, by
irs Form, to express the Palfions, we are led to fay fomewhat

touching the Order or Succeffion of it' Aftion; for tho' in  Sw
ry, the one oftenrimes proceed from the others, and revert and fal
back again, yet especial Care mult be taken, that they be not expresed
and skean all at the same inflant of Time; but that each wait for it' pro
per Turn and Serfon. As if  Gentleman should order his Servant 
beat any one; three Motions arife from hence, which cannot be per
formed at once, becaute the Order mult precede the Hearing, and Per
forman


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap. I be the Confequence. : Again, yis prepofterous, that  Prince
should fland in  commanding Potture, at the same Time as. his: Sate
vants are executing his Commands. It would be as unnatural to frame
the Story of the Woman catch’ in Adultery, in this Manner; Cbriff is
writing in the Dull, while the People are fneaking away difcontent-
ed and athamed; and (which is fill worfe) some provided with
Baskets of Stones, either waiting on the fecond Ground for the Iffue,
or departing out of the Temple; tho' our Saviour had not finished
his Writing, by which thole Paltions were to be raifed. The incom-
parable Pouffin poffefted this Condult in an high Degree; as may be
feen in his Picture of this Story. When  General is spiriting his
Army, each Soldier obferves Silence and Attention while the Ha-
rangue is making.
In my juvenile Vears  painted the Story of Progne, where, in Re-
venge of her defloured Sifter Pbifomels, the is thewing and calling at
Terens the Head of his Son, whole Body is almoff eaten up by him;
At which purfuing her in  Rage, the was metamorphifed into  Bird.
reprefented thole outrageous Women shewing him the fevered Head: At
which the King, trantported with Fury, rifes from his Seat, with 
drawn Sword; the Table is overturned, and the drinking Velfels, Difh-
es and other Table furniture lie broken to pieces about the Floor, and
the Wine fpilt at their Feet; and yet  made the Women keep their
Randing, holding the Head. To re-confider this Story, tis natural to
think, that in the Reginaing the Tyrant fat quietly ar the Table, ig-
norant of what was doing; afterwards the Women entered the Room,
thewing him the Childs Head cut off, accended with Speeches proper
to the Occation; which put him firft our of Countenance, and then
piercing his Heart, he furioully arofe from Table and overturned it;
and drawing his Sword in order to purfue them, he puthed down every
thing in his Way: Notwithllanding all which Rage and Difturbance,
the Women remain in the fame Pofture and Station as when they came
in. Vou may ealily perceive my Overight, and improper handling
this Story. Tis true indeed, that all the different Motions were fudden
and quickly fucceffive, yet the kept the Head too long in her Hand, to
throw it on the Table after it was overturned. In all Likelihood, at
the End of her Speech, the mult have thrown down the Head, and
taken to flight as foon as Tereus made the leaft Offer for rifing; and
then muft follow her Metamorpholis, and the be off the Ground. 
conceive therefore, that the Table ought to have been still flanding;
and the, after the Head was thrown upon it, to be flying; and, to
  Ordennance, or Compefition.
 II.
thew her iohumanly, with  Sweed or Chopping-kaife in one Hland, and
incnacing with the other. But  pass on to thew my cooler Thoughts
in another Example, being the Fable of Apollo and the Dragon
Python.
This Ordonnance exhibits  wild Prospect; on the right Side, on
the second Ground, in  low Morass, is feen the frightful Monfter Py
sben (faid to be engendered of the Vapours and Exhalations of the
Earth) lying half in and half out of the Plath, laden with Arrows;
fome People, flanding on  near Hill, are viewing him, flopping their
Nofes becaute of the Srench. On the left Side, where the Cround rif.
es higher,  round Temple appears, and therein the Statue of Apotte;
with various Conditions of Men worthipping, facrificing, rejoicing,
skipping and dancing. About the Morats or Plath iland some wither
ed  Pieces of Ruins, and fcattered Bones of devoured Men and
Beafts. Behind the aforefaid Rifing, in the Offskip, are feen Cottages,
the near ones ruined, thofe more diftant from the Montter lets damas.
 On the fore Ground the infulcing Archer is feen leaning on his
Bow, and with his Quiver at his Backempty; he flands daring and
haughtily on his left Leg, coffing his Head backwards towards his
right side and the Light, and, with his leff Hand extended, and 
fcornful Smile, he is putting by Capid, who, with his Scarf flying be
hind, foars aloff from him, and, with Anger in his Looks, nods his
Head, thewing him an Arrow with the Point upwards, as if he were

Tox shall soon feel this Point. Behind Phebus, or Apelle,
laying,
flands  large Paim-tree, and by it an Oak, againtl the Trank of
which he lers his Back; his Head is adorned with Oak and other
Leaves Forwards  ought to reprefent  Brook, wherein he is part-
ir feen by the Reflexion of the Water; his Dress is  golden Coat of
Armour, and  Purple Garment Hanging down behind him..
 seceond Ordennance, touching AEOLLo and DATRNE.
No fooner had Apells caft his Eyes on Daphne, but he fell in love
with her; his eager Paftion made him purfue her, in order to make
her fentible of it; hereupon Cupid, after having touched Daphnes
Heart with  cool Arrow, pierced Apollos with an hor one; Daphne,
infentible of what is doing, is talking with fome Waternymphs, who
he, with their Pots, on the Bank of  clear Stream. She slands in the
Em in  fronting Pofition, with her Ouiver hanging at her naked Back;
he beholds the Nymphs, with  down and lovely Look, over her lef
Side;


 Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  her left Hlip rifes; her left Hland is airily under her Breaft, with
the Palm outwards; in her right Hand the holds her Bow above the
mdlle, which fomewhat supports her, opening her Elbow from her,
whereby the Hollow of her Body on that Side is filled up; her Gar-
ment is girt short under her Breall, being faftened with  Ribbon on
her left shoulder, and with  Button at Knee; the Side Flappets are
cucked under  Girdle coming over her Hip, the Ends hanging down;
from her Head ornament, burtoned up, her light Treffes hang down
on both fides with  lovely Flow over the Shoulders. Behind heralong
the Waterfide (which, after partly running towards the Point of Sight,
alters irs Courfe) is flanding  whice Marble oblong Stone,  or  high, adorned with Basreliets, againtt which Stone her Ground-
Shade falls: On it lies  Water nymph on her left Side, fore-shortened;
the is refting on her Elbow, and, with the left Hand under her Checks,
is looking at Daphne; the Nymphs lower Parts are covered with 
blue Scart, which fers off the naked upper Parts of Daphne. Dapb.
nes Garment is Apple-bloffom Colour, lirtle darker than the naked,
with Violet Reffexions; along the Water-fide fland Willows for Re-
pose of the Nymphs. On the Brink of the River, to the left, is 
rocky Mountain full of Rilings from Bottom to Top. between which
the foamy Water runs and defcends. On the right Side Apollo is feen.
(between the Point of Sight and where the Ground rifes high with rude
Steps) coming full of Amazement Gdeways from it; he sloops forward,
his left Hand refting on  Crook or Staff; his right Foor lowly pur
forth, juft touching the Ground with his Toes; his Breall almoff
meets his left Knee; his right Elbow is drawn back; his open Hand
is up at his Ear; his Face in Profile, and his Eyes faring at Daphne;
 fiery Arrow enters his Brealt; his Garment is of coarle, light grey
Stuff, two Ends of which button under his Chin, and the others,
from under his Arms, tuckt in his Girdle before, where alfo flicks 
Shepherds Flute; on his Head  blue Cap, turned up before, and
Wrinkled on Top; his Breafl fomewhat inclines to the Light, and,
his right Thigh is feen in full Length. The Light proceeds from the
right; the Hill on that Side is upright like  Wall; the Steps
parallel or fronting; on the left the Hill makes  rugged Slope; and,
every where over-run with Variety of wild Shrubs and Herbs, it fills
up almoll the right side of the Picture, running up high by the
Point of Sight; projecting over the Way, which is very low, it gives
 Ground-shade there, which takes half the Way to the Scone behind
Daphne; and beyond it is another Ground shade, runningbetween some
high.


 Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II
high Trees behind the Hill. The Offckip, on the left Side, dilcovers
 nne Fabric, being the Palace of King Admetus; near which, some
Cattle are grazing in the Field. Cupid is fiying towards the Hill, look-
ing back at Yfols.
If it be asked, how we shall know this to be Apollo;  By
his beautiful Air and golden Locks, his lovely Aspect, and the De-
roir with which he is viewing the Nymph, and by the Arrow with
which the fiving Capid has prerced him. Befides,  do not know, that
OziTs Alcramorpholis affords any fuch Reprefentation of  Shepherd
thu, enamoured with  Nymph; for it muft be obferved that Apolle
was at that Time expelled Heaven, and bereft of his godly Ornaments,
the Purple Garment, Sun-rays, Management of the Charior of the
Sun, the Lyre, and the like; and got his Living by feeding Cattle for
King Limcrys.
 reprefent Daprne' Converfation among the Naiades ( think) not
improperly, fince the River-god Peneas was her Father, whom  leave
out of the Story, becaute his paternal Authority would not fuffer her
to entertain fuch Kind Looks; for he difliked her Manner of lir-
ing, and would have her marry which the difapproved; wherefore,
to fhew her Averfion for Men,  have incroduced none but Virgins
 have allo not given to Hpollo  Crown of Oak-leaves, becaute im-
proper to  Shepherd, but  blue woollen Cap;  Dress better fuit
ing that Condition, fince now he is no more Pbebus, but polle.
This Story is rarely handled, generally overlooked by Painters
Third Ordennance relating to Arollo and DAPRNE.
Here folle is purfuing the Object of his Love, running and at the
same time intreating her; her Countenance difcovers Fear; and feeing
him to near her, the endeavours to thun him by stopping thort and taking
another Way; the fears neither Thornbuthes nor rugged Ways, but
runs (wiftly over all. He purfues, but not with Intention to ferre her,
becaufe he has one Hland on his Breatt, and with the other he cafts 
war his Staff, skimming over the Ground behind him; his blue Cap
is blown off his Head, towards the Way whence he came; his Head
is flung back and fidling, to demonflrate that he is intreating her; and
the is looking back at him; his Aspect fiery, his Eyes flaming, bu
to no purpote; for the contrarily, tho' tired and fweaty, is pale and
wan, her Face dry, Eye-brows knot, Mouth railed in the middle witt
the Cormers downwards like an Halfmoon, to thew her Pain; the lif
Be


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap.  extended Arms towards Heaven, quite exceeding the Poize of her
Body; the Quiver at her Back is flying back, and the Arrows (catter-
ed along the Way; the holds her unbent Bow in her chill’ left Hand.
Spolle, in the Purfuit, has carch’  Flap of her Garment as her Feet
take Root; her Body is towards him, but her Face towards Heaven,
Rruggling with approaching Death. Her eager Lover (as yet infentible
of this) thinking thes now in his Power, hopes for Victory. But here
 mean not to thew her flanding slill, but to run further by friving
to difengage her rooted Feet and Toes, which the imagines are only
retarded by Apollo; wherefore the flings her Head back, difcovering
her Fears by loud Shricks; at which Moment her Metamorpholis be-
gins. les not improper to thew  long and winding Way by which
they come; and, in the Offckip, the Nymphs, by the whice Marble
Rone, looking after her; one of them thades her Eyes from the Sun
with her Hand; others are wondering; others mutually embracing.
Behind them are leen the Mounts Cytheron and Helicon rearing their
Heads to the Clouds; and behind Dupbne, between some Trees, is 
Terme of Mercury, if then in Being, otherwife that of Diana her
Miftress. Her Drets is as before. Apollo and Daphne' Courfe is againtt
the Sun; the is feen backwards, her right Leg forward, and the left,
lifted high, feems to turn to the right to take that Way; he, contra-
rily fomewhat flooping with his left Leg forward, and his right behind,
jult off the Ground, is turning to the left, tracing her Steps like
an Hound courting an Hare, which, fopping thort, takes  new
 of APOLLO ARl DAPHNEs Stery..
Duphne, unable to run further, at laft remains fixed to the Earth,;
often friving to unroot her Feet, but in vain;  rough Bark now co-
vers her Legs and half her Thighs, and  deadly Chill congeals her
Blood; her ffuttering Soul feems to be leaving her, fighing for the laff
Time; the fands on the left Side of the Point of Sight; on the fore
Ground; the upper Part of her Body, Arms and Head are still intife;
her Quiver in Diforder, recedes  little from the Point of Sight to the
left; the under Part of her Body fronts the Light; her right Hip
rifes; her Legs twining unite below, juft under the Knees; into  fin-
gle Stem; her Breaft flanding out is fronting; her Head turned to the
left droops over her left Breaft; her Eyes are half clofed; her Mouth
almoff thut, difcovering still some faimt Signs of Pain; her Checksare pale,.
biut


Of Ordennance, or Compesition.
Boof II.
 her Lips violet; her Head is full of Branches, and to filled; with
Leaves prouting out on all fides, that they thade the Face, and half
her Bofom. Before her,  liitle to the left,  large Oak rifes, which
the embraces with her left Arm, againtt which her Head is leaning
Her Dreis is as before. Afolle, now at the End of his Hopes, burtts
inro Lamentation:, monning her hard Face, but chieffy his own hor
Inclipations; the Caule of both; he slands on her right side, with his
right Leg on the second Ground, his Foot hid by the Hollow of the
War, and his left Legon the firft Ground, with the Foot clofe to
the Srem; his Head  Eirtle backward, leaning to the right side, and
his Face towards Heaven; he excends his right Arm, with the Palm
of the Hand ourwards, as far as he can reach, feeling under her
left Breait to fee whether her Heart fill beat, or not; his right fland
is off from him quite open; the Flap of his Garment, loole on the
left Side, hangs down behind. On the right side, from behind the
Ground,  Water-god comes running with Wonder; above whom ap.
pears frrofos, or Fate, with her Dillaff and Sciffors; the is feen from
behind and fore-thorrened, foaring high towards the right side of the
Picture. The Sky abounds with driving Clouds. The Mount Parnaf.
fus appears off on the right side, as allo the River running behind it
towards the Pont of Sight; on the Bank of which River some Bealts
are drinking. Halfway up the Mount is feen  fmall round Temple of
the Goddels Themis; before the Frontifpiece of which, sland an Oak and
 Linden tree; and in the Lointan, almoff on the Horizen, the Town
and royal Cartle of Admeras; the reft is Field, in the middle of
which  Shepherd is fitting on the Grass, and another flanding by
him, who ponts at the Cattle, at which the other is looking with
Wonder; Capid talking with Atropes, is fiving along with her. Be.
hind the Oak should be feen  Part of the before-mentioned Terme.
The Concluson of Apotlo and DAPRNEs Story.
When Spolle had finithed his Prophecy, Daphne gave  Nod as  of her Affent to it; but while he is gazing at her Mouth, he
fees her no more; the Tree alone (on which her Bow and Quiver
hang) muft now be his Comfort; he fighing and lamenting went to
lean againft the Cak, which was half withered, old and rent, his El.
bow in one Hland, and his Face supported by the other; his Legs across;
in this Pofture he remains  while muting and filent. The Water
nymphs are firting round about, one on her Urn reverfed; another
 Ordonnance, or Composition.
 A the Ground near him ; another is embracing Dapbrcs unhappy
Body, looking up at the Leaves, and feeming to addreisher, who sow
is no more. Another, flanding by, is raifing her Shoulders, dropping
her folded flands, and Head hanging. An old Shepherd is pulling  by the Flap of his Coat, but he does not regard it. In fite, no
thing is feen but univerfal Diforder, Sorrow and Wonder; the Gods
and People are flocking from all Parts to view this new Sort of Crea-
ture, to wit, Dryades, Satyrs and Hunting-nympbs, fome with Re
spelt, others with Amazement, others with Joy; the univerfal Mo
ther Earth herfelf Rands in Surprize. To conclude this Fable,  muft
add this Remark, as not foreign to Apollo' Propheey, That the Lan-
rel in Times to come should ferve for  Token of Viltory, and adorf
the Brows of Conquerors inflead of Oak-leaves, and that, in Wic
mory of Daphne, thole should be facred to him above all others.
Here, Valour, or Hercules, appears with his Lion'’ Skin and Club; to
whom Viftory, relling againtt  Laurel tree, is offering  Garland
with one Hand, and pulling off  Branch with the other; in her Arms
is her Trophy.
Memory fits by the aforefaid Tree, on an Eminence, recording, in 
Book, the ctions of the Heroe; Saturn thews her Hercules. On the
second Ground, by  Morats, lies the Body of Hydre, with fome
Heads ftruck off, and others burnt black.

CH AP. XIII. Of Use and Abuse in Painting.
AHIS noble Art having been the Elteem of all Ages, as Writ
ers tellify, his certain, that nothing to pleafingly flatters the
Eye, as  Pilture viewed in irs full Luftre; but in all Things
there is an Use and Abuse, and to it happens in Painting.
The Use lies in handling of noble and edifying Subjects; as fine
Hiflories, and Emblems moral and fpiritual, in  virtuous and decent
Manner; to as at once to delight and infruct. Thus the Art gains its
Lufire.
The Abase appears in treating oblcene and vicious Subjects; which.
ditquiet the Mind and put Modefty to the Bluth: He, who follows
this Method, can never expect the Reward of Virtue (which, Horace
fays, is an immortal Name) but rather eternal Infamy.. We shall confi-
der the Matter in both Respects.
No.  Ordonnance, ir Composidion.
Book II.
 Hifforisds year an Hiffory, they. feldom pats Oter any Cir.
cumflance, the' eret to indecem; nay, the fie be intirly evit; Peed
do the fame in their Fiftions; but in  werle Degree; becaule  flatter-
ing Tale eatily ruffies, often milleads the Mind of  Reader. In fine,
it were to be withed, that, when fach Libercies are taken, (which
should never be, without abfalnce Necefficy) naked Truth were either
veiled, or call into Shade, in order to prevent unlawful Defires.
Bot if  Dilcourfe can ths captivace the Heart, how much more
mull the Eye be attracted by  Painting? Since the Sight affects the
Senfes in  greater Degree, especially when the Subject is vicious:
What Honour would  Mafter get by painting the good Man Noab,
wallowing obfcenely in Liquor? And would it be  lets Crime than
Choms mocking him? He did it only to his Brothers; who, turning
away their Faces, covered their Father with their Garments, in order
to hide his Nakedness; whereas the Painter expoles him to all the
World les as indecent to thew Potiphar' Wife, naked on the Bed,
in an unfeemly Polture, inticing Teseph, tho' it was  private Fall,
and not attended with the worll Circumftances. Nor is Michirel Angelo
Buongreti more to be commended, in exhibiting his Leda flark naked,
with the Swan between her Legs;  Circumftance certainly that he might
have omitted Is it not to be lamented, that fince there is fuch  Fund
of Marter for fine Deligns, Virmes as well as Vices. whence we maj
draw good Morals, fober Matters will commit fuch fcandalous Faults,
and execute them to barefaced and circumftancially, that they want
nothing but Smell: As Horace intimates,
Nam frufra Vitium ritaveris illad,
Si te aho pravum deterferis.
Bt, leaving this unlawful Subjelt, as unworthy of an Artiff, let .
proceed to thew the Tokens of  good Picture.
Writing printed is more intelligible, than the Scrawl of an indiffe
reat Penman; and to tis with  Picture; if the Story be well exprest,
end euch Objert answer its Charafter, with respect to the Story, Time
and Occusion, leaving naked or cleathing the Figures, which ought to be
so. fch an Ordonnance may be juftly called  (peaking Pilture: But
is otherwife with Paintings governed by Whim, and void of Like
hhood; the former Pilture explains irfelf at firft View, and the latter
  dark Riddle, in need of unfolding,



Of: Ordonnance; or Composition.
Chap. IIs.
   not fofficient to thew Dians with  Meonon her Head, Pewar
with her Star, and Florg with her Chaplet of Flowers; for we should
allo thew their diftinguithing Qualities and Charalters, fill regarding
their Headornaments, and when they mult be deck’, and when not.
Doubtlets in every Country, except among Savages, are to be found
good Laws and Manners, and three principal Fimes for dretting, tfee
cially among the Women, whole Actire Worning and Night is plain
and loofe, but at Noon fet out.
Iis no Wonder, that among the Crowd of excellent Mafters, fegr
make Trae Decerum  Maxim in their Works, fince their Opinions  various, and governed either by their Degree of Skill, or inclinati-
on; one thinks, it lies in the Harmony or Conjnction of Lighss and
Shades; another, in the Compofition of Colours, and thofe ahofether
broken;  chird, in chuling the Colours as beautiful as poffible; and=
ther, in great Force; another, in airy Reffections, Coc. But, fet them
fancy what they pleafe, none of thele Parts will alone confliture  be
coming Picture, hew fimple foever; much less  compleac Ordonnance of
Figures, Landskip, Archicecture, Flowers, Cartle, Edc. For Inflances
of what worth is  Composition of Figures, where all the Pollures and
Airs are alike! Of  Landskip, where, in the Bolcage, we fee no
Difference or Variety in the Bodies of Trees, Leafing or Colouring)
in Archifecture the fame; but how decorous mult  Cartle-piece be,
when we fee the Qualiries of the Animals well expreffed! some fmoashi,
others rough, hairy or woolly. True Decorum then proceeds from
 Conjunction of all the Particulars above mentioned, and  great Force
of Light, Shade and Reffexion, and an Harmony of Colours as well
beautiful as broken, and the whole managed according to Rule, and
agreeing with Nature.
If we will weigh thefe Things, we shalf foon perceive that the
Fault is often our own, and that tis in our Power to arrive at Per-
feltion, if we want not Ambition to excel, and do not undertake
Things above our Capacities. Ultra vires ibil aggrediendum.
Many excellent Mafters have miftaken the Mark; Ars longa, Vira
brevis, fay many; but it is  poor Pretence for an rtift. If it be
true, that you endeavour to gain this Decorum, after your particular
Inclination as soon as possible; be as careful in the lealt as the greatelt
Circumflances, of your Picture; reafon diligently with vourfelf at va=
cant Times; for tho' fcarce any one is to be found alike skilfal in
all the Branches, yer tis not impoffible: to be fo; in thort, if his for
in your Power to beftow extraordinary Time to Advantage, be at
 Ordennance; or Composition.
 II
leaff to prudent as not to bring any thing into your Compolitions which
you cansor jultity.

 AP. XIV. Of particular Inclination for one Branch, whetber
Figures, Landskifs, Buildings, Seas, Flowers; &xc.
IL IG EN CE and  proper Talent, in Conjunction with Pru
& deace, may gain Riches; fudden Wealth is not to stable as that
got by degrees; the former is the Effelt of Defire and Luck,
the latter, of Prudence.
 think that Mafter refolves beft, who confiders in the Courfe
of his Study of any Branch.
 Whether his Fortune and Well-being depend on one particular
Perton, or on the Body of the People.
.  Whether it be not more advitable to accommodate himfelf to
the Occafions and Tempers of the People, than to confine himfelf to
his particular inclination.
Laftly, How his Studies may be fometimes enriched with Variety
of new Matter.
He is,  far,  prudent Arciff who, weighing thefe, Premifes be
times, as quickly puts them in Execution; elpecially fince the World
is beft pleafed with Variety and Novelty, which fpur them to Love,
Inclination and Defire: What can iubfict without Variety? Is  Cook,
who can dress but one Dith, and one Way, to be compared with him
Who can do feveral?
We have many fad Inflances of excellent Mafters, who, thro' Ob.
finacy, have drudged in Parerty and far down in Want; rather than
go againtt their Cultom; if the Mafter painced Figures, he contin
ed himself to He and She faints; if Landskip, nothing but Wildernef
fes and Deferrs; if Flowers, nothing but Flower-pots; if Seds, no
thing but Storms and Tempelts; if Architecture, nothing but Grottos
and Ruins. Irs true, that Tis more commendable to excef in one
Branch than to be indifferent in many; but as true, that Variety of
Food caufes new Gulto: In short, making  Virtue of Neceffity, we
are obliged to alter our Notions, and fubmit them to Seafons and Oc
cations
We shall now proceed to enquire and obferve, what ready and con
Stant Materials each Arriff, in his Practice,; has Occafion for; land whe
thes


Of Ordennance; er Composition.
Chap. I thote be copious enoughs and laftly, what are proper to eash
Branch.

 general Fund confifts,

Firll, in the Variety of Paftions and Deligns.
Secondly, in pleafingnew Matter, moving to Love; as the Proverb
fays: Non sufficit unus; wherefore Variety and Novelty are necettary;
but  mean not, that it should appear in every Piece we do; but now ald
 occafionally, in order to pleafe and retain the Curious.

Laftly, Ir mult be confidered, whether there can be found such 
conflant Flow of Novelty, as the parricular Study of the Arcift calls
for, and wherein it confifts; some principal Inflances of which, from
whence may be deduced an infinity,  shall here fubjoin; as, foff
the Figare painter, there are not only He and She faints, but allo Phi-
lolophers, Prophets and Propheteffes or Sybils, eminent Men and Wa-
men as well in Policy as Warfare, Monarchs, Law-givers, Statelmen,
and Ecclefiafties; the four Parts of the World; the five Senfes; and
innumerable other remarkable Perfons and Objects: Judge then, whe
ther there be not Matter enough for thofe who would go greater
Lengths than to spend Vears, nay, their whole Lives, in fingle Figures.
in Landskip what  Field is there for Variety, belides Wilderneffes and.
Deferts? as, delightful Lawns, beautiful inclofures, Rivers and Cat
cades, Rocks and Caves, Pyramids, Burying-places and Tombs, and
Places of publick Exercife; Plantations of Trees, Country-houfes,
Sports of Shepherds; Sacrifices and Bacchanalia; and all thefe varied by
being made Fronting, in Profile or in Rear, fometimes with an high, at
others  low Horizon; fometimes in Sun-thine, at others in Moonlight;
to Which add, Bealts, Birds, Csc. For Sea-painters, remarkable Ac-
cidents, as well ancient as modern, facred and prophane Stories, Far
bles and daily Occurrences Some of them may be thefe; Chriff walls
ing on the Sea, and Peter, fithing in  Boat, is calling our to him;
Chriff alleep in  ship in  Storm, and awaked by the People;  Sea-
coafl with Ships ridingat Anchor, and others, both Men of War and
Merchant-men, under Sail; an Engagement between Merchantmen.
and Pyrates, Turtis and Algerine Rovers; Ser-ports, with trading
Merchants; Relealment of Slaves; Sea-triumphs; the finetian Gete
mony of marrying the Sea in the Bucentaur;  Sea-thore with Helen
ravithed by Paris; CGoronis purfued on the Strand by Neprune; Rely-
phemus and Galathea; King Ceyx and Aleyone; Uliffes ried to the Maft
of his Shipon Account of the Sirens Song; Eneas flying with his Fa-
ther Anchifes; Pyracy; Unloading of Ships; Morning and oEyening
Sun.


of Ordonnance; or Composition.
Book II
 Chine, and Moonlight; Calms, impending Sterms, Esc. Biit none
of the Branches affords greater Variety than Archireffure; as well in
ward as ourward, belides Ruins and innumerable By-works for Orna-
ment, what an Abundance of beautiful Temples; Palaces, Fronrif
picces, Galleries, triumphal Arches, Colonades, Pleafure houles of
elegant Tatle and Colour, pring from the five Ordersf Alfo Termes,
Niches with Figures, Balluftrades adorned with Lyons and Lyoneffes,
Sphinxes and other Ornaments of Porphyry, Free-ffone, Copper gill,
and other ornamental Stone; to which add, the great Diverlity arifing
from the Ornaments of Gold, Silver and Marble, Bassreliefs, Paint
Jngs, Hangings, Alcoves, Pavillions, Cabinets; in fine, nothing can
be imagined, that the Painrer of Architelture cannot make his own:
Andthe proper Defigas in Painting may be, Solomon praying for Wif
dom; the Queen of Sacbs with Sofomon; the Nuptials of Tofeph and
Mary; Crrif among the Pharifees; Mark Anthony and Cleepatra;
the Murther of Tulas Cafar; Solon with Crasus; the Goddels Veffa
appearing before the Entrance of the Puntbeon, to curb the infolent Ar-
tempe of the Peoble to violare her; Herse and other Virgins going to
the Temple of Flers, and Mercury, in love, hovering follows her;
Mfercary and Herse in her Bed-chamber, Coc. Other inward and out
ward Decorations may be Sacrifices in Temples, Court-ffories, and Oc-
cufrences in Palaces, Halls and Apartments (fome of which we have
elfewhere thewn) befides Confules, grand Encertainments, Plays, Vifits,
Wiccheraff, Gholls, delightful Appearances, Coc. As to the Flower
painter, what can be more pleafant and agreeable than Flowers in their
great Varicty, beautiful Air and Colour?  Sight which never fires,
tho' but in Painting:  confine them not to  lingle Flower-pot; for
they may be varioutly ditpoted; wreathed as Garlands; or made into
Feftoons and Groups; or loofe in Baskets; fometimes intermixed with
Grapes, Apricocks, Peaches, Cherries, Grains of Paradife, Cor. accord
ing to the Seafons; which may be expreft by Bults of Copper and all
Sorts of Marble, and by Balsreliefs; befides the five Senfes: Add,
for Variety, notable Leating, as Laurel, Cypress, Oak; and fometimes
to the Fruit, Corn, Turmps, Carrots, Pumkins, Melons, Walnuts,
Figs, COc. Proper Defigns for this Branch may be thefe; for the
Spring, Venas and Adoms in Courrship, fet off with Children and
Flowers; for the Summer, Pomons and Ffora, with Flowers and Fruit;
for Aurumn, Pomens and Vertumnas, in  Summerhoule.
 think it needlets to defcend lower, fince there is no subject, how
mean foever, which cannot be fufficiently enriched with fomething new.
But


Of Ordonnance, or Campofition.
 i perhans  Landskip-painter may fay, —  underfland nothing
bemy own Branch; Birds er Bealts  never fudied: Another maytay,
-Still Life is my Pralice, Landskip, Figures or Cartle  never
touched.  poar Excufe! Since for many Intrmities Help may be
found; as for thort Sight, Speltacles; for Lameness, Cruiches; for
Deafness, an Ear-pipe, and to forth; borrowing from fine Paintings,
and from Prines and Drawings (thefe latter are always to be had) is in
tuch Cafe no Reproach; Moreover we may, without Hurt to our He-
nour, imploy  skitful Hand, if he conforms to the Subject and Sente
we are handling.
lis remarkable that Pieces painted by two Mafters, feldom or never
antwer the Incention of the Compofer, the Diflinction appearing eitherin.
Force, Handling or Colour; But this is no Wonder, when each of them
follows his own Gulto and Manner, without any Regard to the other,
as if the Affifiant' Share in the Work were as great as that of his
Employer. When  General finds himself too weak for an Enter-
prize, he calls in some body to affift him, but not to command; fo we
Painters, when we need an Affiftant, incend not to thew what he can.
do for his own Credit, but that he should work in Conformity to the
Compofer' Direction and Purpofc.
Bur we thall confider an Affiftanc' Qualifications, and how he ought.
to accommodace himself: He should be skilful in Perspettive, Colouring
and Penciling; by Perspective, to give more or lels Force, with re-
gard to the Compofer' Manner; by Colouring, that his be more or lets.
beautiful; and that in Penciting, his be agreeable with the others If
the Piece he tenderly and naturally handled, the By-works mull allo.
be kept tender and well finithed: If the Piece have  light and bold.
Mianner, the By-works mult have the fame; to that the whole Work,.
getting thereby  general Decorum, feems to be oll of one Hand. This.
 to neceffary  Conduct in an Affittant, that his Service cannot other
wife be said to be of any Ule to us; nay, granting him to be.  greate
of Mafter in Fame than his Employer, he ought to take Care that his
Work do not predominate,  Fault which would differve them both;,
and when this Fault is heightened by ignorance or Malice, the Ma-
jelly and Elegance of  fine Compolition is loft, and the Work fub
jected to the Scoff of the Curious, as  have divers Times experir
mented.
CH.AP..


 Ordennance, or Composition. Book II.
is   is thd hsh be   ens
: HAP. XV. Of the four Sorts of Tables, or Ordennances; and

what they are.
 Ti
EE.
.: VE been long in Sufpence whether  might, without being
taxed with Prefumption, offer to publick View hy Reveries .

bour the general Tables of Ordonnances which fpring from refined
Judgment, and are of important Ufe to curious Artifis and Peets, as
eell to exercife their Pens as Pencils: But ar laft prefuning; that the
Product of my weak Abilicies would not give Offence,  purfued my
preations, imperfect as they are,  shall be ar lealf pleated, if my En.
deavours give  Handle for better inquiries
Iis agreed, that  Table or Ordonnance is  Reprefentation of fome
Fall, either with the Pen or Pencil.  Poem is  fhort and plain Ac
count of the moft material Circumftances; fhewing the true Caute from
wheme the Falt proceeds.
Three Qualiries are necelfary to  good Poet.  An exalt Ac
quaintance with Hiffory, and the beft Authors.  Good Knowledge
in Antiquities Laftly, an eafy and delicate Poety; to which add,
an agreeable Stile, by which, after having weighed what Materials
and Paffions are proper, he dispofes every thing in  consecutive Order,
and the moft perfpicuous Manner.
Grace is as neceffary in Poety as Harmony of Colours in  Painting;
but tho' all the aforefaid beautiful Qnalicies be well obferved, yet they
camiot produce  perfell Ordonnance without the Aid of the Rules of
Painting: For  fine Hiffory of great Perfonages, accompanied with .
legant Byornaments, in  delightful Country, unartfully dispoted, is
to far from Perfection, that it cannot have the wimofl Grace, tho' it
were the Life irfelf. Much may be faid for  Subject well treated;
but more for an Ordonnance of  skilful Mafter, painted according to
the Laws of Art, which make even Crookednets feem firait.
 shall now trear of the Narure, Force and Quality of Tables
of Ordonances (as neceffary for Landskip as Hiffory-painters) and
therein confider
 Their Kinds  Their Names.  Which of them have doy
ble Ufes, and which have fingle.
 suppote four Kinds, viz. Hifforical, Peetic, Moral and Hieregl.
ghre; the firft is  fimple and true Fall. The second,  double Ficti
Off


 Is. Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 exhibicing fabulous Stories, or  Mixture of Deities and Mortals:
The third has  threefold Moral; teaching our Duty to God, our Neigh-
bour and ourfelves: And the laft is fourfold, as couching, under 
Thort and myfterious Senfe, the three before going; handling Virtue and
Vice for the Benefit of Soul and Body, and thewing the Happinels and
Immortality of the one, and the Corruption of the other.
In Hiffory, the Poet or Painter, ought intirely to confine himself to
Tratb, without Addition or Abatement; his Ornaments, tho' borrow.
ed from Poety, mult be fo reftrained, that nothing, ferving for II-
inttration, create Improbability; for Inflance, not to reprefent Day-
break by the poetic Figure of Aurera; or the Night, by Dians; or
the Sea, by Neprane; which is needlefs, and an Error, becaute thofe
Things can be naturally expreffed by Colours; as Day-break, by its
Appearance, of Vellow, Red and Blue, or by the Sunrays appearing on
the Horizon; the Night, by irs Darkness, and by the Moon and
Stars; the Sea by its Waves and Billows, Rocks, Montters and Shells
on the Shore; allo the Nile, by it' Crocodiles, Coc. or any Thing
proper to the Sea or Rivers.
The Poetic Tables differ from the hifforical in this; that, inflead of
true Story, they confider Fictions only, intermixing Deities with Mor-
tals, as we have faid; and thereby fignifying nothing elfe, but the
Courfe of the Wolld hme the four Elements, as Air, Earth, Fire and
Water; and tho' hifforically handled, yet each is  fimple Figure, hav-
ing  myftic Meaning, either in Name or Shope, and often in both;
 Scylla, Atlas, Ledu, Cyclops, and many others. And thus the Fable,
being both philofophic and moral, in one and the iame Manner pre-
fcribes Virtue and decries Vice; as we gather from Ovid, Virgil, and -
thers. It is necelfary therefore, in deligning fuch an Ordonnance, to
keep intirely to the Fable, as before is laid, without any Addirion of
hicroglyphic Figures, as Temperance, Prudence, nger, Jealouty
COo. which are fo improper here, as hereafter shall be thewn, that they
deftroy the very Incent of it; for there are others, which (tho' in  dit-
ferent Manner) willexpretsthe fame Paffions; as Cupid, inflead of Love;
Pallas, inflead of Wifdem, and many others; as we collect from the
POets.
The Moral Ordonnances are true Falts, or Hfifferies, propoled only for
Edification or Inttruction; exhibicing either the gallant Alts, or Crimes,
of human Nature; and thefe explained by fome additional emblematic
Figures, which express the Paffions by which they were moved, or
milled; for inflance, with Alexander we may place Ambition; next
No.  Ordonnance, or Composition.
 II.
Morcus furelias, Humanity; next Augupas, Piety; next Scipie Afri-
TOnM, . Moderation, in refforing the young captive Bride to her
Spoufe, and many others, as fforace in his Emblems artfully exhibits,
In this Sort of Ordonnances we are no ways confined to Time, the
Sun’ Place, or the Qualiry of the Country; for we may intermix Sum-
mer with Winter, even all the Elements may appear; the Subject may
be in the Front of the Picture in Africa; and in the Offskip, at Rome,
or cliewhere; even in Hellixfelf another Scene may be alting; to great
 Lacitude has  Moralift: But he mult take Care to avoid Superffuity,
and Things improper to the man Action, which, as in Plays, fpoil the
Beauty of the Repretentation.
The Hicreohpbic Ordonnances are quite different from the three for-
mer in their Nature and Quality, having no other Affinity with them
chan an imention to exalt Firtue, and debase Vice, by the Rewards of the
one and the Punishment of the other They are as well Chriftian  the Chrillian affect the Soul, and the Heathen the Body:
The former Gemonttrate the Immortality of the Soul, and the latter
thew the Vicifficude and Vanicy of the World. Thele Tables canfiff in
affembling feveral emblematic Figures of different Paffions, which all
together are to express  fingle Meaning; as Piety, Peace, War, Love,
Csr. And fuch Tables are called Emblems, by their Application and
emblematic Clc, and by being made up of 
Objects which
have their proper Meaning and Relation, orelfe Derivatives from them;
 the Palmrrec, Lamel, Myrile, Cypress, or the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, of an Hour-glats,  Darc, Flame, Coc. Which fignity any Pow
er, Virtue or extraordinary Effect. Thefe Tables, like the preceding,
admit not of the leall Superfinicy to obfcure their Significations; be-
caufe, havingneither Hiffory nor Fable to build en, taey confift only of
 fingle Paltion, proceeding from the Subject (which may be at our own
Choice) explained and made incelligible by the other emblemaric Figures,
which mulf not be improperly incroduced, left the Sente of the whole
Scene be altered: Bur here we muft obferve to make  Distinction between
Heathen and Grrizian Reprefentations; the Heathen admit of Venss,
Expitor Interes, for Love; the Chrillian Chews Chariry, or  Woman
with Children about her, and  Flame on her Head; the former has
Hereafes, for Fortitude, and the later St Michael; the one takes  with his Thunder, and the other, Juftice; the former exprelies
Picty by  Woman with an Oblacion-bowl in her Hand, and near heran
Ritar with  Crane, and the latter chules  Crots inflead of the Bowl:
hs all this is incertain and not confined to Time of Chimate.
Being


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 Ij.
Being well apprized of thefe Things, we obtain the bell and fureff
Method for deligning any kinds of Tables, of Ordonnances, how ab.
Arufe foever; nay, be your Delign ever to fingle, it will always afford
plentiful Marter to furnith out and earich  large and capital Compo-
fition; as  shall thew in the following Table, tho' but in part, as leav-
ing out the City of Athens in the Offskip,  River with Swans, Face
in the Air, or Mercury flying along with Atropes, Coc. We read of
the Greek Philolopher Eschylas, that, as he fat meditating in the Field,
he was killed by  fortoife dropp’ by an Eagle on his bald Pate; which
mournful Accident  handle thus.  lirtle to the left from the Point of
Sight,  place the unforcunate old Man, on  small Eminence, with 
Pen in his Hland, and  Book in his Lap; he is fallen on his right
Thigh (which is forethortened) with his Legs across, and one of them
extended to the left, his upper Parts bending, and inclining fomewhat
to the right; his Head is in Protile and downwards; he flings his right
Hand (deways from him, the Pen almofl touching the Ground, and his
left is oven over his Head; the Tortoife falls, fomewhat floping, head.
foremoll along by his left Ear; his Book is tumbling out of his Lap to
the left; over his Head,  little more to the left (where his Garment is
under him) hovers the Eagle, looking downwards; at the Corner of  (fix inches high, and covered with  Part of the aforefaid Gar-
ment) running towards the Point of Sight, is an inkhorn, and some roll-
ed Papers, and his Cap. This is the Subllance of the Compofition:
In the Offskip, where the Ground to the right lies low,  thew  Pyra-
mid, and near it  Shepherdels fitting by  young Shepherd, who is
Randing, and offers her  Bowl of Water, or Milk; up and down are
Cattle grazing, and nearer (behind the fore Ground) it would not be
amils to thew another Man, who paffing by, and hearing the Philofo-
wher' Cry, does, in Surprize, look back at him, fwaying the upper
Part of his Body (which is almoft naked to the Walle) to the left.
The Philofopher is plainly dreft in  long Veflment, and  Flappet of
his upper Garment, whereon he fat, comes under his right Thigh;
the Vellment is dark Violet, and the Garment light Fillemot; the
Stone, whereon the Garment lies, is blucith; the Ground Gratsgreeny
the Paffenger, behind the fore Ground, is in Shade, except his Head,
and part of his Shoulders; and is drell in  reddith Skin,  Cap on his
Head, and  Stick over his Shoulder, whereon hang  Pair of Slippers;
the Shepherd and Shepherdess, in the Shade of the Pyramid, receive
very light Reffexions, the whole Prospect being exhibited in Sun fhine.
The Landskip and OffskipI leave to the Choice of thofe who like
the
  Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II.
 Compofition Iis faid, that this Philofopher was to fearful of
his bald Pare, that he thought himself fecure no where but in the
Field, in the open Air; wherefore  do not introduce near him either
Houte, Tree or any thing elfe that could hurt him. But thus it hap.
pens, in the midft of his Security, he meets his Death: Mors inevity-
bile Fatum!
Some perhaps may ask, why Pre chosen but  fingle Figure for the
Subject of this Ordonnance; my Reafon is, to thew thofe who are
skill’ in Landskip  Method of giving their By-ornaments greater
Luftre, and Excellence; thofe,  mean, who are fo rich in Invention
of inanimate Objects, that they are content with one Figure, and at
moft two, and thofe perhaps of little Significancy; tho' it mult be
granted, that the Name of an excellent, wife and celebrated Perfon,
reprefented in an artful Landskip, gives the Work  Lullre, and the
Mafter Reputation; for  skilful Landskip-painter certainly deferves
Honour, but double when he thews that he alfo underllands Hiftory
and Poetry.
Many Landskip painters (not excepting some famous Ialians) chule
commonly low, mean and poor Subjects, and By-ornaments; for my
part,  generally leften my Landship, to give room for Embellifhment.
In fine, if we cannot be alike perfect in all things, we may at leaft,
thro' Perfeverance, go great Lengths; for
Gutta crist lapidem, non vi sed fape cadende.
That is,
By contant Drops the Stone is bollow’ thro',
Which greater single Ferce could nover de.
The aforefaid Ordonnance is very fine for  Landskip; and the ra
ther as it handles an uncommon Story, accended with few Circumitan
ces; for the whole is but  fingle Figure, tho' the Scene, as being  beau
tiful open Field, would eafily admit of three or four. Confider then
excellent Profeffors of this Branch, what  have laid down; the Trow
ble will be but small, and tis in your Power to make it eaty to you
Qui cupit, Capit emnid.
CHAl


Chap. X Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 XVI. Of the Uses of Ovins Metamerphesss; and what is
further necelfary to the sketching and executing  Table or Ordonnance.
XPER IENC  rells us, that Truth lofes by Repetition,
and that he who cafily believes, is as ealily deceived: But the

Mafter, who makes it his Buliness to build on the moft certain
and infallible Means, in order to obtain his knd, bids faireff for Excel-
lence. What poor Work is it, after having feen  well-ordered Delign
of another Mafter, adorned with elegant By-works, and fine Colour-
ing, to be  flavith imitator of it, by incroducing neither more nor
leis Figures, nor other Draperies and Colours? What Reputation is
got by it, were it ever fo well executed; nay, if differenly difpoled
and incomparably painted! Iis certain, that something mere is necelfary
before we undertake  Subject.  prudent General will not rely on
the Report of one Spy; nor (pare either Men, Money or Pains to get
right intelligence of the Enemies Deligns;  good Painter should do
the fame, in order to excel; which to do, the following Obfervations
are highly necelfary.
 We mult know how the Story, we pirch on, is defcribed by the
Author; and confider, whether we agree in every Circumftance with
his Opinion.
 We muit confult the Comments of the beft Writers on that Sub-
jell, in order to get the true Meaning of the Story.
 We mult weigh the fuiting and Application of the Draperies,
and their proper Colours and By-ornaments.
 How the four Elements, the four Complexions, and the four
Hours of the Day, with their Form, Ornaments and Colours ought
to be reprefented.
Thus we may obtain Truth, and the Mafter will make it appear
whether he has gone to the Bottom of Things.
Few Painters excel in Hiftory, especially Fables, for want of Incli-
nation to enquire thoroughly into their Subject; Reading, they think, is.
troublefome and needlets, lace Ovids Fables are now in every bodys
Hands, copioutly handled, with three or four Lines of Explanation
under them, by which they Know, whether is Venus and Adonis,
Vertumnus and Pomona, Lephyrus and Flera, &cc. Is not that sufficient,
by they? And dent  fee, that the one is naked, and the other drest;
 Ordennance, or Compofition.
Book II
  Man, that  Woman; thi has  Deg, that,  Busket of Fruit;
and the ofber,  Flower-pot; why then should not these be my Patterns,
ince they cone fron such great Maffers?  readily grant, that Books of
Prints are of great Ule to Painters; but to ule them in this Manner
is  willing Clavery, unlets we cannot read.
In my Touth  was to converfant with even the leaft of Ovids Fa.
bles, that on hearing but the Name of one of them,  could repeat
the whole Circumftances of the Story; but their Meanings and Ules
(which shall be our prefent inquiry) my Father had never told me;
ill long after, led by Curiofire,  re-confidered them; and with the
Affiltance of my Brother Jumes (who was Mafter of the Greek)
was led into fome of the myfferious Meanings which they con-
tained.
Many have  fuperticial Knowledge of Ocrd' Fables, but few un
deritand the Drifts of them; what they gather is moftly from Prints,
nothing from the Text; wherefore we shall now explain ourfelves in
two Eximples of the Sun and Atom; accended with all the necelfary
Circumftances and Obtervations which we have before infifted on; and
firft, in
The Fuble of APOLLo and HYACINTHUs.
Ovid relates, that Spollo was in love with this Vouth for his ex
traordinary Shape and Beaury; and that, as they were playing at Coins
together, the Vouth was unhappily ftruck with one of them, which
occafioned his immediate Death.
The Comment fays, thatthis Vouth being allo beloved by Eepbirus,
heoffered to make him the chief Ruler of the molt agreeable Spring-flow.
ers; but he, rejelting the Offer, kept clofe to the Converfation of La
fong' Son; in Return for which, Apalto promifed to teach him all the
virtuous Exercifes, which became his Condition and Liking, fuch
as thooring with  Bow; the Gift of Prophecy; touching the Lyre
and finging, but principally wreetling; with  Priviledge that, fitting
on  Swan, he might behold all the Places wherein spollo was mofl
beloved and worthipped. The Wetwind having made fruitlefs Efforts
to gain the Vouth' Elleem, at length, thro' Rage, gave into Despair,
and plorted Means to be revenged of his Rival; wherefore, taking his
Opportunity, as Hpolle and the Vouth were at Coits, he fecreely blew
 Coit to violently at Eyscintburs Head, that he died on the Spot:
Spolto being extreamly grieved thereat, the Earth, in Compaffion,
turned



Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap.  the young Prince' Blood into  Flower, in order at leaft to
make his Name, if not his Perton, immorial
The Table, or Ordennance.
Hygcinthas, in his Bloom, is on the fore Ground to the lefr, and
falling backwards, his Back moft vifible, his Belly raifed, and his right
Leg thing up, and fomewhat bent, the left Leg Rrerched off from the
Ground; contrarily lifring up his right Arm, with the Hand open;
and Fingers pread; his left Elbow drawn back, and the outfide of the
Hand againtt his right Cheek; his Face, trickling with Blood, is in
Protile, and his Head flung back; his Hair is bright, thort and curled;
 Chaplet of Flowers fallsfrom his Head by his right Shoulder, which,
with half his Back, is bare; and lower, his Veltment is girt about his
Body. Apollo appears  or  Paces behind him, to the right of the
Point of Sight, fepping back, in great Concern; he is feen in Front,
Rooping, his Breaft (ways from the Light, his under Parts contrafting.
it, and his Shoulders thrunk; his Mouth is open, his left Hand from
him, and clofe thut; his right Arm across his body, and the Hand up
at his left Ear; his left Leg fliffly flung out; his right Leg quice bent,
the Foot hindward, fupporting his Body; he is naked, and his Hlair
light, yellowiff, and long, flying above his Shoulders; he is crowned
with Laurel. Zephyrus, (or the Welt-wind) whole Rage was the Caule
of the forrowful Accident, we reprefent winged, and flying from the
Touth towards the Wood on the left Side of the Picture; his right
Foot is upwards, and his upper Parts lway to the left: Part of his
Head and Back arecovered with Shoots and Leaves of Trees: On the
left Side of the Piece forward is feen Eavy, in Shade, peeping our of
the Boughs, and laughing: Behind Apolls, we introduce  Piece of
Sone -work, extending almofl from the Pont of Sight, to the Extre-
mity of the Picture, and therein, two large, circular Openings, overgrown.
with Moss and wild Shrubs; near him is  large Tree, and by it  Law
rel, whereon hangs his Garment, and below, on the Ground avainft
the Body, his Lyre. The Ground of the Picture opens  large Plaim,
bounded to the left with  Wood running up to the Point of Sight,
jutt by the aforefaid large Tree, where the River Enretas is gliding
from left to right. On the right side of the Piece forwards, we place
 large Sphink on  broad Pedeftal, whereon lies Hyacintbus' Gar.
meat, and againtt it  lavelin, and on the Ground  Bow and Arrows,
an Hafel-wand, mufical Inftruments, and mulical and other Books
The


Of. Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II.
 Coir fhung at the Vouth is feen rebourding  inches from the
Ground to the right. Behind the Sphinx fland an Olive and Cypress-
tree: The aforelaid Stone-wark is brownith Grey, inclining to violet.
Apollo' Garment on the Tree  Purple, embroidered with Gold: The
Lyre lvory: The Sphinx (. ofe fore Parts only are feen) is in Pro-
file, and of white Marble: he Vouths Veftment is Whice, ftriped
with Gold, and his Garment, in the Sphinx' Back,  beautiful dark
Violer. The whole Ordonna re thews  bright and clear Sky; the
Light comes from the right and the Point of Sight is in the
middle.
Explanation of the Fuble.
Hiacineras, who, according . te Poets, was metamorpholed by
Apollo into  Flower of that Name, is  true Emblem of Wifdom;
for Apollo preliding over the Mufes and Learning, Hyscinthus is repre-
fented to us as  Fouth beloved by him for his Beauty, having his natu
ral Faculries as ver uncorrupted, as being  Child without Judgment or
Difcretion, jet beeiful; exalting his Mind, in order to contemplate
himself. Ithence we learn, that when the Senfes fortake the Follies
of Touth, they bring forth the Flower of Wifdom, adorned with
Virtue, whole immortaliry is, by Writers, facred to all Ages.
Further Notes.
The life of the Bow.] Litons had two Children by Tupiter, Apolle
and Diuny, both expert
Archers.
The Gift of Prophecy.] Apolle was efteemed the God of Prophecy
and Oracles, on account of the Defphic Oracle, to which, People from
all Parts reforted, in order to know Things paft, prefent, and to come.
The Art of Singing.)
Apollo is, from higheff Antiquity accounted
the chief Mufician, intinging as well as on firinged Inftruments.
Principally Wreiling.] This Word has divers Allutions; but in ge
neral implies any bodily Exercife anciently practifed in the Grecian
gheing with the Fills,
Cames, as, playing at Cots, Leaping, Dancings
Irellling, cec.
(Sitting on  Swan he should behold, &cc.] The Ancients have, not without
Reafon, confecrated the Swan to Apollo.  Becaule he (being the Sun)
gires all Things Life, according to the Saving of the Philolopher,
—The Sun and the Manbring forth the Mun.—  By the Swars
and


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Chap.  their ealy Deachs are chiefly denored virtuous Mea, who part
with their Lives chearfully in order to meet immortality.
Animadversion on the foregoing Picture, with respert to the Painters
Ordonnance.
That the agreeable Vouth is of noble Extraction, his fine Mieh and
Purple Garment thew.
His Wifdom and Knowledge appear by the Sphinx, with the lattru
ments lying by it.
The Chaplet of Flowers thews his amiahte Eiualities.
The Garment, he wears on this Occalion, points out his Virtue and
Modelty.
The Cypress, near the Olive tree, gives us to underftand, that all
Tublunary and fenfual Pleafures, how pompous foever, end in Mi-
e done with the Sun, we shall proceed to handle the Moon in
the same Manner.
The Poets differ in their Relations of this Fable of Dians and En=
dymion, but moftly agree in the Explanation of it, as  shall now thew:
They fay, that the Afoon, (Diang) falling in love with the Sheoherd
Endymion, fiung him into an everlafting Sleep, on  Mount in Caris;
named Latosie, that the might Kifs him at pleafure; but others report
otherwife. Punfanies intimates, that they went further than Kiffing,
and that Endymion begot go Daughters on the Moon. Others affirm,
that the yielded to his Pleafure, on Condition he made her  Prefent of
some white Sheep: Tho' all be fabulous, yet it carries some Probabi-
lity; for Pausumas concludes, that Endymion was the firft who obferv-
ed the Phafes and Courfe of the Moon. Pliny alfo reflifies, that Endy.
mion firft obferved the Motions of the Moon, and learned her Narure
and Qualities; which gave Rife to the Fable, that the fell in love with
him. Alexander Apbrodifius likewile writes, in his Emblems, that
Endysion had great Skill in Aftronomy, and, becaute he flept by
Day, to fit himself for Night obfervations, it was teigned, that he had
carnal Knowledge of her, and alfo  wenderful Dream, by which,
being  Philolopher, he got that Knowledge: Others fay, that he was
 poor Shepherd, (as Seneca, in his Tragedy of Huppolifus) tho'  King'
Son, and that he dwelt on Mountains and in Colitary Places, the better
to observe the Moon' Motions. The learned . Gattrucharthus has
it, — The Fable, fays he, reffifies, that Diang fell in love with the
No.  Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
Shepherd Endymion, who, for too great Familiarity with June, was
by Tapiter condemned to eternal Sleep; but the hid him in 
Mount, in order to fereen him from her Conforts Wrath. The Truch
is, that Endymion obferved nicely the Moon' Motions; and therefore
uted to pats whole Nights in Colitary Places in the Contemplation of
her; which Circumftance gave Rife to the Fable. Let this fuffice for
the Story, the Parts and Ordonnances whereof follow.
Tible, or Ordennance, of DIANA and ENDYMION.
Ethlius
Endimion, Son of  King of Elis,  beautiful and well-haped
Vouth, is lying afleep on his upper Garment, on  near Mount, on the
right side of the Picture; under his Arm is  Tacob’ Staff,  Crook
near him, and at his Feet  large Celeflial Sphere, and some Books
and Papers, whereon appear Charalters and Diagrams. He is in Profile,
his upper Parts fomewhar raifed, and he leans, with his left Ear  little
forward, on his left Hand; his right Leg is extended, and the left lifi
ed up; he is all in the Shade of the Trees, except his right Leg and
half that Thigh, and receives frong Reffexions from the Woon. Di
one,  little off, (not in her Hunting Habic, or fitting by him and Kiffing
him, with the half Moon on her Hlead, as ufually reprefented) naked
defcends from the Clouds, with  full Moon behind her as big as
herfelf, and furrounded with Stars, with the Attendance of Love, (or
Capid) the is in  fronting Poficion, bending  litde forward, with
her left Knee on  low Cloud; her Arms wide open, as if about to
embrace the Vouth; and in her lefr Hand is  & Siprum; her Aspect
is beautiful and gay, and full of Defire, being lighted by  Sun-fet as
well as Cugid, who is defcending with her on her right side, with his
Face towards her, and holding, in his right Hand behind him, his
Bow downwards, and in his left, (which comes forwards) an Arrow,
with which he points at the feeping Vouth; he ffies fomewhat oblique
 with his upper Parts from her, with his Legs feen hindward thro'
the Cloud  Boy, flanding on Endymion' right Side, looks to the
leff ar the Goddess; his left Elbow drawn back, and  Finger on his
Mouth, and with his right Hand lifeing up the Boughs hanging at the
Vouch' Head; when another behind Drand,  little to the left Side,
is pulling off her Garment,  Flap whereof twines about her right
Thigh
Sifram is  mufical inhramen:, generaly reprefented in the Hand of  as we fee in Mc.
dals and other Antignicies.





Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  which is fomewhat forethortened. Below this Child, on the
left side, where the Mount declines, fit two other Children joining and
blowing their Torches; and behind them appears the Offskip, being 
Valley with  low Horizon. The Sphere, Books and Papers lying to
the left at Endymions Feet, are (with  fmall Part of the Mount
which comes forwards) in the Light; the Vouth' Garment (of which
 Part covers his Privities) is Purple; that of the Goddets, Sky-colour.
The Sun is low, proceeding from the right.
Explanation of the Fable.
By Endymion we may underfland  virtuous Mind, which the hea-
venly Spirits endeavour to carels and Kils through Violence of Af-
fection.
The high Mount implies, that when the Soul afcends to Heaven,
the Body is feized with heavy Sleep or Death; for fince the Body hin-
ders  perfect Union with God, it follows, that as foon as the Soul
has dilengaged itfelf, it goes eafily and quierly to Heaven.
Diand, by her increale and Decreafe, reprefents the Changeablenets
of Things; for the Greek Poets afferted, that Tupiter, feeing Diana go
naked and indecently for  Virgin, charged Mercury to make her 
Garment, and that, tho' he made her feveral, yet none would fit, becaute
her Shape was always changing; wherefore her Figure is  natural
Emblem of Increafe and Decreafe, and of the Mutabilicy of worldly
Things. This Figure has alfo other neceffary Ufes, with respect to
human Life; as St. Ambrose intimates, who, from the Example of the
Moon, (whole Light is variable, always increafing or decreating)
reaches, that nothing in the World is ftable, but all Things subject to
Decay.
The Siffrum in Diana' Hand (the Ufe of which lies in the Motion)
allo denotes the Vicifficude of worldly Things, and their continual
Destruction and Renovation. Others think, that the Siffrum fignifies,
the Sound, which the Moon caufes in the Courfe of the Heavens.
in fuch  Manner as this, should all Hiffories, Fables and Fictions
be examined, if the Artifl aim at Reputation.  think,  have given
the Curious Satisfaction enough in two Examples; for should 
go further, the Subject would not only be trefome, but fwell
as big as the whole Work; wherefore, for Variety, we shall pass to
CHAP.
N Ordennance, or Composition.
Book II.
 XVIl. Rules for the Management of small Figures in 
lirge Compass; and the contrary.
HE  Es  great Difference between the Ingenuity of  good
Painter, and that of  mere Deligner, with reiped to Or-
donnance; the former proceeds by the eftablished Rules of Art,
the latter only aims at what is Defigner like; the one is Mafter of
Principles and Rules, the other is ignorant of both; the Deligner con-
fidersonly what relates to Relief (being  Stranger to the Natures and
Effects of Stutts, Colours and Tints) and therefore he mult find all
Things by means of Lights and Shades only But  Painter has more
Liberry and Advantage; becaufe he can, belides the Shades, effeet eve
 thing by his Colours and Tints But the Difference is further vi
ble from the Sets of Prints daily publithed, whether in Lapdskip,
Perfpeltive Views, Architelture, :. or anrent or modern Story;
in all which, the Deligner generally travels the old Road of Compoli-
ions, and the Ercher or Engraver as clofely follows him; but when
 good Painter handles them, all the Parts will be improved and be
come more excellent, as well the invention, Difpofition and Harmony,
as even the Motions; by which Means,  Perfon of fmall Abilities
cannot but be better pleafed, and often, for the fake of one or two
fine Prints, buy  whole Set; as in Ouduens Book of the Romin
Night, in which, one Plate, engrav’ by Abrabam Bloteling, does, by
it' Nearnets and Elegance, eclipfe all the reft; and this is the more
remarkable, becaute in his Medals the Figures are shaded not with
Hatching, but with  thick Stroke and Touch on the hady Side.
Now, agreeable to the Tirle of the Chapter, we thall pass to the
necellary Management of an Ordonnance with large Figures in  fmall
Compals It mult be granted, that an Ordonnance in  large Extent,
requires more Circumitances than  fmaller, altho’ in either, the chief
Marcer lie ber in three or four Fgures; for what in the former comes
clofe and filling, mut in the larter be ppread, in order to till up 
large Space; and to do this artfully, we are obliged to introduce other
By-works, and thote (tho' inlignilicant, yet probable, and not. repug
nant to the Subject) tending to explain the Story; for inftance, in 
Landship, to introduce fome Buildings, Fountains, Pyramids of Sta
tves; of in an Hall, or other large. Apartment, Hangings, Alcoves,
Bals


Of Ordennance; or Composition.
  and fuch like, either for Ornament, of to make larger
Crouping; in thort, any thing that will entertain the Eye, fince jmoll
Figures, in  large Compass, are not of themselves cupable of doing it:
Wherefore, with respect to fuch, the By-ornaments ought to be large,
in order to create broad Lights; yet thefe Ornaments mult not be to
mondrous as some have them, who, in order to rell the Compofiti
on, make Pillars bigger than three of the Figures can fathom, with
Caftle-like Capitals, and frizal Figures almoft in full Proportion; nor
to out of the way as thofe, where, in  Landskip, are feen Trees  or
 Feet high; Termes, mere Coloffules, and Pyramids higher than
any in the World; to which add, Houfes in the Offskip, where, be-
fore People can poftibly approach them, they muft be loft by Diflance.
But this is egregious Condult; for we should always bring together
tuch Parts or Objects as neither leffen the Figures, or cause any Obfiructi-
on in the Composition;  meas, that  large Compats mult either look
large, or elle be filled and adorned in  moderate Manner, as we shall
thew in two Sketches of the mourning Vous, Plate XVill. each repre
fented in  different Mianner, to demonfirate, that in  large Compass 
great Mass of Light is absolutely neceffury. The Story is, Venus incon-
foleable for the Deach of her dear Adonis; even the Aid of Cupid
fails, whole Bow, rrews and extinguished Torch, nay her beloved
Garland of Rofes, the tramples under Foot; Murs, tho' fetretly-pleaf-
ed at the Adventure, however pretends to tympathize with her im her
Sorrew, but in wain; for the flighis his Offers, and puthes him: frown
her; the refts on the Tomb of her Lover, wherein erther his Body. is
depoficed, or (according to the Curlom of the Country) his Athes are
kept in the Trn; the other By-work is  Grove of Cypress and Myr.
les; from the Urn, might prosced  Sprig of the Flower which is ad
 to him; fince it owes its Origin to his Blood.
.
On  dae Compariton of the Plates, we miy difcover the Difference
between the two Compofitions; in the uppermoft the Mass of Light
is neither to large, or pread as in the undermoft; which proves, that
in  great and clofe Oxdonnance in  lmall Compats (as the upper) fixt.
 great Riats of Light is not neceffary, much lets By-works, infordey
to encreafe it; becaute the Figures there principally govern; and Her
ing large, have on that Occalion, the greateft Forez, as well in the
Execution, as Beauty and Colouring; the By-works ferving to thew the
Place and Occafion, but not to draw the Eye: Whence, is cafy to fee,
that whaticreates Decorum and Elegance in the one, appears infignifi-
cant and difagreeable in the other;  speak of the Ligtt ont, which
requirs


Of Ordennance, or Composition. Book II
  diiint Management in both; wherefore, fince in  large
Compats, the Br-ornaments make the greateff Part, they muft con
sequently caule greater Maffes of Light there; and contrarily, in 
imall Compats, where the By-works are leaft, the main Light ought
to take the Figures only. And to confirm this,  mult fay, that what
in the undermoll Repretentation pleafes the Eye, and fets off the Com-
polition (even were it as large again) is only cauted by the Light, be
caute the By-works, being the moll, abace the Light of the Figures;
wnich having in the upper, with the dark Tomb, more Force,
muff create fuch  Confution as to weaken the Strength of the prin-
cipal Figures. in  Word, the larger the Figures, the more Shade
ouget to be about them; and of Consequence, the smaller the Figures, the
thor: Ligrt.
CH AP. KVIIl. Of the Ordennance of Hifferies, Pourtraits, Still-
Lifc, &xc. in  small Compass.
RE we end this Book, or leave this Subject, tis proper to con-
II fider further, whether it be not more artful to reprelent  Story
natural and clofe in  fnall Compats than  larger; which  think
to prove from the Examples of Raphael, Caracci, Dominichine, Pouf
pa, Le Brun, and other excellent Mafters. Moreover daily Experience
confirms it. les cerrainly troublesome to be confined to  fmall Com-
pats, especially to thofe who affelt to load their Compoficions, becaute
Largenets is very entertaining to the Thoughts: the Difference between
both Managements is the fame as painting as big as the Life and in
Lirtle, where we fee that in the former lies the moft Art, fince we can
more eaily go from the large to the fmall, than contrary, tho' both
be done from the Life. The Cafe of thefe two Arcifts is like that of
 skilful Steerfman, who, capable of wreftling with Storms and Dan-
gers, fails unconcernedly in imooth Rivers; when  meer Ferry-man
would be pur to his Shifts to fteer on the Occan: He then is happiell,
who has been always uted to large things, fince the small spring from
them like an inlend River, which lofes its Strength the further it goes
from its Spring; of which the old Mafters were not infentible, who,
tho' much employ’ in small Painting, yer lay in for large Work, be
ing confcious, that what required the moff Trouble and Skill, got them
the greater Name and Profit.
The


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  Force of  large Painting beyond  small one, and its Advan-
tages are thele:
 The Natural Reprefentation has  better Effect; for viewing it
near, it raifes Love, Pity, Anger or any other Paftion, as if we lym-
pathized with the Story.
 It raifes the Mafter' Fame.
Laftly, The Work is much effcemed.
Itwere needlets to mention other Advantages; wherefore Ishall confirm
my Opinion by Examples. We read of  Picture of Stratenica, that
the Sailors in  Storm took it for  Deity, and accordingly worlhipp’
it. And that in June' Temple, her flanding Figure was to artfully
painted, that her Eyes feemed to look every Way, and at any Be-
holder wherever he placed himfelf, appearing fevere to the Criminal,
and gentle to the Innocent. The Reaton of which Effelts is, that the
two Pictures were fo highly finished, and had fo natural an human
Shape, that they feemed to be rather Fleth and Blood, and to have
Motion, than to be Paintings.
This thews what inffuence large Reprefentations have on the Senfes;
let us now fee what Paffions Currofty raifes, as in this Example;  fup-
pose  murther’ Corps lying fomewhere; near it  Perfon weeping; 
little further, the Seizure of the Murtherer; and the People running
some towards him, others towards the Body. Now it may be asked,
whether all thefe Circumftances do not fufficiently thew the Fact,
without other Perfons, or greater Paffions: To which,  antwer nega
tively; for we ought to fee whether the wounded Perfon be dead, or
not, and in what Part wounded; next, whether  know the Affaffin;
whether the Woman lamenting him be of Quality, or ordinary, and
whether the be related to the wounded Perion; accordingly coming
nearer,  think  know him;  am affrighted;  behold the Wound,
which appears ghaftly to me, and am the more affected by the Tears
of the troubled Woman, who flands at his Head; Ilook for the Mur-
therer with Concern and Revenge, and fee him dragg’ in lrons between
two Officers; he looks pale, and his Heart forebodes the worl; in
fine, every one is varioully affelted, some concerned, others indiffe-
rent with respect to the Fate of the wounded, or Murtherer. Now,
if such  Variety of Objects occur in  fimple Accident, what Force
mult the Life have, when feen near in fuch  Reprefentation, especial-
ly if naturally expreft? But we need not wonder, that fo few tread in
that old Path, fince they feck Eale, and want the Ambition to excel
by an exact Inquiry into Nature.
Ionce


Of Ordonnance, or Composstion.
 II.
Ionce thought  got Reputation by painting in little, but was af
terwards convinced that large Work, or the Life feen near, was the
turelt Way to Excellence; but Envy and Strife fopp’ my Career.
Ihat the Painters in large in thefe Countries merit, may be eafily
determined, fince few of them do it mafterly, thro' Ignorance of the
true antque or beautiful Life; by true Antique  underfland, perfect
Anfiquity without Mixture of modern Mode; not Venus with Stays,
Mlars in  Suit of Armour, Pallas in  Straw-hat, Cc. which is 
Choice that can never get Reputation; becaute frch  Mafter has
no thorough Knowledge of the Life, nor brings Work enough into
his Ordonnances. If he get  bold and light Pencil, thats thought
fufficient; his Drawings are commonly to flight, that they difcover lir.
tle more Light than whar is necelfary for the moft relieved Parts,

witkour Reoard to half Tints, tender Parts and foff mufcling; and
from thefe Drawings he paints as big as the Life; whereby he is ob-
liged to fupply, as he can, all the other Requifices which in the Life he
fighted; thus the Compofition comes out lame, and what makes it
worfe, his Averfion to Draperies, and beautiful Fefds, which are to
gracefiul in  Picture, and to eafily to be had from the Life. But Dra-
peries, fays he, are Triffes; as they fall out, let em pass; if tis not
Linnen it may ferve for Woollen; and if for neither, tis at leaff
Draperr.
Bur when, on the contrary,  view the old Maffers Works, what 
rall Difference do  not difcover! What Pains have they fpared to han
dle their Subjects properly! Tis true, they admitted not of many
Circumftances in their Compofitions, but, what they did, were perfelt
ir artful, elegant and natural. View but Caracer' Weman by the Well;
Rapharls Simon Magus; Dominichine' Tudith, Tiba, Esther and
Ducid; Poufins Ember and Abasuerus; or Le Bruns beautiful Death
of St. Stegben; how wonderful, expreffive, noble, natural and clofe they
are ordered, and that with large Figures. All which plainly proves,
that painting as big as the Life is much preferable to that in Ltile, and
char he, who has made the former his Praftice, can eafily perform
the latter, tho' he in Little cannot to eafily give into the large. To
have  fine and narural Exprestion in Little is certainly commendable;
but Tis more ealy to mark out  Camp, and draw up an Army for
Barrle in  large Plain than in  narrow Compats;  pread Army is
weak, but Cloteness of Troops makes it frong; wherefore in hnarrow
and ill firuared Places,  General muft thew his urmoft Conduel. We
nfually fay, that the beil Writers and Poets are Chart and concife; in
Mutick,


Chap.  Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 the fame, perfelt Harmony lying in four Parts, whether vo
cal or inftrumental; us likewife more artful, to compofe  Piece in few
than many Divifions.
Charles da Gardin was exceeding fine in Little, and yet he had 
great Inclination to imitate the large Manner; but he did not fucceed.
Alseris, the famous Painter in Little, loff all his Credir with his Parron
the Duke of Tuscany, by his Pourtraits in full Proportion; and to it
has happened to others. Thole who practife in Little, ule small Pup-
pets for their Layman, but not Pupper-dreffes; their Academy-figures
are drawn on whice Paper, uncertainly fhaded without Mezzo-tint or
Tendernels, and no higher finithed than ferves their Turn: Othiers,
who fancy they Know better, and, as if they had  Notion of broad
Management, Charpen the Extremities of their Figures and darken 
little againtt the Light, having no need of  second Tint; becaute their
Figures shall not round. Once, as  was drawing at the Academy, 
met with  Perfon who managed in that Manner, and  defired he
might be, asked (becaute then  underffood not the Language of the
Country) why he did not finith his Figures better, fince he had Time
ehough for it? Whofe Anfwer was, he had no Occafion for more Fin th
ing, as painting fmall Things, one, two or three Foot high at fur-
thelt  then cauted him to be asked, that fuppoling he were to do
tomething larger, whether he would not be at  lols! He antwered; that
he hoped he should not, as long as he kept to his Text: Which indeed
was Truth, as appeared in the Confequence; for having an Opportu-
nity afterwards to paint fome Figures in full Proportion, there was no
more in them than in his Drawings, which were his Models. More
Inftances of this Kind were fuperfluous, fince tis hoped the better Ad.
vifed will conduct their Studies righly in  due Examination of the
Life, in order to qualify themfelves for larger Things.
This Obfervation touching (mall and large Compals, is not only ufe-
ful in Hiffory, but alfo in Landskip, Pourtraiture, Flowers, Fruir,
Shipping, Architecture; in fine, in all Parts of Painting.
CHRP. XIX. Of the Divisson of Histery.
 all Things we should obferve Order; which some proceed in, ac-
cording to their Fancies, and others alt counter to Rules, not
knowing, that Things are eftablifhed thus and thus, by an univerfal
No.  Ordennance, or Compofition.
Book II
 and why. He, who thinks himself to do as he pleafes, may
indeed paint Tapiter with  Fools Cap, and  yellow or green Garment;
and Momas in  purple Drapery, and to forth; becaufe theres no other
Punithment for him but his ignorance: But  well advifed Artiff will
make better Inquiries, that he may jultify his Work, or that the
Work may peak for irfelf. Let us love Vertue, Jays Horace, for
the fake of Vertue, and thun Vice, not only for fear of Punithment,
but allo for the Odium it carries. ltho' no one need fear corporal
Punishment for diforderly Manasement of Hiffory, yet he is not free
from the Reproach of lon
and Blunder,  Punishment great 
nough to  generous Mind; wherefore we should fubmit to eftablished
Order, as the Conduftor of our Studies, the fureff Way being bett,
and the bearen Road neareft. If  good Hifforiographer, in compiling
 Story, make an orderly Divifion of his Materials, ere he begin to
write; dispoting firft the general Heads, and then the particular ones;
afterwards, the incidents, and which of them are principal, and how
many; and which of them happened Without, and which Within
doors; moreover contidering, whether the Story throughout is to be
handled in all iis Circumftanses in  certain Number of Parts, or in
some principalones only ; as whether he will contract Hemer'  Books
into  Virgifs  into  or Orids  into  or  at pleafure; to 
judicious Painter, in handling  magnificent Hiffory, should make him-
felf Mafter of the true Concents and Meaning of it; as whether the
Parts be few or mant; if many, whether he cannot bring them into
 fmall Compers; and if few, whether he cannot add to them: More-
over he is to conider, which are the principal Parts, and what can be
left out, in order to reduce them to fuch  proper Number as will an
fiver his Purpote; always remembring, in cafe he should fall thore,
that he may ule any Licence that is not againtt Nature and Reaton, even
to make two incidents out of one, when Occafion requires.
We are therefore to eltablith it for  general Method, in handling 
thorough Hillory, divided into   or  Ordonnances, more or lets,
that the firtt Picture mult always thew the Drifc, srate and Place of Alli-
an; and the lait, the Conclution of the whole Story.
Large Hillories, fuch as of Tofeph, Alexander Hercules, and others,
which belt become Palaces, Saloons, Apartments and Galleries, can
not be handled in  tingle Piece, becaute of the Variety of Accidents
they contain, which muit be concinued in feveral Fictures, whether in
Tapeftry or Painting. Again, if the Gods come in Play (which fre
quencly happens) the Cieling is proper for them; taking Care, that 
ther


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
  the Beginning or Conclution of the Story be over the Chimmney,
as  shall more largely thew in the Book of Cieling- painting.
There are many fuch long Stories in Homer, Virgil, Apuleins, Tafe,
even in Scripture itfelf: Now if we would chule two lncidents out of
any of them, or make two Compofitions, and thofe to be hang' to
gether, we ought in the firft to reprefent the moft remarkable Part,
whether it be the     or gth Accident, according as it
happens, to that its Fellow may be the laft; as the End of Adonis,
or his Death; the Fall of Phacton, or his Grave; Sardunapalus burn-
ing himself; Encars Deification;  Is Dilinghantment; and, in
facred Story, Solomons offering to the Idotr Rinaldo
Here tis neceffary to be oblerved, that all Hiffories have two con-
trary Beginnings and Conclutions; fome,  forrowful Beginning and 
joyful Exit; others, contrary; to which add  third, which are neither
joyful nor forrowful. The Story being divided into three Accidents,
the firft should lerve as an incroduction to what we intend to treat of;
in the second should appear the main Action; and the third should turn
in the happy or miferable Event: For Inttance; we may reprefent fis
has Cafar eatring on the Government; next, his Condition, or fur-
ther Promotion; laftly, his Death. We can allo divide  Story into
four Parts or Stages, as the Birth, Rife, Life and Death of  vulgar
of noble Perfon.
But five Divisions are the most perfelt; more are fuperfluous; becaute
any Hiffory may be fufficiently reprefented in five Parts; thus, the
Perfon' Beginning in the firtt; his Rife in the second; his Condition
in the third; his Fall in the fourth; and his End in the fitth; as we
shall further illuftrate in the Chapter of fellowing or matching of
Pieces.
In reprefenting an Hiftory the rcift is not always confined to the
Laws of written Story;  good Hifforiographer is obliged to go thro'
with all the particular Facts from the Beginning to the End, in  fuc-
ceffive Order;  Painter, contrarily, has  greater Liberty of Choice,
fince tis indifferent to him, whether he falls upon the Beginning, mid.
dle or End of  Story; and therefore fomcrimes begins where he
pleafes; picking out of the Story what beft fuits his intention, either
What went before, now is in Action, or muft be in Confequence; being
obliged to exhibit no more out of the Whole, than can be feen toge-
ther at one View.
Horace divides the Drams into five Acts. The firff containing the
Senfe and Introduction of the Scory; in the fecond is the Sequel or
Confe
 Ordennance, or Composition.
 II.
Confequence, arifing from the firft; in the third, the Contention or
Dispure; in the fourth is feen at  Diftance the Iffue of the Story;
and in the fifth, the Caraftrophe or Conclution either in Sorrow or
Joy. But the Drama differs from  Painting in this; that the one con-
tains in each Alt  particular Time, Place or Action; and the other
exhibits only  momentary Action
The Dirifion of the Drama into five Acts is not without Reafon,
from the Example of the Suns Courfe; which begins with Day-break;
fecondly afcends all the Morning; thirdly, has  Meridian alritude;
fourthly, declines in the Afferngon; laftly, fets in the Evening.
He who would ad fure and orderly should ufe the following Means;
which, befides the Truth of the Story, will furnith him with Plenty of
Thoughts.
 The Time.  The Place of Alion.  The Conditions of the
Perfons concerned.
By the Time we underfland either the paft, prefent, or to come;
and therein,  Divifion into Night, Morning, Noon and Evening;
alfo into Spring, Summer, Aurumn and Winter; and into Months,
Weeks, Days, t for the Place, we muft contider, whether it be in Earope, Assa,
Africa and America; whether in Town or Country, Within or With-
our-doors; in flately or vulgar Buildings, or  Nixture of both.
in the Conditions of Persons we meet with great and iluftrious ones,
a Emperors, Kings, Princes, Senators, Generals, Coc. as allo Deities
and High-priells, male and female; in the fecond Tire, Nobility,
Merchanis and Cirizens; lattly, the common People, Countrymen,
Begears, Cr. in thefe Orders of Men, we diftinguith between great
 and lefs, and the fame in the other Conditions; and divide them
again into old, middleaged and young. Among People in general
we find rall, middle-fizd, thore, thick, flender, well and milhapen,
healthy and fickly, fentible and foolith; all differing as well in their Na-
tures and Humours, as in their Countenances and Shapes.
We may add, in the fourth Place, the Mlanners of each, and the
particular Cultoms of Nations, whether of Romans, Greeks, Persians,
Armemans, Germans, &. together with their Dreffes, confiffing of
Various Stuffs, as Silk, Linnen, courfe or fine Woollen-cloth, long or thort.
Lallly, the Knowledge of Phyfiognomy, Perspective, Geometry,
Architecture, Anatomy, Proportion, Colours, Harmony, Reffexions,
and every thing that occurs in the Chapters treating of those Particu
lars; which we shall not here repear.
  Of: Ordennance, or Composition.
 now remains only to be obferved; firfl, that there are two Sorts
of Piltures, natural and unnatural. Secondly, what good Hiffories
are, in order to thew their Continuance in one Painting. The natural
Pictures are thofe, in which we exhibit the Nature of  Story or Acci-
dent by  fingle Paftion, . . by  fingle Reprefentation of the Perfon on
whom the Strets lies. The unnatural are thofe, wherein the fame Per-
fon is reprefented more than once, and thereby two Accidents mixed
together which happened at different Times, as the one by Day, and
the other by Night; which is contrary to Nature, and wherein is often
uled more than one Point of Sight. Secondly, the moft pertinent and
intelligible Hiftories are fuch as that of Heliodorys, defcribed in the
Maccabees, when he was punifhed by the Angel; to which add, the
High-prieft profirate before the Alcar, intreating the Almighty; and
further, the Widows and Orphans, lamenting and crying; all this
thews the Continuance of the Hiffory, and may be brought into one
Piece. Another may be, that of Pompey, where he is burning all the
Letters and Papers of Perpenne in his Sight, and then ordered him to
be carried to his Punishment: And many others.
CHAP. XX. Of the Obfervables in  Frontispiece plate.
  we have treated of many Particulars and their Requi-
 fites, it will be proper here to fubjoin the Difposition of Objects
in  Frontifpiece-plate, and their Obfervables, as being of  diffe-
rent Nature from other Ordonnances, and tending in all Respects to
embellifh the Book only; like  fine Garden-walk, where the Ob-
jells, whether Vafes, Statues, Trees, Coc. are placed to anfwer their
Purpofes.
The Figure which denotes the Subject of the Book, ought by all
means, as the principal, to appear in the middle of the Plate, fet off
by other By-ornaments: Over Head or beneath mult be  large Table
or flat Face, with the Book' Ticle thereon, either in thick black Let-
ters, or elfe double-lind ones, and the other Figures, which ferve for
Illuftration, placed of equal Height on each Side, either flanding or
fitting: Thus much for the fore Cround. The Offskip, having litile
Concern in the Matter, we may difpofe where we think proper with
low or rifing Grounds, in order thereby to give the Uniformity of the
Subject greater Luftre, and  Painterlike Decorum: The principal
Vifle


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Beok II.
 ought to be in the middle; but, if two are neceffary for the fake
of hewing fomething in the Offskip, they muft be on each Side, and
equally large and extenfive.

Ber we mut take especial Care, that the Title be encompaffed with
Arctrecrure, or Rockage, or Trees; or at leaff remain within the
fore Ground, which we ought to confider as  Thearrical Stage opened
on one or both Sides with  Curtain, fomerimes fetting it off with 
colonaded Frontifpiece, or elfe incloling it in  Moulding or Compart-
ent; in which Cafe there should always be  founding Fame, either
before or behind, let the subject of the Book be what it will: Even
the Fame alone with the Title of the Book will look more proper,
than the Figre of the Book without the Fame.
 looks well to interibe the Title in the Pendant of the Trumpet,
wher is in the middle of the Plare, and in double-firok’ Letters;
but it it happen to be on  side of the Plate, Tis improper. The ca.
pral biack lecter fuics the middle and bottom of the Place; however,
when the Title muft be placed high, the open Letter is beft, becaute
the other would take the Eve too much, and weaken the reft of the
York. Thus much in general.
itith refrest to Particulars we mult obferve, that the Figure repre-
fenting the Book, should alwars poffets the chief Place in the middle
of the Plate, and that to be elevared; the Figures of less Contequence
fomewhat lower and further in; and thus with the others; each go
ing off according to its Rank, Action and Qualiry, to the Ofsskip; and
if other additional Ornaments are neceffary, they muft be contrived
here and there in Batsrelief
But to explain myself,  shall give  Plate example, and take for the
Subject  Book, carrled Ans MILITARIA, or,  Treatife of Military
Exercife Bellons, as the Subject of the Work, fits exalted on an high
and large Pedeftal, in the middle of the Plate, fet off with all Kinds
of warlike Inftruments, as ufual; beneath her, on one Side, flands 
Perfon in an offentive Pofture; and on the other,  defentive Perfon;
thefe three Figures make the whole Story; the latter is reprefented
as  brave Citizen with  Table in his left Hand, whereon is drawn
the Plan of  Forritication, and under his right Arm  Sheaf of Wheat;
the former appears as  vigorous young Man, with  Spike headed
Staff in one Hand, and  Spade in the other, and at his Feet  Crow,
or Wall breaker; on one Side in the Oftship, is  Town -wall, and on
the other some armed Men feering Houfes on fire; behind the former
Htands Vigilancy, and behind the latter Subtilry.
Now


Chap.  Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 we may oblerve, that the aforefaid Uniformity in the Figures,
accompanying Bellona, and which help to explain the Senfe, is una-
voidable; for if one of the hieroglyphic Figures next her were fitting,
and the other flanding, it would caufe an Abfurdity in the Ordon-
nance; becaute thole two Figures ought to thew an Altiviry, or at leaft
to be in  Readinets to undertake some Encerprize: Wherefore they,
as well as thofe behind them, muft be flanding; the latter being plac-
ed there, not as capital Figures, but to aid and subferve the two -
thers; and therefore, being rather ornamental than neceffary, they
may be left out; as alfo may the Offskip, fince the Subject fufficient
ly appears without it: Neverthelels it may be retained when it does
not obfcure the main Delign; but  should rather chufe to contrive it
in Bassrelief in Stone-work.
All Frontifpiece-plates should have the three following Qualities.
 To delight the Exc.
 To fend to the Praife and Honour of the Author and De
figner.
 To be advantageous to the Seller.
Thefe Obfervacions, tho' little heeded, yet are very necelfary, fince
all Things have  Reference and Tendency to fomething; and tho' by
 proper Application, we muft thew their Qualiries, as in the three in
ftances aforelaid, yer we have  Liberty to make further Additions, if
not foreign to the main Delign of the Compolition:  fay then, that if the
capital Figure be fet off by an Area, Palace, or other Building, that
Ornament mulf come on the right side of the Plate, next to the Bind
ing of the Book, and run off to the left as fcantily as the Delign will
permit. It would be improper to repreient  Table, Pedettal and
Vafe, or such like, holf in the Piece, unlets the Print have  Border
broad enough to be suppoted to hide the other half, or it were on 
third or further Ground. We allo remark, that the Light falling on
the Objects muft be suppoted to come from without the Book; that is,
it proceeds from the left side or opening of the Book, and thoots to the
intide of it, in order thereby to create between them ( mean, the
Print and the Book)  perfect Union and Sympathy; like that of the
Soul and Body; fuppoling the Book to be the Body, and the Print the
Soul which moves it; to which add, in Confirmation of my Polition,
that the Back of the Book gives Rife to the Print and Leaves.
The Reafon why  difpofe the Objects thus, whether light or heavy,
 becaufe  think the contrary very improper and ill-grounded; as the
Decorum of it may be leen in the Frontifpiece-place of my Drowing-
book;


 Ordonnance, or Composition.
 II.
book, deligned in that Manner; which  shall explain, and give  Proof
of, in the two following Examples.
EKAMPLE .
 place, on the right side of the Defign,  fine Frontifpiece or Porch
of  Court or Temple, with Wings coming from it on each Side; and
on them, fome People leaning over  Balluftrade; all running to the
Point of Sight, which is in the middle of the Piece: At the Entrance
Rlands Prince, Princels or Vefal Virgin; and before him or her, on the
Steps,  Manor Woman kneeling, and receiving  Staff, or  Roll of
Paper: Fame on high founds towards the left; and on the second Ground;
alloon the left Side, (but half withour the Piece) some affrighted Peo-
ple taking their Flight. On the same Side, the Offskip should appear
Villo-wile, like  Gallery, up to the Point of Sight. Now, the De-
fisn being lighted from the lett, and only flightly sketched with black
Chalk, or  Pencil, and rubbed off on another Paper, the former will
fsre the Boot, and the Reverfe, the contrary.
EKANIPL  II. In  Landskip.
On the right side is  mafty Tomb, fupported by Sphinxes, and fet
off with other Stone-work, as Pedeftals and Vafes; the foremoff
whereof are more than half without the Piece; and all running to the
Point of Sight, as in the foregoing. Behind it is  clofe Ground of
Cypress and other Trees up to the Point of Sight; and beyond it is
the Offskip. From the left Side, on the second Ground, may be seen
in part only, some People coming forwards; as  Priefl, Boy with fa-
crifcing Urenfils, the Ax-bearer, and Beafts for Sacrifice. Before the
Tomb, on the Plinth, should fland  fmall ltar; forwards, two or
three Hargies taking their Flight; and from the Tomb Cupid flying
after them, with an Arrow in his Bow, as driving them from thence.
Now reverfe this Drawing alfo, and then obferve the Decorum it pro
Suces.
Alcho’' this Method of proceeding be founded on Reafon and good
Grounds, yer,  fear, many will take it for  Chimera; on  Suppoti-
tion, that we precend to amend fomething, and lay down  politive
Law for what has been feveral hundred Vears left free and unlimitted;
fince Books may, without the aforefaid Obfervations, be good, fell
well


Chap.  Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
 and bear  Price: Again, if  Book be good and have but  Ti-
de-page, without  Frontifpiece-plate, that' enough; even  Plate
ever to poorly handled will pass, if it but thew what the Author treats
of. But let me ask, whether tis not more acceptable to give  Print
great Decorum, and make it better with little Trouble, than to beat
the old Road; especially when we can fupport it by certain Rules,
which will difcover the Error of former Management ? Some perhaps
 Why have not others mentioned this, fince the Politi-
may fay,
on is to poficive! But  anfwer, that tho' many Things have been found
out, fomething still remains to be difcovered by the Studies of curious
and inquifitive Men. We grant, that if  Book be bad, the Frontif
piece-plate will not mend it; however, if the Proverb may take place,
 Thing well set off is half fold; and therefore Elegance is very neceltary
in all Things,
Of the Representations of Dreams, Apparitions, anusual Tboughts and
Fictions, at leifure Times.
Who can blame  ftudious Arciff for amuling himfelf fometimes
with sketching odd Conceptions, or for painting them?  think it ve
 commendable, and  true Token of Creatness of Mind, and the
beft Method for excelling in Delign; it' certain, that they, who make
their Art their Diverfion, have  double Advantage in it; becaute
they exercife their Judgments with Ufury in the molt abfirufe Deligns
which the Senfes can comprehend. Let us only confider, with respect
to the People, how acceptable fuch an Artiff muft be, fince moft Men
have an lich for Novelties; as in Plays, which draw the greateff Con-
courfe of People, the more uncommon they are. If any think  ought
rather to maintain, that fuch Artifls ought not to be regarded, and
that they should find their Pleafure in better Things, let me ask in
what? Whether in hearing idle Talk, reading ufelets Books, walking
the Streets, Coc. all which is rather walting lime than Improvement
les not unknown that Raphael, Michael Angelo, and many other famous
Mafters, did fomerimes exercife their Judgments with out of the way
Thoughts; whence  infer, that they thought it no Shame. But con
trarily, what good can come of exceffive Drinking, and dipping into
other Things, as if Painting no longer concerned us?  certain we
cannot ferve two Mafters at once; and as certain, that he who fiudies
 difficult Point, and niends to mafter and prattife it, mult not at the
Same Time, for Pleafure, give into another which is more difficult,
No.  Ordennance, or Composition.
Book  of  different Nature, left he deflroy his firft Point: We ought
therefore to accuffom ourfeives to Things which neither over-charge
the Senfes, nor too much burthen the Memory in our Paftimes. 
young Arciff, who at his Leifure endeavours to qualify himfelf for
hne Compositions, mulf especially fhun exceffive Drinking, hearkening
to old Women' Tales,
inquiring after News, reading trifling Books of
Stories and Romances,
principally, Accounts of Murthers and fad Ac
and the like; as allo the Grounds of Mulick:
cidents, Inchantments,
Wine intoxicates, fad Tidings too much affect the Mind, and  Series
of Troubles puts us betide ourfelves; reading of Murthers, Coc. feizes
the Heart, and makes us unit for Study; Curiofity, initead of being
fausied, is to craving, that when we delign fomething fedate, it can
hardly find  Place in our Thoughts; and the Study of Mulick, or
other fuch profound Arr, has too great an Afcendant over our Senfes.
To explain whatl fav, touching the defigning of uncommon Thoughts
at leifure,  shall give three or four Examples, each of  different
Narure: But mult firft inquire, why Painters will not give themfelves
the trouble to delign unutual or barbarous Hiffories, fuch as the Indj.
an, Tapsn of Chinese; and find, that yis, becaule no Authors have
Written anr thing abour them worth skerching, thofe Nacions affording
no other Scene than Cruelcies, Murthers, Tyrannies, and tuch like dit-
agreeable Objects, which would rather offend chan delight: Moreover,
that the Oddnets of their Dreffes, Mfannersand Cultoms do not at all
quidrate with the Grace and Beauty of the ncique. Iis certain, that
the principal Bulinets of an Hiftory-painter is, to express the Story with
proper and livelr Paffions, that his incertion may appear plain and fa-
risfaftory to the Curious; and yet, ths would be no more than the
reading it in the Author, if the Grace of the Figures were not alfo to
accompanr it. Wt hat difgults in  fine Play more than ordinary Atti-
an, bad Dreffes, and  contemptible Stage! If  fine Voice be agreea-
ble to the Ear, how charming muit it be, when the Eye fees it come
from  beautiful Woman: Beauty cauies Love, but Deformity, Aver-
fion Irs therefore no Wonder, that we have no Relith for fuch
odd Subjelts, lince Esroperns are too converfant with real Beau-
ir, to be pleated with fuch Shadows and Gholls: Ver, notwithfland
ing what is laid of the Figures and Histories,  think it not unworthy
of  Landship painter fomeimes to exhibit fuch uncommon Landskips,
becaute the Oddnets of the Grounds, Trees and Buildings found in
them is pleating to moft People, especially thofe who are converfant
with their Hiffory; and indeed this Novelry of Prospect is no ways to
repus-


Of Ordennance; or Composition.
  to Art or Nature, as the People and their Manners, in spoil-
ing the Shape which God and Nature gave them.
If it be faid, that fuch Landships are improper without Figures of
the fame Country, it mull be granted; neverthelels, as the By-orna-
ments of  Landskip are ufually the leaft regarded,  think it not dif
agreeable, to exhibit here and there fome of thofe Creatures, in order
to thew the Narure of the Country:  judicious Arcift may difpole
them as he thinks beft for the Good of the whole Picture, and the
Pleafure of the Eyc; and becaule thofe Countries are well known to
Enrepeans, he can incroduce them there, and intermix with them Tra-
vellers from other Countries, as Persans, Romans, Greeks, &cc. who
may add to its improvement; as we introduce Whites into the Blacks
Country, and Blacks into Greece.
But perhaps another Difficulty may be ftarted againtt fuch Land.
skips, namely, that they cannot be handled to natural and true,  we can have the Life before us; which indeed is probable;
however it mult be granted, that the Authors, treating of thofe Parts,
are to many and to particular, that  Man of Judgment may gather
fufficient instruction from them; the Temperature of the Air, Fruit-
fulness of the Soil, Shape of the Trees and other Greens, and their
Natures and Colours are plainly fet down; and if the green happen to
be  little lighter or darker, or the Ground more yellow or rulfet,
who will go about to difprove it, if artfully managed! For my part,
 should make no Scruple to paint fuch  Piece, fince  Painter
ought to flip no Opportunity of getting Praife, and with to have done
it, according to my prefent Ides of it: If we omit doing many Things
for want of  proper Knowledge of them, what cannot the Pencil of 
judicious Mafter do, if he will but fet about ir? Vet some Men will not
go out of their old Road, as was the Cale of  Fellow-pupil with me un
der my Father; who, on my asking him, why he painted not other Sub-
jells as well as Bible-ffories? antwered, that he had no Occation to feek
after others, fince the Bible yielded more than he could do in his whole
Life: Which indeed was no Wonder; fince he painted one Story ten
times, if it pleafed him. But we shall now come to the Reprefentati-
ons we promifed.
Remorfe of Conscience eccassoned by an Apparition. See Plate XIX.
After Sextus Torquinias had ravithed Lucretia, the unhappy Lady
who had habb’ herfelf in Revenge of her violated Chaflity) appear-
P Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II
ed to him, as he was lying in Bed, thewing her Breaft gored with
Blood; at which, he was fo terrified, that he knew not where to
hide.
The Figure which accompanies her holding  Dagger, with Cyprels-
leaves about its Head and Walle, reprefents Desparr, as the broken
Pair of Compaffes, flicking in its Girdle plainly thews. Now perhaps
It may be asked, becaute  xcretid is opening her Wound, whether the
Dagger should not become her! which  grant; as having committed
the Petchro' theother' Inlligation. Iis certain, that theres no need
of By-help, as we shall prove in its Place, in the Batsrelief of Mele-
ager when the Mischief is done by our own Hands; but here the
Cafe is very different; for Aeleager was there dying, and the Revenge
not yet execured; whereas here the Revenge is already had, becaute
the is producing her Wound, and therefore the greatelt Effelt of De-
(pair is over, and the thews him the bloody Dagger by means of De-
pair; which Figure would indeed be superfiuous, were the not fuppo-
fed to be faying,—
This Steel did it. For if the were in  deipe-
tate Polture with the Dagger in her Hand, the Figure of Despair
would be imincelligible, and therefore fuperfluous. Again, it would
be abfurd, to make her stab herfelf at his Bed-fide, fince no Spectre
of any Perfon can appear before  Separation from the Body; where-
fore the shews herfelf to the Debanchee, as the Caule of her untimely
Death, in order to bring him to Remorfe, and for that Reafon Despair
is reprefented in  triumphing Mianner, as if faying, — Hec invifta
Manet.
Alegars by the Bedfide, with her Head befet with Serpents, fcourg-
ing him with  finoaky pirchy Torch, inrimates not only Remorle,
or Reproof, but all other inward Troubles, Grief, Rage, Horror,
Disquier, Ec.
The Lamp on the Table, and in  princely Apartment, may perhaps
feem odd; neverthelets  think, it has  fine Effect on the foremoll Fi-
gure, and allo helps to make the Table-furniture conpicuous, without
hindring the other Light; doing still more good, as being  Lamp,
and having burnt  long Time without fnuffing, and therefore caflin

 gloomy ruffer Light, when that of the Spettre is bituminous, burn
ing white and blueish.
As for the small Compats of the Ordonnance, fome would have filled
 Room three times as large with thofe four Figures; and even re-
prefented an Hall adorned with Pittures, Balsrehefs, Tables, Stands
for


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
Chap.  Candleflicks, Esc. and  within door Viflo; an Ialian comparted
Floor, and many other Things.
Representation of Vanity, according to the Saying, Man' Life is 
Dream.
Alexander, repoling on  Bed, the following Spectres appeared to
pass by him: Firft, Time with it' Hour-glats; next, Ambition, hold,
ing  Torch; next, Valour, followed by Asa, Africa and in liucop.
irons; then follow Riches and Pleasures, and then Honour and Glory;
the former with  Pyramid, and, the latter with  celeftial Sphere; 
naked Man brings up the Rear, having  dejected Look, and hug-

ging himself, who, in paffing the Bed, accofted the Prince thus,
 Alexander! behold me; reffect on what  was, and what  now
am the whole World was at my Dispose; my Valour purchased me the
higheft Honour and Glory; Riches and Pleasures were at my Command;
but now, in Nakedness,  pass by as  Shade: — Sic trantit Gloria.
Mundi.
This Cavalcade  exhibit in an Hall richly furnished, reprefenting
the Figures in  waving Motion, and skimming, over the Floor, 
Foot high, on  thin Cloud, cross the Picture to  Defcent of  or  on the left Side; and thence, on the fame side, up to  Back-
door on the left Side of the Point of Sight, where they dilappear.
The Bed,  little raifed, flands backward in the middle of the Piece;
the aforefaid Shades are vapourith, but not tharp: Forwards, on the
left Side,  place, on  Pedeftal, the Figure of  fitting Alexander,
with Thunder in his Hands,  Clobe in his Lap, and an Eagle by his
Side; and behind the Pedeftal fland two Centinels in earneft Difcourfe,
infentible of what is doing.
Let it not be thought, becaute  make the three Parts of the World
fetter’, that Alexander, by his Valour, fubdued them; for, accord-
ing to the Tellimony of some Writers, he did not conquer all Asa;
neverthelels, that his Ambition made him hope to do it, is not impro=
bable; fince he cauted himfelf to be worthipped as  fecond Tupiter
Ammon; as he himfelf has given us to underfland by thee Words.
Atterius Tovis altera teld.
 question not, but that, if fuch  fhady, Ghoft-like Manner be well
executed, Twill appear very uncommon, tho'  do not lay it down as
 Fall happening to Alexander, but give it as my own Invention..
Ihave


Book II
Of Ordennance, or Composition.
 have faid, that the Shades or Appearances walked as on  Cloud;
: which  mean  thin Vapour, ferving them for  Ground, and giv.
ing  fimt Shade to the Hall-foor; yer the Vapour and Groundhade
are of roother lfe, than to express Things in  fupernatural Way,
and to make  Dillintion between real and imaginary People.
 have leen fuch  Thought painted by Fordaims; where  Man is
dreaming in his Bed; and before it ffood  naked Woman, appear-
ing as  real one, who (one would think) was going to Bed to him,
had not the Arcift painted there some Clouds, as if the were flanding
in  Door of Clouds: Whence  was led to think, the might be  Spec
tre; but then, not having  ghaftly Appearance,  thought the had too
great  Communication with the rell of the Picture; the was seen from
behind, and very beautifuliy coloured:  and others therefore conclud
ed, that this Woman was only  Model; to which the other Particu
lars were added, in order to parch up  Picture, and fill the Cloch.
Bir to return to our Ordonnance.
My Thoughts are, that Alexunder mult not be reprefented naked on
the Bed, but in princely Attire; for otherwife the Door mult not fland
open; and  am no: conined to the Chamber-light, becaute of the
Shades or Spectres; wherefore, in reference to that,  have two
Points in View; firfl, to keep the Light as beautiful as Sun fhine; or
fecondly (which is better and more ghattly) to keep it fomewhat gloomy,
in order to exprefs naturally the Vapouriness; and by it the Vannty
of human Condition.
An odd Fuble.
The Fable wrights tell us, that, in the Beginning of Time,  Diffe
rence arofe between ffollo and Dians, both in their Vouth, who
should produce the finelt Aimals, wherewith to furnith the World;
Tupiter, as chief Ruler in Heaven, for Paltime allow’ it, and gave
them Power to do it: After many Challenges and Disputes, it was
finally agreed, that polle, in the Prefence of all the Gods, should
make the firft Eftay; and accordingly, to general Admiration, he
produced  large Lyon. Dians fentible of it, and feeing the Gods
taken up with the Sight of to strange  Creature, and fearful that
he should not produce the like, brought forth  Cat,  Creature not
unlike the Lyon, but as much inferior in Strength and Shape, as the
Moon is to the Sun. Whilff the Gods were laughing at this, Apolle
was to netiled at the Pretumption of Dians, in thinking herfelf his
Maich,


Of Ordennance, or Compofition.
 that he infiantly brought forch  Moufe; to thew, in  fcom-
ful Way, that the Cat was not comparable with the Lyon: Where-
upon Diang fummoned all her Wit and Power to bring our  Mon-
Key; which Creature, like the former, being found to be very ridicu-
lous, and her Endeavours adjudged fruicless by the Gods, the was. fo
provoked, as to create an eternal Enmity between the Lyon and the
Monkey, and the Cat and the Moute.
Ordennance of the Fable.
Apollo, as  Vouth of about  Vears of Age, flands  little to the
left of the Point of Sight, holding in his right Hand  Scepter, which
relts againtt his Hip; he flands in  daring Pofture on one Leg, has 
fierce Lo and on his right Side,  little from him, fits  large Ly-
on. Over-againtt Apolle,  little forward, fands the young Diand,
holding up  Dart in her right Hand, and feeming to call up  Mon-
Key from the Earth, who, half out of the Ground, looks grinning be-
hind him at  Moufe, which, becaute of the Cat flanding by Diana,
teems to creep away under the Legs of Apollo.
The Deiries view thofe flrange Things with Pleafure; Tupiter and
June fit by themfelves on  low Cload in the middle: Near Apolle and
Diana are feen Mercury and furora; and on the right Side forwards,
Mars and Bacchas, the former lying on  Stone: Venus, attended by
Cupid, lies on the Grats; and next them,  litle further, Ceres, fir-
ting in the Lap of Rbea, points and laughs at the Monkey: Between.
thele two and the Cloud, whereon fits Tupiter and Tune, appears
Saturn: On the left Side forwards fits Pullas with Esculapins, be-
tween Iris and Gunimedes: Behind Apollo advances Momus, Rooping
forwards with his Bawble upright in his lefc Hand, whereon he leans,
and, looking to the right, makes  fcornful Sneer his other Hland
is wide open, with the Thumb on the Tip of his Nofe. The whole
Affembly of the Gods, except Apollo, looks merry and gay.
Emblematic Ordennance of Folly.
Here we exhibit  naked young Man, sripp’ of all his Subliance,
which he lavithly confumed) appearing before the frightful Idol,
lath’ by Despair: The ftern old Man flanding next it, drett in  black
Garment, has his Hair and Beard plaited,
and fomewhat like  Con-
jurer, is shewing the young Man  Cuthion lying on the Ground before
tte





Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Book II.
 Alcar; from under which fprout out Thorns; on which neverthe-
lets he is forcing him to kneel: Nature on one Side, on the second
Ground, lies feeble on  Dunghil, looking with Tears at Ceres and
Bacchus, who, defpitefully going from her, deny any Succour: Necef.
fty alone firs squat down by her, having nothing about her but 
broken Cup and some creeping Infelts: The Bunding feems to be 
rinous Palace; the Villo behind the Idol is frightful enough; and
yet how fine the Houte on the third Ground appears, partly in the
Sim, and partly in the Shade of the pleafant Trees; methinks it has
two Sphinses of white Marble on two Handrails at the Sides of the
Door; and on the Steps is feen Lasury, (cattering Handfuls of Money
out of the Hom of Amalthea Wuntonness is playing on  Timbrel to
tome dancing Satyrs and lewd Women:  little further under the
Trees, fome of the fame Company lay, eating and carouting like
Brutes, by  Fountain: The aforefaid Idol is like  Chimera, compot
ed of many improper Parts; the Head of  Frog; the upper Parts
like  Homans; Arms like lings; Hands as Lyon’' Paws, with one
of which it holds up  Purfe of Money, and the other refts on an
Harpr; its Legs and Feer like thofe of  Satyr; and on its Head is
 Crown of Holm-leaves: The Prodigal is treading on  broken Stone,
whereon appears  small carved Allar, or fome Remains of it: For-
rune, deferting him, is flying forward; at the fame time Envy behind
the idol is laughing in her Sleeve. Nefarium Vita E Fortuna dif-
Dendium.


CH AP. XXL. Neceffary Observations in continuing an Hiffory in
several Pieces, for Halls, Gulleries, Exc.
 have fereral times afferted, that firict Probability ought to
be one of the principal Cares of  judicious Mafter in his Com-
pofitions, without Deviation on any Pretence whatever, be
the Choice, Figures, Landskip, Archicelture, Coc. or any thing elle;
becaute, as the Proverb fays, Truth, the' objcured for  Season, mut
appear It lal.
Now, to obtain this Likelihood or Probabiliry, befides the Requi-
fites which we have in their Places already laid down, it will not be
amils to obferve, that the principal Perfonages retain their own and
Known


Of Ordonnance, or Composition.
Ehap.  Ferms, Cbaratters and Colours, from the Beginning to the End of
the Work.
By the Ferms we are to underfland the Proportions of their Bodies.
By the Charatters, the Features which alter from time to time
with their Vears; from Vouth to Maturity; from thence to middle
Age; and thence to old Age.
By the Colears we mean, the fair, rofy, pale or brown; belides
long or fhort, dark, ruffec, light or black Hair, long or frizled Beards:
in tne, such an one muft be known to be the same Person, thro' all the
Compositions, without any Alteration.
The same Condult muft be obferved, with respect to the Atten
dants or Recinue; especially  black Man and Woman, who, if they
have any Part in the flacely Actendance in the firft Compolition, mutt
maintain that Poft to the laft; becaute, being Slaves, they are feldom
exchanged; and by their Prefence their Mafters are better Known, -
specially when they have been obferved to attend them feveral times
Iis not improper to make mention of Blacks, both Men and
Women, fince they are feen in the Retinues of moft People of Power
in all Nations, the one more, the other less, and dreft in  particular
Garb, by way of Diffinction, like great Mens Liveries, Coc.
les necellary, for avoiding Millakes, to know how many Obmpiads
the whole Work takes in, and exactly to enquire into the different
Vears in which the firft, second, third and fourth Story ended, in of
der to affign each Charalter its certain Age, abating for Accidents,
which indeed to alter People, that they gec out of Knowledge; as in the
thin and flender, becoming thick and fac; and in the brisk and (pright-
ly becoming dull and heavy; and the contrary; and yet thole ccr
dents leave the Features, whence Likenets proceeds, in their Per-
feltion.
But here perhaps it may be asked, if we follow this Obfervation
punctually, whether the Likenels would not be to leffened as to be
quite loft in old Age? To which  agree, to far as respells the Colour
and Fichhiness, the one in  greater, the other in  lels Degree; yet
the Chgralter, with all its known Feactures, is, what maintains Likenets
be  Man ever to old; wherefore, his receffury to make that appeat
in the Perfons from time to time Texander Was very young, wheh
he waged War with the Perssons; and; at the End of his Conquetts,
died in the Flower of his Age. Of Derinstand Casar we ought te
observe the fame, tho' differing in Vears from Alexander. Chriff; at
the Age of twelve, taught the Scribes and Pharifees in the Temple;
No.  Ordennance, or Composition.
 II
when full grown, he did his Miracles; and was, finally, accuted, con
demned and put to Death at about thirty.
Laftly, we ought to obferve, that the Life and Acchievements fome
times follow in  long Series of Vears, and fucceffively; as in the Sto-
ries of Remulus, Julus Cafar, Scipie, Alexander, and many others;
and, in Scripture, Chrif, John, &cc of some of which, we have large-
ly treated in our Book of Tables and Emblems, which we shall pub-
hin in due Seafon
We leave it now to any one' Judgment to confider, how neceffary
the aforefaid Obtervations are in the Continuance of an Hiftory; where
in we muft alfo take Care, that the Horizon through the whole Work
be of one Height, and level with the Eye of the Bebolder; as we have fe-
veral times faid in its Place.
The same Condult as we have recommended for Figures, respects al.
to all immoveable Objects belonging to the Story; for inftance, if the
general Subject require, that  Palace or Houfe muft come in more
than once, Tis necelfary that it always keeps its firft Form and Station,
only altering the Point of Sight, as we would have it feen either in
Front or Reir, or in Flank, either near of diftant.
The Orders and Ornaments of Arcbitefture likewife come under the
tame Regulation; for the Froncifpiece, Balcony, Porch, Steps, Rails,
Balluffrades, Statues, Windows, Coc. muft remain the fame in each
Compoficion; and not only fo, but of the same Marble and the same
Wood, abaring for the Decays of Time.
With the inward Ornaments the Cafe is the fame; for the Rooms
mast not be adoraed in two different Manners, but with Tapeltries
or Pitures of fuch or fuch  Choice. The inner Court may be fet off
with Fountains, Starues, Cl.
No greater Overfight can therefore, in my Opinion, be commit
sed on inch an Occation, than to employ different Hands in to capi
cal  Work, becaute they commonly differ in Manner, Handling and
Knowledge, as much as Night and Day; whence  happens, that the
Chain of  Story is to broken and dubious, that, without an Expla-
nation, is difficult to know whom or what it reprefents; ope fof-
lowing the antique Gulto; another the modern; one giving his Per-
langes  certain Likepets, and another giving the fame Perfon 
Charalter quite different from that of the former, as it hits their Fan
cres and Choice; to that Virgifs Saying is not amiss, Amant alferng
Camena.
Ti  colees  
 


ChaR.  Of. Ordennance, or Composition.
 remember to have feen two Pieces, being the Continuance of one
Falt; in both which were reprefented one and the fame General; in
the former, he was in Armour and bareheaded, more or lets ancique
like; and in the latter, he was triumphantly carried on  Shield,
cloathed in Buff, and with Shoes and Stockings, Hat and Feather,
and with  naked Sword in his Hand: As for his Carriage, it was as
little like that of the former, as his Dress. Now how ridiculous this muft
look, let any one determine.
 could give more laftances of this Kind of Blunders, but thinking
this  fufficient Caution to thofe who may be concerned in fuch Works.
 shall purfye our main Defign, and come to Liteness; which, in 
Word, lies in the Features, how mch foever  Perfon may advance in
Vears.
To hit the Likenets well, and prevent the aforefaid Miftakes, the
following is the beft Method: Chufe  fine Plaifter face, either of
Manor Woman, which has such an fir as the Subject requires, whe
ther model, auftere or amorous; this Face we muft make ule of from
the Beginning to the End of the Work, where thofe Obfervations are
necellary, either in Front or Prefile, and with frch  Light as is pro-
per to the whole Dessgs, whether right or left, forward or backward,
Candle or Torch; all this to be done without any Variation, except
tomewhat in the Liveliness and Flethinets, which, through Vears,  abating in both Sexes, as we have before faid.
As to the Motion of the Raffions, canted by particular Accidents,
we have, in  former Chapter, fhewed  Method, how to manage in
fuch Cafes, without the Life.
Having said thus much touching the Ordonnance,  think it not im-
Proper to Tubjoin two Observations, which are as necellary to what
has been faid as to what shall hereafter be treated of, namely,  De-
scription of the Conditions of Men in the Summer; and Winter Sea-
sons; and conclude this Book with an Emblem.
. Man in Summer


Is vallly affected by the Hleate which, thinning the Blood, makes it
fow with cafe to the Extremicies of the Body; whereby the Mo-
tions are freed from Rettraint.. The Head is raited; the Shoulders
fink; the Arms and Legs spread; the Hlands and Fingers opened,
whereby each Part of the Body; feems to refreth irfelf,, affarding every.
where free Pallage for the Casd; the Mouth is generally open; the
 Ardannance, or Compositios.
Dook II
 feem to be Brisker, becants Warmth enlivens all Things;
cauting alto the Vapours, which afocod to the Brain and fall again. on
the Eyes; the Hair ffuck behind the Ears hangs down the Back, to
that all feems to be uncovered
 Man in the Winter Season.
To express this Figure well, is necelfary to explain Cold itfelf, as
being the Canfe of the fublequent Motions The Blood, wherein lies
the Warmsh of the Body, is (by means of Cold, which is it' oppo-
Iixe, and enters from without, thro' the Pores) forced inwardly; to that
it paffes chieffy from the fmall Members, to wit, Fingers and Toes, to
its Center Wherefore we fee that, to keep off outward Cold, Peo-
ple fink their Heads into their Breafts; raife their Shoulders; hug
themfelves very clofe with their Hands under their Arm-pits, which
the Cold cannot cafily affect; the Knces joined, Legs fomewhat bent,
and the whole Body fooping; the Eyes almoff fhit, or kept open
with Difficulty; the Monsh cloted; the upper Lip hidden by the un-
der one, which covers it up to the Nofe, to prevent the Colds enter
ing the Body; the Hair hangs carelefty both before and behind.
EMBL EM.
The beff Method,  Perton of weak Memory can take, is, to exer-
cife his Judgment on Things at the Instant they
prefent themfelves to
him; that is, to fet down what he has  mind
to Keep, that he may
at any time have recourfe to it for his focure information and Re
membrance; and this to be repeated till he has gained what he wants:
Bot this cannor well be done, unlets he, at frch Times, fuspend the
Ufe of three of his Seates, Hearing, Toffe and Smell, and retain only
Sight anl Feeling, according to our Sketch, thus:
 young Alan, in his Prime, is fitting at  fmall Table, with  Pen
of Crayon in his Hand; Momery is fitting over againft him, holding
upright an open Book, wherein Trath is reprefented, to him on the T Time, stamting by him on one side, points at the Figure of Truih;
and Pradence, on his other side, is guiding his Hand; Sight and Feel.
ing fland by him at the Table; the three other Sentes are, at the Com
mand of Judgment, condulted by Temperance to another partment;
behind Monory, Judgment is feen driving away fome Children, who
are obferved here as Vices and uuntimely Windrances, prejurticial to
Momory;


Of Ordennance, or Composition.
  thofe unfealonable Impediments, always hovering about us,
and courting our Smiles, have each their particular Tokens in their
Hands; the firft,  Timbrel; the second,  Racket; the third,  Plote
of Grases, the fourth,  Pye; the fifth,  Partridge; the fixth, 
Foots Cap.
Thus we may eafily fee, how weak and imperfelt we are, when
Fudyment does not affift us, and we are mifted by the Bent of  cor-
rupt Inclination.
The End of the Second Book.
 . 


  


  IVT

    III
Of Things ANTICUE and MODERN.
AAGNTHYAYTAHRAATLYYYGGYHYSRLTAGRRNRASFRKYRRRGARRANKEEE
CH AP . The Difference between what is ntique and Medern.
  are now obliged, to pat in Execution our Purpofe of
 making  proper Diftinction between Things Ancique
, and Modern; fince the Difference between them is to
great, that they cannot unite, without cauting excef-
lve Deformity; for Things Antique are always the same,


but the Mode continually changing; its very Name imolies
its Mutabiliry; fince nothing is more unconflant than what depends on
Falhion; which alters not only annually, but even daily in thofe who
mimick the Court. Thefe Contraricties, which are to confounding,
and caule fuch  Variance between what is antique and modern, we fee
chieffy in the Composition of Hiffories, Fables, Emblems, and fuch
like; in which both (yet the Miodern moft) are blended together.
Congruity and Suitablenets in the Compolition of Hiftories are true
Tokens of  judicious Mafter. What is more glorious, than while we
are ravithing the Eye, to pierce the Heare! While the Sight is recre-
ated with the Beauties of the Art, to transport the Mind with the
Deco


Chap. . Of Things Antique and Modern.
 and Energy of the Compolition? He therefore is efteemed 
prudent Malter, who not only gives every thing its profer Colours, but
alfo its due Expression, pure and uncerrupted. Thus we fee that great
Mafters, who are got to that Perfeltion, do not blend Things promif
cuoully, and without Dillinction, as Eaft, Weft, South and North in
 Chaosmanner; becaute, with the lirtle Mafters, we should then act
againll Nature; it is therefore necelfary, that we nicely confider what
it is we intend to reprefenc, to the end that we may not fail in giving
the true Meaning of it. How can the Truth of  Thing be known,
unless it be reprefented as clear as  literal Explanation! Let us then,
curious Arcifts! fedately weigh, what gives the Art fuch an Effect and
Luflre: Have ye  mind to borrow any thing for your Ordonnance,
examine firft the Story ye delign to handle, whether it be Persian,
Greek, Roman, &cc. Will ye reprefent & Durins, chufe all your Ma
terials from the Persians, for his Atcirement. Will ye bring  De-
moftbenes on the Stage, learn the proper Circumflances of the Atheni-
ans, and make him appear  great Heroc. Will ye exhibit the vali-
ant]/ Scipie, give him  Roman Drels, and other Neceffaries from that
People luitable to it. By this means each Perfonage will have his true
Property, and you will shew your Skill in Hiftory, and alfo, by obferv-
ing the Time when, and Place where, reprefent the Subject according
 Would ye exhibit High or Low Dutch, English or French Stories,
fetch no Materialsfrom Perfa, Greece or Italy; each Country can furnith
fufficient Matter properfor its Climate, to wit, Plants, Manner of Living,

Pallimes, Houle ornaments, Stuffs, Dreffes, publick Worships, Times
and Manners of Earing and Repofe: All which Particulars muft be
attentively confidered, in order to gain our Point, and for which Pur-
pofe Reading and Books are neceffary: For as  Profeffor in Law muft
draw his Knowledge from the Marrow of the Roman, German and -
ther Writers of Jurifprudence;  Divine from Scripture and the Com-
mentators thereon; and  Philofopher the fame; to  Painter ought
to be skill’ in the Reprefentations which he makes his principal Stu-
dy, whether the fame be ancient or modern. Hence we judge, what
 Fund of Knowledge is requifice: If  Painter would be univerfal, he
should almofl know every thing; nay, more than many other Arcifts
in
He and his Army were delcated at Maraihes; and afterwards by Miltiads, Geceral of the
Athniaps.
 He conquered sicity, after he had hid wifle the Country of Epidgiry,
By whom Gartbage wai dedtoyed.


Of Things Antique and Modern.
Book III.
 their particular Callings; for he ought to have . tolerable Know.
ledge of Mathematies, Philolophy, Geography, Hiltory, Coc.
Do not meddle then either with Things which you are not conver-
fant with, or follow the Advice of others; for tis more commendable
to sketch  Dog or Cat well, than an Elephant, Camel or Crocodile
poerly. Are you dilpoted to handle an ancient Stery, berrow nothing
for it that' ncw, and of modern Invention; fince what is difquited with
Falhood cannever be Truth; like  Traveller, who darkens Truth by
his own Additions, whole Whims make him defcribe Things he never
faw, and that, to  Perfon who, on due Confideration, foon difcovers the
Fallacy. The Arcifts Judgment itself mult therefore always go before; and
all that he undertakes be governed by Reason and Nature: An Ialian
should not be in an Iadian Drefs; or  Persion in  flathc Doublet, fince
the Perfon we defire to know, does thereby become anknown. Each Coun-
try and People are known, not only by their Habies, but by all the other
Circumffances before-mentioned; give then to each its own Requifites,
and every Thing that' proper to it. How excellent muft  Pilture
appear, and with what Admiration viewed, when every Thing has its
due Qualiries, and the Whole,  prudent Management! What will not
the Arrift merit, if he perform nothing beyond his Strength and
Knowledgel For, fince we cannot know all Things in Perfection, we
muft keep within the Bounds of our Underftanding. He who would be
every where, is feldom found any where; and by confounding Things
does, inflead of real Judgment, difcover his lile Skill. Reprefent
then no more than your Capacity will admit; and principally take
care, not to intermix modern and ancient Dreffes, and Furniture in the
some Composstion: Thus we thew  generous Spirit for Eminence, and
with the excellent former and later Halias, Frencb, Flemiss, and other
Mafters, an Emulation to excel in what is noble, great and artful.
 think  cant beter describe the Difference between what is Antique
and Mlodern, than by  Windball and an Egg, thus; the Ball, by be
ins teffed to and fro, and at laft burfting, repretents sbort Duration,
affording nothing but Wind; but the Egg harched and opened, produ
ees  living Creature; not only  Semetbing, but something good; the
former,  mere Nothing; or, if it have  Name, tis Vanity, and
therefore rather bad than good.
Painting was, by the ancient Remans, to highly effeemed, that none
but Noblemen durff learn it: As we may allo gather from the Paint
ers, feveral of whom have been of noble Extraction: And the Reafon
of it is very evident, fince tis not only probable; but reafohnable, that
such


Chap. .
Of Things Antique and Modern.
 ingenious Spirits should have  diflinguithing inclination for Arts,
fuitable to their Qualicy, above the Vulgar. Their Meditations, 
tions, and Perceptions were fixed on great and fublime Things: They
inquired into, and confulted many excellent Authors of Hiflory, Fa-
bles and Emblems, as well facred as profane, and the Accounts of
ancient Medals; from whence they have drawn pleatiful and ingeni=
ous Matter for their Studies: What excellent Paintings have they not
oblig’ the World with! How many Temples, Palaces, and other
fare Structures have they eariched with elegant Devices inciring to Vir-
tue; whereby they have bequeathed  lafting Name to Pofterity  did Archicecture (never enough to be praifed) ffourith in their
Times. But what Alterations do we fee now? How are the Beauties
and profitable Ofes of Painting either funk, oblcured or flighted, fince
thet Bambocciades are multiphed in these Countries; at prelent we can
fcarce fee one Virtue appear, but ten, nay an hundred Vices will rife
counter to it; thus has lprung up  fecond Hydra like that of Lerna;
to that we want  valiant Hercules to lop off thofe Dragons Heads
which are always (prouting. Thus Architecture itself, how excellent
foever, is, with the right Praltice of Painting, brought into Diffrace,
and flighted by other Nations; fince we fcarce fee  beautiful Hall or
fine Apartment of any Coll, that is not fet out with Pictures of Beg=
gars, Obfcenities,  Genera-Stall, Tobacco fmoakers, Fidlers, :nafty
Children ealing Nature, and other Things more filchy. Who can. en-
tertain his Friend or  Perfon of Repute in an Apartment lying thus
in litter, or where  Child is bawling, or wiping clean! We grant,
that thefe Things are only reprefented in Picture: But is not the Art
of Painting an lmitation of the Life; which can either please or teatbs
If then we make fuch Things like the Life, they mulf needs raife an
Averfion. They are therefore too low and unbecoming Subjects for
Ornament, especially for People of Fathion, whole Conceptions ought
to furpats the Vulgar. We admit indeed that all this is rt, or at
leaft called fo, when the Life is thereby naturally expreft; but how
much the beautiful Life, skilfully handled, differs from the defellive
Life of modern Painters, let the Curious determine. Iis certain that
Men (and Beafts too) have each  particular and different inclinagion to
particular Things; whereby they love whats agreeable to their Na-
tures, the one good, the other bad, becaute (as some pretend) they
are governed and influenced by certain Conflellations happening at their
Births: This at leaft we know, that one Man inclines to Hupting, and
?

No:  Count
The Followers of Bambeccis,  celchrated Pringer of mean Subjetts


Of Things Antigus and Midern. Book  Country-life; another, to War, Strife and Contention; another to
Merchandife and Deceir; this, to Politicks and great Things; that, to
Pieatures, CEc. So that in each we difcover what his Nature and Paffion
i prone to.
But let us refielt on the two Arts, Noble and Ignoble; or Antique
and Ardern, and fee how much they differ both in Objects and Execu
tion. The Antique is unlimited, that is, it can handle fylery, facred as
well as profane, Fables and Emblems both moral and (piritual; un
der which three Heads it comprehends, all that ever was, is, and shall
be; the pr present and to come; and that, after an excellent Manner,
which nover afters, but remains always the same: The modern, contrari-
 is so far from being free, that it is limited within certain narrow
Beands; and is of small Power; for it may or can represent no more than
whit is prejent, and that too in  Manner which is always changing:
What is pal anl to come is without its Power; as alfe Hiftories, Fables and
Emblems, as well paetical and philesephic as moral. Hence we may judge
what the modern Art of Painring is, and why it cannot be called noble;
much less have any Harmony with the antigse.  could affign more
Caufes for this Dilunion, but shall at prefent omit them for two Rea-
fons; firff, becaute Mens Judgments are to various; and each argues
according to his Paffions and Inclinations, in Proportion as he likes or
diffifes  Thing: Secondly (which is the principal) that  may not be
thought to raile any Sufpicions of Partiality or Prepoffeffion. But why
should  refirain my Thoughts! Ler me (peak plain in Spire of others;
 fay then, that altho' modern Things feem to have some Prettiness,
yet they are only to be efteemed as Diversions of the Art.  moreover
Mmaintain, that fuch Painters, as never produce more than one Choice
of Subjects, may truely be ranked among Tradefmen; fince fuch Re-
prefentations cannot be called an Exercile of the Mind, but an han-
dycraft Trade.
By fuxh Remarks as thefe, we may fufficiently perceive, that from
Apprebension, Knowledge and Judgment (pring ine Luttre and Elevaii
on of the antique Art of Painting; and contrarily that Ignorance, Weg-
hgence and Self-will debale and fubjelt the modern: So that the Ancients
have not improperly placed Mlinervy by the one, and Midas by the
other; intimating by the former, Skill in the Art, Prattice, Careful-
ness and an beavenly Talent; and by the latter, Imprudence, blind Leal,
worldly Deferts and Hindrances.
But if any one would perhaps examine, whether there be not 
Mcars to make the Modern noble, as well as the Antique, that they
might both march together, they would find it to be Labour in vain;
Since


 Things ntique and Modern.
Chap. .
fince Defects once got fooring are not ealily remedied: But further,
we often hear with Wonder, that Painters perfuade one another thaty.
in handling  Subject, is enough to follow Nacure, tho' the be defec
tive; as crooked, lame, (quint ey’, or blind; and that when the is imis
cated with  delicate Pencil, that is fufficient; and fuch is their Zeal and
extraordinary Pains, that one paints for that end the Air of his Wife,
tho' ever to ugly, with all her Freckles and Pimples very exactly;
whereby the Agreeableness of  beautiful WomansFace is quite loft: An-
other chules his clownith unmannerly Maid-fervant for his Model, and
makes her  Lady in  Saloon: Another will pix  Lords Dress on
 School-boy, or his own Son, tho' continually froaking his Hair be-
hind his Ears, foratching his Head, or having  down lookf thinking
it fufficient to have followed Nature, without Regard to Grase,, which

ought to be reprefented; or having recourfe to fine Plailler-facea;
which are to be had in Abundance.
The beautiful and well -compoted Airs in  Picture of many or few
Figures, have  great Effet on the Minds of the Knowing; of which
the Ancients were thoroughly fenlible; for in the moft perfelt Bodks
they made the Face chieffy to excel in Beauty and Agreeableness. Na
one of Judgment will deny, that  beautiful and well carriaged Wo
man has fuch an Afcendant as moft effedually to move her Beholdorg
in two different Manners, and by two contrary Paltions; under Misfor=
tune or in raging Pain, the will pierce  Mans Heart, and move him
to Compaffion; and when the entertains us on any joyful Occafion,
with Singing or Laughing, the will at once delight us:  clowniff
Woman contrarily, will not produce any fuch liffects; for her Behold
ers, thro' her Unmannerlinels and fimple Behaviour, defpife her Mirth,
and mock her ridiculous Sorrow.
What great Defeet do we not fill find in modern Painters, when they
ufe, or rather abufe, the Life; not doing like thole, who being accut
tomed to  pobter Manner, view the Lite with Knowledge and Judg-
ment, that is, not as it ordinarily appears, but as it ought to be, in its
greateff Perfection: Whereas the others, blinded by Cultom, havg no
tuch Nicery; becaute they imitate the Life just, as they fee it, wiifiont
any Difference: We even fee them make it, more deformed than Na-
ture ever produces; for the more mit fhapen Faces Bambeccie,, Offace,
Browwer, Melfer and many others made, the more they were efteemd
by Ignorants: By which fow Choiges we can: eafily judge,, that they
were Strangers to Beaury, and Admifers of Deformity: However tis
an infallible Rule, that daily Cultom and Converte with People, like
Olir.
  Things Antique and Modern. Book III.
ourfelves, contribute mish to it. Thus Deformity and Vice are pre-
ferred to Vircue, and what should be thunn’ fought; whereas he who
is fentible of Virrue will always endeavour to elcape Error.
CH AP. II. Method for reprefenting what is City-like, or elegant
Modern.

HE continual Changes in worldly Things afford us pleatiful
Matter for modern Manner without recourte to Hiftory, Fables
or Emblems; even to much as to be endless; as may be gather
of from the Affemblies for publick Worhip, Pleadings in Courts,
Plays, Family-occurrences, and the like: All which we perceive to
be either majeftic, amorous, forrowful, or otherwife. Tbose Things,
how different soover, can be represented in the antique Manner as well as
in the modera, provided each keep its Quality; as  have already intimat-
ed, and shall further infifl in the fublequent Examples; which can be
handled in both Manners alike natural and proper, without either' ber-
rowing any thing from the other but the Subjett. This  think worthy
of Remark; and the rather, fince, to my Knowledge, no Auchor,
treating of Things Antique and Modern, has faid any thing touching
It
Fra. Afieris has not only curioutly followed his Mafter Gerard Doy,
in the elegant modern Manner, but is, in some Things, his Superior;
and the rare Pousin, and Raphael, Prince of the Italian Painters, ex-
sell’ in the Antique: Let us then follow their Examples in what is
moft agreeable to our Guftos; and tho' the latter far exceed the for
mer in Nobleness, iis however more commendable, to be like  good
Mieris in the modern Manner, than  bad Raphael in the antique. Tho
 remember to have feen  Picture of old Afieris, which, as often as
 think of it, furprifes me; it was an halflength Figure, about the
Bigaets of the Palm of the Hand, reprefenting the Art of Painting,
holding  Vizor in her Hand; its Air, Headactire, Dress and Furm
ture to very beautiful and truly antique, that  never faw the like done
by any other medern Mafter, how skilful foever. Whence it appears,
how rare it is for  modern Mafter to give into the Antigse.
Let us now reprefent the Cale of Parents permitting their Children
to take some Diversions in Barbing:  Delign which can be as well ex-
eratedin the Antigue as the modern Manner.. The Bagnio: comes for-
ward


Chap.  Things Antique and Modern.
 in the Piece, having  Defcent into it of two Steps: The Boys,
from  to  Vears old, about the Water and in it, are naked: 
Daughter, of  Vears of Age, is feen with  fine white Linnen
Cloth over her Body, in order to cover what Modefty conceals, and as
is cultomary on fuch Occafions; neverthelels her Arms and Part of her
Legs are bare; the is coming up the Steps on the left Side: One of
the aforelaid Boys holds her falt by  Flappet of the wet Cloth, in or-
der to prevent her going up: Further behind, near  Bed, the eldeff
Daughter, about  Vears old, appears almoft unthified; and near
her,  Maid-fervant to put the Clotk about her: The Father we repre-
fent, dreft either in his Cloaths, or  Japan Night-gown, flandingon
the Brink of the Bagaio, and laughing at the Boys who are in it, and
playing their Tricks: One of them is flanding with his left Leg on the
Steps, and with the other Foor juft touches the Water; the joungeff Boy
lies on his Belly excended on the lowermolt Step, plathing with his
Hands in the Water; the Cloth of the Daughter, who is flepping out
of the Bagnio, dropping wer, flicks to clofe to her Body, that the Naked
nets of the Members appear frantparently through it: The Mother all
this while is buty in ferving fome Sweet -meats on  Table covered
with  Napkin, near which,  Child, of  orz Years of Age, is fitting
in  Chair in his Shirt; to whom the offers  Macaroon. Somewhat
further are feen filk Gowns, Petticoats, velvet Scarves, Hoods, Coc.
hangingon Pins: On  Table are lying pearl Neck-laces, Bracelets and
other Irinkets: In fine, the whole Difpolition is moft orderly, natural
and beautiful. As for the Boys Cloaths, to wit, Coats, Hats, Breech-
es, Stockings, Shoes, Coc. they lie on the Brink of the Bagnio.
Now  refer it to the judicious Reader, whether the Daughter,
who, on the lefe Side, is flepping out of the Bagnio, ought not, not-
withflanding her being covered with the Cloth, to be reprefenced
beautiful and Chapeable in her Arms, Legs, Hands and Feet, nay, 
ven her Body alfo, to faras the Nakedne' appears thro' the wer Cloth?
Her Modefty appears evidently by her bathful Look: What  Carriage
thew the Feet and whole Body, while the endeavours to cover the
Parts which Modefty conceals! And how modeftly does the flep up, in
Read of expoting thofe Parts by  wanton Gate! Iask further, whe
ther the Boy, who is slopping her by the Flapper of the Cloth, ought
to be less beautiful and well-made than the Father in the flowered  Gown? The Boy the fame, who lies extended on his Belly; in
whom mult appear innocence and Childifhness: The eldelf Daughter in
her Bloom, well defcended and virtuoully educated. To whom shall we
liken


Of Things Antique and Modern. Book III.
 her? Whence muft we ferch her Beauty ? And whom must we
ale for  Model?  vulgar Perfon, or one of  better Appearance
Even this latter would be infufficient for the Purpofe, if not well edu-
cated and fine carriaged; becaute Beauty without Grace looks mishapen
and fiff. This Virgn then, who is, except in her Feet, quite naked,
ought principally to be painted as beautiful and agreeable as  Grecian
Jenus;  mean not,  wanton one, but an  Heavenly one, . .  vir-
tuons one; for as much as the Soul differs from the Body, and the Bo-
dy from the Dress, does Nobility from Commonalty, Virtue from De-
feel. If any one ask, where he shall find thofe Beauties;  refer him
in the firft Place, to the Books which treat of perfect Proportion;
wherein true Grace coniits Whilft he is findious in thofe, he ought
to have the belt Plaitter figures before him, in order to exercife his
Underflanding, and thereby acquire  folid Judgment. If it be again
objected, that the Plailler is not equal to living Nature,  own it; for
 mean not, that the Arriff should paint Flefh-colour after them, but
get  perfelt Idea of their  Beauty, Grace and Agreeableness, boch

general and particular; whence Perfection fprings; for the Colouring is
evident, and eafy enough to be found in the Lite, as  could prove in
leveral Inflances of fome ordinary Painters who coloured well ; who,
before they had made much Prooress in the Art, were cried up for
great Men, and ret, having any Thing extraordinary to do, were not
able to sketch well an Head, Hand or Foor.
The modern Puinting can therefore not be accounted Art, when Nu-
tare is simply followed; which is  meer imperfect imitation or defec
are aping her. Even, were  Thing reprefented ever fonatural, well
defigned and properly ordered; the Condition, Manners and Cultom
of the Country well obferved, and the Colouring moft exact, yet the
Knowing will not think it artful : But when Narure is corretted and
improved by  judicious Mafter, and the aforefaid Qualities joined to
it, the Painting muft then be noble and perfect.
 fay therefore, with respect to the Naked, whether of Man, Wo
man or Child, that when tis not exhibited moft beautifully, or in its
due Proportion, the modern Painting cannot deferve the Name of Art;
and with good Reafon, fince this is the only Method whereby to make

rofe two alike Sinters accord.
Jan Dis, never enough to be commended, gained Excellence in the
rigue as well as the modern Manner, by strictly following the afore-
said three Graces in both; and he thereby acquired the Epithet of
Match
FeKEsErek:.
 The Tbree Grates.


Chap.  Of Things Antique and Modern.
 Let us therefore follow his noble Example in what made
him to tamous; fince he is the firft who carried the modern Manner fo
high as to gain it the Name of Art. Whence we may eafily conclude,
what great Difference there mult be, between  Painter who makes
the modern or defeitive Life, his Study and Excellence, and one who
follows the Antique, or makes  therough Inquiry into every thing that'
beautiful and perfelt. The Difference is even to great in every relpett,
that  cannot but wonder at it; especially, when  confider how much
greater the Number of the former Sort is, and how they daily increafe.
Twonder,  fay, that now -days Virtue is to little heeded; Virtue,
which took its Rife from Heaven, is now, as formerly the godly &
Affrea did, flown thither again; and Vice, contrarily, which fprung
forch of  Erebys and black Earth, keeps its Station. But it cannot
be otherwife, fince blind Love alone rules, and an (Antero; is no more.
The Reafon of to great  Difference can be attribured to nothing elfe,
but the different inclinations of Painters, to Objects agreeing with their
Tempers.
They, who content themfelves with following defective Life, will
never produce any thing perfect, or deferve the Name of artful Maf
ters; becaule not knowing, or not caring to know, what is beft, they can-
not to much as frive at it: To which add, another Mischief; they
more capity judge of what is bad than good; as  shall explain myfelf in
the following Exampie.
 yeing Man as  Painter with Pallet and Pencils, attended by Zeal,.
is led, by  blind Cupid, to the Figure of Nature, whole Face is co
vered by Vulcan with  Veil. The Sunbehind the young Man enlight-
cas the aforefaid whole Figure. Mercury, on  Cloud, with his Caducent
in one Hand, holds  Star over the Artill' Head in the other. The
Meaning is this.
Nature
Affres, or Werightnets; Sincerity, Love and all heavenly Virtues are underlood by her. She was
the Daughter of one of the Titans and Tbemis, according to Hefiod: Bur Ovif calls her, the Daugh-
ter of Tapiler and Benis. She came from Heaven in the Golden Age, and when Vice and Cor-
suption got fooring, ffew thither again.
 By him is underftood Hell and the Nigbs. Some name him the God of Helf, and fay he was
mirried to the Night. Alio an Hellip River, of which Virgil fings thas, in his Encids.
itliuserge
Venimsn E magnes Erebi tranavimas Amners.
From Eredas and the Highs are brought farth Lies, Envy, Subbornness, Peverry, Sickncts, (Gc.
Coutier-loss, Son of Veaus, and younger Brother to Capid. See Ssidas, Paufanias, Perpbiry,
 Things Antique and Modern. Book III.
Notare is the Painter' Object; the Jan reprefents Knowledge; Vak
can, the gress Part of the fir, or Earthiness; and Mercury, inevi-
Table Fate. The rell explains irfelf. Thus much touching  modern
Painter.
Another Emblem may have this Difference, that intlead of Vulcans
covering the upper Part of Nature with  Veil, Pallar is taking it
off; and Aateres introduced inflead of Cupid. The Meaning is, that
Judgment by Pallx; (which fignifies Wifdem) governs the upper and
moff perfelt Part; and difcovers to the Soulall it needs to know; when
Asteres fignifying Lose to Virtae, is lerding the Painter, attended by
Leal, to it.
But to (peak Hill plainer, we shall fubjoin  third Ordonnance.
We reprefent two roung Men of equal Age; the one flanding on the
Ground before the Figure of Natare; and the other, on one Side, or
behind him, tomewhar raifed on  Stone or Step: By the former is
placed Tylax, and by the lawer, Pallas; the one figaitving Defeft or
Farthy Parts, and the other, the Soul or Perseltion. Let the Figure
of Astare be enlightened by the Sun, and caufe triangular Rays to
proceed from thole young Men' Eyes upon it; the Rays of the for-
mer extend from the Feet up to the middle; and thofe of the latter take
the while Figare. Let us now judge, when the Sun reprefents Know-
fedge, which of the two young Men can fee and comprehend the mgt,
and is moff perfect, he who views the Figure but half-way, of he who
examines it up to the upper Parts. Whence we may learn, that the
Mind and Judgment are beyond the Hand and Praffice, which,
withourt Therry, are of no Worth. Tis Art to produce something which
we bove not in Sight; but mere copying and aping to imitate what we have
before us.
But let us go further, and confider, whether the foregoing Exam-
ple cannot be applied to the Cale of the Lovers of the antique and mo-
dern Manner.
We suppofe then two Lovers inflead of two Painters, and take the
Art of Painting, inlead of Natare, for the Objett; which they, like
the others, view, the one incirely, the other but half way: Thus he,
who comprehends the Figure throughout, knows moft, and has the
beff Knowledge, and is confequently  greater Lover; when the other
is obferved as  Lover of low Things, and ignorant of the more noble:
Of this latter Sort we hnd the greateit Number in our Countries.
Iis  certain Policion, that some Men, tho' hinder’ in their Vouth
by an ordinary Education, from attaining fublime Thoughts and great
Things,


Of Things Antique and Modern.
  can alter in Time by Art and Exercife; even conquer their
innate Difpolitions, and fir themfelves for noble and excellent Things;
to that we need not wonder, that Demofthenes was not more eloquent.
than Demades, who, tho' he feemed as if Nature had not beflowed on
hrim either Tongue or Speech, yet became fo eloquent, that his fin-
gular Example thews, theres nothing impoffible to Art; nay, few De-
fells, which, like Demades, Diligence and Labour cannot overcome.
Do we not read of Heraclides, that he became  Philofepher in (pice
of Narure and Education? Why does Socrates, not prone to Virtue,
become virtuous? Wherefore we need not wonder, that many great
Men have obtained great Endowments, tho' naturally unfit for them:
And from hence we may infer, that Art and Exercife are of more
Worth than the Productions of Nacure.
 have not yet made mention of feveral Men of mean Extraction,
who, tho' they spent many Vears with Pleafure and Affiduity, in low
Imployments, yet afterwards arrived, to general Surprize, at the Top
of their Art; as is faid of Polydere de Caravaggie, who, in Raphaels
Time, having been an Hod-man to his  Vear, became afterwards
 great Mafter: The fame was the Cafe of Quintin Marfys, who hav-
ing been, to his  Vear,  Smith, gave into Painting, and much
turpalfed his Cotemporaries. Martin Hemskirk,  Country-man' Son,
Andrea Mantegna,  Cow-herd, and many others of mean Birth allo
went great Lengths in the Art.
Was not, among the ancient Philolophers, Protagoras,  Country-
man' Son; Pythagoras, an Engravers; Ipbicrates, General of the   Taylors; the Orator Demades, aforefaid,  Sailors, and
the Mantuan Maro, Prince of the Latin Poets, the Son of  Potter?
Even the Muses themfelves were poor; their Nobility (prung not from
their Birth but their Science.
We could give many more loflances of this Kind; but, not to feem
redious, shall proceed to
CH AP. III. The Nature of City-like Subjerts; which daily aford
plentiful Matter for  modern Painter.
 the Genius of Arcifts differs, one leading to the fublime Man
£ ner, another to the common, even to the meanelt; to we find
No.  
OuT-


 Of Things Antique and Modern. Rook III.
ourfelves obliged, to treat of all Parrs of the Art, in order to be alike
ufeful to every one.
We have already obferved, that there are three Sorts of People,
the courtly or high; the Citizen or Commonalty; and the mean of
poor State; the frft is fpoken of in the foregoing Book of Ordennance;
and the second shall now follow.
We suppofe, that every Arriftendeavours to excel in his Choice of
Subjelt; thar some feek Fame and Money; others, Money and Fame;
others, Money only: At the same Time we think it no less artful, to
reprefent  felt than  ferious Matter;  Countryman, than  Courtier,
or an Ass, than an Horfe, fince either requires good Skill to express it
properly.
Altho’ theres  great Difference between Citizens and Courtiers,
yet the one as well as the other may excel alike in Beauty and Good
nets; Tis Grandeur alone that makes the Diftinction between the City
and Court; for Luxury and Pride are peculiar to the latter, but Mo-
defty and Temperance to the former.
Having premited this, it will be eaty to exhibit plainly, the fur-
ther Circumftances, as Occafion shall call for them; firft obferving,

that as the City-life is peculiar to us, with its daily Occurrences of Af
temblies, Paltimes, Family-affairs, and other Particulars, mentioned
in the preceding Chapter; to tis the more eafy for  Painter to make
fuch Subjects his Practice; especially one who inds himfelf infufficient
for the grand Tafle, for whole Sake we give the following Schemes.
And firtt an
Example of Intreating and Refufing.
Two Virgins are feen at  Table, drinking Tea; the youngell is in
her Within door Dress, and the other,  Friend paying her  Vilt;
each has her Cup and Saucer; that of the youngeff flands filled before
her, and the has the Tea-pot in her Hand, in order to fill the Cup of
the other, who, having turned it down, fets it on the Table; the is
friendly intreated by the other to drink another Dith; as if the faid,-
Pray, dear Ifabell one Diss more; but  Servant entring the Room
to call her away, the refuses it, with her Hand on the Tea-pot, to hin
der filling, feeming to tay, —  thank you beartily; fill no more.
Thefe two Paffions caute two contrary Motions in the whole Body,
Hands, Feet and Face. The Mother, who is letting in the Servant
with his Hat under his Arm, holds the Door half open, and is thew-
ing



Of Things Antique and Modern.
Chap.  him his Miftrels; the opening of the Door difcovers  Sledge,
the ufual Carriage of Holland) with which he is come to fetch her.
Now, in order to express more plainly this Rifing from the Tea-ta-
ble, we may place another Virgin at it, near Nabel; who, looking to
wards the Door, feems to rife and fet down her Cup: The Man we
may make approaching his Miflrels, with  Letter in his Hand; and the
Mother, fanding at the Door, and looking:  little Boy may allo
properly fland at the Table, who, ftealing  bir of Sugar out of the
Box, is watching his Sifter, to fee whether the obferves it. Thus the
Matter may fland with respect to thefe two Virgins.
Have we  mind to reprefent the fame. Occurrence by Gentlemen, we
ought only to change the Tea into Wine; the Tea-pot into  Bottle;
the Cups into Glaffes; the Tea-equipage of Ketele, Chafing-dith, Cec.
into  Ciftern, according to the Seafon; and the Mother into  menial
Servant; the Apartment, if in the Summer-feafon, to be in  Gar-
den houle; and, in the Winter,  Chamber, with an Entertainment,
of Collation.
Such Subjects as thefe are very commendable, and may be nobly
difpoted, to the Credit of an Artift: But he mult avoid bandling Cot-
tages, Brandy-shops, Ale houfes, Bawdy-houses, Corps-de-Gard, and the
like.
We shall exhibit another Example of daily Occurrence; whereby
appear more Passions; in order to thew, that they muft not be wanting
in fuch Reprefentations.
EX AMPL  II. Of an Accident which happened at  Painters
House.
The Arciff had one Morning  fine Plaifter figure and two Bults
brought home; and fecting them oue of the way on  Cheft of Draw-
ers, and then paying the Figure maker, let him depart:  Boy of   Vears of Age litting near the Drawers, eating  Piece of Bread
and Butter, faw this; who, after he had eaten, and his Father left
the Room, took  Chair, in order to view them near; and thinking
them Play-things, muft needs take them down: but either thro' their
Weight, or the tottering of the Chair, whereon he food, he dropp’
the Figure. On this Noife the Father, apprehentive of what had hap
pened, came down into the Room, and beheld the Misfortune with
Sorrow. The Boy affrighted, looked about for  Corner to hide in;
and at laft run to his Mother, hanging about her Neck, and begging
her
S Of Things Antigue and Moderm Book III.
her to fave him. She, tho' concerned for the Damage yet, defired the
Father to confider the Childs Innocence; upon which, and the Intrea-
ty of his Daughter, who had ruthed into the Room, on hearing the
Outery, he was pacified; ordering the Maid-fervant to gather up the
broken Parts, and to fling them away: After which, he cook the two
Batts in his Arms, and returned to his Room.
Alcho' this Accident be in irfelf of no great Moment, yet it will
furnith Marter enough for  Mode painter, as well as the contrary, to
fill three Cloths with; being full of efficacious Paffions, Elegance and
Variety; and as rich in Subject as if it were  Filtion.
Ir cant be denied, that this Subjelt, tho' no Hiffory, is of an biffo-
rical Astare, and requires as much Pains as the handling some Filti-
ons out of Homer or Firgil. We grant indeed, that the Nature of it
gives us Liberry of adding what Ornaments, or taking away what hea-
vy By-works we pleafe, lince we are Mafters of our own Inventions,
and can manage our Thoughts as we think fit, till we have brought
them to our Liking; which is  Licence not allowable in other Kinds
of Hictory; neverthelets when we have  mind to exhibit an Acci
dent like the preceding, we mult confine curselves to all the Particulars
of ir, tho' no Hiltory; becaute by abaring or leaving out any of them,
 would make no impreftion on us. This Example then, tho' only
an incroduction to fuch Sort of Compofitions, yet requires  punctual
imitation; and we get in time richer in thofe inventions, by daily Oc-
currences. They mult even be pleafant to Painters in the grand Man-
ner, fince they recreace the Mind, require no Reading, and may in
great Numbers be met with at leifure Times. Princes often difquife in
mean Habits for their Diverfion; and Cirizens and the Commonal
ty in rich ones for the fame Reafon; becaufe any Sort of Variety
tickles; and each feeks his Pleafure foreign to his ufual Way of
Living.
But tis more eaty for  Citizen to play  Cirizen' than any other
Part; and for  Painter to keep to the Management of what he daily
meets with, than any Thingelfe; fince the Mind is like  glats Ball hung
up in the middle of  Room, which receives all the Objects prefent,
and retains the impreftion of them. Thus Rubens and Van Dyt, by
daily converting with the Great at Court, were fixing their Thoughts on
what is fublime and lofty in the rt; Fardeans and Rembrandt again,
on what is City-like; and Bambocrie and Broswer, on what is moft vul
gar and mean Thus each in his Way, according to his Converfation
with People like himfelf.
  
The


Of Things Antique and Medern.
  following Accident is as remarkable as the former.
Ordennance.
This Compofition exhibits  Mother, holding  Looking -glats before
her Child. This Woman fits upright, with her Back moftly againtt
the Light, clofe to  Window, which runs to the Point of Sight, and is
but half feen; thro' which Window the receives her Light  lutle front-
ing; her Drets is  long dark blue upper Garment, and her under one,
having long Sleeves, is light gold Colour with purple Reflexions; with
her lefr Hand the holds the Looking-glats upright in her Lap; looks at
the Child with  Smile, yet her Mouth fomewhat open; her Head, in
Profile, inclines  little to the left Shoulder; herright Iland behind her
reltson  small round Table, whereon lies an open Book,  Frame with
Needle-work, and some Bobbins of Silk. The Child standing before
the Glals, with  Fool' Cap on his Head, holds an Apple againtt his
left Breaft in his right Hand; and has his lefe Arm with  double Fift
up to his Ear; and whimpering threatens to beat the Glass; he turns to
the left, looking angrily at it, and draws back with his right Leg: His
Coat, which is white, is loope on the right Shoulder; and his left Breaft
bare; hes girt with  Rofe-colour Girdle.  Maid-fervant, flanding
behind him, is seen froncing, with her Backfide flanding out fomewhat
to the lefe; her Garment is greyith Violet, with  white Cloth about
her Body; in her left Hand the holds  Key againtt her Breaft, and un-
der her Arm the has  Dulting bruth; her right Hand reftson her Mif
tress' Arm, and with her Head fiung back towards her left Side, laughs
to heartily as to difcover her Teeth; her Hair is tied under  Cap, ex-
cept  black twifted Lock coming over her Bofom on the left Side; her
Smock-fleeves are turned up to her Elbows. Clofe behind the Miflress
hangs  light grey Curtain, moftly shaded by  Pier of the Walling be-
tween the Windows; on which, the Maid gives  large Ground-thade,
which flings off the Child. On the left Side of the Compofition  Door
is seen half open. Forward appears  Cuthion on  Cricket, whereon
lies  Tabby-cat; and by it, some little Flowers or  withered Chaplet.
and  Timbrel.
Now, with respect to this Reprefentation, confider the following.
OF


Of Things Antique and Modern. Book III.
 is fomething more to be remarked than the innocence of the
Child; he grows angry at feeing himfelf in the Glass, imagining, that
 Child, becaute his own Dress is unknown to him, is come to
fright him, and get his Apple. The chief Delign of the Ordonnance
is, to exprets exictly the proper Pallims of each Figure, according
to its Narure and Quality; which not only effectually appear by the
Poftures, but allo by the Dreffes affigned them, and their Colours;
to wir. in the Child, fnnocence; in the Maid, Folly; in the Mother,
Moderation.
Alcho’' this Compoition be no more  Fact than the former, yet it
affects our Paftions as  Truth; and becaufe the Dreffes do not quite
chime in with the Mode, it may, if well painted and executed, hang
better near an astique Hiftory or Fable, than one of  Company of
Gentlemen and Ladies, whoferich Dreffes thine with Gold and Silver.
Moreover the Dreffes varying from the prefent Mode, the Picture will
maintain  Decorum, which will not abace in  Thouland Vears, if the
Circumitances of the By-works be well obferved. By incroducing 
Timbrel inflead of Marbles, Nickers or Cockals, and giving the Maid
 Dulting-bruth inflead of  Broom or Mop, and placing by the Miftress
an open Book of  Frame of Needle-work, instead of  Spinning-wheel
or Pudding-pan, we shall perceive the childith Simplicity of the firtt,
the Servicude of the second, and the Tutelage of Command of the
third The very Carlying by the dead Flowers on the Cricket, inti-
mates childith Play, and  Fondnets to fcatter all Things about the
Room
If the Arriff find no Taffe in reprefenting Things in the antique Way,
and yet think the Modern too mean, fuch an one may very commend.
ably imploy himself in handling fuch Subjects as the following.
Pifture of Virtue.
She appears fitting compofedly before  large Looking-glats, the
Frame whereof is carved and gilt, and adorned with Montters; the
views herfelf in it, holding  rounded Serpent twined with Laurel; her
Aspelt is fedate, her Sway majeftic; and the' accired like  ROMA:
Near her fland fome Children attentively viewing the Frame, and, with
 general Laugh, pointing at the Montters. One of thefe Children
wears


Chav. . Of Things Antique and Modern.
  Fool' Cap; another has  Neft of Birds;  third has  jingling
Iron;  fourth,  Shell of Water, our of which he blows Bubbles
with  Reed; and  fifth is playing with  Puppet; thefe Children are
partly Boys and partly Girls.
The Senfe of this Table is eafy: But if the Curious want further
Scope, let them confider only, for Inftance, in what  good and bad Fa-
mily confifls, and they will find, that there are four Sorts of People:
Namely, in  good Family,  prudent and respected Facher;  careful
and good -natured Mother; obedient Children; and humble and honeff
Servants: The FathergivesLaw; the Mother enforces it to the Chil-
dren; and both they and the Servants obey: Again, the Father pu-
nithes; the Mother reconciles, and the Children love and fear:  good
Father is alfo liberal in the Support of his Family; the careful Mother
manages with Frugality, yet with Honour: All is in Peace and Order,
and Virtue their Aim.
in  bad Family we contrarily fee the Father careless; the Mother
lavith; the Boys wanton; the Girls pert; and the Servants idling and
dithonelt: The Father indolent; the Mother unreafonably indulgent to
the Children; the Girls fancy and proud; the Boys rampant and game
tome; and the Servants carching at what they can lay hold of, thinking
it beft to fith in troubled Waters, and fealt daily at their Mafters Ex-
pence. Again, thereare other Objects in  divided Family; when the
MMan is pious and the Wifea Worldling we fee frequencly wicked Chil-
dren: Contrarily,  worldly-minded Man and  religious Womanoften
have virtuous Children; the Reafon is plain.
If fuch Things as thefe be well oblerved, they furnith abundance
of Matter, and produce an extraordinary Effeltin any Family-occurren-
ces, in what Condition and on what Occafion foever we confider them;
whether in Prosperiry or Adverfity; great and noble, common or in
the mean State; and as well in their Manners and Carriage as their
Dress: And if thefe Things be well executed, whether in the antique or
the modern Taffe, they are each Way commendable Subjects for an
Artiff
CHAP. IV. Continuation of the same.
  Connexion to what precedes touching the two aforefaid Man.
  ners,  shall give some further Thoughts, tho'short of what can
be


Book III.
 Of Things Antique and Modern.
be said of thofe two unlike Sifters, since the Field is fo large, that  could
write  whole Treatife on that Subject only.
Representation of Vanity. Plate XX.
This Ordonnance exhibits an Hall, which receives its Light thro' 
large Window on the right Side: Behind againft the Wall flands  Ta-
ble, on which is  large celedial Globe: Acthe Foor of this Globe lies
an open Book: On the left Side of the Point of Sight is feen, thro' 
Door-way going down with Sreps,  Vifto, with Part of  Fountain;
and on the Side which runs to the Point of Sight feveral Vafes and Bults
of famous Heroes: On the left side of the Apartment is  Clofet 
fended to by two Steps, berween two Hand-rails: In the middle of the
Piece forward, we place  round Table, deck’ with all Sorts of Wo.
mens Furniture, as  Looking glats, Boxes, Coc. At the Window are
feen two Children,  Boy and Cirl; the Boy, with  Shell in his Hand,
is leaning on the Frame of the Window, and blowing Bubblesthro'  Reed
of Pipe; the Girl, who is got on  Footffool, supports herfelf on her
right Hand, and, laughing, points with the other at  fiying Bubble:
Upon which, the Boy looks back, holding the Reed or Pipe with his
rishe Hand in the Shell: On the right side of the hindmolf Table Rands
 Philofopher in Study, with  Finger at his Forehead, and holding 
pair of Compaffes on the Globe in his left Hand: By the Clofet, which
is half open, flands anold Woman looking forwards, with her Head
fidling, and rubbing her Hands: By the further Hand rail of the Steps 
Maid fervant is kneeling, and whiping the faid Rail with  Cloth; having
byher,  Box with Sand,  Pot with Water and  fliff Rubbing-bruth:
The Clofer is full of Place: At the round Table forwards fits  young
Lady, dreffing at the Glats; her Bofom is open, and the is loofely dreft in
fine Linnen and Silk; with her left Hand the is bringing  Right fide
Hair-lockover her Bolom, viewing herfelffide ways, and, with herright
Hand, takinga Pearl-Necklaccour of  Box: The Aparement is of light
Pifin Marble. The Philofopher' Garment is of dark Violet: Thatof
the Boy ar the Wtindow, whire; and of the Girl, blue: The Lady is
in white, and light red Changeable with Blue; and the has  beauti-
ful dark blue Girdle abour her Waift: The old Woman' Garment is
greenith blew, fomewhat faded, and the Sleeves faced with light Vel.
low: The Maidfervant is in light grey, andhas  Pearl-Necklace about
her Neck: By the Steps lie  Pair of Sandals: The, round Table: is

covered


Chip  Things Antique and Modern.
 with  dark green Carpet: The Floor is of Stone and divid
ed into Squares: It may allo be of Wood.
 hallnow, for certain Realons, give the Reader my Thoughts of
the Dilpofition of the Objects in this Ordonnance. Bur firft, he will
much oblige me, if he will pleafe to examine what  have hitherto
said, and thall fay on this Head becaute he will then be enabled to
judge, whether ris impoffible for me, as some imalicioutly report, to
make the Difpolition of an Ordonnance, with the due Actions of the
Figures, and in their proper Places and Colours, according to Rule,
becaute of my want of Sight; for would thefe Men themfelves but
open their Eyes, they would quickly perceive, that Difpolition depends
on politive and certain Reafons.
Firlt  difpofe the Apariment with the immoveable Objects; after thefe,
the Figures; and laftly, the Colourg; whereby  affign Regularity. 
shalls er of the moveable Objefts at the fame time as laffert the por
 Plscesof the Window, Tables and Clbiet.
Now  do not fay, on which Side of the Table either right or left
the Lady is fitting; becaufe tis needlels, and the cannot be difpoted
otherwife than the is; fince the Looking-glats mult be placed againft the
Light; confequently the ought to front the Light, that the may fee her-
felt in the Glass; for how could the thew her Breaft fronting, when the
Face is to be in Profile? And were the to bring the Lock of Hair over her
Bofom with her right Hand, and to put the left on the Table, she would
be without Sway, or good Pofture, and from Head to Foot in Profile.
Let us next confider whether the Pbilesopher could be otherwife dif=
posed than where he is; on the left it can no ways be, for two Reafons. .
Becaute the Globe is on that Side very much in Shade, and therefore
unfit for his Conclations.  Becaule he would then be partly in the
Light, and shew almoff the fame Polture as the Lady, where ver ought
to be an Oppofition. Again, were he fanding before the Table, or
Clobe, then we should nerther fee his Motion, nor his Contemplation;
wherefore no Place fuits him better, or is more proper than where he
Rands: By which, this Advantage alfo accrues, that becaute he now
receives more Shade than Light, the Lady thereby gets more Beauty
and Decornm: He can alfo more commodioutly view the Globe, and
make his Remarks by turning his Body; becaule ofe Side is juft front-
ing the Light, and the other contrary to it.
It may be the fame with the old Weman next the Clolet; fince its im
poffible, that the and the reft of the Figures can be otherwile dispoted
with to much dvatttage and Decorum.
No.  Of Things Antique and Moders. Book III
This Defiga could alfo be well managed in Pountraiture; especially
in  Fumily piece of Man, Wife, Children and  Servant; for we find
daily Occurrences enough agreeing with fuch  Reprefentation.
But to difcourfe clearly on this Compoficion, and to thew, that its
founded on good Reafon, we shall make some further Remarks upon it:
Ifaythen, that it will bear divers increpretations, tho; as will appear
below, they may be brought intoone: The Lady at the Table and the
old Woman at the Clofer both fignify funity; and yet it may poffibly
be faid, that the former may as well be taken for Pride, and the latter
as slanding before the Plate, and, with  finiling Countenance, rubbing
her Hands, naturally exprets Coverousness. The old Man, feen here as
 Philolopher, may confequently lignify Philosephy. But  fay, that
this only teems to be fo; becaute, if the Explanation take that Turn, it
cannot be  compendious Emblem, but  confuled Medley of divers

Things, from which no inference can be drawn.
Therefore tis proper to explain our Thoughts of this Composition
thoroughly, even to the fmallelf Objelts, gradually coming forward from
the greatell Diffance.
The Bullos and Fountain in the Offship, as alfo the Servant clean-
ing the Hand rail, tend altogether to Funity; as the old Man with the
Globe reprefents vain Contemplation; for who can penetrate the Secrets
of God and Narure: The Senfe of the young Lady and old Woman
we have explained before: Wherefore the true Meaning of this Subject
is only to thew, that all is Funity; which yet could not be ablolutely con-
cluded from it, were not the Children there; fince the other Figures
and Objects might be divertly applied, to wit, to Pride, Covetoulness,
Philolophy, oc; and therefore the Children, who imploy themfelves
in blowing Bubbles, are now the Soul of the Work; and without them,
there would be neither  Cornexion nor Conclution: Even each Figure
would have  dittint Signiication, and each call for  diffinet Apart-
ment: And tho' we were minded to exhibit different Paffions into the
fame Picture, yet fomething mutt be appropriated to each of them, in
order to thew irs Meaning: For  Picture is not in the fame Cafe with 
Froncispiece plate, wheren is  general Reprefentation of the whole
Subject of the Book, vis. the feven Wonders, the twelve Months,
C aforefaid Delign is alfo not much unlike  true Hiftory; and
might likewife ferve for  Moral or Emblem: Foreach Figure has its
particularand proper Charalter; Men incline to fudy; Women to ga-

ther Ricnes and Goods; Daughters grow up in Luxury; and mif spend
their


Chip. . Of Things Antique and Medern.
 Times young and innocent Children buty themfelves in Triffes;
to that on the whole, the Conclution muft be, that each Perfon, in what
he inclines to, loves Vunity.
if any one here object, that Affrenemy, Mathematicks and Phileso-
phy are not Vanicies, as being afcribed to wife Men, he mull Know,
that wife Men themfelves are, by  some, accounted Fools; wherefore.
 Pythageras, tho' an Heathen, would not be ftiled wife; but  Friend
and Lover of good Discourfes and Sciences. Knowledge often makes
wife Men prefumptuous, and prevents their confidering; with the Phi
lotopher, that Sciences are Vanity. Thus we lee daily, that the Rich
are haughty and difdainful; the Handfome, proud and voluptuous; tho'
Beauty and Pleafures, like  Morning-ffower, decay with the Evening,
and we may well fay with the Poet, that Voluptuoufness is  Shadow, and
 momentary Delight; and therefore
Peer Creatures
They are, who covet Shadows and tranfient Happiness.
All which Things occur almoft daily; even in one and the same Family;
as we have more largely intimated in the preceding Chapter.
Some perhaps may centure me for incroducing into the aforefaid Ex-
ample fuch  Trifle as  Pair of Sandals, which feem to belong to
the old Woman: But  fay, they are not Trifles, but proper for luch
Women as make Idols of their Houfes, and chule rather to go bare
foot over their Floors than bedaub them, tho' they have their Maids
always at their Elbows with Woollen Cloths to clean after them. But
fince this Satrifice to Neatnels of Houles is here, in Holland, too ob-
vious, we shall urge no further, but, for Peace fake, filently reflect,
Ob! the Vanity of  too spruce Durch Woman: Even the Maid, as depen-
dant on the Miftress, humours her vain Defires; however, fince thofe
serviceable Creatures in their Conditions have likewife fomething, which
thews Vanity,  givethe Servant, in the Example before us, her Corals or
Pearls about her Neck, altho' the were as ugly faced as  Vizard, or like
the Peafants in Latong' Time, when turned into Frogs; for how ordinary
foever thole Women are, they think themfelves handfome, if they have
but  Coral Neck-lace and curled Hair; wherefore tis plain, that fuch
Circumftances are needful, and have, in their Places,  good Effect.
T Sopbiffs termed Wifdom foolith, fcandalous and vile.
 Pyrhrgoras of Sames. He rejeded the Name of syc, which was given him.


 Of Things Antique and Modern. Book III.
As for the Ordonnance of Dreffes in this Example, Mode- painters may
difpole them as they pleafe, agreeable to their Choice:  have on
ly skerch’ them here, to thew, that we may reprefent  Vanitas as well
in the astigse Manner as in the common Way of Mode-painters.
CHAP. . Of Dreses.
 need not doubt, whether the Art of Painting were, or
will be, otherwife, than Tis at this Time, with respelt to its
different Choices; becaute from the Beginning, there were
Mele-painters; and as each Climate has its particular Culloms in Dref
fing, to each Nation follows irs own Fathion; whence it appears, that
Ancrint;, as well as nox, Men were of Opinion, that their own was
the beft, without giving any Reaton for it. The Eaffern Nations have
their particular Dress; and the Northern, theirs: Thefe laft prefer
Cloth, Wool and Furs before the tinell and thinnelf Silks of the Eaft;
and thus it fares with all other Dreffis. Each Vation,  lay, whether
Ialians, Spaniards, French, &cc. cheriffes its own Mode; wherefore
tis no Wonder, that Painters follow thofe, which beft fuit their Choice:
neverthelets the Cafe of Art is, in this Particular, like that of Reli-
gion; There is but one trae; the reff are Setts; to that the Dress which
is the met contant, and remains always the same, is alfo the bet. Never-
thelets we leave each Nation to its own Choice.
That the mofers Paintings vary from time to time in Goodness,
and are continually decreating in that Respect, is not to be doubted;
fince we have daily Inftances of it in many, which are full of Mistakes:
But let me ask, whether the Tassun Order, which is the moft fimple
and frong, do not require  good Architelt as well as the Corintbian,
or beft.
The Mode- paintings agree in all Parts with the antique Subjects,
in relation to Art, to wir, in Delign, Difposition, Colouring, Light
and Shade, and By-ornaments, Cer.
An ingenious Alode-painter ought to take Care, not to meddle with
the Ansque, or to mingle the one with the other; for that would be
an unpardonable Miftake; fince he may be fufficiently furnished with
modern Afatter for his Study. Is it not great Folly to introduce foreiga
Words into  Tongue, which is of ittelf copious enough! Why are
the learned Hoeft and Hurgess to famous! Is it not becaufe of the
Force


Of Things Antique and Modern.   and Purity of their Stile? Especially that of Vondel, who there-
fore is jultly called the Dutch Virgil.
We fee daily, how imperfelt and defeltive the Fassion is; each Day
creates an Alteration, and each Mode we think bett, if it get but ge-
neral Approbacion; as may beproved, if we confider, how ridiculous
our Fore-fathers Habits feem in our Eyes, and confequently how much
he would be mocked, who should appear in one of his great Grandfa-
thers; and would he not be thought  Madman? The Cafe is the same,
with refoelt to the old Reprefentation of Dresfes, with their fliff dou
ble Rults, clofe-wailted and pinkt Doublets, Coc. Does any thing
teem more odd to us? And are not fuch old Paintings, tho' well han-
died, much lighted? And what Reafon have we to think, that the
prefent Alode will better pleafe our Succeffors, when we ourfelves even
diflike that of the Vear pall.
Thofe who take to such  Choice are not qualified to handle any
Hiffory of Antiquity: How ridiculous would it be, to dress Qucen Ep-
ber in  ftiff-bodied Gown, bedeck’ with Ribbons,  Ruff about her
Neck,  wide and quilred Petticoat, lacd Ruffies fetting clofe at the
Hands, and  Point of Spain Head dress, inflead of  Diadem, and eve-
ry thing elfe antwerable; and with her, King Abasuerus firting in 
Spanish Leather Chair, with  narrow crowned Hat on his Head, 
Ruff about his Neck,  short Doublet with long Sleeves, and over ir,
 Chort Cloak lined with Fur, wide Breeches with Knee-Knots, canni-
oned Stockings, Rofes in his Shoes,  Spanip Dagger by his Side,
Gloves in his Hand, Coc. and in the Offckip, Hamon in  red Waift
coat with filver Buttons, and  Linnen Pair of Drawers, slanding on
the Ladder with the Hangman, and  Francifian Fryar at the Foot of
it, holding up  Crucifix to him! Would not this be  fine Ordon-
nance! And yet fuch Things happen.
Now if it be asked, whether the Mode-painters, who paint Mar-
Rets, Kirchens, and the like, are not to be reckoned in the Number of
Figure-painters;  fay, they are; to far as they keep to such Subjects;
nay, were they to handle fillitious Stories, or even Parables, which
aretied to no Time; as, of Lazarus and the rich Mun; of the Publi-
can; Prodigal Son, and the like; or any daily Occurrence; fince fuch
Reprefentations are the more affecting, as they thew foreign Dreffes;
and foreign Modes being  Rarity, are not to foon ditliked as our own.
But fuch Painters mutt not meddle with Scriptural Falts, or the
Stories of Ovid, Virgil, and others, which are tred to Time, as  have
before intimated
Vet


 Things Antique and Modern.
Book III.
Vet fuch is the unaccountable Rafhness of some, that they dare re-
prefent  Sophonisbs incirely in the prefent Mode; Velvet Gown, white
Sattin Petticoar trim’ with gold Laces, laced Ruffies, an Attire of falfe
Hair on her Head, whice Slippers, and in an Apartment hung with
gill Leather, with  Fire in it; and the Floor of Wood, wherein the
Grain and Knots are nicely obterved; the Room furnished with Pluth
Chairs, fringed and bralsnailed; over the Chimney, large Ching
Dithes; and againl the Hangings, Shelves with Tea-furniture;  Par-
fot in  Copper Cage, Coc. Belides  Black feen coming, to prefenther
 modem Gold Cup, or  cut Chryffal Drinking-glats on  silver Salver;
he is in  Livery, trim’ with Guimp-laces and  Shoulder-knot: Her
coflly Bed, even the Pewter or Lilver Chamberpot and Floor-matting
are not forgot.
Lucretis and Dids they treat in the fame Manner; againtt the Wall
of the Apartment of the latter, hangs  Plan of the dditions to Am.
Ferdum, printed for Atlard on the Dum.
Thefe Arcifts would feemingly imprets the Hiftories of Plutarch
Lirz, Taortasand fuch Authors, on the Minds of the People, and yet do
it as ridiculoutly as the Poer, who, in order to make his Verfes Known
to the World, laid them on  River running up to  Town, imagining
that on the Papers (wimming thither, it would be taken up and read,
and his Reputation thereby (pread; but growing wer, it funk, and
happened to be taken up by  Mudman, and flung, with the Mud,
into his Barge. Thus the Poet was difappointed.
Ve Artits then, who are willing to improve, weigh well what you
are abour; keep to the Edges of the Water, that, if ye cannot fivim,
ye may not drown; fince he who is fearlets of Danger, often perifhes in
 The Goodnets of  Knife lies not in  Silver Handle; or that of
ine, in  Gold Cup: Be informed in Truth; fince your Work, tho'
ever to neatly handled, will not plead your Caule to Advantage with-
out it.
Two Painters meeting on  Time, happened to have Words about
Precedence; Antique, who thought himfelf the wifeft, would take the
upper Hand of Afcfo, without more Ceremony; but Mode, who infift
ed not less on his Honour and Reputation, would not yield to him;
and, being fomewhat younger, and sturdr, punch’ him to violently
in the Breaft, that ther both fell. After they had lain  while, and re-
collected themfelves, Aode began chiding; but Antique faid—What;
will yon not give we tre Precedence ? Rot  fays Mode,  am as good as
you; and akat agnity Words? Draw your Swerd, or elfe  will runthis
Knise


Chap. . Of Things ntique and Modern.
 into your Guts. This Treatment was too grots for the proud
Antiquo; wherefore, full of Rage, he claps his Hand to his Sword,
and the Bartle enfued; which was very fierce and doubtful. All who
faw it food amared, calling out Gentlemen, Holdin, bold in! But to no
Purpofe; for each continued puthing, tho' without Hurt to the other.
One Tuffus happening to approach in the midlt of the Fray, and per-
ceiving they were both his Friends, interpofed his good Offices, and
parted them. When they were fomewhat pacified, Tuffus asked, what
induced them to fight with fuch unequal Weapons; and to rathly to en-
danger their Lives. How, lays Antique, are you the only Man who do
not know, that Modo bas forced and transported abundance of boneft Pro-
ple? Has be not brought the chaft Lucretia and virtuous Sophonista,
under falfe Appearances, from their own Countries to Amtterdam, in order
to make  feft of them? Dent you know how he has subjected the innecent
and pious Fther, with the whole Court of Ahafuerus, to the Tyranny of
the Spaniards ? Mercover be robs me daily, and will not give Place; now,
what think you, have not  just Cause of Complaint? Hereupon Tuffus
asked, whether the Quarrel arofe from any Thing but Precedence; but
Mode, unwilling to hear an Antwer, faid in Anger — All that my
Lord lays to my Charge, Irefert on him; how many Things has he stolen
from me? Helmets, Gauntlets, Stays, &cc. Abl have you forgot that
knavish Trick, which has made so much Noife in the Werld, when he con-
jured & Heliodorus, the Churchrobber, out of Judxa, into St. Peters
Church at Rome, with Intention to steal the sacred Treasure in spite of
the Pope? But to cover his Defign, and not to raife Suspicion, in Case of
Miscarriage, he difcovered the Plot to Pope Orban Vill. who instantly be-
ing carried thitber in  Chair, asked the Robber Whether be were not
mistaken? and, Whether he did not know, that ferulalem was meant, not
Rome? Doyou think then, that the bely Father, had be look’ back, and
seen the High-prieft of Jerutalem in the Hely of Holies, weaid have let
that Offender go unpunished? What is your Judgment of this Sample,
should  give Place to Anriquo: Pray, said Jultus, let Reafon then rake
Place. Vet Antique bawled our — Let me have my Buskins and Ro-
man Ceat of Armour which he robbed me of, and  will acquit him of the
rel. To which Mode laid, — Firft reffore me my Great Grand -father'
Helmet and Geat of Mail, which you made  Present of to Kneas, when
he was flying from Dardania; you may keep the Gauntlets: But. Antique
repled, — Tour Great Grand-father’ Armour  prefented to Domini-
chino, and the Gauntlets, to Rubens, who has beflowed them on one of
tBe

 Maccab. iii.


Of Things Antique and Modern. Book III
 Life-guards of Thalefris,  of the Amarons The Conclution
of the Matter was this; Tufus advifed, fince neither could reffore .
ny thing, that they should drink the Queltion, and take Care, for the
ture, not to fieal from each other.
 queftion nor, but the Reader will, by this Story, fufficiently under-
Land my Meaning.
We have formerly afferted, that thofe who daily converfe with
mean and bad People, commonly become like them; as those contra-
rily who keep Company with the well-bred and vircuous, become good.
CHien, Lays Horace, is  fecond Narure; and the Proverb intimates,
Keep Fenck Company, and boneft thou shalf be: He then is happy, who,
having  true senfe of good and bad, chufes the beff and mofl profita-
ble, and governs all he does by that Standard. He, who has accu
ffomed himself to  bad Manner, cannot eafily get rid of it; perhaps
will retain it all his Life: He, contrarily, who gives in to what is
good, will rejelt Evil, becaute tis againtt his inclination
Reafoning thus, tis ealy to apprehend, how beneficial tis for 
Tyro, to inure himself to any fuch fine Things as are proper for his
Study, and to reject the imperfert and unneceffary. Too many Goods, the
famous Bartholet uted to tay, are no Goods.
Here, pray obferve an emblemaric Ordonnance of  Painter de
banched by exceffive Reading of all Soris of unprofitable Books,
in order to thew, that none muft be ufed but fuch as are proper for
his Study; which Sineed affirms, faying, that we ought to fudy few,
but good Books. The Caufe of the aforefaid Painters Diforder may
be alfo atribured  the vaft Quanity of useless Prints, Drowings,
Sc. he confulted; which are as great Enemies to the beft Thought; as an
Excets in Books.
Here is feen an anriqse Table, laid with Boards, in  Painting
Room, and, in the middle of it,  Disss with  Cake in the Shape of
 Pyramid, and by it  Cup. Four Women are fitting at the Table,
viz Painting, Stataary, Arcbiterture, and the rt of Engraving, each
having her proper Marks of Dillinction. Judgment, leading Beauty
and followed by Virtue, is entring the Room, and approaching the
Table; where they are welcom’. At which Inflant Prudence is driv-
ing thence fice, reprefented as an hunch-back’ Dwarf, as allo  Chi
mera. The Room is hung with Hiffories, Landskips, Arcbiteffure, and
Prists. Antiquity is fitting in  Niche, holding fome Medals in her
Hand, reprefenting ancient Lyfre. The aforefaid Door, where Judg-
ment, &. enter, is behind to the left; and Vice, &cc. on the right
Side


Chap. . Of Things Antique and Medern.
 are driven forwards out of the Room. The Chimera has Eagtss
Claws,, Dragon’ Wings,  Serpents Tail, long Neck, . Womans
Head, befet with Serpents, and the Belly full of hanging Teats
Let us then feriouly chule, out of our Collection, the Materials
which will beft serve our Purpose, whether they be Plaifter-figures,
Prints, Drawings, Academy-figures or other Models; rejetting every
thing that' foreign to our Study.
Since we have hitherto (poken of what is Modern, it will not be
amils to make fome short Obtervations on the Antique.
He, who would nmeely follow the Antique, ought to know, that it
contills in thele two Qualities, viz. Beauty and Geodness: Beguty again
lies in  perfect Proportion of the Members; as we have thew’ in the
feventh Chapter of the firft Book; and Goodness in the Grace ariting
from the Motion of the Members; which Motion ought to be free, and
without Exaggeration. Thus much as to the Nudities.
The Draperies, which are well caft, and to adjutted as not to bin-
der the graceful Motions of the Members, are certainly the bett; as we
evidently fee in the Works of Raphael, Pouffin, and some others, who
prattited the Antique.
The Ordonnance, Light, and what elle is requitite in  perfect Piece,
ought all to be most beautifully chosen.
in this Manner we mult allo contider Landskip, Architecture, and
other Embelliffments: All ought to be eitber pure Antique, or intire
Modern.
We shall here fubjoin one other Ordonnance for the Conclution of
this Book.
Ordennance reprefenting  driving away of the Mode, or what is No
dern, from the ntique.
Inlead of Beauty and Virtue, which in the former are led by Judg-
ment, we may introduce here  beautiful and modeff young Virgin, attird
in thin Linnen, which difcovers the Naked; on her Hand fus  Phe-
Rix, and on her Head is  Chaplet of Flowers. Judgment may be
fet off with  gold Fillet or Diadem on its Head, and  Scepter in its
Hand. Instead of deformed Vice, and the Chimera, we may exhibit 
fying young Damfel in  Riffend Gown and high, laced Head dress;
with  fable Tipper about her Neck; her Arm-fleeves full of Lace;
moreover the has Shoes, Stockings and Gloves; and under her Arm is
 Basket of China-ware, and Muhrooms; which, by her rude Mo-
tion,
No.  Of Things Antique and Modert Book III.
sion, the is dropping. Pradence is beating her with  Lecking glass;
holding in her other Hand an Arrow cwined with  Serpent. The
aforefaid young Virgin' Chaplet ought to be compoted of small and
evertaking Flowers, viz. Prarmica Aufriaca and Gnaphalium.
The Mushrooms figaify, shert Duration, or fudden Rife and De
CaV.

The Scepter of judgment is  long thin Rod, with  Knob on the
Top.
The End of the Third Book.


  


  
    INC.
  IV
Of CoLOURINC.
WKYNNNNANNAGRASKKGNRANNNNANRTAWNNWHDNYNHKYKWNNREFKERH
CH AP. . Of the Colours, and the ordering them.
 TS remarkable, that, tho' the Management of the
Colours in  Painting, whether of Figures, Land-
skip, Flowers, Archrelture,  yields  great
Pleafure to the Eye, yet hitherto no one has laid
down folid Rules for doing it with Safety and Cer-
tainty. Contrall in Motion is founded on Reafons,
 which, by Prallice, we can, in  Chort Time, retain,
and inculcate to others; as is allo the Divifion or Proportion of the
Members; fince, according to Albert Durer it may be mathemati-
cally demonfiraced. The same may be faid of Lights and Shades, by
means of Perspective. All this may be thoroughly learnt in our
juvenile Vears; but the difpoling of Colours by and over each 
ther, in order to fetch out  good Inion and Harmony, is not, to
this Day, fixed on certain Principles. Meer Chance is herein our on
ly Comfort.
 IV
Of Colouring.

 cograred, or etch’ Print, beautifully defigned and dispoted, and
apfetably lgtied and shaded, is very commendable; but  Picture,
which betides thofe Qualities, requires an artful Diversity of Colour-
ing, therits the highell Praife.
Nevercheless Mafters have, in their Colouring, their particular
Mianners; one has  faint Manner; another,  dark one; another, 
grey Manner; some have  flaring Manner; others,  muddy one,
Cc. occafioned by their not knowing, that Colours require an orderly
Difpolition; like an ingenious Gardiner, who, in the Production of
choice, beautiful, and large Flowers, confiders what Ground is proper,
and which needs Driness, and which, Moiffure, and what Sorts thrive
beft in each; which require Sun, and which call for Shade; which
want Improvement from Pidgeon’ Dung, and which from Doges
Dung; in order thereby to make  greater Advantage than other Peo-
ple do: In like manner,  Painter, if he makes thorough Inquiries in-
to the Natures and Effects of Colours, and againt what Grounds they
are bet set off, and will bet anfver their Purposes, shall be convinced
that he gains  Point above others. By feeking much is found, and,
notwithttanding any Rubs in the way, we muft renew our Attempts.
How many Artacks have  made on this Secret tere  could make 
Breach in  Had  not imitated Hlexander, and cut the Gerdian
Knot,  should have been ftill to feek.  shall now gladly impart to
the Arriff all my Difcoveries and Improvements, and refer it to his
Judgment, whether they be of any Moment.
The Number of the Colours is px; and thefe are divided into trwe
Sorts
The former Sort contains the Tellow, Red and Blse, which are call-
ed capital Colours.
The latter is  mixed Sort, contilting of Green, Purple and Viclet;
thee have the Name of broken Colours.
Whire and Black are not reckoned among the Colours, but rather
Potentials or Efficients; becaute the others cannot have their Effects
without the Help of them.
Thefe Colours have allo their emblematic Significations, and particu
lar Properties.
The White is taken in general for Light; and Black for Darkness.
The Tellow, for Lylre and Glory.
The Red, for Power, or Love.
The Blue, for the Deity.
The Purple, for Autberity and Turifdittion.
The


Of. Colouring.
Chap. .
 Violet, for Subjettion.
The Green, for Servitude.
Qualities
The Colours confidered in themfelves are certain
ties, impercep.
tible, without the interpolition of and laying on  Body; like the Moon,
which could not receive her Light from the Sun, much lets communi-
cate it to us, otherwife than by means of  Body. White is allo that
from which the Golours come forth, and the Body whereby they become
perteptible to us.
in reference to the Art of Painting, the Colours give Life to all
things; without thofe it would be impoffible to diffinguith between
Life and Death, Wood and Stone, Air and Water, Goid and Silver,
nay, Light and Darknels: They have  particular great Power, unit-
ing by their Agreement, separating by their Force and Crudity: Tbey
cause some Things to difappear in thin Air, and force others to appear
out of the Back-grounds.
Their Variety produces the utmoft Charms and Harmony, as well in
Nature as in  Picture; especially, when in the latter they are dispoted
by  judicious Hland; for what is more beautiful in  Landskip than an
 Sky, green Fields deck’ with  Thouland varioutly-coloured
Flowers, differently-coloured Grounds, this ruffet, or yellow, that, green
or grey, as each requires? Allo the Ornament of the brown Cypress-
tree, the grey Willow, the fair Olive, the white Poplar, the green Al:
der, thered Fir, and joyful Linden, each according to its Nature: Add
to this the Diverfiry of Stone-work; how agreeable feems the Porphy-
 of Tombs, the Serpentine (ione Obelisks, the white Marble Vales
and Termes ? Even Architecture receives  vall Addition byrthe dif=
ferent Colours of Stones; as when the darkgrey Stone,, Frge-ftone,
whice Marble, and such like, are finely marched and put together; and
the Building within is adorned with red speckled greenith jaiper. Por-
phyry and Marble; in the Niches, Figures, and Balsreleifs furrounded
with Ornaments of Gold, Silver, Copper and Alabaffer; and the Floors
inlaid with all Sorts of coftly Stones; as Lapis Lazuli, Porphyry and
variegated Marble, in order to pleafe the Eyc.
But all depends on an orderty Disposstion.. Tis impottible to effect
any Thing charming, with fuch Coltliness, if thofe Colours be not duly
maich’, and artfully placed: It is therefore highly neceltary, that the
Arciff Know perfectly their Natures and particular Effects, in. order to
proceed with Certainty; as  good Writer, acquainted with Letters,
beflows his Thoughts on Words only.
As


Of Colouring.
 IV.
As for the Dispastisn, it mult be obferved, that as in an Ordennance of
man; Figares, divided into Groups, one of thee Figures is always the
Primipal, attis which all the reft muft be fubordinate, according to
their Ranks, to tis the fame in the Colours, that they may altogether
produce  good general Harmony Nay, were it necelfary to place the
three capital Colours together, the yellow mult be forward, the red
next, and the blue behind; which will produce  fine Harmony.
The three other Colours may be difpoted in the fame Mianner; when
the Purple is placed forwards, the Violet may be behind it, and the Green
laft, as being the weakeff. Thefe latter Colours are called weak and
broken; becaute they poffets very much the Qualicies of the former;
the purple; for lattance, being produced by  Mixture of Red with Blue;
the Violer the fame; and the Green, of Blue with Fellow.
But tho' each of the Colours have its different Force and Effect,
yer ther do not obserce any particular Rank; or Order; becaule  frong
Colour fomerimes happens to come before  weak one; and the con-
trary, as orcation requires; for were they always to Keep Order,
and the Fellow to be principal, to that the others muft diminith gradu-
ally, there would then be no Difference, but the Effect always one and
the fame; whereas tis here as with an Actor, who fomerimes playsa
King, at others,  God; now,  Man, then  Woman; now  prin
cipal Charalter, then  mute one.
Ver if the principal Part in  Picture, whether thro' Choice or Ne
cefficy, confift of white, light or weak Colours, the Parts about it,
how beautiful foever, will be no Obstruction, if they be but varioutly
and well ordered
Again, if the faid principal Part confift of Fellow, Red, Blue, or
Green, and be thereby fer off, all the other Partsought to be intermix-
ed here and there with small Portions of this firong and predominant
Part, as if they were enamel’ with it; yet in frch Manner, that they
may feem foowe their Origin to the faid ruling Part, and, tho' feparat
ed, yet bare but one Efe:, and unite the whole; like the great Body of
the Afoon, furrounded with glittering Stars.
This fuffices for the ordering the Colours in general; and yet they
cannor have their full Effelts, or due Decorum, without chuling proper
Barkgreands for ferting them off agreeably; avoiding thote which
create Confution, of are too harth and difcordant. Of the former Sort
are fuch as follow.
Whire fuits on all Forts of dark Grounds, except warm Fellow.
Light Vellow fuits on Purple, Violet, Blue and Green.
Light


Of Colouring
 .
Light Blue, or Green, Viclet and Fellow not warm or fiery.
Light Green has  good Effect on Purple, Violes and Blue.
Light Violet has the same on Green and Blue.
On White fuits Black, Violet, Green, and Purple; but not Vellow
or Blne.
On light Vellow fuits Violet, Purple and Green.
On pale Red fuits Green and Blue.
On pale Green fuits Purple, Blue, Vellow and Violet.
On pale Blue fuits dark Vellow, Red and Green.
But were we to lay dark Blue on light Vellow, or the contrary, it
would appear very harth and difagreeable.
There are other Colours which are neither harth nor dilagreeable in
themfelves, and yet appear unpleafant and without Force; as if one
or the other were quite dirty and muddled; fuch are, Purple on Red;
beautiful Redon Fellow; or beautiful Greenon Vellow; Purple on Blue
or Violet; and the contrary; allo White on warm Vellow; and the
contrary; or Red upon Red, or Blue upon Blue; as Experience
teaches.
Touching the Colours which are ufed in reffelting or changeable Silk,
 shall fay this: That with Musk-colour fuirs beft Mafficot, with light
Purple or Violet in the Reffexions; with Afh-colour Blue fuirs yellowilh
Whire, reflected with Rofe-colour; with Orpiment agrees dark Purple
with blue Refiexions; on beautiful Green fuits Rofecolour, with light
blue Reffexions; and with Purple of Violet agrees Naples-yellow, with
Sea-green Reffexions.
But we mult especially obferve, that all refletting or changeable Stuft
keep their own Colour in the Shade, to wit, that of the main Light; tor
we muft not commit the fame Miftake as the old Mafters, who painted
all changeable Draperies with two Colours only; as  yellow changi-
able Stuff, with  blue Reffexion; they made the main Light yellow,
and the Shade blue; and thus they managed all others. Truly  great
Millake, and quite contrary to Narure.
Since we have thus far engaged in the By-colours, and their Effeets
and Harmony; we shall alto treat of thofe which tend in particular to
embellish aLandskip, Hiffory or other Painting.
On Grals, pale Red is exceeding well fet off, and appears pleafant to
the Eye; as alfo dark Violet, dark Blue; light Vellow changeable
Silk, with Red and White; and light Blue, with purple or violet Re-
 Colouring.
 IV.
On Rufict earth Grounds agrees  dark Violet, Blue and dark
Green.
On dark grey Stone, (commonly called Blue ffone) agree light Red,
Green, Pelow and yellowith White.
On Free-fone fuir ail dark Colours, viz. Purple, Violet, Blueand
Green.
Ber we mult not ue  Colourof pure Lake and White; nor fingle
light and red Orpiment, without urgent Neceffity, and then very spar
ingly. The Green and Red of one Iint, either in Light or Shade, al.
to diagree, on account of their Harthness; wherefore they muft not
come together.
In  Piece of many or few Figures, which is to hang againt  dark
Ground, or in  thady Place; allo in  Landskip, againtt durk and close
Boscage, Whire has  fine Effect; especially Naples Velow, Red and
light Orpiment, Vermilion and fine light Red.
Again in  light Aparement of whice Marble, or light Free-ftone,
of in  Landskip painted light, clear and full of Sky, Blue, Purple,
Violet, Green and Black have good Effelts; whereas the Colours be-
fore named are, in this Cafe, not only difagreeing, but they alfo fook
veak, and without Strength; except White, which cannot be ufed too
much, fince yis no Colour, and therefore fuits any where, except .

gainlt Shies.
Nevertheless  do not here affert, that the Eprbelliffiments, in the
aforefaid Pictures, muft confiff only of light and Warm Colours; but
that they be incermixed with some durk and weat anes; and that in
the latter Piltures, where we ule dark and weak Colours for the By-
ornaments, we mult difpofe fome light and warm ofter among them.
Now fome may poffibly think, becaute we place Blue by the other
Colours, that fuch would obftruct the Ofsskip; or that the Lrointains,
which, by reafon of Diftance, are commonly reprefented Blue, would
be damaged by so beautifiul  Spot: But this Doubt may he foon cleared
up, by confidering, thatl do not chufe here all dark Colours; but that
the Offskip wiil thereby in some meature appear mere diffant, faint and
uniting. It is alfo true, that Blue in  Landskip is often harth, and
makes the Painring look flaring; but by the Darknels it bechmes, in this
Cafe, foff, natural and tender.
Befides Blue,  mention alfo Violet, Green, Coc. but my Meaning
thereby is not, that tis indifferent where thofe Colours are placed; as
Blue againft the Blue of the Sky; Green againtt green Trees; Vialet
againft  Violet-ffone, or Ground; or Light againft Light, and Dark.
Rels


 Colouring.
Chap. .
 there
nets againtt Darknels; for that would be improper; becaute,
is Light and Darknels in  Landskip, to we have always means to
give dark and light Colours their Places.
With  Candle-light, either Within or Without doors, or other
Lights proceeding from Fire, fuit Violet, Purple, Blue, Green, White,
Black, Red, without Exception; thefe being Pieces, in which thofe Co-
lours have an advantageous Effelt, and wherein they predominate on
their proper Grounds; for Vellow and Red are almoft the fame as 
burning Candle; which has  great Effect by Night; as it has none in
the Day-time, becaute the Sun-fhine makes it hardly perceptible.
Now as the two former Piltures confift of flrong Colours, viz. White,
Vellow and Red; and the two larter of Purple, Violet, Blue and Green,
yet thofe of the one Sort may be joined to thofe of the other, in order
to create an agreeable Elixture and Harmony, by placing with the rong
some that are weaker; and the contrary, letting each in its place have
the Matery on its proper Ground.
But  have particularly obferved, that out of the three aforefaid pre-
dominant Colours, others may be temper’ of less Force, viz. brown
Oker with Naples Vellow, Pink with White, and fuch like; and placing
them by the others, as middle Colours, we may, in Conjunction with thote
others, setch out  great Mass; fince White has its Degrees as well as
Red; always obferving, that the principal muft predominate, both in
Force and Beauty; and that chole Colours, which are drawn from it, be
disperted here and there thro' the whole Piece; as being beft set off -
gainft the general Ground.
Having now plainly thewed the Qualities and Ufes of the Colours,
and their Differences, we may ealily think, that the Pictures, wherein
they are confidered, mult needs be very affecting.
We shall not here fay, what, where, and how one Colour mixed
with another is to appear; becaute tis impoffible and unconceivable:
The principal Method for obtaining this Secret is, to obterve, to robat
Pitch we work up our firft and strengeft Celour, and to let this Colour
predominate; for which Reafon tis  Maxim with some, that we mult
not introduce into  Picture more than one capital Colour, or  Colour
which reprefents it: But  have already shewed, that fireral may in
that Manner be brought together in the same Piece: Wherefore the
Eye and Judgment muft decermine this Point; for if we find it proper
to incroduce  beautiful Colour where we have  mind to place fuch
an one, why should it be bad? This only makes it fo; its being ac-
companied by By-colours, not well ordered; as warm Colours againft
Watin,
No.  Colbaxing.
Book IV.
 and Grey near Bine; whereby those Colours have no Effed;
of elfe, by placing too ftrong and too many capital Colours by one -
nether, which overcame the aforefaid beautiful Colour, and make the
Painting look fiaring.
But, that we may not mittake in this Point, let us chule any Colour;
and in order to find an Affociate for it, take one which is difcordant;
as if we puch upon Red, take  Grey one; if dark,  light one, Coc.
Thus they are, as proceeding from each other, joined together; and by
fuch Means we can never be ar  Lots in tinding different Colours for
different Draperies; ver with this Provifo, that in all thofe Colours the
Ferce or Distance of the Figures muft be obferved.
For the ready obtaining thefe Things,  have found out  very eaty
Method, which alwars thewed me the Particularity and Harmony of
the Colours; it even ofien helped me, with Cerrainty, over the Diffi-
culty about the Difference of the Colours in Draperies; especially
tuch as were changeable: Firff  temper’ on my Pallet, out of
my general Mixtures, three particular Colours, viz. one for the main
Light, one for the Half-thade, and one for the Shade: Then  took
Cards, and feverally painted them with one of the aforefaid tem-
pered Colours; when they were dry,  placed and replaced and chifted
them to long as till  had fansned my Judgment: Sometimes, when
this would not antwer my Purpofe,  thuffid them; and then cook 
Parcel from them at random, which, if they happened to pleate,
were my Directors This Method helped me moft in reffecting Drg
feries, which  thereby often produced very advantageous, and of 
fine Colour; it was especially ufeful, when  had any Doubt, whether
fixh or fuch  Colour would fint well with fuch or fuch an one, or
net; for the Cards certainly shewed me the Thing as well as if 
had the Stufts themfelves, and faved me the Trouble of uncertain In
quiries.
It will not be amils, to fay fomething further, touching Back-grounds:
Ir often happens, that  Perfon feesa Colour in  Picture, which feems
to him very agreeable; and yet, on imitating it, he finds his Colour
has not the lame force and Effelt, thro' his not obferving againtt what
Ground that Colour was painted;  Point worthy of the uimofl Atten
sion, if we would avoid Mistakes in Colouring; wherefore we mult al
Ways obferve the Greands and Places of the Colours, if we would have
our Colour predominate; ordering the moft difagreeing againlt it;
for Inttance,
to make the Vellow predominate, place Blue againft it,
or elfe the Darks of other Colours; would you. abats the Force of
Fellow,


Of Colouring.
  place Green near it; and, to bring it lower, put  Colour
which proteeds from Tellow, whether it be Free ftone of any thing elfe
  yellowith  the fame Manner you may handle all the reft of the Colours,
obferving, that, as the Objects diminith by Diftance, to the Colours mult
proportionably be fainter, and gradually more grey; Nature thews it:
And yet  have found, that we may place even  capital Colour in the
Offckip, and it shall be prevented from approaching, by accompanying
it with Colours like it, and drawn originally from it, as we have before
thewed.



CH AP. II. Of the Property, Nature and Colours of Drefes.
  have before faid, that the Art of Painting is an Imitation of
Nature in her vifible Pares; nothing is impralticable to it; and
yet observes due Order in all Things; and as we have before
thewed the general Order of the Colours, to we shall now handle it in
particular, with respect to Druperies, wherein it chieffy lies.
Draperies confift of four Kinds of Things, : Linnen, Silks, Stufs and
Clotb; and thefe have each their particular Natures and Manners of
Folds: Their Properties are alfo different; and to thew them by an Ex=
ample,  shall divide the Kinds into the four Times of the Day.
Linnen Draperies are for People in the Morning of their Lives; Silks,
forthole in their Lenith; Stufs, for thofe in the Afternoon, and Cloth,
forthofe in the Evening of their Lives. But to (peak more intelligibly,
there are four particular Conditions of Men, viz. Infuncy, Touth, Man-
hood and old Age; and each provides  Drels according to his Vears;
Children should be dreffed in Linnen; young People, in Silks; full-grown
Men and Women, in Stufs; and old People, in Cloth.
The Colours for the leveral Stages of Life are thefe; for Childhood,
White; for Touth, Green; for Manbood, Red; for old Age, dark Vio-
let; and for Death, Black.
in the firft Chapter we have thewed, that Whire and Black are not
accounted among the Colours; fince the one is but the Parent of Colours,
and the other, the Depriver of them; wherefore we introduce Whire,
 Light, without which no Colour is vifible.
Dark Fillemot or Tawny shall ferve to repretent the Earth, or Green
nets; White, to thew the Water; Blue, the fir; Red, the Fire; and
Black,
X Colouring
 IV.
Black, the Darkness above the Element of Fire; for there is not any Mat
ter or Either beyond it, which can contain or be penetrated by the Suns
R know, that there are four Seafons, viz. the joysid Spring;
golden Summer; fruitful Hutumn; and melancholy Winter. in the
Spring, we begin to leave off Cloth, or heavy Winter-raiment, and to
wear thin Stafs; Summer and Hurumn permit us to drels, according to
their Heat, either in Linnen or Silk; wherefore  certain Authorlays,
that we cught to suir our Dreffes, as well as our Words, to the Seafon.
The Seafons may be alfoexpreft by Colours; as the Spring, by Green;
Summer by Vellow; Auturn, by Red; and Winter, by Black.
Vet, among the Deiries, there are fome who have atways one proper
Dress and Colour; as Tupiler,  purple Manle; June,  blue Veil;
Disz  white and blue Garment; Acprune,  Sea-green one, Cot.
Thefe we cannot alter without committing Miltake: But the Figures
mult neverthelels be ordered, if postible, where they suit best. All brarg
Personages, of either Sex, should likewife be clothed in Red or warm
Fellow.
It therefore behoves  prudent Arcifl to have  perfect Knowledge of
the Narure and Qualiries of the aforenamed Stuffs; even, were the
Figures ever to tmall, he mud notwichllanding thew in his Work, of what
Sort of Stufs the Dreffes contill; and alcho’ Reffexions cannot be well
obferved in small Figures, yet we ought to fee, by the Courfe of the
Folds, whether the Draperies be Silk, Cloth, or other Stults.
 neat Painter in Lictle ought aifo, not only to diftinguith the Thick
nets and Thinnets of his Driperies by their Folds and Corour; but in the
particular Nature and Colour of each Drapery, their Diminutions and
Variations; as between thin and thick silk opposed to Sattin, and more
Iuch; for if the Eye, at tirff Sight, can perceive and diffinguith them,
we ought allo to make them appear what they are; chieffy in fmall
and highly-finithed Pictures; as Abseris and others have artfully done to
fuch  Degree, as plainly to diftinguish between Silver, Pewter, Tin and
polihed lron.
As Becomingness fublists not only, in the Stuffs, but allo, in their
Colours; to, knowing that, we shall not eafily mistake in the Choice
of Colours and Draperies.
Bur  mult here give some Painters an Hint about the Nature of Sruss,
especially coloured ones; they believe, they can paint Sattin after white
Silk, and changeable silk after coloured silk: But this is lame Work;
for


Of Colouring.
Chap. what in plain Silk is thining in the Light, will often be found quite
dark in Sattin; wherefore in this, Nature muft be confulted.
For thefe Reafons the Eye is pleafed, when in  Painting of  Con-
courfe of People or publick Shew, it can eafily diflinguith all Sorts of
People, and the Conditions and Ages of both Sexes; and at the same
Time their Motions according to their Natures and Qualities, and the
Dreffes and Colours which become them; as, anold Man, heavy and
weak, flanding on both Legs, and fometimes by the Help of  Stick,
becomes  long dark-coloured Cloth Garment, viz. of Umber, dark
Violet, Fillemor, or Black, faftened with Strings or Buckles, and fetting
on him fomewhat negligently.  young Man should appear in  quite
contrary Motion, as being frolickfome, fickle, airy, and standing often
onone Leg; he mult be painted in  mofl beautiful purple, green, red
of yellow Drapery, of light Stuft, or thick Silk, fattened on the Shoul=
der, and not too long, that it may not hinder his continual Motion;
becaule  Man, if full of Fire, loves to have his Legs free. Women
and young Virgins, as being tender, fedate and modeft, are chiefly dif-
ringuithed by their white Garments of thin Linnen, and all Sorts of
airy and womanith coloured Silks, viz. light Blue, Apple-bloffom,
Pearl colour or light Lemon, caft loofly on each other, and in fuch man-
ner that the Beauty of the Naked may eafily appear thro' them; their
Pofture is modeff and fet; their Legs clofe; their Bodies upright; their
Necks bathfully bent; their Arms clole to their Bodies; their Mode
gay; and taking hold of their Garments, which hang down to the
Feet. Children are feen moftly in whice Linnen, or Lemon, blue or
violet-coloured Silk; they are often in white Velts, without any hang-
ing Drapery; but when they have tuch loofe Drapery,  small one;
about  fard in Length, is lufficient, and this faftened on the Shoulder
for Security, while they are running, bultling and rolling on the Ground.
This Condult is, in my Opinion, of great Confequence, tho' few
have obferved it; nay, even fome good Painters oftentimes fail in ir,
making no Difference between manly and womanith Colours; giving an
old Man  femenine Colour, and  manly one to  Woman; intermiking
them as if there were no certain Rules for either: But it muft be grant-
ed, that the Silk-colours, which befit  young, furdy, capricious Mian,
are very difagreeable ro  Virgin, who is tender, weak. more fedate and
lets voluptuous; he requires flrong, the more loff and beautiful Colours,
yielding  Pleafure to the Eyc. It would alfo be very improper to paint
 Child in Black;  young Man in dark brown Colours;  grown Man
in part Colours; and an old Man in beautiful ones.
 IV.
Of. Colouring.
 faw  Pitture, of an unknown Malter, in which, all the Par.
ticulars  have recommended were plainly and nicely expreft; it had
tuch an Elegance, and gave me to great Satisfaction, that  ffood in
Surprize. On  mature Confideration of this Paintingl perceived, that
II was purely deligned to anfwer this very Purpofe; for  faw here
and there fome aged People, mortly in dark and Cloth-colours; there,
again,  Group of young and gamefome People in variety of beauti-
ful-colourd Stutls; allo some Women in light colourd changeable
Silk, . near them were some old Women in dark Dreffes; here and
there appeared Children, running about and playing in the Sand,
all dreff in Linnen habies and foff Colours This Ordonnance vaftly
pleated me, and put me to confider what it could be likened to;
and  find it to be the same as the four Times of the Day; for let us
rake the Children, wheher Boys or Girls, for Day-breat; the young
Men and Women for Noon, when the Sun is at higheft; and the old
People for igts; between Mid-day and Night is Vesper or the Even.
ing, which may be reprefented by joining fomething of both Condi-
tions; allo between Gurory and Midday, the fame; to as to make,
in the whole,  proper Difference between the Conditions and Ages of
Men. Here let us not forger, that old People fometimes affect Wwite,
to thew their becoming Children again; contrarily Black is fometimes
from by young People; as  thin black Veil to fignify fome Sorrow,
or elfe to diftinguith  married Woman from  Marden.

CH AP. III. Of the Colours of Dresfes, and their fuiting with each
other.
 we are treating of Drosfes, it will be proper to fay fomething
of the fuiring their Colours;  mean what Lining or Furniture

each coloured Garment requires;  Matter of great Moment,
tho' as liicle obferved in Pictures as the Life: Wherefore let it be noted,
firft of the seak Colours.
When the upper Garment is White, the Lining or Undercoat
may be Rofe-colour, Fillemot, Purple, Violet, or beautiful Sea-
green.
WWith  light blue Garment fuits  Furniture of yellowith White,
Violet, dark Fillemor, or dark redith Blue.
 light


Of Calouring.
Chap.  light or pale yellow Carment ought to be furnithed with Viclet,
Sea-green, beautiful Green, dark Fillemot and Purple.
 pale green. Garment mult be fet off with yellowith White, Sky-
colour,, Violet and dark Red.
Now follow the sfirong Colours, and their proper Mixtures.
 Lemon colour Garment may be furnished with Sea-green, Violet,
and dark Fillemot.
 Garment of red Orpiment colour fuits  Furniture of Violet,
sky and greenith Blue, Musk and Umbercolours
 Sky-colour blue Garment may be adorned with Rofe-colour, yel-
lowith Whice, pale Vellow and light beautiful Green.
 Filiemot-coloured Garment may be furnished with pale Vellow,.
Rofe-colour, light Afh-colour, Violer, dark Purple, and dark Green.
All these Colours reverfed have the same Effects.
Here let it be obferved what  mean by the Word (Furniture); Tis
an Adorument, or fetting of; as when  large Drapery of  plain Co
lour is adorned with one or mere small ones, whether  Veil, Girdle or
Sleeve-facing, under Garment, or Breaft-cloth; this Furniture is er
ther of changeable Silk, or of party-coloured Stufts, when tis to fet
off  large and plain-coloured Drapery; and the contrary the fame;
as when the large Drapery is changeable, the fmall Furniture ought to
be of  fingle Colour.
For further Sarisfaction  shall fubjoin an Inftruction of what colour-
ed Stuffs may be beft adorned with Gold, whether flower’, leafd or.
Rrip’.
On  green Ground fuit Flowers.
On = purple and violet, narrow Spriss or Stripes.
On Musk-colour, clofe and large Flowers or Leaves.
On Rofe-colour, Apple-bloffom and white thin Silk, fuit Stripes.
Purple, Fillemor, Musk-colour and Whire ato look well with.
Fringes, either feanty or full, according to the Subltance of the Stuft.
It muft be obferved, that what  have hitherto faid of the ordering
of the Colours, is not to concern  single Figare only, but to forve any Oc
casson by  diffufive and agreeable Intermixture: Nor do  mean, that,
among feveral Figures, there mult be but one with  fingle coloured
Garment; and the relt, of changeable or broken Colours; for when
they are feparate, and the Draperies large, each in particular is to be.
fet off in the Manner  have before laid down; for latlance, If all the
imall Draperies were feparated from the large one, and we dreit as many
Figures in them, then each muft he further adorned with ocher small
Dra.


 Colouring.
Book IV.
Draperies, of Colours fuiting with it, in fuch Manner as the large one
was before. In  Word, if we only confider, that  fingle Colour
ought to be incermixed with  changeable one, and  changeable Colour,
with  fingle ors, we shall perceive what Order this Affair requires, in
order to look decorous, and pleate the Eyc.
Bur, for further Explanation,  shall give two Examples of it. The
fird   Company of fre or fix aged People, either without or with-
in doors: Now if thefe Figures mult be all dreft, it requires no Art,
nor is it  Signot Knowledge, to give each  fingle-coloured and equally
large Drapery, altho' we might find as many different Colours, in order
to join them agreeably; and this, for two Reafons; firft, becaute, that
cannot Pappen in the Life without Premeditation. And secondly, becaute
the Figures may not seen to be emblematic; for tho' to the twelve Apoples
are appropriated their particular Colours, yet we mult not infer from
thence, that, if they were all affembled together, we ought to give them
 Colourfrom Top to Toe; becaute, tho' we break the Colours,
tsey yer regain the same; as Blue, with green Reffexion, remains Blue;
Fellow, with Purple, remains Fellow; and fo of others. Our fecond
Example is,  wanton Meeting of yoing Men and Girls, modithly
dred according to their Years; thefe are skipping about, and playing in
 Fieldor Room: Now ie would not be at all proper to join all their
Dreffes of broken Colours rogether, tho' they were coupled in such Ors
deras they require; and for the former Reafon; namely, that it can
hever happen but thro' Premedication and Necellity: And tho' it would
appear elegant and pleating, yet not at all artful without an Intermisture
of some single coloured Drageries. Nevertheless we find many do it; or
ther, becaufe they take no Delight in changeable Draperies; or elfe be-
caufe ther cannor paint them, and therefore make thift with broken
Colours. Again, there are others who have no Value forfingle Colours,
and therefore, on all Occations, introduce changeable or broken ones.
We have allo met with  chird Sort, who do not know how to make 
Difference between  changeable Stuff and  broken Colour; tho' its
certain, that  reffeeting or changeable Drapery is an Intermixture of
two of more Colours, and  broken coloured Drapery, but of two; as
Violet, with Red and Blue; Green, with Vellow and Blue, Coc.
whence they are called broken or mixed Colours.
In the firff Chapter, treating of this Management, we have fpoken
of refleiting or changeable Draperies; and as we are now again embark-
ed in the same Subjet, it will not be amils to explain the Matter
further.
Many


Of Colouring.
 fancy, they make  good reftelling Drapery, when is well
folded, and different in Colour in the main Lights, greateff Shades and
Reffections; even Rapbact and other great Mafters have been mistaken
in fo doing; whereas  good changeable Drapery ought to draw irs
Refettions from the Colour of which the main Light sonfiffs; the Shade
likewife proceeds from the ruling Colour, yet has fome Tintture of the
Changeablencts: And altho' the Drapery be changeable, yet it has 
conflant Groundcolour of the main Woof of the Silk: Thus Tis 
wtual Expreftion, —  Green and Tellow changeable: This then is
the true Quality of  reflelting Silk, that all that is seen frenting on the
Relief keeps its main Colour, but the Sides of the Folds going of.
cause the Changeableness; which we may eatily perceive on laying 
changeable Stuff fmooth on  Table or Floor; for viewing it perpen-
dicularly from above, it will then appear red or yellow; but if feen
parallel along the Stuff, often appear blue: Whence it follows, as we
affirm, that only the Folds which go of become changeable, and alter in
Colour; when the others, in the main Light and Shade keep their own
Colours: gain, what in one Stuff changes red, will in another ap-
pear green or yellow, according to the Woof or Warp.
By Reafon of fuch Accidents, we are obliged to have Pieces of par
ticular Stuffs, in order to thew the Difference; which cannot be learnt by
Heart, becaufe of the Nicety of the Matter.
We have faid, in the foregoing Chapter, that in an Ordonnance of
many Figures, we ought to obferve the Sexes, Ages and Conditions of
People, and that each muft have his proper Stuff; the Golden fuits Dei-
ties, and thofe who are deified; Purple becomes Princes; thus each,
down to the Slave: Now, to thofe of weak Memories,  shall thew 
good Method for their becoming Mafters of this Point in  Chort Time.
Set down in your Pocker book, the following Heads or Titles; old
Men and Matrons; married Men and Women; young Men and Maidens;
Boys, Girts and young Children: Place thele Titles under one another;
and write againtt them the proper Dress, Sruff and Colour of each Sex
and Condition: Thefe Notesyou mult often confult, and especially when
jou are about an Ordennance of few or many Figures.
Voumay allo make  Column for the Colours of Draperies; fetting
them down under one another; as White, Vellow, Blue, Green, Red,
C and againtt them write their Linings and Ornaments, as  have be
fore mentioned.
It will not be improper here to obferve, fome Particulars on diffe.
rent Occafions, in an Ordonnance of many or few Figures, with re-
No.  Colouring
Book IV.
 to Colours; not as if they were unknown of not obferved by in
geaious Artifts, but becaute they are ofcentimes neglected and flighted,
either thro' Carelessness, Prepoffeffion of an Opinion that they need
not be to strictly confined; or elfe, becaute beautiful Colours are moft
pleating to People, and therefore they muft especially facisty the Eye;
withos reflelting, that they thereby injure the Art and their own
Reputarions: Such Painters are like great Talkers, who fay little to
the Purpofe.
Truly, the Colours have great Efficacy, when well ordered and fuit-
ed but they raife an Averion when unskilfully and confuledly dif
poted.
An ingenuous Perfon will undoubtedly agree with me, that there are
purticuler Characters which diftinguith one Man from another  Prince
from an Officer; an Officer, from  vulgar Perfon;  rich Man, from
 poor one; By what means then is this Difference perceived ? Is it
not by his authoritative Countenance, Grandeur and Stately Carriage,
and by his Garb longer and of more coftly Stuff and Beauty than the
others; If fo, it will be eafy to apprehend, that, tho' fuch  Perton
were nor endowed with all the aforetaid Qualities, but with the con
Irarr, he ought neverthelets to be made known by fomething or other
as we have thewed in treating of Ordennance Wherefore tis needless
to fay anr thing further in this Matter, to bring us to the prefent Point
touching the Coisars; namely, to thew on what Occafions they ought to
be uted trastifuly, and on what, not; for which Purpofe  shall ex-
hibit teres principal Occurrences, as Examples, whence we may deduce
and order all others.
The firft may be  Council, or  Triumph, or fuch like; wherein
all the Dreffes ought to appear incirely of the moft magniticent, rich
and beautiful Stufts.
in the second, contilling of Bucchanals, Country-merry-makings and
Herefmens Sports, the Colours ought to be half beautiful and half
Droken, each agreeable to the Condition of the Parties And
in the third, being publick Sigbts, viz. Pleadings, Mountebanks,
Tugghrs, Merry-andrews, and fuch like, made up of common and
mean People, coarfe Stufts and dirty Colours ought to be moft vi
 here is shill to be remarked, that in the one Sort of Colours
as well as the other, the moft beautiful excels; and as thofe three Oc-
carrences are not common,  muft lay, that among the meaneft as well
as the bert there are some which have the Preference; among the
Beal


Of Colouring.
  are some more beautiful; and among the mean, meaner
ones. Thus much as to Colours, in order to Know  good Malter.
But ere we finith this Chapter, let us obferve, in what Parts the co-
loured Stufts appear most beautiful; fince Stufts are very different in
this Relpect, and have their divers proper Beauties.
We lay then, that black Stufs are moft beautiful in their srongeft
Shades; White, Tellow and Red in their main and greateff Light; and
Blue, Green and Purple in the Half Tints. But all Stufts, not having
 Gloss, ought to be much more beautiful in their Lights, than their
Shades; becaute Light gives Life, and makes the Quality of the Co-
lours appear, when contrarily Sbades obfcure and extinguith their Beau-
ty; contequently all Objects will thew their natural Colours better,
when their Surfaces are less smooth and even; as we fee in Cloths, Lin-
nen, Leaves and Herbs, which are rough or hairy; in which no Glols
or Shining can appear, becaule they cannot receive the Reffexions of
neighbouring Objects, but thew only their true and natural Colour un-
mixed nor tinged with that of any other Object, except the Redness of
the Sun, when, by his fetting, he makes the Clouds and Horizon par-
take of his Colour.
CHAT. IV. Of the Disposstion of Shady Objects, either diffant or
near, against  light Ground.
  againfl Light, and Shade againft Shade naturally unite.
Againtl  light Ground fuit well dark Figures, and againtt 
dark Ground, light ones, in order that they may be ttrongly
fet off; however, the fecring off of Objects either much, little or less,
on the firft, fecond and third Grounds certainly differs very much.
Now it may be asked, when  parcel of Figures, flanding or fitting,
have  white Back-ground, and appear, fome far from, others near, 
thers againll it, whether dark Colours would not be proper in all the
three Groups?  fay, they would; but then they ought to be confider-
ed in another Manner; for, without intermixing some of them with
light Colours, they could not fubfift; wherefore tis necellary, to give
tome more, others lets Force; the Figures clofe to the white Ground
ought to be mixed with light Colours, in order to flick to the Light,
and to break the lets their Force; and yet the dark Colours will pre-
dominate, the light ones being only, as  fay, to have Communicati-
V Colsuring.
 IV
on with the white Ground, thereby to keep their Diffance, and to -
nite with the great Light of the back Ground. The Figures, on the
frond Ground, which came more forward, ought again to have less
tgbt Celoars; and the Group, on the fore Ground, the leaf; whereby
they have lets Comminication with the whice Ground, and confequent-
ly more Force againtt it.
Tis the fame with Light againtt Darknets; for we can eafily per-
ceire, thar Whice and Black never approsch each other without Parti-
apation. The more Black is mixed with Whire, the more it inclines
to Whire; like  large and thick Felloon, mottly light, placed againt
 dark Ground: Now, if vou would have this Feftoon appear clote to
the Wall for tis not with Nature as with  Picture) you muft needs
ule in it some dark Flowers and Leaves, ordering them about the Ex-
gremitr, the mot Whire or Light to be in the Parts myt relieved
darkening it gradually cowards the two Excremities nearet the Ground,
whereby the one kicks to the other and unites; remaining yet  light
Feresx, the intermix’ with Dartncis. Tis the fame with  dark
Festoon againft  light Ground; the dark Flowers being in the middle,
and gradually diminith on each Side. Tis certain, that it will not thow
tich Decorum and Relef, tho' its Shade be in Proportion as flrong  of the former: Ver tis oaly to be uted in cafe of Neceffity,
when the Marter and Condirion of the Place require it; wherefore we
muff accommodace ourtelves to all Exigencies.
This Erfelt is not only proper for Flowers, but alfo for Fruits, Or-
nathents, . Eren all kinds of Gold and Silver Ornaments may
with Elegance be joined together by the Colours, after the fame
Manner.
Now follows an Example, in Plite XKl. dispoted after the afore-
said Manner. Here, on the fore Ground appear five Figures of Men
and Women againit  white buck Ground; the three middle ones, clofe
together, are dark and slrong, and the two on either Side, of  litrle
lighter Colour, whereby the Croup keeps an agreeable Relief and .
ion on the Extremity. On  more diftant Ground fland two other Fr-
gures, of which the foremoft is dark, and the other, half behind the
former, lght; yer both of less Strength than the foremoit Croup.
The lail four, flanding clofe againt the Ground, differ Hill much from
the others, as being here and there intermixed with more Light;
one having  whire Stomacher; another  white Cloth on her Head;
this having Flowers; that with light Hair; another with  white Pot,
light


Of Colouring.
Chap.  Drapery, Nudity, Coc. which Licdeneffes notwichflanding have
not to much Force as to enlighten the whole Croup..
The Doltrine of Harmony, teaches, that we muft always place
Darkness againtt Light; and the contrary; but this is only  Medium,
thewing, agreeable to that Polition, how and in what Manner Light
and Durknets may appear either clofe together or diffant, like the -
forefaid Feffoons; but it mult not be confidered otherwife than as. 
Purt of  Pifture. If we would have  perfelt Ordonnance, we can
order, at pleafure, fuch dark Figures as thole, againtt light Grounds;
and the contrary; for Inftance, would you have, on the right Side, of
the Piece,  dark Buth; in the middle,  Viflo; and on the other
Side, Houfes or Stone-work, neither light nor dark; you may place 
gaintt the Buth, light Figures or other Objects, and in the middle, 
gaintt the Oftship, dark ones, and againtt the Houfes, others again
which fuir beft; execute each correctly, and in particular, according to
the said Examples, and then nothing will be wanting that concerns
the Tines: The Colours joined to it make the Work compleat.
 think  have fully explained this Point of Darkness againtt Light,
and the contrary; yet feveral Things ferving my Purpole Hill occure
ring to me, which were forgor in the firft Chapter,  judge them plo=
per to be mentioned here.  fay then, that all light Colours, cith
were they broke, appear well againtt  dark Ground, but not with
tuch  Force as the flrong ones; as we have formerly faid, that witen
Colours appear beft on  faint Ground, and the coptrary, whether
they be light or dark. Tis allo  conflant Rule, that the ftrob Co
lours, as light Red and light Vellow, do not fiuit on  ligth of hird
Ground, more than beautiful Blue on  dark one, tho' reckoned  eat
pital Colour.

But let us return to our Example; we have hitherto only ipoken
of the Tints, or Light and Darkness, it will now be necelfary to
thew alfo the Colours of the Dreffes, according to their Order, Place
and Power.


No. . is Sea-oreen.
 — Vellowith Grey.
 - Violer.
 Somewhar less beautiful Green than No. .

 — Purple.
 Dark Violet, not beautiful; but the Girdle beautiful light
Fellow.
 Colouring.
 — Brown Oker, and Violet Reffexion
 Greenith Blue.
 - Red Orpiment.
 — Violet.
 with little Red.
Obferre now, from behind forwards, whether thefe Figures, as they
advance, do not become gradually fronger, by the Intermixture of
Frong Colours. The Off-group has none; that in the middle has one;

two; of which, one is very firong.
and the foremofl,
II it be asked,
why  place here the flrong one, namely, red Orpi-
no Force againft  light Ground;  fay, it mult be
ment, as having
obferred as the foremoft Figure, being encompaffed with two dark
OReS.
Let it allo not be thought, becaute  thus exhibit the Colour of each
Figare, that they ought therefore to be of the same Colour from Top
to Toe. Confule the Skerch, and remember their Draperies (one
large, another fmall, of broken and faint Colours) with which they
Ire intermixed, and fuit the Ground; as we have already intimated,
that (in order to form great Maffes of capital Colours, viz. Vellow,
Red or Blue, and they to predominate in an Ordonnance) we may
enlarge or break such  strong Part with Mixtures of the same; as red
Gniment with brown Oker, Umber, or tuch like, which nevertbeless
 Tellow. After fuch  Manner we may handle all the Colours,
to wit, beautiful Green, with other Green; Red, with Purple; Vio
lets with Blue or Grey; yellowith White with Grey, and to forth;

in  Word, if but one of the two be less beautiful.


CHAP. . Of the Harmany of Colours.
HEY, who are converfant with Books, are fentible that few
Authors have written of the Harmony of Colours; and what
they have done is to obicure and unintelligible, that  shall en-
deavour to make the Point clear.
Ir muit be granted, that in every Part of the Art Narure is our
Pattern, fince the difpofes herfelf in the moft perfelt Manner. If we
at any time difcover fomething fine and pleafing in her, (which we
often


Of Colouring.
 .
often do) and yet know not the Reafon why it has fuch Elegance
and Decorum, we ought to confult the Rules of Difpofition and Her-
mony, and examine with which of them the Objects agree; by which
Means we shall foon apprehend what Decorum is, and on what Rea-
 founded
Harmony proceeds from placing faint Colours againft Rrong ones)
and the contrary; wherein fuch an Union appears, that the one
seems naturally to flow from the other, as in this Inftance: Let
us fuppofe an Ordonnance to be divided into three Grounds, or Di-
ftances; place the principal Figures in the middle on the Fore-ground,
and let lome of them be firongly coloured, and the whole Croup as
Rrongly fiung off by  shady hollow Rock coming behind them; place
to the Right, on the second Ground, some Figures beautifully coloured,
yet  Tint darker than thofe on the Fore ground; and behind them,
an airy, greyith-green Buth; and further on,  light Offskip, filled
here and there with fmall Trees: Let this Buth be  Tint darker than
the second Groundfigures; on the left side of which Ground, place
other Figures, as of Girls and young Children, in faint colour’ Dras
peries, which, tho' coming againtt light Buildings and the blue Sky
of the Offskip, will notwithflanding appear beautful and harmonious:
Now, in fuch  Difpofition, we are enabled to perceive hew each of
the three Parts keeps its Diftance by the Nature of the Ground bebind

it. The foremolt, as the ftrongelt, and confifting moftly of Light, ap
proaches with Force againt the greateff Shade; and thofe on each
Side, tho' almoft as light, yet are limitted by their buck Grounds,
which differ but one Tint from them; whereby they appear nelitferi
further nor nearer than they really are: From all which Premifes nre
may plainly perceive, that granting these three Parts, or Croups, had
 like Strength and Colour, yet they may, by means of their back.
only.
Grounds, be brought down in fuch  manner, that, at pleature,
one of them shall predominate, and the other two retire: Would
jou.
and
have the foremoll Figures dark, reverfe your former Conduct,
your Purpofe is antwered. Thus you may cafily join Grounds and Ob
jelts in order to fetch our Harmony; and by Harmony, one of the Per-
fections of  Painting,
But the more clearly to evince the Force of Colours againtt proper
Grounds, with respect to Disfance,  thall explain the Matter in  fe
cond Example: See Plate KXIl.  reprefent the Boat, as the neareff:
Objell, gill with Gold, and frongly glittering againtt the Shade of
the Trees, and Rock; to the foremoff fying Figure, on the famer
Diftance


Book IV.
Of Colourisg.
 as the Boar,  gire  light Red Drapery againtt the Shadiness
of the faid Rock, in Force equal to that of the Boat; the second fy-
ing Figure, tomewhar further in, has  geen Drapery, alfo light againtt
the Rock, where, being  broken Colour, it becomes fainter; and the




third, wiich is further in Shade, and has  dark Blue Drapery, is flung
 and aceps irs Place againt the furchelt Part of the Hollow of the
Rock, which, with the vellowith Blue Sky next it, is lightith: The
handing Figure, in the Sten, or Off part of the Boat, is more firong-
 Eex off, by  darn and warm Fellow Drapery againtt the aforefaid
Hollow, than the Blue Garment of the hindermoff flying Figure, and
 than the Boats Head and Timbers which have the greateft Force,
as beingi he greatel Part doubled by the Reffexion in the Water: On
the River-fide, againt the Trees, are feen other Figures, (partly naked



and in fine-colour’ Draperies, ciz. Apple-bloffom, light Changeable
ntr
and Whire, nermixed here and there with Vellow) and their Re-
 and that of the Green of the Trees in the Water: Now thofe
Figurer, tho' frin and light, are, in their Diminition of Force, in
the lame Degree with the middle rlying Figure, as having the fame
tair
Dillance, and being of the Jame Narure, and compoted of broken
Colours: So allo the Red of the foremoll fiving Figure agrees with the
Fellow of the Boat, bock being nrong Colours: The Rowers are in
Cark Blse.
Tho' this Example funiciencly enables us to manage any Ordonnance

whatoever, ver  mean not that there muft be always forwards  yel


 WRRd ir,  blue one; and in the middle,  Green, Pur-
low Objer
ple or Violer; for you may chye what Coloar you please; as, intlead
of this gill Boat,  red one; and give the fore ffying Figure, intlead

of  Red,  vellow Draperv, affigning to each  proper back Ground.
Alcho' the Fellow of the Boar, and the Red Garment of the Figure
are frong Colous, yer ther are diftinct in Narare; for as the Vellow
 in itfelr Egner than the Red, to the Red requires  darker Colour
than the Fellow, in order to be fiung on. Again, if inflead of the
Figures by the Riveride, which are cloched in Apple-bloffom, Blue,
 we would me ocker Colours, as Green or Red, we may do fo,

Provided, as before, we gve taem tuch  proper back Ground as will




King them on, with reipea to .. Dillance; for it muft be remark
 that, alhg ther are CEas, vet there is no Neceffity for giving

 fain: or broaen Colours:   Maxim with me; that any Co-



lettr, Low erbry terere, vs: &: nelerated and refrained according to its



-
DzIRrS, he Colsirs in this Example are difpoted according to their
Ranks


Of. Colouring.
Chap:  (the ftrongiones forward, and the weaker, in Degrees of Dit
tance, according to their Natures) only to thew the Method of placing
them; in  Word, Whether they are to approach, because of their no
tural Strength, or to retive by reason of their natural Weakness.
But it' fcarce posfible, that in any Subject all the Colours should,
according to their Natures, happen to fall to advantageoutly, and there
fore we may, on any Occafion, alter them; for Inftance, if, inflead of
the gilt Boat, we were to introduce  Piece of white Marble, adorned
with Mouldings and Balsrelicfs, and flrongly lighted; the Vifto behind,
turned into  clole Ground, and the Trees behind the Stone-work, in
Read of greyith, more fentible, warm and approaching; this Stone, 
fay, would have the fame Effect as the Boat, and come forward with
Force, tho' Whire, we all know, is not to frong  Colour as Vellow:
Forherein it will happen as in  Camp, where, in the Generals Ab-
fence, the Lieutenant general commands; and in  Company, the Lieu-
ignant for the Captain, and the Enlign for him; even the Serjeant is not
without his Power; therefore when ttrong-natured Colours are not in
 Pilture, the weaker tupply their Places, in  greater or lets Degree as
the Matter requires; wheren lies the Crisss of the Management: Let
me add to this inftance of the white Stone-work, that it muft be the
Rrongelt and moft carching Object in the whole Ordonnance, and that
no Arong Objects muft come near it, to leffen its Force, or kill it, unlets
they be weakened, and brought down either by Miftiness, or by means
of their Back-grounds; whereby they may then have no more Force than
& braken Golour.
CHAP. VI. Of the Disposstion of irregular Objects; and Light -
gaint Darkness; and the contrary.

  placing and ordering of Objects is of great moment; for if,
after we have choien them all moft beaunful, we difpote them
careletly, they will abace of their Luftre; again,  good Dit-
polition will make an Object, tho' unelegant in itfelf, look agreeable.


to give some Examples of it,  thall begin with Place KXIIl.
On the Fore-ground, on the right Side, is lying an overfet Pot -
gaintl  large Stone, and both of them frong and warm in the Light,
againtt the Darknels of some high Trees which are on the second Ground.
On the third Ground, lower and by the Waterfide, rifes  column’
No.  Colouring
Book IV.
Bailding, which is light again In the middle of the Piece, the Hori-
 appears very low, with Come Hills; and on the Fore-ground, are
three Figures making the greateff Group, and moftly in warm and dark.
coloured Draperies, againft the Fainmess and Light of the Oftskip. On
the second Ground is  young Man, who, with the Houle, at the Door
of which he flands, is below in the Shade, occafioned by the Ground
shade of the Treesoppofice to it; this Houfe is of Free-ftone, and there.
fore light againft the blue Sky. The Fore ground has no Verdure, and
is alllight, chiefly about the Figures.
This Sketch thews as the Irregularity of Objects in an Ordonnance,
and how we ought to difpose them according to Art; some bigh, others
low; together with their Force, in orderto create  diverfified Decorum,
By Objects  mean both the moreable and immoveable, viz. Men, Cat-
tle, Birds, Trees, Hills, Buildings, Csc. as well horizontal, as falling
back behind each other.
As to Force, it confifts in Light againft Darknels; and the contrary;
for (except by the Diverficy of Colour) there is no other way than this,
to fet off Objects againft one another.
We have faid, that the three fore-ground Figures are flrongly colour.
ed, and come againft the faint Offskip; whereby  thew, that in one
Piece there ought not to be two Lights on the same Ground, alcho' they
are both frongly fet off, burthar one Part mult confiff of frong Light,
and the other of Darkness. Ies allo eaty to conceive, that the three
Figures, becaute they come againtt the light Offskip and not into Shade,
mult needs require dark Colours: Contrarily, the Pot and Stone are fer
off againt the dark Trees, by  general Rule, that when there are some
bigbr Objects on one side of the Compolition, thofe on the other should
be durk.
Let us now view  second Example in Plate XXIV. as being an Ob
fervation depending on the former, feeing neither can fublift without
the other. This rends to illuftrate the Management of Lights, boch.
above, on euch Side, and bebind one anotber and that we ought always
to order after fuch  Manner; when the former Example shew us the
Irreculariry of Objetts in their high and low Disposstion.
The forward firting Figures are, with the firff Ground dark, as be
ing thaded by  driving Cloud; to alfo is the walking Figure thm to
its Middle. The Building on the second Ground fronts the Light, to
gether with the two flanding Figures, which are fet off by the dark
side of the Houte. The three hindmoft Figures are in the Shade of
the fame Building, againft the Sky; which is their Ground. The
Colums


Of Colouring.
Chap.  allo on the fecond Ground, is almoft to the Top in Shade  the hindmoft Trees, which run to the Point of Sight. The
Man is half again in the Light againft the dark Column; and his under
Parts, (which with the firft Ground are dark) are fet off againtt the
second Ground, which is light.
But tis not fufficient to place here or there  Ground shade; we mult
alfo thew the Occation of it, that it may not be asked, what cauted it;
for all Shades are not alike; fome are more dark, others more clear;
moreover, they differ alfo sometimes in Colour; wherefore it will not
be amils to fay fomething of it here, tho' we shall treat of it more at
large in it' Place.
The Groundshade of Trees often appears less of more Green, accord
ing to their Tranfparency or Clofenels The Ground-shade cauted by
driving Clouds is faime, and has no other Colour than that of the Airbe-
tween. The Ground-fhade of  red, green or blue frerched Curtain
is allo of the fame Colour. Thofe of an Houfe or other heavy Piece of
Stone-work are grey and dark, Coc. But to return to our Subject.
les plain, that what is demonftrated in thefe two Examples, touching
Light and Darkness above, on each Side, and behind one another, is the
same when reverfed; namely, if that which is now Dark were Light; and
the Light, Dark. les alfo indubirable, that if one of the Lights were
taken away, the Ordonnance and agreeable Harmony would be fpoiled
at once; even to much, as not to be brought right again without  general
Alceration; for Inftance, fuppole the walking Perion were dark above,
how could he be fet off by the Column: Since we have before faid, that
Darknels againft Darkness is improper; and were the Column to be
Light, how should we manage the Sky ? And if the Sky were Dark be-
hind the Column, that would be as bad again; for the whole fore
Ground and all upon it are dark; and the fecond Ground is light again;
wherefore every Thing would be in Diforder and indecorous: From thefe
Premifes we may planly perceive, that this is  conflant Method for
Management: And when  good Difpolition of the Colours, according
to their Qualicies, is joined to it (for we know, tharObjects have various
Colours, of which we can chule the moft proper) the Decorum will fill
be the greater, and the Eye more pleated: Trees, tho' they appear
always green, are yet diverfified according to the Seaion, and their Na-
tures: Some are Sea-green, others deep Green, this Rullet, that Grey-
green, thefe again light Green, others dark Green: Groands likewife
differ, as Hilly, Sandy, Clayith and Muddy: Stones do the same: All
which, we have fully shewed in the firft Chapter of this Book. As for
 Colouring.
 pV
Mes, pone excepted, what Colours have they not? in fine, he who
well underflands the ordering of the Colours, and the facing them,
will never be at  Lots
But let him especially observe, that in any Ordonnance, whether of
Hiffory, Landskip or any other Branch, one Side maft be contrary to
the other, not only in Light and Shade, but allo in Height and
Dench.
The Defigns of thefe two Examples are not much unlike that in the
foregoing Chapter; yer here is greater Variety; for the former was,
of the Force of Objects, either dark or light, againit contrary Grounds;
hereas thefe, tho' grounded on the fame Obtervation, thew us how
they are to be ordered above one another, when it to falls out: For In-
ftance, we fee  Group of Figures on the fore Ground, againll another
on the second Groand, fomewhat higher; and that, againtt another silf
Ligher; and to on, to the Cieling or Sky: We have thewed, in Chap.
 how we ought to let off Objects behing one another, and to unite
them with the Ground; but thefe Examples reach, firft, how light and
dark Objects  on: another ought to be managed; to as to ferve each

other, and that each may keep ir' Dillance. Secondly, How, for want
of Shade, we mult make thife wirh the  of Colours. Lattly,
How irregular Objects ought to be placed againtt each other; which is
the Soul and Life of an Ordonnance, especially where there are many
People. Bur Tis not confined to human Fioures; for it respects all Sorts
of Objects, whether Grounds, Hills, Balluftrades, Bartlements, Win-
dows, Roofs, Clouds and Sky; in fine, every thing we can fee rife be
hind any Thing elle, whereon People can appear. Speaking of Clouds,
it mult be obterved, that we may reprefent Figures fying in the Air
and littingon Clouds, in the fame Manner as on the Earth;  Marter
of principal Concern on fuch an Occafion, where the major Part of the
Objelts contills of Height, and many are at  Loss in the different Lights,
Colours and Tinrs. Wherefore, docible Arcifts! Regard this as an in-
fallible Rule, and confider every Thing which  have laid down in the
aforetaid Examples, to prevent your falling into the Miltakes which
are herein nlually commired.
 thall now fubjoin  third Skeich, Plate XXV. touching the Crefing
and Geing off of Objects, as  Sequel of the two preceding.
See in this Example,  Boat going off againt  crols Height, or
earthern Wall, whereon divers People are leaning by one another; who,
with the Trees riting behind, break the Regulariry of the Wall: The
approaching Figures appear again againt the Offskip, which runs acrols.
The


Of Colouring.
  Boal is in  flrong Light againtt the shady Wall, which ende in
the middle of the Piece; where the foremoff approaching Figures are
fee off with Light both againft it and the hindward dark Figures, which
have their Effelt again againtt the Light of the Buildings in the Offskip.
The Sky on the right Side of the Piece abounds with heavy hanging
Clouds; and on the other Side are none, or very small ones.
Here we perceive, firff,  great Motion in the Dilpolition of the Ob-
jects; which cross each other up to the Horizon onone Side; and on the
other, the contrary; which caules an agreeable Variety; especially, as
there are some Objects going off, which thew the Point of Sight: The
second Obfervation is, the Harmony of Light and Sbaile, as in the for-
mer Examples.
This Examplethen thews, what Methods we may take, in order to
fetch out fuch Esfelts; and Tis for that Reafon, that this Point is ex-
hibited feverally, and in different Manners, which we may make ute
of as Occafion offers, as much or as little as we think proper; tho' ne-
ver too much; fince Variety tires no one, but is always pleating: As
here  Viflo, there Bolcage, Houfes, Coc. here,  winding Road,
there, again  Building hiding, Part of the Offskip; here,  level
Ground; there,  River befet with Trees, partly running towards the
Point of Sight, and then bending, either to the right or left cross the
Piece round  Rock; and at lalt to difappear. Variety feeds  cor
tinual delightful Defire; but we mult know, that it principally respects
Ordonnances in the open Air or Landskips.

CHAP. VII. Of Agreeableness in irregular and contrafting Objects
 we have not Knowledge in Compolition, all that we endeavour
at is Extravigancy; even should we bring out  good Difpofition,
it would be owing to Luck; when  well-ordered Piece, tho' indif-
ferenely coloured, will always have an Harmony. The Truth of this
 find clearly evinced in irregular Objects; which give Life and Moti-
on to an Ordonnance; as we have leveral times thewed in treating of
Ordennance, and alfo in the firft and laft Examples of the foregoing
Chapter.
This Motion is happily ferch’ out, if the contrafting Objects be
confiderately joined; for by this means they will meet each other to
 Colouring
 IV
agreeably as perfectly to pleafe the Eye; not as placed thus by Na-
ture, but as the Refull of an artful Compofition.
By the Irregularity of Objects,  underfland their Forms; as when one
is high, another is oblong; this pointed, that (quire, round, oval,
C Bur ere  proceed further, shall thew the ealy Mechod  took in
order to get the Knowledge of Irregularity.
Firft,  drew all forts of Figures in different Actions, as fitting,
Standing, fooping, lying, walking, Coc. and cut them out with Scif.
fors Next,  made  Skerch of my Ordonnance, and laid it down
fat, and put my cut Figures upon it, moving them about cill  was
farisfied where to place  fitting, flanding or lying one; how many
faired here; how few, there; and thus, after much thifting,  brought
forth  good Ordonnance; which  then deligned fair, making fuch Al-
teration in the Actions of the Figures as  thought proper, yer retain
ing their Poftures in general; leaving large and flanding ones where
they ought to be, and the small ones lying or fitting in their Places:
And to forth.
By this means  have found, that  Landskip, with many and small
Frgures, ought to confift of lurge By-works for fetting them off, viz.
large and crofe Trees, heary Stone-work, broad Grounds, Coc. And
withindoors, in  Palace or Apartment, there ought to be, behind
small Figares, large and flat Walls, with few Ornaments; for were they
to confilt of many Parts, all would feem alike large; and were we to
place by large Figures lome large Parts, all would appear small; or,
to speak better, equally turge.  large Object mult make another
small; an oblique one, anothererell; and  square one, others pointed or
round; for Contraries muft be brought together, that the one may
thew the other.
It is the same with Light. If  large Part confiff either of Light or
Shade, let one be the Ground for the other; for inftance, if, on the fe-
cond Ground,  large Part be in Shade, let the third have some Charp
and glittering Lights; this will help the broad Shades and wanton
Lights: But thole two Choices require  different Management; the
Principsl ought always to precede, and the other to be fubfervient to
it: In Landskip the immrecable Objects predominate, and the moveable
ones ferre only for Ornament; contrarily, in an Ordonnance the Figures
are fird disposed, and then the By-werks; for when we fay, that an up-
right flanding Figure mult be placed by  bending Tree, and  crook
ed Stem, by  ftanding Figure, we underlland by the former the Stem
to be the Prinips!, and the Figure the Affiliant, if in  Landship; but
 Colouring.
  an Hiffory, the Figure is principal: Thus it is allo in an Apartment
with Architecture, Statues, Bass-reliefs and other Ornaments.

The Irregalarity of Objects does therefore give  particular Deco-
rum and Elegance; for what Satisfaction would it be to the Eye to fee
some beautiful Grapes and Melons lye each in  feparate Dith? But if
Grapes, Melons or other Gibbous, round, oval and large Fruits were
grouned together, they would add  Luftre to each other.
We Know, that  lmall Houte vifibly magnifies  Temple or Pa-
lace; and that  long and low Building makes  Tower or Maufoleum
look high.
Such Contraricties as thefe are many;
and, to name them all, would
be as tedious as impoffible; wherefore  shall content myfelf with men-
tioning some of the chief.
Plate XXVl. The Example No.  with an high Horizon, thews
the ordering of Objects according to Perspective; the Steps  run up
againtt  Parapet; the Figure Bfits on the Grounds where the Steps
rife; and forward, where they fint, fands the Figure . The Point
of Sight Dis on the Horizon.
No.  thews the contrary of the former, when the Horisen is
  is the fame as the before-going, with  low Horizon.
Plare XXVil. No.  thews that bing Objects require flanding Fi-
gures.
No. . Is the contrary; by lying Figures ought to be introduced
high standing Objects, viz. Columns, Trees, and the like.
With  Pyramid ending in  Point, or an high and narrow Square
Stone fuit frceping, fitting, and lying Figures; allo sanding Figures, but
moftly in Prosite.
Under, or with Statues in Niches or on Pedeftals agree no set standing
Figures, unlets one be fitting.
With thin Busbes or cut Coppices fuie bett flanding, leaning and sleop-
ing Figures; but not any lying or sitting.
Againlt an elegant Stone, with Bafsreliefs, ought to be Figures
with flat and broad-folded Drageries. The contrary is allo good.
With  prait-coursed River braken Shores and Bunks.
With lying Cattle, flanding Men; and the contrary.
With Herfes, Affer and Cows, agree Boys, &&.
Wich Sheep, Geats and other small Cattle, fuir full-grown People.
With fat mufical Infiruments fuit round ones, viz. the Hlautboy, Lute.
and the Like.
Wich


 Colouring.
Book IV.
Wich  Tixbrel,  Cymbal or triangular ringed Iron, exc.
But when any thing is incroduced into an Ordonnance to create 
Contrall, the principal Piece which we would break by the By-work,
muff alwars predominite.

CHAP. VIIl. Of Gring Objects againt faint Grounds; and the
centrary, or, Dartress againt Light, and Light against Darkness.
  IN  already spoken largely about the Management of
the Colours, which is one of the capital; Parts of Painting, 
have taken great Pains in building some Rules thereupon, with
 View, that when Occation required,  might give good Reafons for
to doing. Under my prefent Misfortune this Comfort is left, that 
now have nothing to hunder what  firmiy purpote, and therefore can
confider it with more Vigour than ever;  even imagine it in  de-
gree equal to Nature herfelf, fince  lnow perfeclly the Strength and
Nature of Colours and their EficTs.
Confider then the following Example, Plste KXVIIl. whether it
be of Moment.
The Man    warm Fillemor Drapery, is againtt the faint Off-
ship: The Woman  in  light blue Draperr agaumithe Trees behind
her: Or,  beautiful Sky-colour Blue, and  pale Red: Again, 
dark beautiful Red, and  Rofe-colour Or,  Purple, and  Whire;
thefe are the principal and moll luitable Alcerations, befides changeable
Stufts
Some perhaps may ask, whether the blue Drapery, which we place
here againt the Oftship, does not contradict what we have formerly faid;
namely, that Blue is rechoned among the weak Colours? Andyet here
we affert Warmth againt Faininels, and the contrary: To which  an
Iwer negatively; becaute wecall warm Colours, thofe which are purc
and unmixed, erz. beautiful Skv-blue, beautful Fellow and beautiful
Red; whereas, when thote Colours are mixed with Whire, their
Warmthnolonger lubills; becaute their Durkness gives the Glow. We
fee, on the contrary, that light Blus, lighe Fellow and light Red, even
Whireirself, ferre for weak Colours againtt the dark, as this Example
Shews
The Reafon why  ought now to be of  fingle or capital Colour,
is, becaute the Ctiship, being made up of to many tender and faint
Colours


Of Colouring.
Chap.  shall have no Communication with it; which makes the one
the better retire, and the other approach.  does the fame contrarily.
This small Example is of fuch  Nature, that any Ordonnance of
what Kind foever, as well within Doors as in the open Air, aterfrom
 must thereby become good

if we incroduce, inflead of the Offskip,  Building with Bats-reliets.
Figures or other Ornaments, of  weak Colour, or elfe of Marble, it
will antwer the fame Purpofe; and if, inflead of the Trees, we exhibit
 Curtain, Grotto, Rock or other Building of warm Stope, it will be
the fame again, with respect to Colour: But if  come againt  fist
Ground, of one Colour, whether Grey or White, then that Figure
map be of different Colours, or changeable Stuff. Likewife if we place
Bagainll an Hlanging, or  party-coloured Ground, that Figure muft
needs be of  fingle Colour or Drapery; wherefore we are enabled to
judge how far this Obtervation extends.
Yet as this Example shews only Light and Darkness, we shall fub-
Join another in Plate XXVill. aforetaid, with  third or middle Tint;
which, with the former, will fuffice for giving  right Notion of
compoting all Sorts of Ordonnances, as well within Doors as in the open
Air, as before faid; alcho’ the Delign were to confifl of    or
more Groups; observing the Grounds againft which they come, whether
faint, flrong, diffant or near; to the end those Croups may, by the
Force of light or weak Colours, obtain their due Beauty;  speak not
in reference to any one in particular, but all in general.
We find, that when dark Colours are placed againtt  faint Offskip,
they are vilibly fet off, and make the one appear diftant, and the other
near; and the more, when we fet some light and weak Colours on the
fore Ground, whereby shey fill have  greater Effect; as we may ob-
ferre in Figure .
From which Premifes tis plain, that the fame can be effected
by the contrary Method; to that the Argument of some, namely,
that Rrong and warm Colours ought always to be placed forwards, in
order to approach the more, and the weak ones to be in proportion to
their Diftance, the fainter the further, is intirely overthrown for want
of contidering, that the Strels lies meftly in the back Ground.
The Example now before us is like the former, the fore Ground ex-
cepted, which is added to it, the better to explain our MMeaning in the.
ordering the Colours to advantage; by which Method we can difpole.
our Ordonnances with cafe, and to as to ferch out  beautiful Harmo
 See Plate XXVIIl. aforefaid.
No.   Colouring.
 IV
 place, on the leff side on the fore Ground in the Grass,  fitting
Woman, with her right Leg froncing the Light, having  white un
der Garment, and over it  redone. She retts her right Hand on 
dark greenith-blue Pot.  lictle further behind her flands an half Co
lumn of grey Stone; which fets her off, and whereon leansan old Phi
lotopher drelt in dark Blue, having on his Head  Crown of green
Leaves On the right Side, on the fors Ground, which is landy, and
here and there intermixed with Ruffec, lies  large ffar Basker of  dark
ruifer Colour, and in it is  large Iralian Pumpkin, on  beautiful dark
biue Cloth (preading, half out of the Basker, on the light Ground. By
if flands  Girl, dreit in Rofe-colour, holding her Lap open. Behind
her appears an heavy whice Terme. And, on tl left side to

sands  Woman dreft in light Violet, who is putting  Garland on the
Terme. The Girl is in Profile, and the Woman fronting. The Phi-
lolopher thews, to the Woman before him, the Terme, which the turns
towards and looks at. The Terme, Girl and Woman are clofe foge
ther, making with the Ground  great Light; againtt which the
Basket is ftrongly fet off.
CHAP. IX. Of the Painting Objects dustily.
THERE is Rill one Thing which many Painters careletly pats
over, tho' very ufeful and elegant, if well and naturally obferved:
It relates to suck Objects as are duly, as well in Roomsas in  Gar-
den; for tho' the former be fomerimes fwept, and the latter cleaned,
yet Pedettals, Balluftrades, Parapets, Vafes and Statues always elcape;
Galleries and publick Places for walking in, are likewife feldom clean
ed: It is therefore, in my Opinion, very improper in thofe, who with
great Care reprefent the Prvements of the faid Places with Stones of di-
vers Colours very difinctly jointed, one dark, another light, without the
leaft Spot of Unckanness which makes it very difficultto get  good De-
corum, or caule thole Pavements to look fat, without Offence to the
Lyc; cauting moreover an exceffive Stiffuets, be the Colours ever to
well ordered; whereas ufually in  large Apartment, daily walked in,
we cannot, in the aforefaid dittind Manner, perceive what the Colours
of the Floorare, except towards the Extremicies and next to the Walls;
wherefore the Middle, where is the moft walking, must appear dull,
Wiit.


Of Colouring.
  and almoff of one Tint. Some Painters exprets the Compart
ments of fuch Floors so diffinttly, that you would even imagine they
were wer.  grant indeed, that lometimes in the Life it is fo, by means
of the dark Stone; yet if we break and make them  lictle lighter,
they will then not pare so much, and yet be no lets natural:  if an
Apartment were furrounded with  marble Surbafe, and in the middle
of the Room were  gilt Ciftern, by which the Floor may very well
appear prong, becaule of its Agreement with the Marble, and the
glitier of the Ciftern.
For my part,  should rather chule  plain Floor than  comparted
one; but if we lie under  Neceffity to introduce the latter, the beft
Mechod will be, to unite the Colouring in fuch  Manner that the
Tints differ but little from each other.
This Obfervation does in an especial Manner affect Landship; fince
tis certain, that the Parts which abound with Trees, whether Woods
or Sides of Roads, are fubject to Rain and Wind; and, by means of
Dufl or Sand, the Greens, Tombs, Pyramids, Vafes, and all other
Objects in fuch Places, are to fullied and covered, that the true Colours
of the faid Objects are hardly perceptible: For inftance, in fuch  as we now speak of, flands  red Tombon  black Plinth; now,
if we make this Tomb or Plinth too dark, or too frong, it will look
as if it had been waked; whereas contrarily it ought, by means of
the Dult of the Branches and Leaves which fomerimes fall on it, to be
to covered over, that we shall fcarce perceive, whether the Tomb be
red, or the Plinth black.
Alcho' some may think this Obfervation too triffing and far-ferch’,
is nevertheless highly neceffary, in order to find, befides by other Me-
thods, the Litelibood in  Picture; whether it be, for breaking thereby,
in fome meafture, and uniting Objects, which, through the Nature of
their Colour, would have too great  Force, or for any other Caule;
fet not without Reafon, that it may not appear too affected.
But here, methinks,  hear some object, that if we thus oblerve in
every thing this Dull and Sully, long Gowns and train' Cloaths can-
not be free from it; especially thofe of Women, which are common-
ly of beautiful and light Colours, and muft confequencly be at the
Bottoms, as well as their white Sandals, more or less dulty, to the no
fmall Laughter and Wonder of the People: To which  antver, that
Ishould more wonder, to fee  Perfon come dry out of the Water,
than cleap out of Dufl and Dirt; for tho' we do not fee it obferved by
others, who have always made the Sandals beauriful and white, even
those
A Colouring.
Book IV
 of  common Soldier, as well as of  General; and  train' Gown
the fame; yet  fay, that this Obfervation does not tend to countenance
AEtakes, pot to make us mindful of the Natures of Things, and to
exprets then in our Piltures with all Likelibood, more or lels as the Mat
cer requires, not fuperffuoulty, but in Moderacion;  Virtue which, tak=
ing place in other things, should not be negletted in this Point.  ju-
dicious Mafter will obferve an Equilibriam, in order to prevent Aver-
tion, fince Things too beautiful are unnatural, and thofe which are too
dirty ditagrecable to every one. This Management would alfo not
be juftifiabie, could we not, as  have faid, perceive the Reafon of it;
as in poor People, Countrymen, and fuch like, with old and tattered
Cloaths, which wear not without foiling and gathering Dult.
But this Obfervation is of no ufe to thofe, who, not apprehending
the Caufes of Things, will have every thing as beautiful as posfible;
whereas Likelibood should appear in all Parts Prudenter agende.
The End of the Fourth Book.
  


 
AINT ING.
AK.
   
Of LichTs and ShADES.
RXENENYNERNKGSGNSNYNANRYYARATAYExKRREARRENRRENNRAFENRH
CHAP. . Of the different Lights of  Pitture.
 JVDGE this Point to be one of the moft important in
the Art of Painting; for without  thorough Know-
 ledge of it tis impostible to make  good Picture;
wherefore  shall thew all, that by Discourfe  can bring
 as the Refule of what  have learned by many
 Observations and long Experience.

Of  common Light.
Objects, in  common Light, have no broad fharp Lights, and their
Shadesare uncertain: The lecond Tint and Shade keep their own Co
lours much better in  clear Hir without Clouds; becaute the Objects,
being lighted on all Sides without Vapour, appear fentible, and more
relieved than in Sun fhine. This Light  think beft for Pourtraits, and fuch
Objects as we would have enlightened from without the Picture; as an
open Gallery or fuch like Place; and tho' the Objects thus lighted have
D Lights and Shades.
 
no great Force, we neverthelets find, that the mais Teuches both in
Light and Shade are firenger than in otber Lights.
This Light gets great Elegance and Advantage by low Horizens;
when if makes greater Shades; as under the Leating of Trees, Mould
ings and Projectures of Buildings, and fuch like.
Of the Light in  cloudy Sty.
We need not wonder, why the Objects in  cloudy Air appear
more fentible than in Sun-thne or clear Weather; becaute the Air or
Capours, being moftly exhaled, leave the Objects below without Mis.
riness, and thus afford  much Charper Tranparency for viewing every
thing, without the leat Obstruction; for which Reafon, Things in 
cloudy Air, teem lels to go off from us, and appear dark and near,
and of  more beautiful Colour; especially the Green of Grats and
Trees
Of  Sun shing Light.
Objects enlightened by the Sun are more or lets mifty, as the Sun
thines frong or weak; for this Reafon, that the Atoms or Motes be-
tween us and the Point of Sight feem more deafe, by the Strength of
the Sun, than in  common or clear Light; and are more or lels ting-
ed; by which means the Shales of Objects become faint at ence, and
go of more suddinly, than in another Light; wherefore we may ealily
conceive, that, tho' the Shades are broader, and more fenfibly limited,
than in another Light, yer they appear not to Charp as fome Mafters
have, by Mistake, expretted them; efoecially Berchem, in his Objects
lets than the Life; this indeed would be well enough in covered Pla-
ces, as Galleries, Palaces, Apartments, where there is no Hir; where
by the Objects then appear more perfelt, plain, and less retiring;
Suppofe, for Intlance, you walk thro' tome fhady Trees, it is cer
tain, that, comins towards the End of them, you will fee the Objects
in the open Air plainer and better than in the Field; the Prospective
glats evidencly proves this, were the Day ever fo clear. Obferve then
in general, that (as  have faid) the Objects grow faint more fuddenly
and difappear in Sun fhine; which herein principally differs from com
mon Light
Of


Of Lights and Sbades.
 .
Of the Light in Halls, Rooms and other Apurtments.
For Pieces to be hung againtt Walls of Apartments, the common
Light is moft proper, if the Difpofition of the Light of the Place
will permit, as being the moft moderate and agreeable when well and
naturally expreffed. This Conduct then is principally to be obferved
in it, that the Figures and other Objects be lighted more or less
ftrong and bread, according to their Nearness to, or Distance from the
Light of the Windows; and, tho' flanding on the same Ground, they
ought neverchelets to be different in Force of Light and Dullness of
Shades. So alfo the Ground-pades on Walls, Grounds and other Ob-
jects, should be, some sporter, fironger and more sensible than others.
The Figures clofe to the Windows mult therefore certainly receive their
Light from on high, and have sorter Groundshades, than thote which
are further from them.
But as it may havpen, that the Objects, diffant from the aforelaid
Light, may receive Light from other Windows, to their Sbades ought
alfo to break more or lets, and to become faint, becaule they are encom-
patted by alarger Light, besides Reffexions from the Walls. The Shades
of fuch Objects are alfo warmer than in the open fir, where the Blueof
the Sky and Vapours very much weaken them, and make them faint.
We mult likewife oblerve in general, that in an Apartment hung
with Red, Vellow, Blue of Green, all the Shades of the Objects are
thereby reffected, and partike of the same Colour; but the Touches and
Shades of the fainteft Objects will appear the firenger.
 Compendium of the Lights.
in cloudy Weather, the Objects are lets retiring, more warm, and more
fentible.
in clear Weather without Clouds,  little more retiring.
in sun shing Weather, sill more retiring, and less fentible.
in fogey Weather (as at the latter End of the Vear, or in Winter)
the moft retiring, and more fuddenly difappearing.
The groffer the Air, the more Body it has; and the more Body, the
more vilibly lighted; whereby the Sight is thortened, and the Objects
appear more indiffinct. Thus much as to Objects in the open Air.
Thete


Of Lights and Shades.
 .
Thefe four particular Lights, naturally handled, are certain
Proofs of  skilful Mafter; and it would, in my Opinion, look very
agreeable, to fee fuch Pieces king by one another, embellifhed as follows.
In lgudy Weatfer, the iferdimen, fearful of Rain and Storms, are
packing up their Bassage; the Sheep every where making towards
 Litless and hanging their Heads; which they are driving in an
Hurry into the Woods, looking continually at the Sky; in fine, the
Bullle is great, and every one in Motion.
in clear Wesiber, the Herdlmen walk hand in hand; others fit here,
and there, by  Founain, in Difcourfe;  third Croup divere themfelves
with tinging and skipping about, and tome play on the Hautboy, Fife,
Reed of Straw-pipe, Intiruments ufual among Country-people; and in
the mean time their Flocks are grazing in Safety.
in Junfking Weather, the Shepherds and Shepherdeffes fit at eafe
under their (pread Cloaths; some by  llater-fall wathing themfelves;
others fleeping in the Shade of  Fountain, or Trees; their Flocks are
grazing up and down in Croups; some chewing the Cud for Coolness,
others drinking at  River, others lying in the Shade.
In sagey Wiather, the Herdlmen are driving their Flocks nomewards;
walking with Concern, and Chruroing their Shoulders, and poking out
 Heads, carefully looking to fee whether  Sheep or Goat have not
been loff in the Fos, and clotely guarding the Flock on every side. The
young Women follow, with Cloths or Veils on their Heads; and some
are slopping their Noles with them, becaute of the Srench of the Fog
CHA . II. Of the Cindition of the Hir, or Sky.
 Sky is  wide Expantion, feeming lower or higher as tis
more or less replete with Vapours; now the Sky is certainly
never without Vapours, fince, were there none, it would be 
very where blue, as well on the Horizon as over our Heads: But we
fee, it appears lighter next the Horizon than vertically, becaute the
Vapours fog and diminiththe beautiful Bluetbere. Tis allo plain, that
the nearer the Air is to the Earth, the more denfe and gross it is; and
in Proportion to ir' Afcent, the more rarified and tranfparent. The
Vapoursare likewife more or lets fentible in Proportion to their Dentity
of Rarity.
We


Of Lights and Shades
  muff obferve here, that when the Sun rifes in the Eoft, it is
then, in that Part, lighter on the Horizon, than in the three others;
and at Noon tis lighter in the South; and to round; becaute this large
heavenly Body communicates its Infiuence to every thing near and -
bout it.
 shall now demonterate, by an Example, the Reafon why the Va-
pours, the further they are from us, become the lighter: Take  thin
Gaule,  or to Vards long, and ftrain it, in the open Air, on four
Poles; mark each Vard with  Crots-line, numbered    to  place yourfelf under No.  and, looking along to the End of
you will perceive the Blue of the Sky less in the second
the Straining
Divifion; and the further, fill lefer; becaute the thin Threads dou-
bling before your Eyes, thereby thicken the Gaule more and more,
and abace its Thinness or Tranfparency; infomuch that at latt you per-
ceive nothing but an intire white Stuf.
Suppofe now, that the Stars were up, and you were to make the
same Experiment; you would find them to appear most diffintt in the
firft Division, and ditappear in Proportion as they go off; which is 
plain Proof, that tho' the Air be ever to Rare, forwards or near, yet,
it becomes groffer, the further of, and confequently more Body must re-
ceive more Ligbt.
Tis for this Reaion, that the Stars are never feen very near the Ho-
rizon; and if we do perceive any thereabout, they are but small and
weak.
Between the Air and Water there is no Difference; the one feems to
be an Impreffion of the other; to wit, both of them light towards
the Horizon, and the Air over head and Water forwards both dark.
As for the Ground or Plan, which receives its Light from the Hex-
vens,  do not find it necelfary to arlign other Reafons for proving,
that the Cafe of this is quite contrary to that of the Air; fince Per-
peltive thews, that every thing enlightened, if it have but  folid
Body, darkens more and more the further it goes off from us: Sup-
pofe, for Inftance, an open Gallery,  Feet long, having an even
Floor; you will perceive the firft Foot to be the lighteff, and to on to
the further End, less and less light. The same may be obferved in Fi-
gures cleathed in Wbite, and how much the firft will differ from the
lall.  (peak only of what is in the Light; for the Cafe is quire dif-
ferent with what is dark, and in Shade; as we may fee when Figures
are dreft in Black, that then they become lighter and lighter by the
thickening of the Vapours.
No.  Lights and Sbades.
 
The Objects which appear in  level Field, when the Air is with-
out Clouds, and the Sun, hidden either behind  Mountain or Tree,
will receive Light from all Sides, and jet keep their Relief by reason of
their firong and dark Tourbes. Their Colours are not broken, but re-
tain their nacural Beauty: And tho' the Sun, as before faid, be hid
den by fomething, and cannot then shine on the Objects, they will
neverthelets receive more or lets Light from the fir on the Side where
the Sun is hidden, without altering the Colours.
That the Blue of the Sky is no Colour, we can plainly perceive by
the Objects in an open Field, when the Sun or light Clouds fhine not
on them, which are not in the leaft tinctured by it; as being nothing
elfe than  vafl Remotencts or Height, from whence it comes forth,
and therefore not able to impart this Colour to the Objects, as they do
their' to one another, for want of Body.
Since we are treating of the Virtues of the Hir, it will not be 
mils to fay fomething of its Reffexion;  Matter worthy of Obfervari-
on; fince in that Point are offen comminted great Miltakes: And to
explain it, we thall exhibir the three following Examples.
. . The Numbers fignify the Tints; as  is one Tint;  one
Tint darker, and ,  Tint darker than the preceding.
The Figure , Plare KXIK. is  Tint darker in Shade than Bfor
this Realon; that the Trunk of the Tree  has  rough Superficies
which can gire no Light; and the white Houfe  contrarily can give
 great Light or Reffexion; Now if the Houfe were not there, but 
lerel Field inflead of ir,  would rather be lighter than darker;
and if the Trunk and Buthes behind it, were alfo taken away, thofe
two Figures would have  like Shade: Whereas now we fee two Fr
gures on one Line or Ground, one darker and the other lighter, tho'
the darkeff Shades in the latter keep their own Force; which, did
they appear otherwife, would be againt Nature and the Rules of
Art.
The second Exemple has the fame Obfervation.
Now  am well altured from Experience, that if we were to give
to tome (who had never feen this Sketch, or known the Reafon of it)
an Oatline of the following or fuch  Defign, difpoted alike, and one
Figure as far from the Trees as the other is near it, flanding in  Line
parallel with the Horizon, in order to shade them according to their
Own Notions, they would reprefent them both alike in Light and Shade;
tho' by an infallible Rule, he who flands furtheff from the Trees,
have more Light round about him than be who is nearer; and therefore it
cannot poffibly be otherwife than as we fee here exhibited; to wit, Bone
Ti


Of Lights and Sbades.
  in Shade, and  in the Ground shade; and   Tints in Shade,
and  in the Groundshade. Now behold the Woman on the fore=
ground, who, like , has one Tint in Shade, by reafon of the Re-
flexion of the Stone flanding near her. The Groundshade upon that
Stone confifts of three Tints; and if the Stone, or any firch Hindrance
were not there, the ir would caute the fame Effect, tho' not fo
Rrongly.
Some may poffibly think, that the Houle is too far to caule fuch 
Reffexion; and that then the Figure  ought not to differ to much;
but  fay, that the Trunk  with the May-bubes behind, to interpole,
that the Figure  cannot receive any Reflexion from the Houfe, and
therefore it mult naturally be one Tint darker in Shade than . Would
you make  far-feich’ Opposition, and dress  in White;  fay then,
that there would be no need either of the Trees or Houfe; when yet
irs plain, that the one as well as the other is thus ordered to ferve for
an Example.
The third Example, Plate XXK. confirms the two former; in
which we plainly fee the Reafons why Objects are weakened more or
less in their Shades, not only by the Reffexions of other Objects, but
allo by the fir on the left Side; and the Groundshades the fame,
which are darkened more or less beyond the Reach of the faid Air or
Reffexion: As it appears on the three Columns, in which tis evident,
that the Ground-thades of  and  are  Tint fainter than that of  the
Pillar  by the Light of  and the Air, and  by the Airalone. The
Pillar  is about half-way from the bottom darker in its Reffexion
than above, and its Groundthade one Tint darker than  and  by
reafon of its flanding nearer to  and whereby Pillar  comes to caft
its Ground shade on  which Ground-hade covers the Light of  whereby this laft cannot reflect thus far againtt  nor in its
Ground thade. Thefe Effects happen as well in Sun-fhine as common
Light, without the leaft Alteration.
We exhibit here another Example in Plate XXX. aforefaid, which
affords no lels Confideration than the foregoing; and whereby  thew
the Force of Light and the Mainlight Touches upon Objects, and how
unlike they appear in two Objects alike, according as the Horizon is
high or low.  and Bare the Inttances, and Cand , the Proofs of
it, that it cannot be otherwife. The Cafe is the fame, whether the
Light be Sun-fhine of common; or whether it be fronting or fideways.
The Horizon is, as we fee, between both Hleads, and the Point of
Sight
B  Lights and Shades.
 
Sight in the middle, or fomewhat more to the right Side. The Light
proceeds allo from the right.
Now confider, how the two Heads  and , tho' having one and the
fame Light, differ in their Main ligh-Touches;  having thofe Touch-
es on the Forehead, and all the projecting Parts, as Nofe and Chin,
under Lip, and to forth; and  having them on the Rife of the Brows,
Corners of the Eyes, befide the Nofe and along the Check, Tip of
the Nofe and Chin, Cc. which Atteration is only cauled by the Point
of Sight, according to its Pofition either high or low. When the Ob-
jelts (be they of what Kind foever, if but smooth and even, as Marble,
Copper or the Life ittelf) fland under an high Horizon, the aforefaid
Main-ligbt-Touches go upwards, and on the contrary defcend, the more
the Objelts are elevated above the Horizon; as we have faid, and is here
demonftrated; Now obferve CD of the fame Stuff as the foremoff
Heads, and lighted by the fame Light, where  has  flrong Height
ening on the rifing Part; which defcends more or less as it rifes above
the Horizon.
This Example is of great Mloment, and procduces uncommon Things;
in which we should fometimes be at  Loss, and which would not occur
to us in many Vears:  (peak in reference to thofe who are too conti-
dent of quick Conceptions, and do not duely weigh Things; for it mull
be allowed, that, without the Knowledge of Perspective, it is impofli-
ble to trace Truth from the Secrets of Nature, in order to bring it to
pats in our Works. Tis true, we can imitate the Life,  Gold or Sil-
ver Por, Kerle, Dith or other Chining Piece of Houhold fluft, as fine
as the Life; but may be vaftly miftaken in the Ules of them in our
Ordonnances, if we do not regard the Motions of the Glitterings;
which are as various as incredible; and yet all thofe Things may
be eafily apprehended, if we underfland, and fometimes prattile, Per
(Feftirc.
CHAP. III. Of Reffesions in the Water.
HE reprefenting Reflexions in the Water is certainly not of the
leaft Moment, and their Agreeableness makes them worthy to
be naturally exprefted; but as there are not affigned, or will be
found, any certain Rules for them, without the id of Perspettive, to
is lofl Labour to feek any: For which Reafon, some Landskip-paint
 Lights and Shades.
  often pats over the Reffexions in the Water, to avoid the Trouble
of Perspective.
Neverthelels the incomparable Pousin has not forgot to make ule of
them, and he has got great Reputation thereby;  lpeak of Nicholys,
who was as famous for Landskip as Figures, and who never met with
any Difficulties which he did not furmount.
Having earneftly applied to this Point,  confidered, whether there
could not be found other thorter Means to effect it, than by planning
Lines, Coc. that to agreeable  Part of Art might not be neglected;
and after long Trial  difcovered the following Method.
Take an oblong Board of what Size you preafe, and place thereon
some Wax-Figures as clofe to the Edge as you think proper, or accord-
ing to their Diftance from the Water, which they ought to have in
your Pilture. Bend thefe Figures into fuch Actions as your Sketch re-
quires, and place them, by means of little bits of Wood or Potters
earth, as high or low as you defire; then take  Trough (made for
that Purpofe) of Lead, Wood or Tin, painted within fide with fuch  as you want, whether Black, Umber or Terrevert, and fill
it with Water, and fet it againtt the Board and Figures, as high or
low as your skerch’ Ground direlts. Next, fix your Point of Sight;
and, after having found your Diftance, place yourfelf there, either
Randing or litting, and thus defign the Figures with their Reffexions;
Hlighily allo marking the Shades: Then fet your Layman to each
Figure, and delign it very carefully; fixing the Layman each Time in
the Place where each Figure ffood, to as to fee its Reffexion like that
in your Sketch.
Here especially take notice of the Length and Breadth of the Re-
Rexion; for it always shortens more than its Object; becaute it is to
much lower under the Horizon. When you place the Model or Lay-
man as much above the Horizon as it reflects under it, and delign it
thus correctly, in order to paint after it, you hold the Drawing uplide
down: Here you will poffibly fay, that the Reffexion ought to be re-
vers’; which  do not difown; but then you can make an Impreffion
of your Sketch on another Paper, and thereby perceive the good
Effelt.
Having proceeded thus far, and painted after your Skeich, you may
be affured every thing is right.
But here let it be obferved, that the Reffexions mull always be
perpendicular with the Objects above them, as if growing out of each
other; as we may fee in Plats EXXl.
This


 Lights and Shades.
Book .
This Merhod relates not only to the placins of Figures, but all -
ther Objects of what Kind foever; as Horfes, Dogs, Pyramids, Stones
with Batsreliefs, Vafes, Pors and other Things, and whether they
be forwards, backwards, or at the Sides of your Painting.
You may, inflead of  Watertrough, ufe  Looking-glats; but
Tis not to narural as the Water, which may be made to look deep or
shallow, and as dark or light as you pleafe, by placing  little Mud,
Grats or Sand in the bottom of the Trough.
As for the Colouring, Experience teaches, that the more the Water
is enlightened by the Sky, the more ancertain the Reffexions are; and
when the Sun fhines directly on the Warer, the Objects will appear
ib are uncertain, as well with respect to us, as thofe who view
themfelves therein; for the Reffexions then appear only as defcending
Rays, without any Shape; as we fometimes fee by  Candle, the
Moon or other Thing, which gives only  Reflexion on the Surface of
the Water, whether in Sun-thine or by Night; becaute we cannot then
perceive the Trantparency of the Water.
The Reffexions in the Warer, tho' it be quite dark and clear, are
never so light as their Objects witheut; but always  Tint or an half
durker.
Now, to reprefent the Reffexions in  running Water, you muft firtt
paint it with Light and Shade, on  Ground rubbed thinly over with 
firtle rough Oil; then take  large foft Pencil, and here and therecross
harch it. But  better Way, is, to take  long hair’ Fitch, and make
the Strokes as clole as the Veins of the Waterrun, taking Care, not to
Itrike out too much of the Our line. But as Glass is  diaphanous Body,
and therefore has so Confancy or Fixednels, nor can effect any Thing,
but by Means of fomething elle having more Body, as by the Earch,
which is  firm Body; (this we fee, when the Glass isfilvered or pirch-
ed) to with Water the Cafe is the fame; which will produce no Effect,
nor receive the Form of any Object, unless there be  firm Ground to
fx its Transparency; as we mavice by  Piece of ice.
Having laid enough of the Reffexions which concern Objects out of
the Water, it will be neceffary to oblerve fomewhat about Objects pand
ing in the Water;  Point well worth our Notice, on Account of the
uncommon Occurrences which happen in it, tho' as little heeded as if
they were on the Land, and no Water thereabouts.
We mult fuppose the Water to be like the Air, and that the Objects,
between it and the Air, feen from Topto Bottom, appear the fame as
if they were uplide down againtt the Hir; there being no other Dif
ference


Of Lights and Shades.
Chap.  between the Lights of either, than that Water is  little fainter
than the Air; as may be apprehended by  Looking-glats, in which,
the Objects, tho' they appear ever to plain, do not come up to the
Life irtelf.
Thefe Things being premifed, tis eafy to conceive, that Objects
Randing in the Water are enlightened as well from below as above. 
(peak not here of the Reffexions of Objects, but of the Objects them-
felves, and their Shades, as may be seen in Plate KXXl aforefaid The
Man  who extends his right Arm over the Water, receives flrong Re-
fexions from below, of  violet Colour, like that of the Air, above
him, along his chaded side; and his left Arm, across his Breaft, re-
ceives  double Reffexion; to wit, from the Water, and from his Body;
whereby tis of  more warm Colour than the other. The young Man
Bfooping over  Stone, views himself in the Water, in the Shade of
the Tree: By him  thew, that the Reffexion of the Water is like that
of the Air, but  little fainter, as  faid before. The Face, on the
Stone  exhibits the fame, but more fenfibly, being allo lighted from
below.
Here we muft further obferve, that the further or higher Objects are
from the Water, the more Reffexion they receive; as may be feen in the
ManD, who, with his Breaft, is close to the Warer without any Reffex-
ion; becaute the Light over him cannot thine on it, fince he is flooping
forward, and thades the Warer to the Ground with his Body. Thus
far  have experimented; and from whence, other Circumfances may
be deduced by Practice.
in the mean time we may obferve, how much thofe Objects differ
from thofe on the Land; of which latter we muft note, that the more
theyrife from the Ground, the less Reffexion the Shades receive; be
caule the Light of the Grounds being on the Superficies, they main-
can their own conftant Colours.
Touching the Reflexion in the Warer, befides the Contraction and
Reffexion,  have been long doubting about the Irregutarity between
them and the Objects themielves; fince  perceived by the Rules of Op-
ticks or prattical Perspettive, that there was fomething more to be taken
notice of.  apprehended alfo, that as there is Air and Sun above and
below, to thote two Lights mult needs caufe an uncommon Effect in the
Objects and their Glitter or main Heightenings. But yer  could not firm-
ly conclude how or in what Manner; and the rather; becaute (which 
am much furprifed at)  never heard, that any Perfon had certainly de-
montlrared it. Atlaft, finding the greateff Difficulcy in explaining my
Concep-


Book .
Of Lights and Sbades.
  did, to give  Sketch of it, caute an Inquiry to be made
into the Truchirfelf; as Plate XXKl. aforefaid fhews: Wherein we
plainly fee, how far Things may fometimes go beyond our Gueffes;
Thofe who try nice Experiments, mult be rejoiced, when they make
greater Difcoveries than others. We fay — He who seeks finds.
But nothing is to be obtained without Labour and Practice. Obferve
then, that the Stress lies here in the Main-light-Teuches, as the afore-
faid Figures plainly thew; but they may be qualified according to Occa-
Lion and as you think fit both in the Objects and their Reffexions.
We take then, for Example, the Objects flanding on the Water;
being under the Horizon equal to their Height, and receiving their
Light from the right; they fland on each Side of the Point of Sight,
and have their proper Lights and Shades, according to Perspective,
as allo the Mainlight Touches or Gless on the Relief. The same Ex-
periment may be made with all Sores of Objects; in all which, we
may perceive, how much the Reflections in the Water as well as the
Contractions will differ from the Objects themfelves.
This is an uncommon Obfervation; but Study will make it fami-
Lar.
CHAP. IV. Of Ground shades according to the Difference of
Lights.
 will not be improper to make some Obfervations about the
Ground fhades of Objects, and the Course of those Shades, accord
ing to the different Lights, proceeding from the Side round to the
fore Part.
As Perspective decermines exactly the Length, Breadth and Depth
of Things, to Tis impottible to reprefent any thing duely and well
without it, tho', as  may fay, we were to practife the Art an hur-
dred Vears, and the Ordonnances to confift of but two or three Fi
gures;  will not fay, of ten or more: Tis no Wonder, that we to
early caufe young Arrifts to learn Perspective, before they take to Com
polition; tis even commendable if they underfland it but indifferently,
and thun thofe who not only reject its Rules; but laugh at thofe who
fiudy them;  Converfation very prejudicial to young and unexperi-
enced Tyres. But to return to our Subject.
We


Of Lights and Shades.
Chap. .
 find  great dvaniage in uing  Sidefight in: our Ordonnaices.
with respelt to the Greand-pades; becaute thole Shades, whether for
wards or diftant, always run parallel with the Horizon, without any
Forefhortening; which we may eafily find without Perfpective; as
may be feen in Plate XEKIl. Fig. . becaute they may be conveni-
ently meafured with  pair of Compaffes, or clfe gueff at
We may then well perceive, how much eafier this is, than where
the Light is more fronting, and the Ground-hades confequently run
Tomewhat oblique and thorten, and therefore not menfurable by the
Compaffes; much less to be gueffed at, thro' their great Variety and
Diffimularity. If the Objects change their Places, the Ground pades alfo
after; one runs almoft parallel; another, more oblique and thorter;
and others Kill more, in Proportion as they go off from the Side whence
the Light comes; as in Fig. . whereby is thewed  Method for find-
ing fuch Ground-thades,  thout Trouble or Loss of Time, in what
Manner foever the Light fall.
As to the Frentlight, as in Fig.   mult further premife, that as
in such Cafe the Ground-fhades go off backwards, to we need nothing
but the Point of Sight, in order to find them; and their Fore-fhorten:
ings can be only found by means of the Gradation-line, which, tho'
 fmall Trouble, may be fooner made than read. My Method is
this.
Firft  skeich No. . for my Ordonnance, fixing my Horizon and
Point of Sight at pleafure. Then  begin with the foremoll Fig. .
and shade it, and ftrike its Ground-fhade at random, according as  fup-
pole the Light to be  little fronting. Next  fet my Line  (where-
on are marked the Gradation feet) on the right Side. Further  draw
 Parallelline  from the Foot of Fig.  to the aforefaid Line;
which thews its Distance Now, in order to exhibit the Courfe of its
Shade,  lay my Ruler to the Foot of Fig. , tracing its Ground-
shade up to the Horizon, where  make  uttle Star , from which
Star  fetch all my other Groundshades, both fore and off-ones, from
one Side to the other, whether Figures, Stones, Coc. Now, to find
the Lengths of all thefe Ground Chades,  draw again, from the End
of the Groundhade   Parallel-line  to the Gradation line; then
 count the degrading
Feet, suppoting the Figure  Feet high, and iis
Ground-hade  Feer
long, going  Feet into the Piece, as smarked on

the Gradation line. Thus may all other Objects be managed; by. 
ly counting their Heights, in order to give the Depchs of their Ground;
thades accordingly.

to Ses
No.  Lights and Shades.
 
Tis now eaty to judge, how difficult it would be to find the Varia-
tion of Shadow without fuch  Line, as aforefaid
This Method has  further Advantage, in affifting thofe who will
finith all their Figures after the Life; for, by the Courfe of the said
Groundfhades, we can prefently know where to place the Model or
Layman with respect to the Light of the Piece; as we have demon-
Rrared in our Drawing-book.
CHAP. . Of Reffexions in general.
 make this Obfervation plain,  have thought proper to it.
luftrace it by one or two Examples; becaute tis one of thofe
principal Beauties of  Picture, whereby we every where dif
corer the Malter.
Irs not improper for wearied Huntimen, or Nymphs, to reft in
Shades; as in this Example, Plite KXKIIl. Here they fit forwards
in the left Corner of the Piece, on  green Bank, againtt  Wall quite
over-run and shaded by the Trees; on the Tops whereof, here and
there, are feen some lmall frong Lights. The flanding Figure receives
the frongelf Light almoft down to the Knees; and the remaining Part,
uniting with the Ground, fhews its Diffance: The Light of this Figure
has however not to much force as to give the Wall, behind the fitring
Figures, any Reffexion; partly becaute those Figures are between, and
partly on account of the Roughness of it; as being full of Breaks, Holes
and projecting Branches and Leaves, which double the Shade, and admit
little or nothing of the reffetting Rays of the Figure. We fee con
trarily, that the Figures fitting over againtt the light Object or Figure,
receive, without Hindrance, firong Reffexions, the one from before,
the other fomewhat fideways, according to their firting, either behind,
forwards or in the middle.
Tis of great Moment to thew plainly the true Caufe of the faid Re-
Rexions, as to Diffance, Colour and Force. Of the Colour  shall lay
this (for the Diftance  have already shewed) that, were the faid light
Frgure drel in beautiful light Red, and frongly lighted by the Sun,
and the four firting ones dreft in Purple, Vellow, Blue and Whice,
they would certainly be adulterated by the red Reffexion, and parly
lofe their own Colours, in order to take that of the other, and be
mixed with ir. As for Inftance, the Purple will become Red; the
Blne,


Of Lights and Shades.
  Viclet; the Fellow, Rulfet or Fillemor; and the White, Ap-
ple-bloffom of Fleth-colour: Vet some more than others, according as
they receive faint or flrong Reffexions, diftant or near: Moreover the
Naked will become more warm, not all over but in the Parts which
are tinged by it; for the Air round about is feen lets or more, whe
ther in the Shade; of between it and the Part which receives the Re
fexion.
The second Example in Plate XXXIIl. aforefaid shews the Break
ing of the Shades, according to the Place, as well in Colour as Force.
The Stone-wall is of  Ruffet and warm Colour; the flanding Fi-
gures dreft in White or light Colours are, with the Stones and Ground
about them, lightened by  common Light or Sun-thine.
Thefe Objects hew us, that tho' the Light, which comes upon
them, be pure and unmixed, their Shades are neverthelefs quite adul-
terated; becaute they are hidden from the Air, and furrounded with
 warm Ground, and receiving no other Light than from the Refiexi-
ons of the faid Ground, the Colour whereof the Shades take: We fee
the contrary in the undermoft flying Figure, to wit, that the more
the Objects approach the Air, the cleaner they become, and Keen
their own Colour; as appears in the uppermolt Figure, which is half
in the Air, and not the leall altered in its Shade; lave that it becomes
 little more purplith according to its Distance; which may be vifibly
seen in its Under-parts, and in the loweff flying Figure; which is flitl
in the dark, and cannot be rouched by the Blue of the Air, being of
 quite different Colour from the uppermoft; to wit, more warm, as
are allo the Figures which fland below.
Formerly few Mafters underfood Reffexions, especially among the
Ialians. Among the French we find some made ufe of them. How-
ever  freely own, that fuch of the Irations (were there but one) who
obferved them, underffood them in Perfection; and the French but in-
differencly; tho' Vouter oot his Repuration by them, having therein
done much more than all the French and Iuhans: Which makes me
believe that the Reffexions have not been long in Praftice; fince we yet
find many old Pieces wherein they, are not at all obferved;  cannot
but think, that at that Time they were unknown to them. Buss what
is Kill worfe, fome, as Laftman, Rotenhamer, &cc. did not knoty, when
an Object was in Shade, on which side it ought to be light or dark,
wherefore they shaded it like others which were in the Light,
more or less, as if it were glazed to much darker: For Ifflance; in
 Piece lighted from the right Side, you will fomcrimes fee  Fisure in
CC  Lights and Shades.
 .
the Shade of  Stone or other Object; Now the Sharle of this Figure;
imtead of being sn the right side, occasioned by the Stone, they made
on the left, like all the reft:  true Sign that they knew nothing of Re.
Hexions. Rrphaet himself was not expert in. ii; for at. that Time
they knew nothing of placing Light againt Light, and Dark againt
Darkness; on which Occasons the Reffcixons come moft to pass; whereas
they fought the chief Effelts and Harmony in oppoting Light to Shade,

and the contrary, and therefore needed no Reffexions: Moreover they
avoided all great Shades and Broadness. But now--days the Manage
ment is quite different; we are for great Sbades: And what makes an
Ordonnance look finer than great Shades and Lights, whether Build-
ings with Figures and Batsreliefs, woody Groves or any thing elfe,
quise in Shade, agreeably lighted by the Reffexions of Greands,, Rir or
other light Objects!  certainly gives the Eyc great Satisfaction, with
respect to Pariety; and at the fame Time produces an agreeable Union
and Tendernets, as well in the whole as the Parts of  Picture. Ne
verthelets it fares with Riffexions as with all other Things, Superffuity
caufes  Surfeir. There are allo fome, who to delight in Reffexions,
that they thew them at all Adventures; and will often exprets almoll
imperceptible ones with the greateff Force, by Vermilion, Ultrama.
rine, red Orpiment, CCc. we find fuch chiefly among the Flemings as
Yordaans, Rubens, and many others.
We mall take then particular Care, not to reprefent any Reffexions
without thewing the Reatons of them, and how far or near they are to
their Caules; that we may rightly judge, what Force or Weakness
they receive or give. in  Word, that we need not be obliged to
ask, wrence the Reffexion proceeds? why it is Red, Tellow or Blue, so
Brong, so faint? &.
CH AP. VI. That Sunskine has no more Force than common Light,
with respect to Sbades.
: certain, that Objects lighted by Sun-Chine have no darker or
fronger Shades than thofe in  common Light, tho' they seem to
have tronger; for the Blue of the Air is lighted more or lets, ac
cording to the Sun’ Strength or Weaknels, and therefore keeps atways
the same Tint, asI prove by the firtt Example in Plate XXKIV.
The


Of Lights and Shades:
  Column, whether plain of ornamented with Bats relicts- like
the Trajas or Antenine, is fet up in the middle of the Field, and at 
Diffance from it, at the side of the Piece, an high Tower or Bulwark,
the Ground-hade whereof above half covers the Column; wherefore
the Sup Chines powerfully on the upper Part only, and yet we shall
aind the Shade from top to bettem of one and the same Tint.
Tis the fame with the Light of  Candlein  darkith Room; or in
the Evening; which, tho' fronger and of more force than the other
Light, yer does not in the leaft darken the Shades of the Parts on
which it comes, but lets them remain aliks, as we fee in the second Ex-
ample.
The Lantern, in the Boy' Hland, lights the Objects near it in part,
when the Refidue is lighted by the Window; we lee then,  fay, that
the Parts illuminated by the Lantern; do not become darker, in the
Shade, than if the said Light were not there. And if the Dayhappen to
be thut in, and Night approaching, it will not only be darker about
the said Light, but all over.
But its quite the reverse with transparent Objetts, luch as Stufts, :
laballer, Horn, Cec. for want of the Solidity of the preceding Objetts;
as we fee in the third Example.
Suppofe that the Column, either of Paper or Alabafter, receive
its Light, thro'  small Opening, either from the Sun or  Candley.
you will find, the Shade, about the Part fo lighted, to be more or lets.
light, according to the Strength of the Light, in fuch Manner fiat
it may be plainly diftinguithed from the other Shade whereabout is no
Licht.
This Obfervation especially prevails in Nudities and transparent.
Draperies.
in Nudities lighted by the Sun, we shall find, the small or thin Parts
to be always more or less transparent; as the Eyelids, Nofe, Ears,
Fingers, Coc. and therefore they muft not have firm Shades: But Tis.
contrary in  Stone-face, for tho' the Sun fhine ever fo frong againtt
the thinneff Parts, yet they will not be tranfparent, but remain as.
dark as the thicker: And were this Face to be painted with  beautiful
and natural Colour, it cannot be like the Life, but rather  dead Per-
fon:  fpeak with respect to Tranfparency; for we know by Experi-
ence, that the Blood, being warm, is thin and tranparent, but when.
chilly or coagulated, it is corporeal or folid; wherefore its certain,
that, in this Cafe,  dead Perfon is more like  Stone than  natural
Figure. We can plainly perceive this in flaughter’ Oxen; when the
Entrails


Of Lights and Shades:
 .
Eotrails are taken out, and  Candle, fet within the Carcass, the Breaft
and Parts between the Ribs will be more tranfparent while the Fleth
is warm, than after is cold and has hung loager. It is the tame with
 dead Body; for if  Candle be fet behind an Ear, or next to the
Nofe, they will not be tranfparent.
The fingle Folds of thin Draperies appear more tranparent in Sun-
thine than in common Light, and have therefore sainter, Shades than
coarfer and more thick Veftments; but the Shades of double banging
Folds, especially when they are clofe together, appear in Sun-fhine
mach Bronger than in the fingle Folds of thick Stufts. Leaves of Trees
do the fame.
The Difficulty being thus folved; namely, that the Strength of
Sun thine, or  Candle, do not make the Shades darker than they are
in common Light, we fhall, to accomplish our Purpofe, thew wherein
the Sums Strength confifts;  Matter eafily to be apprehended by thofe
who have well weighed what has been before faid.
We find by Experience, that Objects lighted by the Sun have much
greater Force than thofe in common Light; which is not effected by
Rrong Shades, but by their Broadness and Sharpness; which common Light
does not gize, either within doors or in the open Air. Some imagine,
the Strength to be greater in the Sun than in common Light; which
can only make Objects approach in Proportion to their Magnitude, Di=
ftance or Nearnels, as mall Life and large Life; yet  fay, that common
Light has this Property as well as Sun-thine. What Difference then is
there between either! No other, than in the one broud and sarp
Sbades, and in the other, more round and melting ones. The former
-cautes plain and long Ground-shades, and the lawer, short and uncertain
ones. Hereby we properly dillinguith  Sun-thine from common Light.
That the one is more forcible than the other is no Wonder; the Proof
appearing in the two following Examples, in Plate XXKV. better
than  can express it in Words: Of thefe the firtt is lighted by the
Sun, and the second by  common Light; both alike in Darkness of
Shades; the one tharp, with long, plain Groundshades, and the other
the contrary.
 once painted an Emblem, or rather  Narciffus viewing himfelf
in the Warer:  cook the Light more fronting, as tis commonly order
ed in Sun-thine, with an incent only to thew, how  apprehended Sun
thine with respect to the melring of the Sharpness, and alfo to avoid 
Groundhade, which  Childs Head near him would have cauted on
the Cheek of Nurciffus (the Principal in the Piece, and his left Check
already


Of. Ligbts and Shades.
  in Shade) if the Light had come fideways; which would have
look’. to very offentive, that his View could not have thewn the
Beauty wherewith he was to much enamoured; it was moreover indif-
ferent to me, whether the Light came from  Side or was more or
lets fronting, becaute it respects the general Delign no more than if it
were intirely fronting: Tis true, that large Groundhades caufe the
greatelt Elegance in Sun fhine, if they come not too clofe together
(for then they look dilagreeable, and caule  certain Melanchoty in 
Pilture) but appear more pleafant when intermixed with Gleams
of small Lights to break their too great Breadth.
 call this Piece an Emblem, becaute the Poct fays, that this Vouth,
feeing his own Likeness in the Water, fell in love with himfelf. Now
this fort of Love difcovers  vain Conceit or weak Paffion in  Man,
to far clouding his Knowledge and Judgment, that he is infentible of
what he is doing: For the more natural exprefting which Senfe,  had
placed, near Narciffus,  Child with  Fools Cap, fawning on and
embracing him, and decking his Hair, Virginlike. with Flowers;
and, to thew the Delight he rook in his Folly, his Motion and Look
bespoke one affected with the Reffexion which the Child shewed him
in the Water.
This Piece was richly filled with By-works; as Figures, Architec.
ture, Bolcage, Cattle, Flowers and Water, with delign to reprefent all
the particular Objects lighted by the Sun, each according to its Qualiry
and in the moll faitable Manner.. It was thoroughly finithed: By -
nished,  undertland, when every thing is in it to the moft minute
Circumftance, not when only the principal Parts are expreft, and ma-
ny small Circumftances left out, or, when Things are curioutly foft-
caed; as fome, by the Word, would make us believe. Be that as it
will,  had not left every thing unfoftened; becaute the Difference would
then have been to great, that the Piece muft have had too much Near-
nets; fince irs certain, that as Objects go off they become more uncer-
tain. The fmall and fubile Things, luch as fmall Folds and Features,
difappear; yet the Painting might well be faid to be finithed; fince 
very Thing was in it that ought to be, with respect to its Distance.
 had before painted the fame Delign, for  Model of that above;
was laid on flat and not in the leaft loffened; whereby the Difference
between them was very vifible: Now  mult own, that foftening is ve-
ry alluring, and has an apparent Distance; however we may always.
perceive, that the one has as much Force as the other.
We have before afferted, that Objects lighted by the Sun caute )
greater Force and Motion than in common Light; which fome ima-
Fine.



Of Lights and Shades.
 .
gine, proceed oply from the Sharpnets of the Shades: Nowg irlis: to,
in some Meafure, with respect to their Broadness, but principally: for
the Plainness of the Ground hades which the Objects caft on each other;
whereby Thingsare often broke and divided in fuch  Manner as if all
ire deable; even lix Figures in  common Light will not fometimes
give to many Pieces as four in Sum fune: Whence we may plainly per-
ceive, that Sampneys grves  Nearness, foftening more and more as the
Objects go off; to that no Objects whatever can thew any Sharpness un-
tys they ire Mir; becaute of the Air interpoling between us and them:
If this seem strange and unincelligible,  due Inquiry will make it ev:
dent; Wherefore fargue, that the nearer the Objects, the more plain
and fudden are their Shades; for as lets Hir interpofes between us and the
neared, to it muit increate in Proportion as they go off
Here it will not be unneceifary to relate  particular Accident, as 
Contirmation of my Aftertion.  have formerly faid, that in my
Vouth  made many Deligns in Watercolours: Now  had one Time,
among others, painted one, which, by reafon of its farved and hard
Penciting,  fo diiliked, that  purpoted to try to give it  better
Face, tho'  were to tpoil it inirely. Firt, Irried it with the Glare
of an Esg; which not fucceeding.  fixed it on Paftboard, and
made  Brim of Wax round it; then  poured clear ifinglats on it,
and let it dry: By which means the Painting became as neat and
toff as poffible; and, thewing it to one of my Incimates, he was to
furprized, that he could hardly believe it to be the fame Piece, be
caufe the Body of the Kinglats had taken away the aforefaid Hun
griness and Hardness. But afterwards, on inquiring into the Na-
tures of Things, this Experiment appeared not firange or wonderful to
He
By this Occurrence  would intimate, that Mill or Hir takes away
all Shargness; making Things gross and rough feem light and fmooth,
like  Vernith or Gluegloffing every Thing in Nature before our Eyes.
Touching Objects lighted by the Sun, they cannot, by Means of
Rrong and dark Shades, and with Tellowisness only, look natural or fim-
ay; becaute there is no Difference between this, and other Lights, with
respect to Force;  mean in Objectslets than the Life. The Sharp-
nets of broad Shades, and the Forms of Ground-shades, with the Co
lour of the Light, and their Rellexions, how weak foever, can natu
rally effect it: But Objects as big as the Life are beyond our Power,
if they were only to confift in Force. Now, fome may paffibly fay,
that then it is the better to be represented in Little: To. which  mull
antwer,


Of Lights and Shades.
  that then the Painting would not go off in Proportion,
fick to the Frame: Of which we shall fay more in another Place.
CHAP. VIl. Of the Ground-spades in Sunshine.
 certain, that the Groundfhades in Sun-fhine (which contribate
much to the Decorum of  Picture) confiff not only of Length,
Broadness and Sharpnels, but in  Conformity with the Objects
which caufe them, whether Pillar, Pyramid, Square, Coc. The
Ground-sbade of an upright flanding Figure, falling on the Ground or
any thing elfe, must be perfertly seen; even to much, that tho' the said
Object were not feen, or were hid behind fomething, yet we may
judge, by its Ground-hade, what Shape it has; which is one of the
principal Tokens of Sun-thine. Some think this no great Matter; and
that when they have ftruck, on the Ground,  long Stripe of  certain
Breadth, that is fufficient, without shewing whether it be the Shadow
of  Pillar or  Man.
Speaking of this,  cannot omit mentioning  Blunder of  certain
great Mafter. He had reprefented  St. Francis in the Wildernels, on
his Knees at Praver, with extended Arms before  Crucifix, as he
is generally exhibited. The Piece in itfelf was very fine; but cafting
my Eyes on the Crucifix (which was compofed of small Twigs of
Trees)  perceived, that it made  diffinct Shade of the whole on the
Ground, tho' was almoft balf in the Shade of the Saint. But what
more furprifed me, was, that his Body with the Arms in the same Po
fition as the Crucifix, but ten times bigger, did not caf  like Sbade
on the Ground, but the Shade of  Mass or Block, without Arms.
Now, we have faid before, that tho'  Figure or other Object be
hidden behind fomeching, yet we can judge, by the Groundshade,
what Shape or Form it bas; as  shall thew in few Words: For inftance,
place  Perfon in  Palace or Apartment, behind  Pillar, or the like,
and let him be lighted by the Sun; his Shape will plainly be feen on
the Ground, by his Shadow. Again, would you introduce into 
Landskip,  Pyramid, Tower, of Bulwark, which is not there, it may
be done by means of the Ground hade, when it falls into the Piece
from the Side of the Light; whereby the Objects, and every thing be
longing to them, will be plainly vifible.
No.  Lights and Sbades.
Book. .
Ingeious Pritters of Sun frine have still an fidvantage above others,
that they need not make any high Trees, Hills or Buildings, in order
to create here or there large Groundfhades, for bringing forwards
Fore-objects, and flinging off Hinder ones: they order their Shades
where they think proper, and can always fupport their fo doing with
Reafons; becaute we often fee, in Sun-fhine,  fmall driving Cloud
Shadow  whole Piece of Ground, and another Ground shall be light
again; and to feveral behind one another: Thus they can divide 
Field, at pleafure, into Lights and Shades, in order to thew Things .
greeably.
 have, with great Attention, obferved the Colour and Shades of
the Suns Light, and found (especially in the Month of September, 
bout  er  in the Afternoon, when the Sun is ftrongeft) that the Sky
has  clear blue Colour, intermixed with small driving Clouds. As for
the Objects, when the Sun Chines flrong, they appear, as if heighten
ed with red Orpiment and Whire, and the Shades reddith Grey; as
White, Black and  little brown Red mixt together; not uniting with
the Blue as in common Light, as some imagine, but becoming gradu-
ally  liitle more Violet, and growing famter towards the Horizon,
where no Blue is to be feen. The Treeson the fore and second Grounds
appear finely green: The Blue of the Objects is greenith; the Red, is
Orange colonr; the Violet, Ruffet; and thus all the Colours in Pro-
portion: Deep ltater thone on becomes greenith Grey. This exact
Obfervation agreed perfectly with what  had formerly experiment
ed, in  bright Sun-thine, by means of  fmall Hole in the Window
of  darkened Room; by which  faw naturally on the white Wall,
as on Paper, the Reffexion of every thing that was moving without-
doors.
But let us proceed further to confider, whether mit Chapen Shadows
do not make Objects unintelligible. Beaury in general, fublifting either
in Figures, Landship of other Objects, exhibius all things plain and
diftinct in their Shapes and Forms, without Dimination or breaking
then; for Things contrary to each other cannot poffibly raife an
agreeable Beauty in our Eyes, nor convey to the Sentes  true Idea of
their Forms, unless by  Medium, confifting of  second or middle
Tinr, which unites the two contrary Parts, namely Light and Shade,
when they come too sharp on each other; thereby to foften the De-
formity on the Objefts, and to unite them:  fpeak of Things
which are the broud; which makes round Objelts, inflead of look
ing relieved, feem quare or angutar as if in Sun-fhine; where.
fore


Of Lights and Shades.
  they appear not beautiful but mif hapen: And the Reafon is
plain; People are not fenlible of any other Deroram than what oc-
cors to their Eyes. For its certain, that Things alter by the leall
Accident, whether of unufral Lights or Shades, which make them
frange and unkhown. Let fome boatt, that is broad and the bett
Manner;  maintain, that tho' it were  Sun-thine, it is all one and
the fame: And if we are to fpeak of what is agreeable and perfect,  that it ought to be known; that  Pitture with  common Light is
the most perfect;  Light which fiews as more exactly and plain the pre-
per Forms of Objects; what is round, remaining fo, and the Square alrer-
ing not. As for the Mifhapes of Things exhibited in San-thine, we
have fufficiently thewed them; as alfo, that the Sharpnets of deformed
Shades spbils ifie true Propercy of the Objects; for Inftance, fuppofe
two flanding Figures, talking together, are lighted by the Sun; if now
the one call  Shade on the other, to as half to cover his Face, we need
not doubt, but he will becomelels Known, even where he  Parent.
in Arcbiteffure or Mouldings it happens as bad; becaute the ofen-
five Sharpness of the Shades distigures and confules their Form and Neat-
Rets at Once.
 think it therefore  Sign of Pufillanimity (not to fay Cowardice)
in  Landskip-painter, always to make Choice of Sunfhine; which is
certainly but  fmall Part of his Arc: As if an Architect were to be
continually imployed about  Cheff or Box;  Flower-painter, about   Cattle-painter, about  Cow or Sheep;  Still-life Pain-
ter, about  Scull or Hourglass;  Sea-painter, about  Sloop or Boat;
of  Statuary, about  Crucifix. He is no Hiffory-painter, who al.
ways repreients an Herodins with  St. John’ Head in  Charger; or  Rabbing herfelf; or  Tael with an Hammer, or  St. Toon
with  Lamb; all which are but particular Incidents, which fcarce de-
ferve  Name: An Arriff therefore mult not. be afraid to exhibit every
Thing that can be repretented with every Sort of Light.
But the Opinion of molt Paincers of Sun Chine, is as ridiculous as that
of thote who always practife  common Light; boch proceeding from
 Millake or Ignorance, whereby they cannot rightly judge of Things
diftering from what they have been always uted to: Now, their Judg:
ment is only  Conclution agreeing with their Apprehcations in  Poilt
which they precend to undertland, and which therefore ought to be thus
and thus; when yet it' certain, that before we can judge of Things,
we ought firft to inquire into them, and, by  Comparifon between boib,
to observe wherein they differ.
Dd  Lights and Shades.
Book 
 Sun fhine is not to proper for Hiftory as for Landskip and Ar-
chirelture, arifes from heace; that, on fuch Occafions, it is obftructing,
and appears hard and unpleafant, by Reafon of the Sharpnets of the
Shades and Ground hades, as we have before incimated; neverthelets,
if the Matter require it, it muft be uled; yet with fuch Caution, that
no mit Chapen Ground pades appear to obttrult the Sight, or create an
Averfion
But if Sun fhine were the beft and moff advantageous Light, Face-
painters would certainly ule no other; of which, to this Day, we have
not one inftance; becaute firft, the Colours do not fhew themfelves in
that Light to be what they really are.
Secondly, Becaule is impoffible, that either Man, Woman or Child,
can, without Trouble and an Alteration of Countenance, especially .
Dour the Eyes and Mouth, fir any Time with their Faces in the Sun.
Thirdly, Becaufe the Sunnever flands sill, but is always altering.
Fourthly, Becaule the Sweetnets of the Features would thereby be
poiledatonce. And,
Laftly, Becaufe it would be very improper to hang fuch Pictures in
 Roomout of which the Sun is kept.
II would be ridiculous and abfurd, to fay of  Woman, that the is
unlike  Man, unlets they to refemble that we can fee no Difference be
tween them; for as the Woman is like  Woman, and the Man like 
Man, to there muft needs follow one of thefe Conclutions, to wit, that
he cannot or will not Beeir: We could add  third, as  Contempt of
the Woman, namely, that the is not incirely like  Man: But this laff
(Which arrends moft People' Judgments) is moft ridiculous, and to be
especially thunn’ by thofe of right Apprehention, as being often the
Source of Hatred and Envy, and even Ruin, as Experience daily thews
in those, who, thro' Prepolfeffion, defpife every thing that' difagree
able to their Work and Fancy.
 shall not enlarge on this Point, but keep to my Purpofe, of thew-
ing the Prepoffetfion of Sun-thine- Painters, as well as others: And, to be
the becter underftood, premife, that there are three Things wherein the
Whole Matter contifts, and which we muft firft fix, and diflindly ob
ferve; namely,  Sunshine,  common Light, and  faint Light, which
differ from each other as much in Fact as Name.
The firft is grong and shurp, the second bread, but not sharp; and the
third, faint and mekting.
The firft caufes di hintt Groundshades; the second makes melting ones;
and the third, faint ones.
The


Of Lights and Shades.
Chap  firfl receives irs Colour from the sun; the second, from the
Cloads; and the third, from the Blse of the Sky.
We will fubjoin, that the firft may be confidered as  Man; the fe-
cond, as  Woman; and the third, as  Child.
Who will now fay, that the Child is not good, becaule is not to lut
ty, frong and bright as the Father or Mother; or that the Woman is
not fo, becaute the is not intirely like  Man?
Obferve then, how thefe unthinking Sun fhine Painters judge further
of the second and third Lights: It is not broad, fay they; whereby,
weare to underfland, that tis not fo funny and Charp in Shades as in
their Paintings: Broad, Broad  they fpeak to their Difciples in to
low  Tone, that no Stranger muft hear it; as if it were  Secret unknown
to the very Art lis faid that the good Pbilemon was to bigorted to
Things having broad Lights and Shades, that he never painted other
than Sun or Moon-light-pieces; which he evidenced, in exercing his
whole Force to reprelent Tupiter with ffemena; where they are both
seen going to Bed, and yet the Sun thines to bright into the Room,
that you might count all the Squares of the Window on the Floor.
Poor Tupiter ! How violently are you dealt withl Dares Phabus, con-
trary to your express Cemmands, peep thro' the Windows, the you charg-
ed him to bide for three Days and three Nights? But what signifies that,
thinks the Painter; the Painting muft be broad, and the Sumshine muft
be there, were it Midnight. Had he made  Moonlight, it would
have fitted that Seaton
But it fares with fuch Artifts as it did with one, who was fo fond of
Painting Oranges, that he never made  Piece without one. This Zea-
lot, having made interelt to paint the Battle of Pavia, asked his im
ployer, whether there should not be an Orange in it? Hew should tbat
come to pass? fays the Gentleman: Topass, or not, replied the Painter,
let me alone for that : The other laughed; and not dreaming he would
put one in, aftertalking of other Things, faid, at parting—Do asyou
think beft: The poor Man, glad of the Authority, was looking in his
Picture for  Place for the Orange; but fearful; if he placed to fine 
Fruiton the Ground, it might be trampled on by the Horfes, he con-
trived  small square Stone in  Corner of the Painting, and fet thereon,
in  Pewter-plate, an Orange as big as the Life, and very naturally
done. This innoceat Wretch (for luch deferve not the Name of Pain-
ters) gives us to underfland, that what we can do beft, is beft, whetber
it be proper or not.
Ie



Of-Lights und Sbades.
Book
 is  conftant Maxim, that Things, witbeat Sanstim, finely paint-
ed, and with proper Lights and Shades, muft needs be good; without
it any how. Do
the Word (brord) which they abute by incroducing
not think then, true Arcifts! that the Pieces which are not proad, are
not as good as those lighted by the Sun, Moon and Candle.


 
CH AP. ViIl. How Sanskine is to be represented in  Piece boving
 common Lighr.
+
H  Propoficien may peffibly feem flrange to fome, and per-
haps  Feint; but is, in Fact, to far from it, or being  Tritle,
that tis  Matter of Moment, and founded on good Reaforns.
We take ir for granted, that the Sun differs in Force from other
Lights, and is  Tint lighter.
Weather abounding with driving
We often fee, in changeable
Cfouds, that the Sun is obfcured by very thin and hanging airy Va-
Dours in fuch Aianner, that whole Tralts of Land, Howles, Hills,
Cc. even whole Woods are over-fhadowed: Which. Shades however
are thin, and exhibit all the Objects more or lets plain than in com-
mon Light.
But let us come to the Point; which is, to reprefent, in  Common-
light-piece,  Sun-fhine with one and the fame Force of Colonrs, each
in its Degree, without Impedimet to each other;  mean, when the
Sun is not forward or in the Front of the Picture, or is not too much
fpread, which would thereby feem too flaring.
To do it therefore according to the Rules of rt, divide, for In
ftance,  Landskip into four Grounds; of which, let the firft be
Whire, and the three others diminithing in Proportion: Let the
fecond Whire ground ferve for the Sun-fhine: Now, tis plain, that as
the common Light on the Fore ground alrerdy pefeffes the Force of
the Coloars, it muft needs follow, that the Sunffune, which is one
Iint lighter, as before faid, and has no other Force than the fame
White, can alfo have no nearer Place than that of the fecond Ground:
 plain Proof, that, if it be placed on the third Ground, ir will dit

for to much more in Force. Now, in order to diftingwith the Ditte
rence between this Light on the second Ground, and that on the firfl
and to reprefent it narurally, we ought to exhibit the Shades and
Ground shades of the Objects, parp, broud and long; whereby we may
Per


Of Lishss and Shades
 Di.
perceive, that this is  Sunlight; and the other, with dall and pert
Groundshades, to thew that it' commen Light. But the better to con
ceive the Nature of Sun-light, obferve its Colour in the Morning and
Evening.
To aid thofe who may not prefencly underlland what  have faid,
 thall lay down  fhort Method of Management in  certain and ealy
Manner.
Having sketch’ your Delign, and fetiled the Parts which you would
have enlightened by the Sun, dead colour it neatly, as if it were to
be throughout  common Light: But in the fecond Colouring, you
mult fomawber mere beighten the Parts which are lighted by the Sun;
whether whiter, more yellow or more ruffet, according as you would
have them, and to as to perceive  visible Diference: The Shades allo
to he mere diffint and bread, without making them glowing, except
here and there in the Reffexions.
Now, if on the Fore ground, or about it, there be no White, we
have an Opportunity to throw here and there on it some Sunrays by
the Force of White, Fellow or Ruflet, according as the Suns Colour
then appears; which could not be done; if we had before laid the Suns
Force in the Offskip.
Here, let it be obferved, that if we enlighten some forward Objects
by the Rays aforefaid, they ought not to be of Ligbt, and bright-co-
loured Marrer, fuch as whice Marble or light Free ftone, very light
Draperies, or beautiful Carnations; but of fuch Tints as appear dark
in  common Light; becaute thefe frongly heightened with the Sun-
like Whice will teech out the same Light,
Now, to finith the Work with Certainty, and to find, with Eate,
the proper Tints of Objects, lighted by the Sun, proceed thus. Tem-
per your White with red or yellow Orpiment, more or less Tellow, as
you would reprefent the Sun early or late. Then, inflead of pure
White, mix it with your light firff Tints of all the Objects which are
lighted by the Sun: Whereupon you will find each Colour to be
broke according as its Qvality or Force, with respect to its Body, dif-
fers much or little from the reft. Thus the Work will have the de-
tired Effect, as Experience, the Daughber of Irath, can reftity.
CHAP.
 





Book .
Of Lights and Shades.
 

CHAP. IX. That the Sbades of Objects in Sunshine are not more

glowing than in common Light.

 NY are fuch Strangers to the Truth of Things, and to
 iide enquire inco them, that, to retain their groundless Ha-
bits, they flight Reafons, and maintain their Erroys. This is
evident from their univerfal Opinion, that the Shades aff Objects are
more glowing in Sim-hine than in common Light: Which  intirely
deay; but that the Shades and Reffexions become lighter and lighter,
in Proporton as the Sun Chines Rronger, is true.
That the Suns Light is more glowing than  common one, is indif
putable; for, as the Suns Light is more or less Vellow or Red, tis
natural, that every Thing he thines on should partake of the same Colour,
not only in Lights, burallo in the Shades which receive the Reffexions
of the Grounds, and other near Objects: But, as there are no Objects
what firong Reffexions foever they receive) which do not here and there
preferve some un reffected Shades (as, when one Object is covered by the
Ground-Lhade of another) to the said Shades ought, fince they have no
Communication with the Sun or his Reffexions, and are of another Na-
ture, to be moregrey, like thofe in common Light, as receiving no Co.
lour bit what the Airgives them.
Hereby,  think, we can beft diffinguith between  Sum thine and com-
mon Light; wherefore is ftrange, that People, who commonly feek
Shades for the Sake of Coolness, will notwichttanding hove them warm.
Tis therefore no wonder to find to few Winter-painters.  have
teen Winter-pieces of Brengel as warmly coloured as if for Midsummer;
even the very lee and Snow as glowing; tho' in Winter all Things re-
ceive light Refiexions, and have little of no Shade, the Ground-fhades
are lighrith and blue, and yet every Thing has it' Diftance and Going
off; tho' fome, contrarily, make their Off-fhades as warm as the for
ward ones
For this Reafon, Tis neceftary for the Artiff fometimes to exercile
himself in Sun-fhine, and make due Obfervations on the Narure of it;
not making it his conflant Praltice, but  particular and agreeable Study:
If he cannot be perfect in it, he ought at leaft to know as much of it
as of common Light, in order to ule, in his Works, fomerimes the one,
fometimes the other, as Occation requires Some think, becaute of
the


Of Lights and Sbades.
 .
the Broadness, that Sun-thine is more eafy than common Light: But it
is not fo; lince  think it as difficult, for  Sun-thine Painter to repre
feat common Light, as  Common light Painter to exhibit SunChine,
with respect to Nacuralness. Many, perhaps may differ from me in
Opinion, becaufe, in Sun fhine, the Groundshades are diffintt and li-
mited. Whence, they deduce this Argument; that in  Piece lighted
intirely from  Side, and the Sun having Meridian Alcirude, the
Groundfhades of all the Objects appear  third lets than their full
Length, and therefore they may be correctly meafured by the Com
pafles, each in Proportion to its Length, on to the Offship: Which 
willingly grant, and to which  will fay further in their Favour, that
is to be practifed, not only when the Grounds are level and horizon
tal, but likewife in Up and Down grounds, where the Compalies are
utelets; if the Ground drip, the GroundfFades will do the fame; does
itrife, they do to too; as the Knowing in Perspective well underfland;
thus far,  fay, they are in the Right: But fuppofe it thould happen,
that the Piece be lighted from within, or from without; Is it not thes
as uncertain as in common Light, and, becaute the Compaffes are ufe
less, much more troublefome to find the Shades and Ground:hades,
and their Enlargements forwards and Offdiminations; which ought to
be as fentible as the Sun is either off or forward? Contrarily, How
ealy is it in common Light, where they are small and dull? The Task
is therefore not to ealy as fome imagine, who endeavour only to re-
prefent  Right or Lett fide thade. To reprefent the Sun in all Pofitions
is quite another Thing, and there are few fuch Painters: For we do
not eafily find,  Sunthine-painter meddle with common Light; but
contrarily, that  Commonlight Painter will fometimes practife Sum
thine; and the Reafon is plain, the common Light takes in every Thing;
wherefore, he who underflands this well, can eafily give inco Sun-thinc.
The Point is only, that Sun-fhine is warm in the Lights, but not in the
Shades, as fome imagine.
Now it fometimes happens, that two Pieces,  Sun fhine, and 
common Light, hang together, both having the utmoll Force of Co-
louring, and to alike, as hardly to diflinguily the Sun-thine; the Lights
being in both alike and broad (for fince the Word Broad is come into
Fathion, some will paint bread, whether it be Sun-thine, or not, as
well within doors as without; moreover, the Lights and Shades warm. )
What now is to be done, when two fuch Pictures muft hang together.
in order to diftinguish the Sun fhine Nothing edia verily; than to abate
the Strength of the one fomewhat, and heighten the Force of the 
No.  
ther;


 Lights and Shades.
Book 
ther; not by making the Shades darker, but by  more warm and
bright Light, with long and diffinet Ground shades, not only broad,
but Barg.  underfland here, that the Common light piece ought not
to be inferior in Goodness in its Kind; but not broadlighted or sha-
ded, unlets the Caule plainly appears.
Bur we feldom fee too fuch Piecestogether, done by the fame Mafter;
becaute moll Painters make but one of the Kinds their Bufiness: And
if it once happen, yet they do not think, the one ought to be lighter
than the other. And if they are done by two different Hands, each
Mafter endeavours to make the Colours anfver his own Inclination.
Thus it happens, that the Sun fhine Painters are in little Concern .
bout it; for they think — Are my Objefts to appear by the Force of
Light;  will, by the Strength of fiery Shades, maintain the Superierity.
We have faid before, that, in Proportion to the Suns Strength, the
Reffexions become lighter; the Reafon whereof we shall now explain
We find, when the Sun is low, and the Objects are firongly lighted,
that they receive flrenger Reffexions from each other; becaute the Suns
Rays fall not obliquely and glancing on the Objects, and thofe on others,
Dut ffrike directly upon them, and return Reffexions: Contrarily, when
the Sun is high, the Reffections of the lighted Objects cannot touch the
others with fuch  Force, becaute the Reffexion of the Light mutt
Heeds revert to iis Origin: For Inftance, if in an high Light, two Men
fland in Difcourfe, and the one receive the Sun on his Breaft, and the
other on his Back, the Light which falls from on high on the Breall,
muff needs reflect again upwards, whence it came, and therefore pats
over the others Head; to that the former Figure can thereby receive
hone, of but  very weak and almoff imperceptible Reffexion.
Thus  think to have thewn, that Reffexions in Sun-thine ought to
be reprefented much fronger than in common Light; the Proof of
which may be deduced from the Life itfelf.




CHAP. . Of the Difference of Ground shades, preceeding either
from the Sun, or radial Point.
 PIste XXXVl the firft Example thews the Suhs Place of
Quarter, which  obferve as Eafl; and opposite to it, in the Wel,
is  Building, which is lighted throughout from the Eall, not  Rays, proceeding from  Point and growing wider, but by fuch as
 Lights and Shades.
Chap.  parallel to each other;  mean, not from the Ceater of an affigned Sun
at the Side of the Piece, but from the whole Quarter wherein the Sun
is; or from the whole side of the Piece, as wide as the Opening, thro'
which he thines into it.
The second Example thews the contrary to be falfe; when the Sun
being directly behind the Objects, the Groundhades are not ferch’
from the Radial, but another Point.
For if this were good, it mult follow, that when the Sun fhines di-
rectly thro' the middle of  Street, he would enlighten both Sides
of it; which is contrary to Nature, and to what we have shewed
before. And
in the third Example, tis plainly vifible, that when the Sun is in
the Eall, and the Room in the Well, the Objelts on the Ground muft
needs be lighted directly from behind, as well the one as the other,
without the leaff Difference: Which their Ground-thades and the Lines
of the Floor fufficienly thew, both proceeding from the Point of
Sight, and the latter shewing us the Eall and Weff through the whole
Room.
The fourth Example in Plate KKKVIl. affirms the fame; repre
fenting  Southern Colonade lighted direct by the Sun, which is in the
oppofite Point; of which Bunding each Column throughout calls its
Shade againtt the Pillar behind it, not proceeding from  Point, but
by Parallels, according to the Rules of Perspective.
The fitth Example contrarily thews  great Miltake, which yet is
often committed, in making the Ground-shades proceed from an aftirned
Point, each Column feeming to caufe  particular Ground shade; which
is against Rule, and the Nature of Sun-fhine.
it will not be amiss to fay fomething here of the Light of Grounds,
to wit, that in what Manner foever the Light comes, whether from
behind, fideways or fronting, the Plan or Ground will always appear
alike; that is, in the Front of the Piece, the moft Light, be the Sun
ever to low, nay, on the Horizon: And not only the flat Grounds,
but every thing that receives Light: The Reafon whereof is to evi-
dent, that it would be superfluous to fay any thing more about it, than
whats shewn in the fixth Example of  fide, froming and backward
Light, which Perspective fufficiently jultifies.
if some think, that when the Light comes from behind or  fide,
the Ground mult be lighted otherwife than fronting (for many keep
it always moft Light on the side whence the Light proceeds)  allow
it, with respect to  Candle or Torch; but, (peaking of the Air, muf
Lay
.   Ligbts and Shades.
Book .
fay, they do nor at all underfland the Mitter: Indeed it would not be
very improper in  Ground running off from the Light: But level
Floors or Grounds cannot admit of  Diminution were they, if  may
Tay fo,  thouland Sceps long; nay, the Ground will always be moft
figbt forwards, without any Difference, let the Light come from be-
hind or forwards.  think, no Arriff will be to foff as to ask, how
then it shall appear whence the Light comes ? Since tis  general
Rule, that the Shades and Ground-hades of the Objects plainty thew
II. And in cafe there were no Objects on the Ground, the Air, if
there be but the leaff Cloud, will make it fufficiently apparent.

CH AP. XI. Of the Representation of different Lights in the same
Piece.
 think ir impoffible for different Lights in the same Piece
) to look well; for, fay they, if it were good, Raphact, Caracer,
Tition, Pouffin and other great Mafters would not have rejected,
but approved that Manner; even the French Hcademy, which is arriv-
ed at to high  Pirch, unanimoutly agrees, that no more than  fingle
Ligbt is necelfary, and rejects  Picture which has more; wherefore
they judge, that double Lights are only the Inventions of Dutch Maf
fers, who do not underfland the Antigue, but only follow Nature in
order to pleafe Ignorants. To all which  antwer, that tho' Rappact,
Poxfrm, and other great Mafters, have not thewed it in their Works,
but only kept  fingle and common Light, we muff not infer from
thence, that they defpited or rejected that Manner, as contrary to Na-
ture, but they neither thought nor knew it, Art not being, in their
Times, got to its Perfection in this Particular: Ver  do not fay, that
 Piece with different Lights is better than one fingle-lighted, if naw
rally reprefented;  mean only, that if it to fall outand be judiciouly
managed, it gives  Painting  diverfifying Elegance.
 believe, many common Painters will not much thank me for dit
clofing this Matter; becaute, should Lovers defire fuch  Piece, they
would have more Trouble in doing it. However, ler every Man do
what he will, or can. It fares with our Art as with others, if  Man
will learn all thars neceitary, to become  good Mafter, he may do
to; or if he be content with Half-inquiries, no body will call him in
Croftion for ir; But he who is able to repretent  fingle Light well
majs


Of Lights and Shades.
  in my Opinion, alfo do the others well. How many brave
Malters furmount every thing they undertake? What should hinder
their exhibiting three or four Lights as well as one? But, let me not
here approve the Manner of some Landskip-painters, who introduce
many small Lights into  Piece.  fond Conceit without any Bafis.
 thought it proper to handle this Marter of different Lights, to
thew, that we ought not to regard the partial Opinions of Ignorants.
but always chule what is moft natural and agreeable;  mean, that we
should enrich our Ordonnances in general according to Occation, and
without Affectation. For which Purpofe we shall here exhibit an Ex-
ample with different Lights, Plate XXKVill. in Expeltation to hear
what Difficulties some will raife againt it.
We fee here  Building or Gallery; and before it,  Mote of Water,
on the Brink whereof is  Man faftening  Boat. Near the Water
lies an Heap of various Kinds of Houlhold-Goods. Two Men are feen
bringing forwards some imall Veffels on  Bier. On the Pavement
Hands  grave Matron with  young Virgin, directing the hindermoft
Porter to lay the Goods to the refl. Somewhat decper in the Piece are
two Soldiers; one bare headed, carrying fome Houhold -Gods. 
Servant is coming down the Steps with an heavy Cheft on his Shoulder.
Through an Arch of this Gallery is feen, at the further End of .
Field,  Garden afcended by  or  Steps, inclofed on each Side by
 green Hledge. Some People are feen going up and down the Steps..
In the Field firs an Herdlman with  Dog near  Stone. The Fore-
part , with all the Objects thereabouts, is little lighted forwards..
yet Rrongly. The Gallery , and the Figures on the same Ground are
lighted directly from the Side. Every thing in the Field , is lighted.
like . The Sceps , and the Objects on them are lighted forward.
 receives it' Light from South-Egf;  from South;  from Eqt,
and , like , from South-Eqt.
 appeal now to Men of Judgment, whether the Lights ought not
to differ from each other as well in Tints as Sades. , and the
FieldD, to the Steps, receive, as aforefaid, their Light from South
Ealt; in which Point  fuppofe the Sun to be; wherefore the Air is
there lighteff. The South an the right Side, which lights the Gallery
only through an Opening, thereby becomes  Ettle darter than the Fore-
part of the Piece. The Steps  in the Offskip, covered by the Right-
lide-Iedge from South and South Eall, and by the left, from North,
mull needs receive their Light from Eall, and the Air over Head;
whence, we may perceive that the Objects are never witheut Light;,
poui-



Of Lights and Shades.
Book .
 they are incompaffed; fince what they lofe on one Side, they
gain on the other.
 exhibit here another Deliga, Plate KKKIK. alfo tending to thew
different Lights in the Jume Piece.
Let us confider it as  Square Room, which can receive it' Light
from the four Cardinal Pomes: For Inftance, we fuppofe , to be
North; BEalt;  South, and DWel; again, No.  to be North-
Eaft;  South Ealt;  South-Welt, and  North-Weff: Between
thefe Points are, South-South Eaft, Eaft North-Eall, Coc. which are
needless. Now, we ought to obferve, this Room being open on the
four Sides, and  Figure flanding on  Pedeftal in the Middle of it,
and lighted from the four Sides, from which Side it would receive
ir' firongell Light: Certainly from the Eaff, where the Sun is; and
next, South Eall; North-Ealt,  Tint less; then, North and South,
Hill  Tintdarker; and to the fame with South-Well and North-Well.
The Wel Side only should be the Shade.
Br thefe Examples  think to have fufficiently cleared the Point
touching the Natures and Effects of different Lights; and alfo shewed
the Advantage of knowing them, as well in Sun-fhine as com-
mon Light, with respect to the Variety either in Landskip or
other Subjects; together with the abundant Means they afford for
cariching an Ordonnance, and that above the common Method.  fub-
join, that in  judicious Ufe of them, we muft be very careful in their
Difpolition, that they may not, as  have faid, seem forced, but natural
and neceffary, that there be  general Union, and that the Principal
Part have it' Predeminancy.
   . Xil. Curious Observations on Sun-shine.
  VE already faid much touching Sunthine, and yet, as 
Matter of Confequence for Hiftory and Landskip- painters, shall,
from three Deligns (which for that Purpofe  exhibit) make  gene-
ral Obfervation upon it; and thereby thew the Miltakes of fome and
the good Qualines of others, as  Precedent for thofe who would
get Honour by Living Embellifhments.
Three young Painters had once  Controverfy about the Repreten
tation of Sun fhine: They were each of different Tempers; one, cross
and politive; another, meek and of good judgment, and the third
was by the others generally accounted filly. in the End, they re-
folved,



Of Lights and Shades
Chap.  each to make an Ordonnance; and to thew their Skill, the
two firft chofe one and the fame Delign. See the Sketches in Plate
XI.
The firfl had given all the Objects, without Diffinction,  yellowith
Light, and made the Shades firong and glowing; thereby precending
to express the Sun as fetting; not confidering that he thereby expoted
his ignorance, as having made the Ground-thades too thort.
The second had expreft the Shades and Groundfhides not to Charp
or to long; as repretenting the Sun much higher, and  little fainter;
yet herein thewed to much more Conduct, on making the Woman and
Boy, who are looking at an Huntlman founding his Horn over the
Wall (whom the Man coming out of the Gare thews them) pur their
Hands over their Eyes, as Nature teaches; when the other, who had
repretented the Sun much sronger, had not taken any Notice of that Cir-
cumflance.
The firft placed  Man before the Tree, sleeping in the Sun; The
second, contrarily had placed him in Shade behind the Tree; and
tome other People were fitting in Repofe againtt the Wall, in Shade,
to avoid the Sun' Heat.
The third, had made  Delign of his own (fee Plate XLl. to thew
his nice Obfervations on the Sun; which the others, as counting him
filly, at firft laught at. He had reprefented  naked Boy, firting in an
open Window, and making Bubbles with  Pipe. The Child received
his Light forward from the common Light of the Room. Thro' the
Window appeared the Tops of fome Houfes, and  Part of  Column
with  Sun-dial affixed to to.
Now, on  nice Examination, it appeared, that this latt had bett
bellowed his Thoughts on the Sun, and that neither of the others
had thewn to many good Effects in their Pieces, as he, in to small 
Compats; For, firft, he exhibited the Colour of Sun-fhine in the Sky
and on the Tops of the Houles, fufficiently differing from the common
Light: Secondly, &is not enough to reprefent the Sun ftrong or weak,
or with long or thort Ground-hades, but we mult allo fee, by the
Ground-hades, bow late it is; wherefore he had incroduced the Sun-
dial, the Ground-fhade whereof was on  Thirdly, he had obferved
the Dubiousness of the edgy Obietts going off: And lattly, to shew
that we cannot bear the Sun’ exceffive Brightness without doors, he had
placed the Child in the Window, in the common Light of the Room,
that he might, with more Liberty, Rare about at the Bubbles than
he could in the bright open Air. Thus he juftified the Condult of
him:


Of Lxtts end Sbades.
 .
him who had made his Fignies, fhading their Eyes, and advifed the
ocher to give his Figures thote of an Eagle, faid to be the only Bird
which can look againt the Sun.
the others owned themfelves convin
By theie natural Obtervations,
ced; with Excute, that they laughed not at his Skill but his Choice,
which ar firff feemed odd to them.
CH  . XIIl. Of the Suns three Qualities.
 we ought not only to view, as far as we are able, the Won.
ders of Narure, but allo to reprefent their Likeness; So we

shall now make our Obfervations about the moft beautiful of
Things.
Wtho can be infentible of the three Qualities of the Sun, viz. his
Splender, Hest and Colour? Can any Light exceed the Sun in Bright
nets and Clearnels, or any Fire be more invigorating or confuming, or
ant Colour have greater Power ?
The Sunbeams, fays  certain Poet, penetrate the Depth of the Sea,
and render the fundy Grounds ligbt; imperceptible Things, sensible, &cc.
what Light can effect what this does! It is faid that Lightening can
blind the Eyes; tho' this be rather cauted by its Suddenness than its
Light.
As for the Sun’ Hear, Ovid tells us, that, Phacton being of an am-
bitious Temper infortuned his Father to let him drive the Chariot of the
Sun; which Regset bring granted, and the Herses proving tso bead sirong,
and be, ignerant of the Course, driving out of the Way, thereby fet the

Erber rirc. The Gold in the River Tagus was seen flowing along.
This poverful Light inflamed the Eatern Countries, as Ethiopia, Lybis,
ESc. in such  Manner as to make the Inhabitants black; as we fee them
at this Dry: The Lakes, Rivers and Fountains beiled away. Even the
Sey berame  fandy Valley. He, who would know more, mult confult
Aato himself.
Ir is faid, that the rolling and frightful Noife of the Thunder, will
Which is not improbable, fince the pene-

mell Metals in an Instant:
trating Power has  great Effect upon them. Two Flints, by Col
lition, will produce Fire. Even two Pieces of Wood will, by Frilli-
Nature.
on, do the fame, tho' in themfelves of  cold
in


Of Lights and Shades.
Chap.  relation to the third Quality the Poet proceeds thus: Phabus,
lays he, in his light Hair, and sitting in  glittering Ckarict befet
with Carbuncles, gilds all things, be shines on, with  gellowip Colour.
What Light has juch  Brightness and beautiful Colour? What Salt-
fetre, Brimsone or other combultible Matter canreach so far, and spread
from Eal to Weft? The white Moon and Sparkling Stars, nay the
fulden Lightnings themselves are all weak and faint, if compared with
the absolute Beanty and Splender of his lively Colour.
 therefore very much wonder, that fuch an Ignorant can be found
as  met with about gor  Years ago. Even he, who fat up for 
great Mafter, plainly afferred, that the Sun is Blue, may, asure Bluc.
Was there ever harboured  more abfurd Opinion, than one which
makes the moft trankcendent Brightnels and most penetraring Object,
the weskgr Since every one knows, Blse to be the weakeff of all Co-
lours, and by which every thing is madeto recuc. What Light can be
drawn from Bluc? Does  bluc Eody produce Green, Red or Fellow ?
Ves, lazs Momas,  Flue Objett will caj  Tillvwifness;  gellow
Light,  Elue one; and  ked,  beauriful Grein: Af  jellow
Drapery will give  green Roffexien;  biue Dragery  red ene; and
white,  black one. Mercorer, the Light of the Sun is wellexpret, wken
the main Lights are whitish Blae, and the Reffexions gellow and searm.
Thus, fays he, we mut reason about all Colours lighted by the Sun.
 think this the blueft Policion that can be; For, in painting the
Sun and all other Objects after this Manner, could there be  more
ridiculous Picture? How green, yellow, blue, and sported would it
appear? — But many are fond of Party-colouring.
We shall give here  Delcription of one of this Mafter' Pictures;
 Work as frivolous as his Judgment about the Sun.
in this Piece he had reprefented.  Vulcan hammering  Piece of
Iron,  Foot long; one half whereof was red hot, and the other he
held in his Hand: He had allo exhibired  Finus, with the fame
Precaution, fitting ftarknaked and unconcern’ in the midlt of the
Sparks.
Now, are not thefe fine Thoughts, and worthy of Reprefentation?
Does he not feem to fay— This hon is not beated by the Fire, bus
painted of  glowing Colour  And indeed he thews it plainly; for
the Pincers, which Futean ought to hold the lron by, lie by him on
the Ground. Moreover he was foolith enough to paint  Fire againtt
an Hanging. But why do we wonder ar that? Why should he not do
it? Since  painted Fire cannot burn. We might fuppole him as wile
No.  Ligbts and Shades.
 
as the Man who fer  Piece of lee to dry in the Sun, that it might not
wer his Back in carrving home.
To find fuch Wreckes among mean People is truly no Wonder;
Dir among Painiers, and such as fer up for great Mafters, tis palt my
Cerllandng.
Thole Mea, who are uracquainted with the true Qualities of the
Sun, may be excuted; but they, who know, fee and are fentible of
them, and yer through Careleincts or Folly make fuch gross Blun-
ders, are unpardonable. Arcids! be then advifed in Thingsye do not
rightly underlland, that ve may be fentible of every Thing Art can
effect.
Is there anr thing which we cannot imitate with Pencil and Colours;
whether Hear, Cold, Dav or Night, Earch, Air, Water, Fire, Wind,
Thunder, frightful Apparitions, tweer Sounds of Voice or Inflruments,
Sorrow, Jor, Brternels, Sournels, Cc. Even, invifible Things, as
the Sound of an Horn or Trumper? .
But, let us now fee how thefe Things can be exhibited : Are there
not abundance of Motions, Polures and Paffions, which herein afford
us Help, and which Narure herfelf and daily Inttances thew us, if we
will but take norice of them? What then can be wanting to make our
Meaning plain and clear to every Body : Does not an unexpected Sound
caufe  ludden Emorion?  Thunder-clap, Confternation!  fright
ful Spectre, Terror and Trembling :  Burn, Rage, and  Contrac-
tion of the Members? Sournets, pinching the Mouth and cloting
the Eres; Bitterneis,  loathing Contraction of the Features! Sweet-
nefs,  placid Countenance?
As for the Reprefentation of por Countries, we know, that both
Men and Bealts feek there Shades and Caves for Shelter and Re
pote; allo, that tis niual to wear Umbrellos, and go either naked
or dreft in thin Silks: in celd Countries we find the contrary; for
there, People repofe and recreate in the Sun, or where he gires
the molt Warmih; they fir in an Hut or Houfe by Woodhres;
and if the Country be near the North-pole, they are cloathed in
ool and the Skins of Bears, and other wild Animals. Thus we
fee, one Sort of People feeks Warmth; the other, Coolness. Here,
the Sun thines hot; there, the Snow abounds. The hot Indian ap-
pears almod naked; and the Lyglander and Rufffan hug in party-
coloured Furs. But as thefe Effects are owing to the Sun only, whole
Infiuence on thefe Countries is in Proportion to his Nearnels to or
Distance from them; fo we know, that the Heat or Coldnels of
each


Of Lights and Shades.
  Climate is thereby cauted, and the Sun feels hotter in one Place
than another.
Since we are treating of the Sun, we shall allo thew how the Poetic
Expreftions, defcribing him, are to be underfood.
Poisy and Painting, being Siffers, agree intirely; and tho' Fables and
Filtions be not thought necellary for  Painter, yet they are delight-
ing and uleful, and we cannot be good Painters without fome Aid from
Poily. We may make ule of Poetic Thoughts, as far as the Hillo-
ry, whether facred or profane, will admit, and as the Nature of 
Thing can be thereby exprefied. How can the Morning, Noon, Even-
ing and Night be more elegantly reprefented, than Homer does it in
some Palfages of his Works; among othe , at the End of his Odiffee,
where he lays, — All Objects appear in the Morning, at the Down
of Aurera, dark; and afterwards the imperceptible growing Light dif-
tinguishes and gives them their natural Colours.— Thus he, as to the
Beginning of Day; and elfewhere of the Morning and Evening he has
it, — As when Phebus fatigued, hides in Theriss Lap, &cc. He
lays further, — Aurora, the Day-break, and Fore-runner of Phebus,
rose in the Eaft in ber Turn, fitting in  Purple Charicr, and gilded the
Tops of the Mountains, &cc. And Firgil in one Paffage lays,
Aurora, risen out of Tithon’ Safronbed, exc. And in another, 
The Sea was now got refy with Morning-rays: The Orange Day-break
appeared, in the high Heaven, upon the Refe-colour Charict, &cc. Again.
As soon as the Day-break, riding up Heaven, began to be rosy, &cc. All
which Expreffions give us to underlland, that Aurorg' Light begins
with Rednels, and grows gradually Vellow and flronger as the gives
Way to Phabus.
We need not fay more of the Names which the Poets affign this
great heavenly Luminary; Narure fhews us the same daily in almoft all
thofe Qualities; and he who does not confider Nature will reap little
Advantage from my Obfervations.
CHAP.
. F Lights and Shades.
Book .
 

CHAP. XIV. Of the Narure of the Sun, with respett to different
Countries.
TOR MERL  ar lefure Hours,  diverted myfelf with read
ing the Dekriptions of feveral Eattern and Northern Countries,
written by Lin crot, Olius Alagnas, Archbishop of Opfict, and
others; and, on one Side,  law the Cape of good Hope, where the
Suns great Heat is remper’ by the Sea-breezes, as tis thro' all Iukis,
Tucis, China and other Rezons. Of Ching, Writers fay that it en
jors the fwceref hir, and the Inhabicancs arrive at great Ages, and no
contagous Ditemper is heard of amongit them.  read allo of many
 and . anze Rarirnes, and of the Corostree vielding  refrething
Liquor; and what elfe was worth obferving. On the other Side of
the World  viewed Grentn which  found to be exceffive cold, and
full of high Mountains covered with erernal Snow; the Seas abound.
ing with Whales, and the Air piercing and rigorous on the comforta-
ble Suns Deparcure; and, like the Country, the People rough and fa-
vage, as we fee in the Gorks, Fin and Laplamlers, and other bordering
Nations, where cold Air and Narure have great Influence on the
People.

Digetting thefs Things,  had  fancy to make two Sketches of
them: in one,  repreieaced, according to the Writers, Pulm and Cr
coutrees, licde Water but many Hills; and for the Embellifhment,
fome naked Blarts; the Light,  Sun thine: in the other,  could er-
hibir lirtle elle than Fircrees, Wooden Huts and Drifts of Iee; the
People  had cloathed in Bealts Skins, and some hunting wild Bears,
others buty in dragging  Uhale on the fee, which they had killed

with Hargings,ons; in fine, any Circumltance of their Manner of
:VES
 Scraiches were lying on my Table, for further Improfe
ments as they occurred in my Thoughts; when  Gentleman, or
making me  Vific, caft his Eyes on them, and, tho' but flightly
Fratche, bought them of me; and, at the fame Time, befpoke ano
ther Piece, the Subject whereof  should have from his Son, then new
ly arrived from Indid.
Accordingly the son defcribed to me,  certain Place in India (where
he had lived) generally inhabited by Blacks, except the Governow
himfelf


Of Lights and Shades.
  and some others: He instructed me in feveral Particulars, as well
Manners as Dress and other Things, proper to the Country: All which,
 fet down, and then made  rough Sketch of it with  Pen, in his
Prefence; in which, he faid,  had rightly taken his Meaning. This
being done,  fell to colouring it, in hopes thereby to get his future
Favour; which  did. The young Gentleman' Affairs, in the mean
Time, calling him out of Town for three Weeks, his Father, on his
Return, had  Meeting of some Friends, and on that Occafion fent for
the Picture (which was finithed) and, at the fame Time, defired my
Company. The Piece was inflantly hung up; and, after the Gentle-
man had  little viewed it, he took me by the Hand, and whifpered
- Tis very well done; but  forget to tell you one
these Words,
Thing of great Moment; yet you can alter it in half an Hour' Time.
To be short;  had taken the Sun too lew, and alto made him fall into
the Piece pilcreys; which occationed long Ground sades; whereas, 
should have made him vertical (or over Head) as he mott Times ap-
pears in that Country.  was confounded, and owned my Fault; for
his Criticitm was jult, fince the great Heat muft be expret by the Sun'
vertical Peption. Here  faw, that, after all my Pains,  had failed
in the main Point, for the Reafon aforefaid. The Gentleman' Judg-
ment was as right in one Point as wrong in the other; for he muft
needs be acquainted with the Nature of the Climate; but his faying,

sw calily the Fault might be rectified, reminded me of the Cale of
Apelles, and  thought, — Ne Suter uttra Crepidus; becaute he
thereby difcovered his Ignorance; for rubbing out the Ground-thades
would not in the leall have better’ it; and to enlighten the Figures
from on high, would be more Work than to begin  new Picture.
Neverthelels, he taught me to make my Advantage of it in Time to
Come.

CHAP. XV. Of the Suns Light upon Objects at Rising and
Setting.
 is unaccountable in many Artifts, who handie an Art, whole The
ory is built on Mathematies; its Practice, on Experience; and the
Execution, on ature; that they take to litle Notice of the
three Points wherein lies their Honour; especially in the lighting
of Objetts in  Suriet; for the Sun, bow fow feever, cannot sine on
ARy


Of Lights and Shades.
 
any Obiett anter the Paraliels; namelv, not in the leaft from underneath,
aere the Object, if  may fay fo, as high as the Clouds; and yet we
fee manr Paintings, wherein the Objects are, by  Sun-fer, more lighted
from unternenb ton  Which is contrary to Nature; as we may
dailr experience, in walking againt the Sun, how troublefome it is
to thate the Eves He rum our Heads lideways, or hold an Hand
Ferchief before our Eves; even, the Hat is no Defence; and yet the
Sun never takes it unEernen:.
This may be plainly evilenced by Perspertive; to wit, that, as
the Honzon limts our eight, and the Sun cannot, with respect to the
Exe, delrend lower; therefore he cannot find his Rays upwards, but 
long the GrCkEL, or faral:.

Thefe Rars isen, in their Pallage, unless you pull your Hat over
 Eves, mut needs ihine into them:  even dare to lay, that, were
the Brim of your Hat ren Acres broad, and parallel with the Hori-
 it ould not call  Shade of  Pins Breadth over your Eyes,
nor the sun to much as take the under Parts of the Brim, tho' we
were flanding on an Eminence.
Bur, to be the better underftood, let us confider Plate XL.ll. where,
on the Fore-ground,  place  Figure with  Board on its Head (like
the Americans, lerel with the Eye-brows. Next, we fee an high
Building, with  projecting Cornice running towards the Point of Sight;
and, on the other side, an high Column with  Figure on it, having
fuch  Board on its Head as the other. Now you may perceive, that
the Sun does not prite underneath againtt it, but fends his Rays parat
fet,  mean, when he is fetring. Draw then  Ray from the Sun pa-
rallel with the Board of the Fore-igure, and fee how much Shade its
Eves will have. Ferch another Ray from the Front or Cornice to
the Suns Center, to find how much Shade the Projecture will throw on
the Frize; do the same by the Figure on the Column: Then you will
perceive, that the Joints of the Scones in the Building will be parallel
with the Suns Rays, and that the Offcorner of it, tho' lower than
the Nearone, will yer be alike with the Nearone, and the Frize pa-
rallel with the Ground.
Ifit be objected, that, when we he out at Window, the Sun is
lower than the Window-board we lean on, and does not fhine on it: 
antwer, that we only imagine so; for if we rightly obferve, we shall
perceive  small Groundshade of the Crosspiece of the Window, tho'
ever to faint; wherefore we are enabled to conclude, that as long as
the Sun Chines, nay, if but  Finger' Breadth above the Horizon, the
Ground


Of Lights and Shades.
Chap.  muft receive some Light; and, of contequence, as long as the
Ground is somewhat lighted, it is impoffible for the Sun to thine on
any thing from underneath. Suppole, for Inflance,  Column, fix
Feet high, lighted by  Sunfet; if this Column throw any vilible
Shade on the Ground, the Ground mult have fome Light; and, if
to, how is it pollible, that the Sun should fhine from above and from
underneath at the same Timel And if it be granted, that the Sun does
not light the Column on Top, irs Ground-hade muft needs be infinite;
in which Cafe, the Capital ought juft to be lighted from underneath,
and the Ground, of Neceffity, to be without Light. This is an un-
deniable Truth, though the Point be little handled by Writers; even,
feldom heeded by Mafters: Tis allo no Wonder to fee some fail in
it; the moft probable Reafon for which (as  think) is their Ignerance
in Perspective.
  AP. XVI. Of the Application of Sun shine and other Lights.
 is an old and rooted Evil, and thereby almoff become  Law,
rather to gratify our Fancies and Paltions, than confult Reafon:
Molt Painters verify this in their Choices and Ufes. To represent
Sun-shine, fay they, is pleafant, and delights the Eye; therefore we
must always introduce it. But this cannot be; fince the Varieties of
the Seafons, and  Change in all Things vifible demonftrace the con-
trary. This Light is indeed very agreeable in  Landskip, but very
differviceable within doers; for, how ridiculous, in  great Encertain-
ment, would Sun-thine appear on the Table? And how could the
Guelts fee one another? Or, how could the Glitter of the Plate be ex-
prefted, without obicuring every thing elfe?
What  fine Piece would that be, where the whice Tablecloth mult
be mixed with black ? And how agreeable would it look to fee the
Ground-thades of the Window-frames and Squares expreited on the
Table and Floor. Sun thine is not always proper; and yet some will
not give themfelves time to think whether the Subject require it or not;
 in Chrift' Crucifiaion it is improper, becaute the Scriptures men-
tion the Sun to be hidden.
The better to explain my Meaning,  shall exhibit three different
Lights in as many Ordonnances relating to the Perfon of our Sa-
jiour.
Of


Of Lights and Shades.
  CRRIST’ Crucifixion.
Here, on Mount Gelyoths, is the Place of Suftering. The Sun, tho'
. Voon, is cheared, by  dark Cloud. Behold how the Place is light-
cl, from the right Side, where are the Crots and People, receiving
 fring and  froid Light from the Clouds; all this appears on the
tard Ground. The Figures on the Fore-ground, thadowed by 
Clzd, are not so breadh hgored, but unite gradually in Force with
the others, till they come to be Pite brostgbted. About the third
Ground the Sky is durker, and full of heary Clouds, which, as they
rite, krem to draw  little crots towards the Sun, which is on the
Fight Sdr.
Now, we meft follow Truch as much as poffible, and not our Fancies
or Choices. Here, every thing ought to be ftill and inactive; Chise
 :. Does not this furnih fuificrent Reaton for Afourning? Where
fore  chole the arorels’ Light, as tof expressing Serres. And jet
Tis hor proper on all Occations, as mar appear in the two following
Ordonnances; one of which is firing did brondly lighted, and the
other with Sta-tire, parp and leng-shaded.
Truly,  Piece with theie Confiderations, and exhibiting the Nsturs
of Trings and Tins, mut needs pleate the Curious: Even, the very
hearing tuch Reaions and Obfervacions can make  Lover knowing;
especialle, if he be isstructed by  good Mafter in right Principles,
and is fomewhat convertant in Drawing. Such an one may even cas-




circe Parters, if he have  particular Genins, quick Apprehention
and  good Alemory; improve his Time, read good Books and fhun
fuch Company as prartle much, and do lirtle.
To converfe with the Skilful and Judicious is very commendable,
but the contrary, injurious. Reafon should always take place, and 
ditcerning Jedgment not be rejected.
Rather de sometbing less, and

wign it terougths. Augaiars saying is, on this Occation, not amiss,
Fering lente; Hgre with Rase. Good Things will endure, but thofe
which are to feemingly, mull decay. Burmy Zeal has carried me too
far, and therefore  shall return to my Purpofe in the Ordonnance.
Of CARISTs Burigl
The Rock on the left Side of the Piece, which opens  little for
waid, and has  dark and deep Entrance, is the Place of Chrips' Bo
fial


Chap.  Lights and Sbades.
 The Funeral Rites are performed within, and one of two Lamps
are seen fomewhat to light the Hollow. The Body is carried in by   Men. The Time is about the Evening, and the Sundoes not thinc.
Behold the People, againft the Rock, almost witbout Groundbades, as
being lighted from on high, and  little forward; becaute of another
Piece of  Rock rifing up there by the Side, alike with the former.
Obterve the three Figures, on the fecond Ground, flanding between the
two Rocks; thofe, wanting the Fore-light, mull needs receive it from
behind. Somewhar further, on the third Ground (which is the com-
mon Road) some People are coming clofe by the Trees flanding on
the right side of the Piece, who, on the other Side beyond the large
Rock receive their Light from the left Side;  plan Proof, that,
were they more diftant in the Field, they would be lighted from all
Sides.
My principal Remark on the Piece is this. This Burying place be
longs to Toseph of Arimathes, and lies near the City of Tcrufalem, as the
Text thews. He is there with his People, who carry in the Corps.
Now, my Intention is, to light this foremoll Croup as prongly as pof-
lible, and yet without Sunspine: The Light comes almot frenting, by.
reafon of the Side-rocks, which obstrult  Side-light; to that they can
fcarce have any Shade other than from bebind through the Rock or
Burying-place,  little from some Cypreffes slanding on one Side of it.
Between the two Rocks,  shew, that the People, coming forward,
mult needs be lighted from bebind, fince they are Hill half in the
open Air; and that thofe fomewhat further off, in the Road, againtt
the Side trees, ought to be lighted forwards, backwards, and from the
loft Side, where the Rock is very low; confequently have but little
Shade on the right Side of the Trees, againtt which, their Ground
Rhades fall. The other Croup and the Stone heaps in the Field, on  Ground,  thew to be lighted from all Sites, and to have no
other Shade than from below, and the decpelt Hollows; becaute the
Sky is fercled, and without Clouds. Row, irscertain, that few will
relith to nice an Obtervation, fince they follow their own Fancies witt-
out further inquiry: Vet if any of the Circumftances were omitted, the
Matter would allo be lels apparent.
The chief Regards had here are to the Light; the Tine or Heur;
the Situation of the Eurying-place; and the Quality of the Man who per-
formed the Funeral Rites, not only as to his Perion and Authoriry, but
alfo with respect to his Dress; together with the Alanner of the So-
temnity, according to Scripture: All which appear plainly. As for itr
No.  .
Of Lights and Shades.
 in the Offship, they are Burying places raifed up and down
about Terufslem (of which the aforefaid is one) we fee them fmall
and mean, large and ftacely, according to the Condicions of thofe who
cauted them to be made; as the Scripture teltifies.
Let us now obferve the third Ordonnance.
Of CRRISTs Rejurrection.
 again reprefent here  Rock; before the Entrance whereof is fir-
ting the roung Man or Angel, on the Stone of the Sepulchre, in shin.
ing Rarment, (peaking to the three Women, and pointing upwards.
Cbr;: ariiing is furrounded with Rays like thofe of the sun; where-
by, two of the Homen (one beholding him with her Hand over her
Eyes) are to crongly and Burply lightes, that their Shades, by reaton
of the Nearnets of the Dazzle, fall very diftinl on the Ground for-
wards, and on every thing elle thereabouts. One of thefe Women,
as neareft the young Man, thereby receives prong Reffexions; when
the third (who is ftepping towards the Sepulchre) is without the Reach
of either Light, and tho' receiving, in  manner, some Light from the
Air, yer melts in the brord Shades. Somewhat further, on the second
Ground, the Trees allo, along the Way, give broad Sbades. In the
Offskip is feen  in  rifing Mill; becaute is Day-break; the
Heavens abounding with trim Clouls mottly in the Sun' Quarter,
which on the right side of the Piece appears  little on the Horizon,
fomewhat vellowith and purple.
Now, if  Lover or Matter will, with due Reffexion, join hs
Thoughts with mine, and not fear any Trouble in the Performance,
 quettion not but he will, by fuch  Reprefentation, fatisty Coartifls,
and ment the Name of  great Mafter.



   . XVIl. Of the Properties of the Sun and other Lights in
their effential Regrefentations; and of the chief Times of the Day.
JE need not fay further, that Lights differ in their Kinds, as
having, in the preceeding Chapters, fufficiently thewed their
Nacures, Effects and Qualities; yet, to finith this Head, we
shall here lubjoin some Particulars which could not before have Place.
A Lights and Shades.
Chap.  for the Sun, my Opinion is, that he cannot be represented in any
Picture; Firft, becaute the Eye is too weak to behold him; and there-
fore his Force cannot be expreffed otherwife than by making all Objects
dark and black. Secondly, becaute when he thines directly in our
Faces, we cannot perceive the right Shapeor colour of Things, unlets
we shade the Eyes, as Nature teaches.
For the fame Reafon,  think, we may not reprefent  burning Can-
dle, Torch or other Matter giving  great Light, unlets we allo ex-
hibit the Objects as this Light makes them appear to us, and not as by
their Colour, Stir and UUnion they really are; for the further from
the Candle, the more faint they become. Tis therefore Folly to
raintain, that the natural Force of Candle light, especially it the
Flame be feen, can be imitated, fince it is paff our Skill to give the
other Work its due Appearance; for when the Light of the Candle
thines in our Faces, the mot deep and dark Colours, even Black it.
felf, appear neither darker nor blacker than they would in  dark Dav.
But we shall afterwards treat more largely of thefe Lights; and there-
fore now proceed to lay
That thofe who love to paint Sunshine may obferve, that tis pro
per for Sacrifices, Combars, Bacchanals, Dancings, Sports of Herdf-
men and fundry other jovial Occurrences and Hiffories, which require great
Buffle; but very improper and oblirulting in Councils, Pleadings, En
tertainments, Acadenies, Wedding-ceremonies and other such Circumstances.
But Cloadlight gives an uncommon Decorum and Nacuralness in solemn
Afairs; such as, Affemblies of Magiftrates, Pleadings and other Buss
ness of Authority and Consequence.
The third of the Lights, of which we have fpoken (the Terch or
Candle) is proper for mournful Occasons, for dying Persons, Burials and
such like; elpecially in the open Air.
The Sun appears agreeable and delightful in the open Field, when,
thro' thick Buthes and Trees, his Rays here and there light the
Grounds, and the People are feen repoling or diverting in the Shade:
Bur he acts againtt Nature, who exhibits tender and beautiful Virgins
basking in  funthing Field, faring at the Sun, and talking and be-
holding each other with as little Concern as if it were but  Candle
or Star-light; fince he himfelf would leave their Company, and retire
t Shade.
To prevent any Miftakes of which Kind, let us defcribe the chief
Fimes of the Day.
   
 Lights and Shades.
Day-break.
This firft born Time of the Day favours the Enterprizes of great
Generals in befrging or ferming  Town; no Time more proper for it,
by the the Example of Joshns in taking of Fericho. This Rule, tho'
not without Exception, has been obferved by all Nacions; of which
 could give many Inftances. The Batule of Pemper againtt Cafar be-

gan at that Time.
Tis allo the proper Time for Hunting; as in
the Reprefentation of  Diana, Cephalus, Adonis or any fuch Subject.
Jndicious Mafters alwars chule the Hour of the Day which beft agrees
with their Story. This Time is of fingular Advantage for the haff
Tints it gives; exhibiting all Things in their natural Corours; whence
arife an uncommon Agreeablenets and Decorum.
The Morning.
This Time principally rejoices Nisture; even inanimate Things are
fentible of it. The glittering Light takes the Tops of high Mountains,
and cautes, both in Buildings and Landskip, great Shades, appearing
very delightful. This Light, at breaking out, gives uncommon Sweer-
nets when the Objects shine in the Water; as allo  certain Freshness
mixel with Vapours, which bind the Parts of Things fo well together,
 intirely to pleafe the Eye of the Knowing.
At this Time the Herthens offered their Sacrifices: And we read,
in the Books of Mofes, that the Children of Irael had not only cheir
forning-oblations, but allo worthipped the golden Calf at that Time.
The Tows recain thole Cultoms to this Day; as alfo did the ancient
Chrifians, who offen baptized in the Mforning; as was likewife Chrif
in Fordin. The Persuns moreover honoured the Morning by their
Oferings. Wherefore we ought to have due Regard to the Time of
 Day on all fuch Occafions; and take especial Care, that the
Light fall on the principal Object and Place, according to Poufins Con
duct in  Picture of Cbrif refering the Blind to Sight; wherein the
greatell and flrongel Light is intirely (pread over our Saviour.
The Light between Morning and Noon.
This Light is not very fir for Objects, if it be not broken by fome
Accident of Rain, Sterm or Tempel. Such  Time may be prope
for


Of Ligbts and Shudes.
  mournfal Ocsasons; fuch as, the lall Judgment and our Saviours
Suffering, when (as faid in the laft Chapter) the Sun was darkened;
which looks frightful, and caules an expreffible Amazement: Where-
fore fine and pleafant Weather would, on fuch Occalions, look ri-
diculous.
Noon.
At this Time the Sun, darcing his glittering Rays, thines in full
Splendor; wherefore  defire thofe, who ufe this Seafon, to think,
that Nature effelts, by the Force of this Light, what cannot be repre-
sented; fince we often fail in our utmoft Actempes for that Purpofe:
Whereby it happens, that in endeavouring to make Things come for-
ward, we often ule fuch  Force of Light, on the Fore-ground, as far
exceeds that of the Sun; as in the Cale of Draperies of  fiery Colour,
or the like. Certainly an unaccountable Way of proceeding.
Neverthelels, the Suns Light may be bidden behind Mountains,
Buildings, &cc.
This Hour gives Ret to human Labour. The Scriptures tell us,
that Chriff, tired with his Journey, fat to reft on the Well; which
gave the Woman of Samarra occation to hear his wonderful Predilti-
on; His Difciples, alfo wearied, lad down near him. He who en-
deavours truly to reprefent the Natures of Things, mull especially ob-
ferve the Times and Hours proper to them.
The Afternoon.
As this Seafon is moft liable to Diverfity of Weather, by means of
driving Clouds, which occafion many Over-calls, tis very proper in
the Reprefentation of Bacchanals and licentious Aftions. But thele are
not always fixed to that Time.
The Evening.
Labourcealing at this Time, it gives Liberty for all Sorts of Paf
time; as Dancing, Walking, &xc. If you would reprefent the march-
ing home of an Army, or Herdfmen driving their Cattle out of the Field,
this Time is the moft proper for them. This Light frequently changes
its Colour by the Interpofition of riting Vapours, which it draws; but
does notwithflanding moft times enlarge the Superficies of Objects.
When.


Of Lights and Shades.
Book .
 the Shades do not receive the Reffexions of other Objects, they
ouger to parrate of the Light. This Seafon is quite different from the
Morning; vet not less agreeable, by its small glittering Lights, if we
keep the general Light fomcubat dasky, which creates great Mases
or Parts; eipecally when the Colours are fomewhat difperted by
 GutOs Mate.
Ar Noon the Juns Light muft proceed from on high, giving thort
Crrourd-thades; ber in in Evening his Light muft be low, and cauling
TMr GrcurlEikis.
The Morning is like the Evening; and with this the Alcen-light
Siz  AP. KVIll. Of the Moan, and ber Representation.
 ION sot ber many of my Politions and Obfervati-
ons in this Pome will be cenmured as Heccrodox, for being contrary
to both ancient and modern Practice: Nevertheless,  shall not
fear to enforce them, that diterect Arcifts may enquire, whether they
are founded on Reatons, or not; especially feeing they are not new
Inventions, but Corrections of oid Mittakes; as  think  shall prove.
tuppole then, that ts  grots Error to reprefent the Moon tiss
 the Life; becaute, how diftant foever the be, we nevertheless
fee her like the Sun alears retain ber natural Bigness: And if this be


granted, the concrary muit be unnatural, and therefore forbidden to 
Paiter, who is the Imirater of true Nuture.
Had   mind to paint  Moon skine,  would, without Injury to
Nature, manage it, as  have before faid,  would reprefent the Sun;
that is, to exhibit her Shine, but not her Body (for the Light is of great
or Moment is  Picture than the Bodies of either the Sun, Moon or  lighting my Objects thereby either from behind, fideways or
forwards (and as well in Figures as Landskip) somewhat darker than the
Duylght, that it may appear  true Moen-light, and not  Sun-thine (which
it very much affects by its fudden Lights and tharp Ground-shades) making
the Blue Sky here and there, with some glittering Stars. And, to make ir
fill look more natural, we may, if the Subject permit, introduce up and
down Torches or other Lights, burning Piles of Wood, Offerings or
other Fires, as Occafion requires, and thereby mate the Lights the
sirenger, and the Colouring ruffet and more jellow; yet the Shades not to
 Lights and Shades
  so harp as those of the Meon. This would, in my Opinion, have 
fine Effect, especially if the faid accidental Lights were moftly ordered
in dark Places. But we ought principally to obferve, that in the whole
there muft be feen more Darkness than Light, and that no Colours ap-
pear to beautiful as thofe of the Sky, in reference to the Moon, unless
they be red, yellow, and fuch others as are peculiar to burning Lights
(as we have thewed in the firtt Chapter of the fourth Book) for Light
red and yellow become dark: The Moon’ Brightness, contrarily, makes
dark Blue and Sea-green appear lighter; but Black Keeps its Poft;
wherefore little light Red, and as little dark Blue ought to be feen in
the Picture.
By fuch  Difpofition, we gain two Advantages;   natural Light.
 An uncommon Variery in the Colours.
If any one find any Difficulty herein, he may pleafe to know, that
he is no more obliged to exhibit the Moon than the Sun in his Piece;
becaute the former takes it' Courfe round the Heavens as well as the
latter, and may therefore be placed as the Elegance of the Figures and
By-works require, fince both illuminace the Earth and its Objects
forwards, backwards and fidewife.
As to Quality, in three Particulars the Moon is to like the Sun,
that there is no Difference between them: As,  She always throws
her Rays parallel as well as he.  All that is lighted by her is broad
and tharp.  The Shades on the Ground are plain, and conform with
the Objects: But the Reffexions are not to Hrong as in Sun-thine; be-
caule the Moon light is weaker than the Suns, by reafon of the oppofite
Natures of thofe two Luminaries, the one being warm, and the other
cold; And as the Moon receives her Light from the Sun, the canthere-
fore not have to much Power to impart it to the Earth; nor the Objects,
lighted by her, appear to diffind to the Eyc. Again, as the Sun often
alters his Colour by means of the Vapours which he exhales; to we lind
the fame in the Moon, who, by the fame Means becomes alfomore
pale or yellow in Proportion to the Vapours about her, or the Airs
Rarity or Denlity.
Can it be doubted, wrether fuch  Piece of Moon-light, without
the Appearance of her Body, be fuch, when the Darknels, Broadness,
and Sharpnets of the Ground-hades, and the Palencts of the Colour
are well obferved, all which conjunctively express Evening or Night.
If it be  Quchion, whether this were the former Practice?  lay,  no Buliness to enquire into that; fince we ought not to accommo-
date the Art to Fancy, but our Senfes to the Arc. Tis to as linle
Purpote


Of Lights and Shades.
 .
Purpofe to confider, what is done; but rather, what may or ought
to be cose, according to the Dillates of right Reafon. In short, tisim-
poffible, when the threeaforefaid Qualities are well observed in  Piece,
It hould fail of reprefenting  very natural Moon light.
As my Polition runs counter to old Cuftom, and therefore not to
caly to Apprehenion,  have endeavoured to explain myfelf by the
three Examples in Plate Xllil.
in the firtt,  fhew the Moon in her natural Bignels, yet without the
Piece; becaute the would otherwife come too near the Horizon, and
caule too long and difagreeable Ground-hades.
in the lecond, the is exhibited after the old ltay. And,
In the third,  thew only  Starry Sky, with the frong Lights of .
Moon, who, as in the firtt Example, is without the Picture.
if any one think, that the Moon' Body gives  firong Glitter,
Elegance and Life to  Piece;  fay, the sparkting Light of the Stars
does the same; effecially if we make them, as large as they appear to
us; but not in  Perifeltive way, as being berween Heaven and Earth,
like the Moon. However, we need not reprefent them all, but the
chief only ; fuch as, the Charict, the Triangle, the Serpent, the Norts
and Evening Star, and tuch as make  known Figure; all which, as
having no figural Being, but only the Shine of  very fmall Light,
may be eafily expreffed by fmall Points.
We may allo make the Moon, though without the Piece, appear in
the Water, and caute an agreeable Reffexion in the waving surges;
and, by chuling fuch  Side-fight, we have the Advantage of reprefent-
ing alf teings q berutifal, neither more nor lets than in Sun-thine or
common Light.
 mull fubjoin another important Confideration; which is, that as
the Moon' Light is fomerimes obllrutted by high Objects, fuch as
Rocks, Palaces, Trees, Hills, Coc. to some Parts mut needs be dark;
in which, the Reffexions of to weak  Light haveno Power to enlight
en or feigh our the Objects or Bodies in them, though ever to near.
For this Reafon,  Painter ought to avoid juch Accidents, and not to
incroduce them unlets through Neceffity, to create an Harmony or Forbe;
and to place them mathr forward, or in the Offskip, againft the Sky;
for fetting them between bork, cannor but make  dijagreeable Spot, un
leis it be broke by fome Water, wherein the Reflexion of some Stars
orother Lights of the Air appear; and, into fuch  Choice of Land
ship or Vitto, you may introduce, white Marble images, Buildings
light By-works, and light coloured Stufts, which all together loon
agrce.


Of Ligbts and Shades.
  And as the Night vapours are more deafe than thofe of
the Day, to the diftant Objects become more faddenly dark and undiffin-
puispable. Forger not, that in windy Weather, the Moon as well as
the North-Star, is encompafted with  yellow Ring.
If any Perfon be not yet fully fatisfed, let him pleafe to weigh the
following palpable Realons: Tbe Sun, Moon and Stars cannot diminish;
becaute we can neither approach nearer nor go further from them; but
all fublunary Objects can, by our Recels or Approach leffen or magnity:
And, to prove this, take  Glass of the Size you intend your Picture;
place it before  Window, and draw on it the Prospect, with the
Moon, as it then appears to the Eye; which done, you will fee how
large the ought to be painted. Now, if you approach with this Glats
some thouland Steps nigher towards the Sun or Moon, they will not
appear bigger on or through the Glass, but have the same Magnitude:
Whence arifes the Falficy of those Reprefentations, which diminish the
Sun, Moon or other Meteors as well as the Figures.
 conclude then, that the Pictures, exhibiting Nature contrary to
what the ought to be, are liable to Cenfure, and that we ought to feek
Truth by Ratiocination, and then, waving old Cultoms and Prejudice,
to believe our own Eyes.
 hall further illultrate this Matter, in the Chapters shawing, What
is meant by  Table; and of the Uses of magnifying and diminishing
Claffes; and of the Difference between large and small, warm and weak
painting; to which we refer the curious Artift.
  AP. XI. Of the Efferts of Artificial Lights, as of  Lorch,
Lamp, Candle, or Fire.
  VING, in the moft plain and concife Manner, treated of
the Effects of the Sun, Moon and Starlights, we shall, on the
same footing, (peak allo of the Auxiliary Lights, which Necet-
lity, for the Eafe of Mankind, has contrived, and Art brought to
Perfeltion.
 think it not amiss to thew here, in the firft Place, the Force and
Property of thefe particular Lights, in fuch manner as  conceive
them..
No.  Lights and Shades.
Book .
 of  Flumbern, or Forch, is, at Night, the moft powerful and
beautiful; having two Qualiries, to wit, of afrighting and rejoicing.
 Light is very proper for Bacchanals, Entertarnments, Plays and -
ther jofal Mertings; and, on the comrary, frightful in Serceries, Ap.
Pirisions of Grors, and tuch like nocturnal and unexpected Accidents.
The Lamp is melancholy, faint and gloomy, and therefore proper for
Barials, Prisons, near fick and dying Persons, and on other mournful
Occations. This Light is moft agreeable within-doors, and in Gaves,
Grettes, or frightful and unfrequented Places of small Extent.
The Astare of this Light, and irs Efef on Colours, are the fame
as thote of the Sun, with respelt to irs falfifying the Colours; but the
Light and Reffexion are not to frong; for which Reafon, the Arrift is
often at  fland in the Ules of them, arifing moftly from his flight-
ing this Light as  Matter not worth his Obfervation.
in reference to Shades, they are not much unlike thofe of the Sun,
 well in Brondness as Sharpness; yet with this Difference, that the
Sunlight falls more uniform on Objects, as he is more diftant from
them; and becaute in the Evening, but especially at Night, the Vi-
pours are darker and more deate than thofe of the Day: Whence it
follows, that all Objects, deprived of the Lamplight, ditappear;
and, by reafon of it' Nearnels, can be lighted but in part.
To contirm this, we thall exhibit  Marhematical Inftance in Plate
XLII.
Fx  Point  for the Center of the Light, from which all the
Rars ffow. Draw, under it,  Candleftick of  certain Height, as above the Ground. Then skerch  or  Columns going off fur
ther and further from the faid Point of Light: Ler thefe be  Feet
high. Next, fet one Foot of the Compaffes on the faid Point, and
extending the other, to as to touch the Extremity of the firft Pillar,
tweep  segment of  Circle on the Shaft; do the same with the other
Pillars. Now, you will perceive that the firlt Pillar is leaft toucbed,
bur receives the fronge? Light, and that, above and beneath the Touch,
the Light falls weaker and weaker: Moreover, that the furcheff Co
lumn is mof toucked, by means of the greater Sweep of the Compaffes,
and therefore it will be lighted almol all over, but allo moft weak.
IThence Tis plain, that Objects lighted by fuch Lights, are never light
 intirely and uniform. nd were they rouched and lighted alike, it
would be to faint and dark, that we should perceive nothing diffindly,
either in Colour or Our line, more than in  weak Moon-thine.


Of Lights and Shades.
  any one want further information how  apply this to Practice,
 shall now freely impart it.
Firfl,  skeich my Ordonnance on blue or dark Drawing-paper;
then  make my Plan, to thew the Places of the Figures and other
Objects; which  flightly feratch; next,  affign  Point for my Light,
either high or low as Occation requires; on this Point  fet one Foot of
the Compaffes, and with the other, touch Circle-wife (with an Extent
equal to each Objects Diftance from the faid Point) all the Objects
wherever it happens: By this means  find the Parts, which, as near-
ef the Light, ought to have the prongeff Light; and confequently the
Diminution of the Light and Colour thews itfelf in Proportion as it
goes of from the drawn Circles.
As for the Reffexions, they are in the fame Cafe with all Lights;
the brighteff, largeft and Rrongeft give the frongelt; and the purer the
Light, the more yellow appear the Colours both in the Lights and Re-
fexions: Contrarily, the fouler and more vaperous the Light, the more
Russet seem the Colours.
( Candle is yellowith.
The Light of .  Lamp is Ruffet.
 Flambeau, or Torch, is more Red.
Artifis, who delight in reprefenting fuch Lights, ought to regard
the three following ufeful Precepts.
 To keep molt Light together.
 To take especial Care in the meling and lighting of their Out-
lines.
 To obferve the Naturalness of the feveral Lights, whether Can-
dle, Lamp or Torch.
It muft allo be noted, that the Space between the Eye and the
Light, as likewife the firft Object or Figure (if it come before the
Light) ought to be the durkeft; but if it be behind the Light, it be-
comes weaker and weaker both in Light and Shale, occationed by the
Vapours, which, as before has been laid, appearing more denfe in the
Evening, the Night light more affects them and enlightens them.
Add to this, that the Mainlight being temper’ with light Vel-
low, Ruffet or Red, the Diminution and Breaking of thofe Colours
ought to be found by Black;  mean, by Black and the proper Colours
wherewith the Objects are shaded, and more or less weak in Proporti-
on to their Diftance; for the foremoff Darkness, and neareft to the
Light is more warm than the hinder and furthermofl, which, in Pro-
portion to its Diftance, becomes more blue; yet, much more in the .
Hh  Lights and Shades.
 
gen Sir than withindeers; becaute the Vapours of the Air are more
iubtile than thofe of conined Lights, which being made with Lamp-
oil, Rofin, or the like, emit  foul Smoke.
But as the foremoll Objects mult, by means of  confined Light with-
i reeds be fubjert to much Shade, whereby they often main
tain but  small Light on their Extremities, it will be found, that
luch eutaarl Lights appear more or lois frong than the Objects lighted
freght forwards, according as the Stuff whereon it falls is either rough
or (mogtr. As for the Reffexions, with the Light thining thro' thin
Folds,  obferre the fame Management as  prefcribe for Sunfhine
touching thote Parts: But, in breaking the Colours, let me fubjoin,
that the forens? Darkness mit be the greateft, and therefore lets fallin-
ed by the Light than thole which are more diftant; the Colours there.
by keep cleaner, and are lets fouled; and Hill lets in the open Air,
than with: doors.
 am even not afraid to add an eafy Method for finding the Diminu-
fir: of ti Linis on Object:, according to their Diftances, not from the

Pon of Sgar, but from the Candle, Torch or Lamp. Cut  Strip of
Paper or  cilum, as long as from the Center of the Light to the fur
thet Corner of the Piece. Ler it be  Finger and half broad at Bot
rom, and : awar to  Point at Top. Then paint the Point with
fuch Colour as vou give your Light, yellowith or ruffet, diminithing
it gradually in Proportion to its going off from the Light. Next,
with  Pin, fix the faid Point in the Center of the Light, to as to more
it about, at pleasure, to all the Objects near to or diftant from the
Light. Then divide this Strip into degrading Fict, small at the
pointed light End, and from thence gradually larger; by which means
the Scrip will ther, withour Trouble, the right Tint to temper.
For the Objects going into the Picture towards the Point of
Sight, you may make another Strip, the Reverfe of the former, to
WII, Light at the Bortom, and diminithing towards the Top or Point,
to be fixed on the Point of Sight.
 you would ule any more Helps for the Diminution of the Co
Jours, and lets troublefome, try the following Method.
 in my Ordonnance, exactly defigned the Figures after the
Life,  paint it like  Common light Piece, without breaking the Co
lours more than Perspective requires. The Light  take as from 
Candle or other Mlatter, proceeding from  Point within the Piece,
whether within doors or in the open Air. After which,  take  thin
glazing Vellow of the fame Tint  give to my Light, and Scumble
 Lights and Shades.
Chap.  nealy and thin over both Lights and Shades. This Vellow muft
not be too dark, becaute my main Heightning is taken only from 
common Light; wherefore Asphalium, yellow Lake, and Dragons
Blood would be to warm and fentible, as to take away the Mipiness in-
separable from Nighhpieces, unlets it were before painted accordingly;
to the no small Trouble of the rtiff. Now, as glared Things com-
monly abate of their Neatnels, you may, if it be neceffary, retouch
the Main-lights, as well in the Faces as other Parts, and thereby ferch
out their Force again.
The Advantage arifing from this Method is, that there is no Kind
of Night light, whether of Lamp or other Oil, Pirch, Brimftone,
Candle or Torch, but it may be reprefented with the fame Trouble;
becaute it depends only on the tempering the glazing Colour; the bett of
which, in my Opinion, is Cumbooge, light Pink or yellow Lake mixt
with  little Vermillion.
 think thefe very good Methods; becaute fomerimes in Night
pieces, elpecially in great Brytles, we use two, three, and more particular
burning Matters for Lights and by this means we obtain  fure Nicthod
for fetching out thofe Lights and Fires, not only ar Night, but allo in:
the Day-time, in the Evening, nay, in Sunskine, where we often meet
with Flambeaus, Torches, burning Allars or Piles of Wood.
But let me not propofe thefe Precepts as Laws, but Examples to
exercife the Artifts Curiofity, and for their Proficiency; wherein 
with my Lahours may be of Service.
CHAP. XX. Necefary Hints in the Use of Perfpective.
  VE been long confidering  Point, which, in my Opinion,
is very remarkable, and yet has never been fertled; tho'  think ic
may be done: It relates to the Execution of Hiffories, either with-
in or without-deers, and Landskip embellised with Figares.
My Thoughts are, that as Perspective affigns  certain Diftance for
viewing  Pilture with respect to its Magnitude or Smallnets; or, 
large Piece with large Figures, and other Objects going off, to wit, on
the second and third Grounds, thofe Objects ought to be as nearly. fi-
nithed as thofe on the Fore-ground; provided they keep their Faintness,
cauled by the interpoting AAir. This Pofftion,  think, is founded on.
certain and natural Principles.
But


Of Lights and Sbades.
Book 
  mult prerioully fuppofe, that when we fay,  Piece is well .
iked, it mut be underffood that the Whele is fo, and not  Part on.
 If we begn inquiries, we ought to puth them as far as polhible,
to enable us to lay; tuch  Piece is artfully executed; nay, to perfect,
that nothing is wanting: For that cannot be affirmed, when the Fore-
ground is hniched and well painted, and the fecond and third Grounds
but flarely rouched.  grant, that we fomerimes fee Pieces with
imall Figures, tho' loofly handled, accounted finer and more artful
than large Pictures laboured and highly finithed; yet it mult be allow.
ed, that more Work is necelfary in  large finithed Piece than  fmall
  looly handl : The very Words (fnishel and feofy) imply it.
Mr Opinion is, that if we be not wanting in Trouble and Time, as
artful  Piece may be produced, as what has been hitherto done, yet
only by thole who underfland Arr and its Rules in Theory and Prac
tice. And tho' ir feem ditficult to aftempt  Thing new, we mult
not therefore be difcouraged; for what great Things have not been ex-
perimented and performed : What did not Afexander? Had he feared
Danger and Trouble, he would never have gone the Lengths he did.
He had  mind to do it; rhis created  Refolution, and that finithed
his Hopes
But, to return to our Subject, let us fuppofe, that  Picture ten Feer
high, with Figures as big as the Life, ought to be viewed at ten Feer
Diulance; and that  lmaller one, five Feet high, with Figures half as
big as the Life, muft have five Feer Diftance; and thus the smaller the
nearer, according to Perspective: Now, the Quellion is, which of thote
three Pieces ought to be moft finithed? Many will certainly fay, 
The  But my Opinion is, that each of the three Pieces mult be
painted equally neat; becaute each has its determinate Diftance with
respect to its Bignets.
Again, there is another fuch Piece, ten Feet high, but divided in
to three Grounds, whereon are placed the fame Figures as in the three
former; to wit, thote as big as the Life on the Fore-ground, thote
half as big, on the second, and the lat on the third Cround; the
Queftion now is, which of thefe three Grounds ought to be moft finith
ed! Being all in one Pilture, the Judges will, contrary to what they
before afferred, fay, The first; and that the hindermoft muft not be to
near and finithed; fince they can never relish, that the Figures on the
second and third Grounds ought to be painted as neat and elaborate 
thote on the Fore-ground; for lay they, — Who would por
Ob Lights and Shades.
  it at ten Feet Distancez nay, who ever faw such  Painting, or
did it?
But the Cafe is not, whether there have been fuch Pictures; but
whetber they ought to be sof We are not ignorant, that tis the Cultom
to finith fmall Pieces, the fmaller the neater; and large ones, contrari-
ly, bold or loofe; now  would fain know the Reafon why there should
be more Work in  Figure of three Feet than in one of lix! Can it be
proved, that the fmall one ought to have  Fold, nay, an Hair, more
than that in full Proportion: But, what other Anfwer can be made,
— If the Cultom were not good, it would not have prevailed, nor laft-
ed to long? Neverthelels, as long as we reafon thus without Foundation,
and bigor ourfelves to common Practice, and old Cuftom, we shall never
advance. Irs not the proper Way to go forward; and therefore many
keep their old Station. But  want to be informed of now Things;
without which Art cannot improve. Variety nourishes the Mind. 
grant, that Men fometimes produce new Things which meet not with
publick Approbation; but, whence come they ? Either from falfe
Grounds and inconfideration, or elfe an immethodical Way of Expla-
nation.
To express my Thoughts perfpicuoully,  have exhibited them as
plain as  could in Plate XL. . and queltion not but you will appre-
hend my Meaning.
Numb.  Has three Pieces fronting; with their Diftances of   Feet and an half.
Numb.  Is the fame in Profile; with the Meafure or vifual Rays
which limit the Diftances, whether great or fnall; being the same
Polition  . Where they are all three in one.
Now, my original Quettion, with respect to Numb.  is, which of
the three Pieces ought to be moft finithed! If any one fay;  Tbe
small one, because it muft be viewed neare,?.  ask again, whether there
mult bemore Work in the small than the large one? Now behold Numb.
 where they are all three in one according to Perspective; and let
the Queftion be, which ought to be moft finithed, the foremoll or the
hindmoft? Vou will certainly antwer, that it thews itfelf, that the Fi-
gures on the Fore-ground muft be more finithed than what is further
off, and that there muft allo be more Work in the large, as being
Rearer.
But how agrees this with what was juft now faid, that the smalleft of
the three Pieces ought to be moft finithed; fince now you fay, the turg-
 Ligbis and Shades.
 .
gi mull be to; for the Examples and Objects are the fame; and it is al.
ready granted, that the fmallerit is, the nearer is the Distance affigned;
and that in the imalleff or furthermoff, when nearelt, there ought to
be as much Work as in the feremoit: And tho' you will fay, that
the latt Figure is fainter than the foremott; yer there is not  Fold
lets in it than if it were quite forward, and as big as the Life.
Jurge further; when lhighly finith  Figure in full Proportion after
the Lte,  muff fir ar learl as near as the Model is high, to perceive
:eren the morl minuce Parts of  Now if  would make another Fi-
gure half as big, allo after the Life, to place it on my fecond Ground,
How multI then fer the Modet! Ought  to keep the same fitting, or
mud  remove further from it? This laff is never done; for if it were,
We thould, intead of  Paintingroom, want Wetminfter-Hall, in order
to mokil an Offtig-tgure after the Lifc. But suppoting it were fo, mul
 then fir sofar of that  mayfee it more nataralty? les certain, thatl
should not joe tre balf of it. And tho', it may be said to this, that
whit cannor be feen in the Life, ought not (to make it look natural)
to come into  Picture; yet, pray obferve, that luppoling  make, in
the Oftship,  Figure of  Foor and half high, and the Subject require
it to be holding  Thread, to which hangs  Medal of the Bignets of
half  Guinea, the Queltion is, whether  mult exprets the Medal,
but not the Thread? Again, were  to reprefent  Window without
the Glazing or Lead work, or  Door, without Hinges or  Key-hole,
what would thole Things be taken for, if thefe did not appear! 
Metal dropping our of the Hand; an open Window; and  Screen in
llead of  Door.
From all which Premifes  infer, that if Things be prafticable, and
hove any Bigness, they ought to be expressed in the Little, and, asl
may lay, even to  Thread The Diftance makes them natural
if well painted, and the Diminution be exactly obferved according to
the Remoreness of the Objects.
Whether thefe Obfervations will pats current  Know not; yet every
Mian has the Libery to ule or ler them alone, as he pleafes.
CHAP


of Lighis and Shades.
Chap.    . XXI. Of the different Colouring in great and small
Pieces.
 Propofition is  Confequence of the preceding; and, to
be incelligible,  shall thew my Thoughts by the following Ex
ample in Plate KLVi.
There is  Gallery  Feet high and  Feet long
divided into
three Pannels, each five Feet wide and to Feet high. The two out-
ward Pannels are cloathed from Top to Botcom, and the middle one
but half way from the Top downwards; and under it is an handlome
bear. Thele three Cloths are to be painted by three feveral Malters,
Itarpose with Lindskips, all having  like Horizon, but different
Poince of Sighr. one Mafter embellifhes his Work with Figures, ei=
ther Fable or Hillory: Another introduces Architelture and imagery,
according to his Gullo: And the chird adorns his with Cartle, or what
elle he thinks fit.
The Queltion is now, in order to produce  general Decorum agree-
ing with Nature, whether thefe Mafters ought not to be concurring
in their Work, with respect to Perspective, Force and Diminutions
Certainly they ought; for the Light muft in all the three Pictures fatt
alike, either from the left, right, before or behind; the Air mult be
the fame; fince they all ought to appear as one Landship, feen through
three Openings, as two Doors and  Window.
But now, another Queltion arifes, whether the Figures, in all three.
ought to be as big as the Life? This will beagreed to, with respect to
thofe on the Fore-ground: But how then will it be, in the middle

Pilture, which is but half the Size of the two others! How shall Fi-
gures be incroduced there, in full Proportion? for half  Foot of
Ground, or five Feet, is too much Difference.
Now, if the Mafter, who is to make the middle as the fmalleff
Piece, paint it as firong and warm as he is able, nay, as  Face in
full Proportion of Rembrant, it would be intirely againtt Nature,
and the Rules of Art. But, to return to our Example.
 suppole, the Ofship, either in  imall or large Piece, to be one
and the same; even, were the one as fmall as the Palm of the Hand.
and the other, ten Vards high; the Reafon and Examples whereof, 
have fufficiently shewed in the laff Chapter, and shall further enforce, in
its
  Lights and Sbades.
Book .
 Place, in that treating of what is to be underftood by  painted Ta.
ble, whether Lanmiskip, Hiffery, Pourtraiture, &cc.
Bur, before  leave this Subject,  mult Hill fart another Difficulty.
We know, that  large Painting is often copy’ in Little; and the con-
trary: Now, if, for inftance, all that is large in the Original, be lef
fened in Proportion in the Copy, how can they look alike! as in
the Delign with the two Doors is exhibited; in both which are
large Clouds, and in the other small ones; and all thats in the Offskip
teems more diftant in the one than the other. If the Offskip in the
small Pitture be that of the great one, by what can you prove ir?
fince the Objects, which, in the greateff Diftance in the fmall Piece,
are hardly vifible, appear, in the great one, to large and diftind. To
which Iantwer, that every thing appearing in the one, is and remains
in the other always the same, out so much nearer: And this is evi-
dent; for, is there any thing in the World, which, how remote foe-
ver, cannot be fill remoter? It has been formerly faid, that every
thing on Earth is subject to the Laws of Perspective, except the Sun,
Moon and Stars, and what elfe is feen in the Firmament, with respect
to their Forms; as for the Clouds, they are moveable Bodies, and there
fore muft be confidered as earthly Objects, leftening and enlarging ac
cording to their Dillance, Height and Lowness; all thefe Thingsl
tay, can go off and appreach, be diftant and near. Betides, there is 
Difference between  Copy and an Original, as well in the Form as iIss;
Itay (in the Form) becaute the one ought to be viewed afar off and
the other near: Moreover, it never happens, that the Copy is hung by
the Original; but the Fellow to it.


CHAP. XXII. Of the Diference of Force in large and small Paint
ing; and the Effects of magnifying and diminishing Glaffes.
 be the berter underffood, we shall begin with the Air, and
take thefe two Points for granted; namely, that all dark Objects,
in Proportion as they go off, become, on their light Parts, tight.
or and lighter and the light ones, contrarily, darker and darker, how
clear foever the Weather; yer less in Sun-pine, as Experience fuffici
eatly thews.
Now, if it be asked, whether the Colour of the Objects do not
thereby allo loofe its Nature and Purity!  think it can loofe but lit
ile;


 Lights and Shades.
Chap.  and only in the Shade, which, broke by the other side of the
Light, is gradually transformed into the Blue of it, in Proportion as
the Objects go off; or, to (peak better, till uniting with the Ofship,
they at laft disappear.
Confider allo the Difference between fmall Paintings in the open
Rir, and thofe within doors, in reference to the going of, and the Co-
 fay firtt; that the fir without is the moft clear and bright
Light, in the Abfence of Sun-fhine; and tho' an Aparement mult needs
be lighted from without, yet it will be less in Force and Brighinels,
and therefore the Objects, more darkish, both in Lights and Shades.
Secondly, The Objects cannot fo vifibly grow faint in their going off;
becaule, by the Smallness of the Diftance, few or no Vajours are per
ceptible.
Thirdly, the Shades are not subject to any Alteration or Mixture,
but retain their natural Qualities; becaufe there is no other Light
within doors, than what comes thro' the Windows, and this has not
Power enough to cause any Reffexions, lave some little near the Win-
dow, nor give any Colour: So that by the Darkithnels the Ob-
jects, whether Pourtraits, Figures, Flowers, &cc. retain their natural
Colours intirely, as well in Sbades as Lights: Wherefore, fince the
Beauty and Purity of the Colours appear beft by the Serenity and
Brighiness of the Air, they muft contrarily abace in their Effects and
Force by means of the Darkness.
 hall here propole  small Inftance, for Explanation.
Let  good Maffer paint any thing, as  Pourtrait, Landskip, Fi-
gures or Cattle in Oil, as fmall and neat as  Miniature-painter, and
let both thefe Mafters chufe their Subjects moff beautiful and natural.
Now view the two Paintings together, and you will find, that the one
differs as much from the other as within door Light does from the open
Air. Tis therefore unnatural and againtt the Rules to us thet Warmih
and Strength of Colours, in order to force small and diftant Objects out
of their proper Plices, or to make the Window fy tewards us, inlead
of going off from us. We ought, moreover, to know, that Things
painted in Little can never be taken for the Truth, fince tis undeniable,
that the Life appears therein no otherwife than as at  Distance, viz.
through  Door, Window, or other Opening, whether within or with-
out-doors; wherefore they ought to be painted in fuch Manner, that,
when hung up, they may not appear like  painted Board, Clotk or
Flat, but  natural Windew or Deor through which the Life is really
seen:
 Lights and Shakes.
Book .
 Which cannot he effected by the Force of warm Shades or has
Colears, but by the reciring and tender ones, broken by the interpoting
Air, according as the Weather is more or less clear or mifty: And
this, withour Exception of any Ordonnance, whether Landskig,  Hisjory, &.
Experience will confirm the Truth, if you view your Picture thro'
 Piece of fne Gaufe, somercbat bluiss; for then you will find the
Lights of your Objects gradually grow weaker in Proportion to their
Diftance; without lofing the Beauty of their Colours. It will even
give  Piece  certain Sofinels and Sweetness and great Decorum. Vou
may make the fame Experiment with another Piece of Gause of  grey
Coloar, in Imitation of forey Weather; and it will not only darken the
 of the Objects, but alfo foul and maddle it, and make the Paint
ing look cold and ditagreeable.
Having thewn, that the Vie of the greateff Force of Sbades in small
Paintings, is annararal and againft rt, as well in within as Wichour.
door-Reprefencarions; we shall now peak of the contrary, to wit, Pieces
with lnge Orjefts, in order to thew, what therein, without Prejudice,
 think the moff parural.
Tis  conmtant Maxim, that the Life feen near, is in Greatness,
Force and Colour tuperior to what is diflant; the one being Nature it.
felf, and the other pemingty so; for Figures in full Proportion are like
us who view them, in every Particular of Force, Afpelt and Colour,
except Motion: Which being granted, it may be calily apprehended,
if we will fubmir to Reafon, that there is  vall Difference between
large and fmall Ordonnances of Figures in full Proportion, and thote
half as big with respect to the interpesing fir, the only true Caule of
Things being more or less faine, and their going off, as well in within
 Withour door-Reprefentations.
Let us then rightly oblerve, in what manner fuch large Objects
ought to appear, that they may be natural and artful; but previouly
contider two Things.
 Whar Light is the moft proper for them.
 What Hundling is the moll natural for their Execution.
As for the Light,  think the common bet, and much more proper
than Sunthine; and tho' fome, who let up for the buono Guffe, are
continually talking of painting broad, it is nevertheless  great Errot,
as we have often laid, always and without Difference to ule that Mar
ner, fince tis not proper, in  common Chamber-light, (especially in
Figures as big as the Life, which ought to be in all respects like the
Spects


Of Lights and Shades.
  even to much, that, if painted on Boards and cut away,
they should not be taken for Paintings, but the Lifeitself) to give them
broad Shades, but dubious and melting ones, to the end they may rise
and round; not Black, like Spagnoler, nor Grey, Vellow or Ruffet,
like Rembrant, John Lievens, and many other Italian, Duich and
Flemisss Painters, who, without Difference, bring Warmch, as they
call it, into the Shades to fuch  Degree as to fire them; on
ly to caule Force. Let this be duly weighed, left the Colour of the
natural, and perfect Life be negletted. in my Opinion, is belt to
make the Shade of the same Nature as the Stuf; exhibiring in all
Objects, whether Nudities, Draperies, Wood, Stone, either Red,
Vellow, Blue of Green, the moft proper Colour, as well in Light as
Shade.
As to the Force,  should not be fparing either of White or Black,
tho' many have pretended, that we mull not wte White:  good
Painter will attempt any thing. Vou muft not fuffer yourfelf to be
twayed by this or that Manner; follow Nature, and you will content
 Away then with Drudgery and Muddling; handle your Work
boldly, yet not, with Rembrunt and Lievens, to let the Colours run
down the Cloth, but lay them fnooth and even, that your Objects.
may feem round, and relieved only by Art, not by daubing. Let
the Agreement be to general, that in truth it may be faid the Fi-
gures are large, srongly painted and beldly handled.
People now--days think, that Painting has attained fuch  Perfecti-
on as not to admit of further improvements; fince the beautiful and
great Manner, the bon Gout and hot Colouring are, at this Time,
mely performed in France, Italy, the Netherlands and other Countries,
where Art ffourithes; but we do not find, now--days, Wits who en-
deavour to diftinguith themfelves among the Knowing, by nere Invent;-
ons. We had feveral of them some Time fince, of whom  thall name
but two, Rembrant, and John Lievens, whole Manner is not intirely
to be rejected, elpecially that of the former, as well for its Narural-
nets as uncommon Force; yet, we fee very few followed him, and
thefe, like him, fell thort at latt; notwithllanding some were, and hill
are, who affert, that Rembrant was able to do every thing which Art
and Pencil could effect; and that he furpaffed all Arcilts, even to this
Dav. Was there ever fay they,  Painter who cone so near Nature
in Ferce of Colouring, by his beautiful Lights, agreeable Harmony, prange
and uncommon Thoughts, &&. Having such extraordinny Talents, in what
could


Of Lights and Shades:
Book .
 be be deficient? and is not that enough to charm all the World, the
be had not prattifed  Manner which was in use long before.
But  defire thefe Men may know, that my Opinion herein is quite
different from theirs; tho'  muft own,  had formerly  fingular incli-
nation for Rembrunt' Manner; For as foon as  began to be fentible of
the infallible Rules of Art,  found myfelf under  Neceffity of re-
pouncing my Miltake and quitting his, as being founded only on loofe
 hims and uncertain Grounds, without Precedent.
And now, methinks,  cannot any where better than here, thew the
Effelts of mignifing and diminishing Glaffes, and the various Opinions
fouching them.
Many imagine, that  Painting in Little, and the Life, feen through
 Diminithing-glats, are one and the fame; and that the fmall Lite,
seen through  Magnifying-glats, and  large Picture, appear alike:
But thefe Men are much mittaken, and as wide from Truth as the Eaff
is from the Well.
The Glats ground hollow or concave, fhews near Objects in their

Force, Beaury and Warua with  Diminution. And
The Glats ground riing or convex, contrarily, exhibits faint and dif
tant Objects in  full Proportion, dull and broken.
Now, ler any realonable Man view the two Pieces, the small one
werm and, iring, and the large, faint and weak, and decermine which
of them is molr like the Life or Nature! My Opinion is againtt both:
They are like  Man dreft in Woman' Cloaths, and the contrary;
for one is tor fring, and the other too weak.
But, admiting thefe Men to be in the right, and we were to fide
with them, we should, by this their Pofition and Application of it,
dilcover their wrong Notion; fince they make the large strong, and the
Imatt, eren as frong as the lurge. By which, and the aforefaid Effects
of the two Glaffes, the Mistake fufficiently appears, and Arcifts are
advertifed of it.
CHAP


Of Lights and Shades.
  XXIII. An Enquiry into the Difference between  large
Landskip ernamented with small Figures, and  small one with large,
with respect to the Hir; the Day being supposed clear in both.
 be short and incelligible, we premife, that, in  Landskip
the fir is so governing, that all the Piece contains, whecher Off-
skip, Water, Fields, Trees, Coc. muft from it receive their
Decorum and Naturalnels, and at all Times of the Day, whether
Morning, Noon or Evening, nay, at Night alfo; for as the Airalters,
all the Objects lighted by it do the fame: If the Day be bright and
the Air clear, all Things appear fo; if it be Evening, they are dusky
and at Night, dark. The Mafter, who has regard to this effential
Point, mult needs fucceed, and be thought artful: And why: Becaule
he has, in that Part, fimply followed Nature as an infallible Guide:
Vet he ought to be certain in lighting the Objects according to their fe-
veral Natures, and to obferve, with me, whether there be  Differ
rence between  large Opening without Embellissments, and the contrary,
with respett to the ir. By the Air is meant, the fuperior Part,
which, in  clear Day, is commonly called, The Blue of the Sty.
We lay, that the two unlike Objects in Landship, to wit, one ona-
mented and the other plain, ought, in order to look natural, to be -
tike clear, and neither lighter nor darker, if they both exhibir the
sume Hour of the Day? and if one were of  darker Blue than the or
ther, Tis  Miftake, and unjullifiable; for one of them mut needs be
contrary to Truth.
Now, it may be here objected, according to the old Way of think-
ing, that  Maffer of his Art may, for Decency' Sake, freely cor
rect and alter Narure when the is obstructing: But  anfwer, in few
Words, that, in that Cafe, Nature ought to command, and Art obey.
What can be the Purpofe to paint, in Landskip, the Blue of the Sky,
two or three Feet above the Horizon, as dark as if it were Evening
when all the Objects in the Piece are lighted with the urmofl Bright-
nets and Force, either fidewife or froming, altho' the Sun be fetting;
even, the Shades lighter than the upper Air: Confider how fuch Re-
prefentations mult look in the Eyes of the Knowing, and whether it
be otherwife than  Day-occurrence, or Stage-play reprefented in the
Evening. What Advantage would accrue, if every body had trus
Know-


Of Lights and Sbades.
Dook. .
 and Judgment in the Art, if we did not thew them Art:
What Lore can  gam! He, who knows Are, is very fenfible of what
it aims at; wherefore  Lover of Truth ought to fhun Fallities. 
Picture is  probable Dementration of Tbings; and the Knowledge of
visible Narure is like  Touch flone, by which Menjudge of the Truth
or Falhood of all they meet with: Even. Ignorants as well as the
Knowing are allured by Art if they find it like Nature; tho' they
are disterently affected; the former delighting moff in mean and com-
mon Things, and the latter in fublime and grand.
But, to return to the Point, and from the small to full Proportion,
 mean, Pieces from  or  to  or  Feet high: The Queltion is,
whether the light Blushness of the Styought not to begin higher above
the Horizon in  Piece of ro Feer than in one of :  think it ought
not; becaute in boch, the armof Dilance is the same; and there is no
other Dirference between the great and small Picture, chan between 
Window half and quite open; as the Example in Plare KL. Vil. natu
rally thews; where are two WVindows of equal Height and Breadth,
one half fhar, and the other quire open, through both which, the
Landskip and Horizon are feen to rife  Feet and an half. Now, we
generally perceive, when the Sky is clear and without Clouds, that it
appears Blue; as if we faid, — Twere all Light. — affuming its
Colour flowly and far above the Horizon; and therefore some Land
ship painters act very improperly herein and againtt Narure: But Fi.
fare-painters especially are moft culpable; fuch,  mean, who, in their
Pieces, tho' ever to small, exhibit the Rir suddenty durk and deep Blue,
without confidering the Origin of BlueExperience reaches, that it
proceeds from Whire and Black, and is therefore in the Aforning,
light Blue; at Noon, Sky-blue; in the Evening, Azure; and at Night,
dark Bluc. In this MannerI divide the four Times of the Day, as in
the following Example in the Plsteaforefaid we, by double Harchings,
plainly thew; and not only the Tines, but allo how high the Blue be
gins above the Horizon and approaches towards it; thefe are letterd
 BCD for the Morning, Nosn, Evening and Night.
Ii will not be unneceffary, on this Occafion, to impart  Thought
of mine touching warm and weak Puinting, as well in Landskip and
Hiffory as fnall and great Life; fince it allo takes its Rife from this
Fountain of the Lights.
We find, that thofe, who are accultomed to  particular Manner
of Painting, have not the Power to alter it of any
Occafion whatloe
yer. They who make large Figures or Landship their Buliness, and
uil


Chap.  Lights and Shades.
 great Force and Warmth, paint every thing frongly, without Dif
ference, tho' ever fo small: Contrarily, one ufed to small Things, if
his Manner be weak, retains that Weakness even in the largeft Things,
and cannot ferch out the Force and Warmth of the other.  vall
Miltake, in my Opinion; becaule it is fuch an ealy Matter, and yet
produces to great an Effect;  mean, for him who governs his Work
by Rule; for who, having judgment, is ignorant, that  near Tree has
more Strength and Warmth than one at two hundred Steps Diftance?
Or that  Figure in full Proportion has more Force than one of one
Foot?  think neither of thefe Parties can find Fault with the Colours;
he, in the Great, that he has not weak ones enough, or he, in the
Ltthe, that he wants the flrong and warm, or cannot make them to,
by tempering: If the Knowledge be found, nothing but Will is want-
ing for good Performance.
But let us confider in what Manner we may, on this Occation, arm
ourfelves. Good Reafons ought to (way every body; yet Scruples of
ten make Men fearful of undertaking Things out of their Way; not
that they should not be able to perform them, but on an Apprehen
tion of falling from  good into  bad Manner; fince Experience thews,
that each fuppofes his own Manner the beft.
 think  have found out  Method for thofe accultomed to large
and Rrong Things, to fit them for the small and weak. The Cloth
jou defign to paint on, ought to be primed with  light Grey Ground
for the large Work, and with  dark and warm Ground for the small;
to that, having no other Patterns, whether Figures or Landship, than
warm and sirong ones, you may temper your belours accordingly, and
get rid of your old Cullom. Herein,  Pallet of the same Colour is al
to neceffury, that the Colours tempered on it may produce, in paint-
ing, the same Force or Weakness. And to thew, that this Method is
of greater Moment than some may prefently imagine,  shall relace
what once happened to myfelf.
 certain Gentleman had his Hallcieling lined with five Cloths,
grimed with  Pearl-Colour; and being afterwards defirous of
having fomething painted on them, propoted my doing it. Whereup-
  made Defigns to his Liking, and had  Cloths fent home to me
(the middle one large and (quare, and three fmaller round ones) but in
lien of the fifth, (which was got rotten by Dampuess)  new one was fent
to me, not primed with  light Ground like the reft, but of  brqun
Colour. After  had deadcolour’ the Work and viewed it together,
 perceived, that the Shades in the laft Cloth were much browner and
No.  
Warmer


Of Lights and Shades.
 
Warmer than in the others; and tho' in finithing,  endeavoured, as
much as poftible, to help it, and bring it like the rell, ver something
remained in the Sbodes of another Nature; which fome Pertons judged
to be better chan chole of the other Cloths, (thole especially who were
impliciely addilted to the warm Mianner) without confidering in gene
ral whether Twas proper of not. Thus  found, that the Ground of 
Cloth may often miffead as, and put us befide the Mark, eitber in Near-
ness or Difance; but knowing the Reafon of it, if it happen again the
Fault is our own. And thus we may infentibly, and without Compul.
tion, pats from large Tbings into the small, and from the small into the
VurgE.
We hall further obferve on what Occafions the aforefaid Means may
be made ufe of to Advantage.
 in paincing  light Landskip.
 in painting Halls, Rooms, &cc.
 in Night-pieces, Apparitions, and Candle-lights; and as well in
Lrtle as in full Proportion.
For thefe three particular Defigas, we may prepare the Grounds of
the Clorks thus. That for the Landstip ought to be pimed with pearl
Colour; that for an Apartment, with Umber; that for Apparition;or
Candie-light, with Colagn’ Earth, or Umber and Black. The firtt,
more or lels blaish, according to the Quantity of Sky; the second,
fomewhat brighter and more warm, according as you intend to exhibit
either  common Light or  Sum thine; and the third, according as it
has lirde or much Light, Depth of Approsch, Smallness or Large.
nets; yet the larger the more black. We think thofe Colours, belides
the Tints, very ufeful and neceffary not without Reafon; becaute they
have Affinity to the Nrure of the Subjects; the firtt, to the Blue of
the Sty; the second, to the Reffexiens; and the third, to the Shade.
 have often made it  Queftion, whether it were worth while to
mention thefe Particulars, becaute  am fenlible, some may think them
riffing; as  willingly own, they feem to be: But on better Confide
ration of the Matter, and how many Things are negletted which ei
ther offer of themfelves or seem trivial, tho' of abfolnte Ufe, my Su-
fpicion abared; with this Confolation, that how minure foever my
Thoughts may be,  shall be fausfied, if they any ways tend to the Ad
vantage and Improvement of Are, and Insiruction in it.
Wherefore, reaffuming the Subject,  fay, that the Cloth may be
prepared thus. The Colours, being ground up ftiff with fat Oil, ought
to be mixed very thin with Turpentume and the Cloth painted over,
with


Of Lights and Sbades.
Chap.   foff Tool in this Manner. The Sky, Blue, and the Ground,
Grey or Green, more or lets dark as your Ordonnance and Delign re=
quire. Now, if it be asked, how we mull proceed in cafe of rifing
Objects, as Trees, Houles or other Things coming againft the Offship,

and above the Horizon, and which fill up  great Part of it!  an
twer, that my Meaning is not to provide fuch painted Cloths, with-
but previoully knowing, what we are to paint upon them; for we
mull firft skeech our Thoughts on Paper, and then conclude how much
or little Sky or Ground muft be painted Blue or Green, Vellow or
Black. In thofe Grounds we have no occafion for fine and coftly Co-
lours; common ones will ferve, if they have  good Body and cever
well. For the Blue, take indigo and White; for the Ground, Umber
and White, or Lamp-black and light Oker; for Architecture and other
Stonework, Umber, brown Oker, COc. The Ground thus laid, and
being dry, has three defirable Qualities.
 Tis fit for Work, as being even and dull; wherefore the Colours,
how thin foever, take at firft; which  fmooth or gloffy Ground will
not admit without much Trouble.
 Tis durable, by its Relation to the Tints and Colours painted
on it; which hold their perfect Beaury and Force; which they can-
not do, when the Ground is of another Colour or Tint, fich as White
upon Black, light Blue on dark Vellow, or Red,  in Time appear-
ing more and more through, tho' ever to farly painted
Tis expeditions for him who has  ready Hand and quick Pencil.
and defires to paint up his Defign at once; which otherwile cannot be
done without Dead-colouring.
This Method has ftill further Advantages than some may perhaps
imagine; tis particularly ufeful in Creling-pieces, not only in Acreal
Reprefentations, but alfo Bass reliess of one Colour, whether White,
Grey, Violet or yellowith.
Judge now, whether the Trouble of preparing fuch  Cloth be not
small, when compared with the great Advantage arifing from it.
As  Proof of it,  have oblerved of the great Barthelet, that
when he was to paint  Pourtrait with  purple or black Drapery, he
laid in the Drapery fat, with  fingle dark Purple or Black without
any Folds; and, on finithing, onty beightened and saded it, and thas
worked up the Piece at once.
 K 
Of Lights and Shades.
CHAP. XxIV. Of the Lights within deers.
 H Light ought to be ranked among the Day-lights, as tak.
ing its Rife and Government from thence. This, commonly
called  Chamber-light, we divide into three Sorts.
The firtt enters thro' Doors, Windows, and other Openings, and pro
ceeding from the Air, thereby caules
The fecond, which is occationed by Reffexion; as from  Wall,
Ground or other Objects.
The third fublifts in irtelf; as proceeding from  Candle or Torch.
Thefe Lights have different Natures.
Thofe of the open fir are clean on the light Parts of Objects, and
do sof after then more than in the open Air, cauling the Light to be
broad, and the Shades dark.
The second falls mere or less pare on Objects according to the Colour
and Nature of the Grounds and Walls; their Shades being dim and dif
appearing, and only the decpest Shades visible and frong; the Room in
general, both above and below, being thereby lighted, as well by the
Force and Effed of the Wall within, as by the Groand witheut. Of
the Groundhades we shall fay nothing here, as having, in another.
Place, treated of them, and their Force and Diminution.
The Cundle-light we have alfo, ina particular Chapter, fufficient.
 thewed how to manage, as likewife Sun-thine; which laft, we
think, as we have often faid, very improper to be reprefented in 
Room.
Many have thought very improperly of thofe lights; taking, in  Manner, the Liberty which Horace allows to Poets and Paint-
ers; and precending to help the Defects of Nature, do it in an extri-
ragant Manner, making no Scruple to break down  whole Wall of
 Room, to let in  beautiful Light on their Objects, as prongly as in
the open Air.
They even go fuch Lengths, that, tho' they have Doors and Win
dows, they give every thing their proper Ground fhades, except Win
dow-frames, Crosspieces and Piers; as if  Wall were pot  folid bo
dy as well as  Man, Table, Chair or other Furniture; imagining
they may do fo, that nothing may obfiract the Figures: But, in my 
pinion,


Of Lights and Shades.
  it were better to take away the Caule of fuch an Evil, than to
spoil the Property of Things by reprefenting it.
in painting an Apartment, we ought well to consider the Arcbiteffure,
to aid it, and give it  preper Division, and thew  Door for Pallage;
As for the Windows, whether many or few, it muft appear by the
Objects, and by the Groundshades of the Cross-pieces and Piers; and
that, plain in Sun-thine, but dubious without it.
And, in order to make this laft Point cfear, (which in this Chapter
we chiefly aim ac)  shall, in the two Examples in Plate KLVill:
plainly exprets my Sentiments.
The firtl exhibies two different Lights falling in thro' two differenc
Windows; the one proceeding from the clear Air, and the other, by
reaton of  near Building before the Window, somewhat broke, little
of no Air being feen above that Building. Between the Windows is .
large Pier or blank Wall.
Mark thofe Windows with the Letters  and , and the blank
Wall with , and then obferve, how the Shade, which the Pier 
gives on the Ground, is cut, on both Sides, by the Light falling in
thro' the Windows  and , and how acute it terminates, and how
the Light  is weakened by that of ; moreover, what  thort Touch
of Light  gives, when that of Bgoes far into the Room:. As allo,.
that the Figure , receiving the Light from , is dusky, and Hara
hort Ground Chade, and the other Figure;, contrarily, receiving its
Light from , is lighter, and its Light broader, and gives  longer
Ground-shade. Obferve further, that the nearer the Figures are to the
Light or Window, the purer and more plain are their (round-thadesy.
when, contrarily, the Column . placed againtt the Pier . gives .
 Ground-fhade, the greater evercoming the less.

The second Example thews the fame Things, according to the Cor
dition of the Lights; which are altered and come in from bebind.
The third and fourth Examples, in Plare KLIR thew the fame
Things in Landship; for the same Obfervation prevails in both; with
respect to Light and Shade. As to the Colours in the open. Air and.
their Alcerations,  have faid enough of them in  proper Chapter.
 think it great Heedlelsnels, in many Painters, who, in giving
their Within door-Objects  Side light, do not mind, whether they
Rand on the Near or Offfide of the Window letting in the Light; nor.
confider, that the Light, coming in thro'  narrow Opening, (preads,
and, by reafon of interpoling Vapours in Proportion to the Force of.
the


-
 Ligbts and Sbades.
 .
 Light, there mall needs fall  proportional weak or Brong Shade
on the Ground
Confider the Conduct of the ingenious Poysin, in his Piece of the
Dearb of the great General Epammondas; wherein no Obtervation of
Light is neglected ; all things have their natural Effects, which make.
the Piece look to charming.
Tyros muft not think it irkfome to mind to many Obfervations in
Matters of Confequence; which when once well apprehended in their
Principles, nothing but Carelessacts will afterwards make them flight
Endeavour then to fix the Prisciples and Knowledge in your Memories
by the Help of Jadgment, and all Things will certainly have  narw-
ral and ealy iffue.
CH AP. XXV. Of the Application of Lights to the different Speci-
es of Histeries; with  Table or Ordennance of all the Lights.
rH   we may not be thought to keep any thing back from
 Arciff, which may be of Service to him,  judged is necelfs-
 to fubjoin this Chapter to the Lights, tho' we have to largely
greated of their Natures, Qualities, Forces and Effelts.
 Drawing and Our line, how fine foever, are not agreeable before
they are shaded; and when this is done as Nature and Art require, it
exales the former, and gives an addicional Lustre to Nature; For  so
ber Light fuirs not with butting Figures, with respect to Within
door-Reprefentations, becaute it abates the Elegance and Art of the 
ther. As in The Marther of Cxfar in the Senate-house; or, The Death
of Cato. But, let me not be hereby suppoted to overthrow my for
mer Affertion, that Sun fhune is not proper within doors; fince, on
foch Occafions as those, there muft be found fuch  Medium in the
Light, as there is in the Colours between the more and less beautiful,
and as we have thewed to be, between Sun-fhine and common Light.
Again, this Light would be very improper in  Salatation of Eli-
Labeth and Mary, or, The Stery of Stratonica; or that of The Qued
of Sheba: Thefe require  more tender, foft and fweet Light, and
therefore  common ofe.



Of Ligbts and Shades
  this be not obferved,  good Out line may be spoiled; as when
 Shade should happen to fall on the rifing Parts, or  Ground shade
pass over them.
Were we to make an Hiltory, wherein both Pastions, the sedate and
firring, should meet, requiring confequently, an Oppesstion in the
Lights, we ought to place the afting Figures forwards on the firft
Ground, as having the Predominancy, and to adapt the Light to them
as much as possible.
Accordingly,  Story nott occurs to me, wherein the three principal
Pasions muft meet in one Composition,  mean that of Ahafuerus, Eff-
her and Haman; Efther thews  supplicating and meek Posture and Coun-
tenance; The King dilcovers Wratb and Passion; And Haman, Affe-
nishment and Fright. Now, in order to caft well the Light on thote
Figures, according to my Apprehention,  would dispofe Epber in the
greateff Light, fomewhat in Profile; The King, in the srongeft,  mean,
where it falls moft and has its chief Effect, and increate it by the Force
of Colours; but Haman  would place fitting on the other side of the
Table, in  dim Light, the rather to fereen him from the King'
Wrath: And, as it is  Feall or Banquet prepared by Epber, where
every thing is royal and magnificent,  think the common Light here the
moft proper ; becaute the Sequel of the Story and the King' Rage are
but accidental.
We shall conclude this Book with the following
Ordennance; or Table of the Lights.
Here, the beautiful and darting Aurera is diltipating the fogey Va-
pours of the gaptly Night, by her agreeable Day-break, that the moft
perfed Productions of rich and liberal Nature may appear in their
true Qualities, Forms, Colours and full Luftre; the defcends from on high,
holding  clear lighting Lerch, and driving dark Night into fubterra-
Reous Hollows.
The more radiant Phabus, luting in his Chariot, is mounting out of
Thetiss Lap, gilding all things under the arure Heavens, not excepting
the Snow-whice Lillies.
The chafte Diana, with her harp-pointed Silver Horns, is fatistied
with what her Brother imparts to the World, as ferving not only to
revive, but alfo to be  Beacon to the Paths of Mortals.
The belliss Megarg Tipphone, with her Kinking Torch creating Anxi-
ety and Fright, freing at it, fies this irrefffible Light; inflaming all.
ilangs


Of Lights and Shades.
 .
things in her Way; even farnishing all beautiful Objects and Colours
with ber dark and nafty Papours.
You fee here, the bright Mforning by its pure Rays. surpafting all
former Light; but the Sun, by his fiery Force, gains the Laurel,
gikling all that his Beams can touch; whereby we perceive the Weat.
nofs of the Sitver Aloon, not able to diftinguith Objects and make them
apparent.
WTe exhibit here, at  moderate Diftance, on the right side of the
Piete fear reand Pelgzsss, of equal Miagnitude, with their Plinths
and Houldings running towards the Point of Sight.
On the firz, as being the Aforning, is feen  bright Star, giving 
Bert Grtund-hade, ending in  Point.
On the feronl, appears the Sun, in full Luflre, giving  long and
brord Grounmt-hade, sharp and plain, like the Object.
The Hird has the Moon’ Prefence, which produces alike Ground
Suic. And
The fourth, whereon is  lighted Torch, caufes, by this Light, 
King and enlarging Ground-shade.

The End of the Fifth Book


 




sdle
  

  IV    VI
Of LANDSKIPS.
ER , the God Pan fits playing his Pipes, with 
Crook refting on his rm; and about him are thres
Women, frantickly dancing Hland in Hand: One of them.

is dreft in Green, and on her Head is  Chaplet of Herbs.
intermixed with Field-flowers; another is in Blue, adorn-
ed with  Chaplet of Bulrushes and white Bell-fowers;
and the third is in black or dark Raiment, wearing 
Chaplet of Rects and Musbrooms. Thele three Figures reprefent Trees,
Rivers and Grounds. The Place opens an agreeable Country, cnrich-
ed with Woods, Rivers and Hills.
CHAP. .. Of Landships in general.
  conflant Maxim, that
Variety’ the Souls refind Delight,
And the chief Viand of ber windew’ Sight.
Fi
  Landskips.
Book VI.
 is the Soul of Mirth, Sring of Pleafure. and the Sance of
Life; ts to gracifving, that, without it, we think ourfelves Slaves,
iand, by  confiant Return, we with to live for ever: Without it we
coret Dearh; becaute the Soul, as pent up in  Dungeon, calls for Enlarge.
ment. But he is much our of the way, who hourly wants Variety,
fince any Excets is borh ridiculous and hurtful, as well to the Agent
as the Parient. He who propoles  Livelihoed from Art, is not to pleate
himseff only; becaute his Happiness or Unhappinets depends not on
himself, but otfers, according as his (orks pleate or displeafe; and, as
every Creature kas  particular Liking, and, when in Company, they
are nor to be facshied with one Sort of Food, but with  Variety; to  Arriff should Itreuouly endeavour to qualify himself for every
Pesfr’ Tyle; like an expert Apethecary, who ffores his Shop with
all proper Medicines for the general Good, and thereby gets Wloney.
Let this juffice to hint, that  Landskip- painter mult not be rvedded to

ne Cheirs, either too pirring and extraragant, or foo reposed and melan-
 be asts it would pleate but one Ser of Men, and his Advan
lage would therefore arile but from few. Whereas Variety will allure
both Sorts, and his Fame be the greater.
 thought is proper to premite this, as an Advice to many: Let us
now, tere we come to the Effence of this Branch of Painting; conti-
der, that  Linssiig is the moft delightful Object in the Arr, and has
very powerful Cribries, with reffieit to Sight, when by  fisett
Harmonr of Colours and elegant Mlanagement, it diverts and pleales
the Exe. What can be more Rrisfictory than to travel the World
ithour going our of Doors; and, in  Moment, to journey out of  inro frirs, and from thence back to Imericu, even into the Et-
 Prus, to view all the Wonders, without Danger or Incommodity
from Sun or Frot! What is more acceptable than fhady Groyes, open
Parks, clear Waters, Rocks, Fountains, high Mountains and deep
milly Vallers: All thefe we can fee at once; and how relieving mul



the Sigh: be ro the moft melancholy Temper:

 Circumitances being to glorious, entertaining and ufeful, let

is comide what conftitutes  fise Laydship..
ie contits principally in an orderly Disposstion of Lights againft Dark-
acs; whence arifes the good Hurmony, which intentibly deceives the
Sight, in fuchn Sort, that tho' ir be  flat Cloth, yet it exhibits  mity

ral preffectie Ofening, even Natare itfelf.
Landitig requires two Qualities to make it delightful
 Dispofition.  Colouring.
 Landskips.
 .
The Dispesstion is an artful bringing together of irregular Objelts;
which nevertheless feem not to be againtt Nature, or impoffible.
The Colouring is  Conjunction of proper Colours in the aforefaid
Objects, according to their Situations and Qualities, agreeing with the
Nature of the Sir in fuch manner as to repofe and pleale the Exc.
And yet all chefe Qualities cannot alone produce  perfelt Landskip,
unlets  good Choice precede; which contifts in joining together Variety
of Objects, viz. Woods with Viftos, wherein the Eye may lofe itfelf;
Rocks, Rivers, and Water-falls, green Fields, &cc. delightful to the
Eye. Herein lies the Stress of  Landskip, and Painting is very like
Nature, with respect to Things inanimate; not to mention many others
as the Embellifhments; which give it the utmofl Perfection. However,
this Variety confifts not only in the Difference or Irregularity of the
Objects, as Trees, Hills, Fountains, and the like, but in the Diversity
of each of them; for inftance, bending and frait Trees, large and small
Hills, wrought and plain Fountains, Cottages and Palaces, green and
rufet Lands, &cc. The same Diverfity is to be oblerved in Colsuring,
according to the Seasons of the Tear; that Lovers may not he cloved
by producing, with the Cuckoo, always the fame Thing; as, Stir
and Motion, crooked and mif-shapen Bodies of Trees, waving Branches,
barren Grounds, blue Mountains, or Beafts, Birds, Huntings and the
like; or, contrarily, always Repose and Quictness, frait Stems, clipp’
Trees, level Grounds intirely gre. standing Water, and the same Light.
Colour and Nature.
We have formerly faid, that  Table or Picture hung up, and view-
ed at  determinate Diftance, appears as the Liss, without-deers; of
which, the Frame thews only the Thickness of the Sill wherein tis put,
or Wall, againtt which it hangs. The Queltion is now, whether inch
 painted Opening can be natural and deceiving, without lixing  Point
of Sight and an Horizon equrl with the Eye of the Spettator? and
whether it be the fame, to place them higher or lower! And further,
whether the Thickness of the Frame be iufficient to thew the Thick-
nets of the Wall, without continuing it upon the Cloth?  fay poft-
tively, — No, — and that fuch an Opening cannot be natursl.
much less deceiving, if one of thofe Requifites be wanting; which 
prove thus. Take  Chair, and fit at the Window with your Eye
jull level with the Sill, and then you will oblerve that the Horizon,
of greateff Diftance parting the Sky and Earth, will, as  may say,
approach towards ir, and be parallel with your Sight, and that tngre,
od.
fore you can fee nothing but Sky: Then arife, and yoa will perceive the
Herizen
 Landskips.
 VI
Herizas alfo rife, and that your Eye is always level with it, difcovering
here and there Objects on the Ground Now, confider the Infuffice
eacy of your Pilture, when its Point of Sight does not agree with
your Exe, and how Nacure, joined to your imagined Art, is per-
verred, your Deceit made apparent and your Intentions fpoiled. It is
therefore evident, that the Picture, in which the Point of Sight is placd
mull determine your Dillance, and that the Eye ought never to
leove the Herizen, but be always level with it. If the kye be lower than
the Point of Sight, all the Objects mult needs feem to tumble forwards,
and the Fore-ground to fink. If you are above the Point of Sight, the
Fere-ground rifes, and all the Objects are tumbling backwards. How
then can this feem natural and deceiving? Wherefore there is no other
Way, than to hang the Pilture in  certain Place, and fix  Diftance
whence it is to be viewed without Alteration. As for the Frame, it is
necessary to shew the Thickness of it on the Cleth, in order to know, at
ence, tbhe Ditance from whence you ought to view it; because its angular
Rays are directed to the Point of Sight.
 am not infentible, that this Pofition may feem firange to some;
who will object, that they never obferved any fuch Thing in Poustin,
Titian, Brif or Francefce Moly, or other good Mafters: But the old
Saving shall plead for me; Example is better than Precept. For they
endeavour to follow the Miftakes but not the Virtues of thofe exce-
lent Mafters.  am fure, that, had, thote great Mafters thought of
thefe Obfervations, they would not have rejected them. Do you want
Demonfiration, that every good Mafter approves of what  fay, and
follows it ? Shew me but one Picture, Drawing or Print of theirs, ex
hibiring aed Vilto out of an Hall or Chamber, wherein they
have forgor to exprets the Thickness of the Framing or Walls; fince, 
therwife they mulf depart from the Naturalness, and we would fay, that,
inflead of an Off-ditance, they had reprefented  Picture or Tapellrj.
 therefore conclude, that if Nature require this in  Picture, it is still
more neceffary, when we would have the Picture taken for Nature it
feff, in order to deceive even Maffers. But fome think, — If Iar-
rive in the Art, to their Heights,  shall be satisfied. — In the mean
time Art delpairs of attaining greater Luflre by further Improve
Mments.
But, to reaffume our former Polition, my Opinion is, that what has
been faid ought to be regarded, when we meet with any thing in
Halls, Chambers, Galleries and the like, whether in Niches, above or
in Cbimseys, of on other Occations: And the main Point is, to place well
 Landskips.
 .
the Herizon according as the Piece fands high or low. My ufual Prac-
fice was, to make the Thickness of Walls plainly appear in my Paint-

ings; and would always have done it; but on Painting, on  Time,
for  Lover of Quality, was obliged to alter it for his Pleafure; on 
Surmife,  did it to fave Work, not for the Good of it; aftirming,
that the Painting was thereby dock’, and too much incumbered:
But the Child muft have  Name; he imagining, that the Alteration
made the Work look larger.
Here let it not be thought, that my Piece was wholly taken up with
the Ordonnance, and the Thickness afterwards painted upon it; becaute
that would be great Folly.  frft squared out the Thickness, and then
adapted my Delign thereto, as being more convenient than afterwards
to paint the Thickness over it, and thereby dock too much of the
Work.
Now, to give the findious Artiff  right Notion, as  think, how
to compote  good Landskip, after an eafy Manner, let him con-
fider.
 The Nature of his Subject.
 What Country he is to reprefent.
 What Seafon of the Vear, what Month, and what Hour of the
Day.
 Whether the Subject require Sun or Moon-fhine, clear or mifty,
rainy or windy Weather.
Having fixed thefe Points, let him proceed to feek proper Materi-
ats, bringing them together, agreeable to his general Design, and dif
poting the Objects in their proper Places, each according to its Na-
ture and Quality.
Next let him place the Point of Sight in the middle of the Piece,
higher or lower, as he would have lets or more Sky or Ground, con-
fidering whether the Ground is to be  Level or not, and thus to order
the Figures equal with the Eye, to difcover directly whether the
Painting be leen thro' an high Window in  low Ground, or from  low
Ground to on bigh; for tis commonly known, that if Things be feen
from an Height, the Figures ought to he under the Herizen, and when
viewed from  low Place, they mull rife above the Horizen.
Having done this, let him chule  proper Light, falling in either
from before, behind or afide, to light the Objects accordingly: And
then to difpole the principal Object (if posfible, and the Subject per-
mil) in the belt Place, in the midille of the Piece; at leat from off the
Edges of ir.
Of


 Landships.
Book Vi
Of divers Pafam, if the Matter require it,  mean, if the Land.
ship be mixed with Hiffery, one ought to predominate, and furpass the
reft in Greatness, Beasty and Elegance; filling always the greateff
Part of the Piece with it, whether by means of Trees or Build.
ings. The By-io:ts mult be foirable to it, the becter to explain the
Riatter.
If the Subject be  Wood, it ought to be adorned with Woodgeds,
Giks or Terms, Tonbs, Siats for Refose, Weednymphs and many -
ther Things groper to it.
If  River, it may be handled in the fame Manner, with the Ad
dition of River-gods, Nuiades or smimming Water-nymphs, Fishermen,
Swans and other jach Ornaments.
If  field be the chief Object, it may be fet off wich Shepherds and
Sregherliffes, Couferds, Bacchanals and others.
Rocks and Cares require the fame Management; with this Caution,
that the Fye be taken with the principal Object enly, without other Re-
gard to the By-works, than as Aids and Incidents; for in fuch Condud
hes the Beauty and Goodness of  Landskip.
As to the Ornaments of modern Landship, fuch as of the famous .
verdingen, Pynatker, Ruzsdaal, Meucheron and others who follow the
atern Manner, they do not call for the aforefaid Embellithments, as
having other fufficient Matter, viz. Cottages, Fishermen, Carriers,
Waggons and tuch daily rural Occurrences, which are as proper to it
as the Antige; for the Decorations alone, in my Opinion, make 
Landship cirter Antrgue or Modern; unlels we exhibit modern and
 Plecis, wherein the Antigue would be very improper, as Broy
 Briland Hans Bol have done, without Diftinction between the
loweir Life and what is better. For Nature is in her Objects now, as
the was  thouland Vears ago; Woods, Fields, Mountains and Waters
are always the fame; and therefore Ristare is mortern, that is, imper-
fert: But the is Antique and perfect, when we judicioully adorn her
with unrommon and magnificent Buildings, Tambs and other Remains of
Antignity; which, in Conjunction with the Ornaments abovemencioned,
compose an antique Landskip. Bur when  modern Prospeft on the Rbinn
is deck’ with antigue Froures and Stories, it mult look ridiculous; lince
Cottages and civil and military Architecture will evidently difcover the
prudent Folly of the Mafter, tho' otherwife excellent in  Alaaners
 CHAP


Of Landskips.
   

.   . II. Of the Light, Form and Grouping of Objects in
Landskips.
  us now proceed further, in confidering the principal Qua-
liries and Properties requifite in  fine Landskip: Thefe, in my

Opinion, confiff
 in  good Difpolition of the irregular Objects, as well with re-
srelt to their Matter, Shape and Form, as their Colour.
 in the Number and grouping them.
. in  good ordering of the Light.
By well disposing the irregular Objects, we produce Life and Motion;
the Objects confift of crooked, frait, awry, high and low; and by
the Colours we effect the fame; when one thing is faint and weak, ano-
ther melcing, this Rrong, that hard.
The Grouping confitts in joining thofe irregular Objects; as of two
Bodies on two different Grounds, ther on the Fore-ground ought to be
maller than the other on the second; thus, if  litting Figure come
forward,  flanding one muft be placed behind it; and on the third
Ground,  decumbent Figure; on the fourth,  climbed one, and be-
yonud it  fanding Figure again, CSc. Trees, Rocks, Buildings, Cartle
and other Things occurring in Landskip may be disposed in the same
Mlanner so far as concerns the Irregularity of Objects; which, in
cheir Matter and Colour,  shall thew in the following Example. See
PlateL.
 suppofe then, in  Piece, five Grounds with the Offship; of which,.
the fourth is the largeft. On the Fore-ground,  place  fuse of dark
Perfhiry, number’ . On the second Ground,  Fountain, number’
 On the third Ground, an Hedge, number’  On the fourth
Ground  Starue, number’ . And the fifth is  fow Offskif, number’
 Thus much may fuffice as to Grounds going of behind each 
ther; the same Disposition ought to be obleived on  singhe or level
Grounds.
As for the Light, its principal Management lies in oppesing Brown-
efs and Darkness to middling and greater Light: But when two Lights.
are to fet off each other, the bolour must effict this; as for inflance,
when  lighted Figure is to come off againtt  light Oftship, the for¬
mer mult certainly be of  darkith Colour, as having no Shade; and

then


 Landskips.
 VI
then it will produce  good Effect: For the chief Management lies in
placing  warm-coloured Objett againft  light, faint and weak Ofship;
contrarily, light and faint Gelours againft dark and warm Grounds; the
foremel and sirongef Object againft the deepeft Lointain; and the Objects
furtter off, againt nearer Parts of the Offship: And thus, light Ob.
jects againtl dark, and the contrary.
The Artiil alloought to obferve, that two Lights muft never be above
earb ofber, unless one be rissbly different from the other in Force, er
ther in Coloar or Tint, left one feem to run into the other; which, at
 Distance, would be  prepofterous Union.
Moreover, Part of the Lointain should always be broken, and the
Eye, on one Side or the other kept nearer, eitber by means of  Wood,
Rock, Building or other Ob,..  Part of the Herizon alfo should al.
ways be seen; or, for want of it, some level Object, such as  frenting
Wall, Colonude, or the like. This will produce Satistaction to the Eye,
and Elegance in the Piece.
No one will deny, that Anequal Numbers are the most perfect; ac
cording to the Demonftration both of Philosophers and Mathematicians.
This incquality  alfo obferve and follow in my Disposition of Figures,
thus
Firfl,  place one Figure on the Fore-ground; then, three on the
second; tws on the third; and foar on the fourth Ground; and then
again, one; and to forth: And thus, as well on  single level Ground
as where they happen one bebind another. Thefe unequal Numbers
in the Grougs are, certainly, not of the leaft Moment in Landskips.
As to the Colour mentioned before, tis to be especially noted, that
the Collar which is predeminant, and has the chief Place in the Piece,
mult no where elle be feen than with little Parts,  mean, of less
Branty, Quantity and Dignity.
CHAP. III. Of the Byernaments in Landships.
 is nfual for Landskip-painters to have  particular inclination
for one Choice; one affecting wild and defolate Prospects; another,
repoted and foff ones; and  third, northern or frigid Views, Sun
and Moon-fhine, Water-falls, Downs, watry and woody Prospects.
And the Reafon is, becaute moft People, by  Rrange Impulfe, feem
rather to covet the Gifts of Narure than the Heaventy; which afford
what


Of Landskips.
Chap.  is whole and most perfett: in  Word, they feek only  Part,
the all be to be got. This proceeds from Touth and Ignerance, want-
ing fundamental Knowledge, and therefore not judging, what is most
beautiful and profitable; nay, what they themselves are fit for. But it is
moff unaccountable, that many Landskip-painters are not able to em-
bellith their own Works: To which, fome may object, that as they
have not made it their Practice, to they are content with handling fin¬
gle Prospects well, leaving any thing elfe to the Owner' Difpotal. 
fad Story, that they cannot do their Work without Help! Whence
is evident, of what Moment if is for  Landskip-painter to embel-
lith his own Work, whether the Delign be his own or borrowed;
fince certainly, if he be Mafter of his Art, he mull allo know what
is moft fuitable in his Picture; not Triffes, or Figures to no Purpose;
but Hifteries, Fiftions or Parables, taken from Scripture, Ovid, or TEjep;
Ornaments which will enrich the Work. But this is feldom done; be-
caule few have Time to (pare, or love Reading. As for me,  would
rather want Prints and Drawings than Books. As an Hiffory-painter,
 make ufe of Books, and Detcriptions of Landskips and Bealts: But
were   Landskip-painter,  should provide Books of Hisfory; for
what should  be the better for exercifing one particular Part, of which
 am Mafter, and neglecting others as neceffary to be known?  need
not learn what  already know; but tis impoffible to get Skill in
Things without inquiring into them. Have  Time for peraling No-
vels: Why not allo for neceffary Things! Am  curious to know the
State of the War, or defirous of Peace for the Sake of Art: Of what
Advantage is the Peace, if  do not qualify myfelf to meet it?
 there are few or no Painters who have no particular Manner fo
few are qualified for Embellishment; fince every one ftrives to excel in
tomething, and to get  Name by  certain Wenderfulness therein, er
ther by beautiful Colours, extravagant Draperies, broad and funny
Lights or round and dusky ones; which offen (poil  Work inffead of
bettering it : Thefe they cannot forbear (their chief Talent lying in
them) the they frequently have  contrary Effect, when they are to
adorn other Men’ Works. We mult alfo oblerve, that there are twe
Sorts of Byernaments; the necelfary, and the unnecesfary. The necesfury
are fuch as appertain to the Matter, to wit, immoreable and fixed Orna.
ments. The unneceffary are the moveable ones, viz. Men, Beafts, Birds,
and the like; which, with respect to Landskips, cannot be confidered
as neceffary, but only as tending to give the Pieces Life, that they may
not pall but delight the Exe.
No.  VI.
Of Landskips.
 be more plain in this Point, we shall confider, what  Painter
ought to eoferes and shan in the By-ernaments.
 tay then, that tis very indecent to place  Woman alone, relting
near  Priagus; much more, in the Company of Men, unless you would
exbibir  Stranpet. Tis allo improper, that  Woman, well dreft,
sould fir alone by  Wayside, or in  Wood, or fland prattling with or.
dinary Peegl. Tis much more proper to make  Man sitting, and 
Woman pafing &:, than the Weman sitting and the Man pasting by, or
Folding Ducourse; undys be be inquiring the Way. Tisallo much bec-
ter, that  fiting Man shew the Way, than one who is pafting along. Ii
there be  Company of Men and Women, let not the Men be idle, and the
Women badin; and, if  Weman be reling by berself, de not affign ber
 greater Burthen than she can conveniently carry alone, wbetber Bundles,
Trunks or Fefels.  Woman of Fashion should never travel alone thre
Woods or Tallrs, effecially if youthful, without the Company of, at leaf,
 Dafder Chill. Stepberds and Sbepherdeffes, Husbandmen and We
men, ftit well together. Where there are no Sbeep,  Sbepherd or Pi.
fir, or Laffer with Chaplets of Flowers, are improper; because such Peopl
are not fent into the Field to prattle, but work; tis better to inquire of
fer the Stefferd than the Skeep. Country peoples Children are seldom

witkin-ders in the Sammer-rime, but generally abread in the Field with
their Purents; beting for Birds Nefts, gathering Weed or Flowers,
dizging Hiles, making Garlands, and in other childiss Aftions. In mad
Satrycesor CCARry-fears end Merriments, no People of Fassion shoull
 wnttat gord Reen for so doing, or that they are Spectators
and, and femext : off. Azed People, especially Men, should not be seer;

 trey take no Deligft in jucb Recreations.
 is againt Narare and Reason to offign  dolesome Place for Nints
anl Fearing; or, contrarily, on embelliked with Figures and Fountains,
unless the Subject require is. By fuch Diftinctions as thefe we may know
 good Mafter
He is an happy Painter, who knows how to adjult his By-ornaments
to his Landship, and this to them; thereby making both remarkable:
But he decerves greater Commendation, if he govern all Things by the
Landsk:. The Figures or By-works are certainly of no less Momen
than the Landskip itfelf; yer he may be farisfed, if he continually en
dearour to make the one as good as the other. Such an Arriff is much
preferable to others; for the frequent Ufe of Prints, or other Mer:
Werks, is not the right Mecbod to become  Mofter; you rely too mul
on them: Not that  ditapprove of them; becaute they convey fim
Ideas





Of Landskips.
Chap.  and fir up the Mind ( muft even acknowledge, that  should
have been infufficient without their Aid) but you mult get truly fen-
Rible what Lengtbs you may go in the Thest, not to fall into the com-
mon Error, out of which tis difficult to extricate yourfelf.
in treating of the immoveable By-ornaments, we mull obterve, that
nothing is more difpleating in  Landskip, than always to see Houses be-
kind, againt the Offskip; and, on the Sides, nothing but Trees and Hills,
or scarce so much as one Stone upon another: This Repetition mult needs
be difagreeable; wherefore tis no Wonder, that thofe, who are igno-
rant of Architeffure, avoid it as much as postible: But it is furprizing
to me, that many Landskip-painters will not be acquainted with that
Art; even rather never delire to exhibit it (how beautiful foever) than
to be at the Trouble of learning it: Or of following the Models of
others, which are to plentiful, and made for fuch Purpofes.  Point
to eafily artainable, and giving  Piece to great  Decorum.  have
been long Rudying the Caule of it, and can find no other than  Want
of inclination and Knowledge of its Virtues and Value: Tis eut of the
way to think that Landskips confift only of Trees, Hills and green Fields,
without Houses; or, if there be Buildings, Ruins or Triumphal Arches,
that then it is no mere  Landskip; since no one will take an History in 
Landskip for  Landship, or  Piece with Arckitefture and some Trees,
for  Landskip or Hiffory, but  Prospect with Buildings.  Landskip,
fet off with an hundred fmall Figures, will never pats for  Figure-
piece: But, without Figures or Houfes, it is like  Wilderness or for-
lon Country infected with the Plague, and where confequently, no
Houles are flanding: It would indeed be  very proper Greenland-
view.

CHAP. IV. Of immoveable Ornaments; as Tembs, Houses, &cc.
THE Tombs, exhibited in Landskips, require particular Notice;
as giving not only  good Decorum, but allo  Probability to
the Places of their Situation; that they may not be contradiftery
to Truthand Time.
The moft fure Method is, when you introduce fuch,  Piece of Stone-
work, firt to chufe  proper Place for its flanding, where it may be
most conspicuous to Paffengers, in order to draw their Attention; where-
   Landships.
 VI
fore they are made more or lets fumptuous and elegant, according jo
the Condition and Dignity of the Deceased, or thote who caute them
to be fet up. They are commonly placed in the Fields near bigh
Roals; or, at the Entrance of  sbady Grove, or elfe within it; yet in
Iuch  Manner as to be eafily approached, and feen by thofe who pass
by. If they be caily and finely adorned with Figures and other cary’
Work, they are ufually fortihed againft the Injuries of Time; fome
are crowned with Arches, or elfe with fmall Pediments and Mout
dings lupported by Columns; and topp’ with  Copper Vase placed be.
Tacck tie Children rurning on Pivots, and holding lron Clappers, with
which, when moved by the Wind, they firike on the Copper, and
create  great Noife; their Motion was occalioned by an Hollowness
in their Backs: And this was done, they fay, to drive away Devils
and evil Spirits, who, as they imagined, continually haunted the
Graves of the Dead. Some of thefe Tombs were encompaffed with
low clofe Walls, to fence them againft the North-wind. They were
mot Times placed on raifed Groand or Hillocks, elpecially in defolate
Countries; and we need not question the Goodnels of their Founday
ons, tho' we often see trem in Ruins or funk down; fince nothing, tho'
ever to frong, can refifl eating Time. Iis not improbable, that about
tuch Places were Benctes for Reft; and, the more to draw the People,
they fomerimes made Fountains near them. The Athes of the De-
ceated were commonly repolited in  certain Orn or Bex placed on the
Top of the Tomb, or elfe in  Niche near it, elegantly carved, and in
scribed with Fieroghpbic Letters or Characters.
Thofe Graves or Tombs were fo adorned with Emblems and Figures,
as alwars to make us fentible, whether they were facred to an Heroi,
Philefefher, Starefman, filvan Deity, or who elfe; if we may credit
the Remains, and ancient Ifriters. II would be roo redious to ename-
race all the Parriculars touching thefe Tombs; and as thofe Things
terve only for By-ornaments to Painters,  think what  have faid is
fufficient, with the Addition of what cancerns their Materials: Thefe
were Various, viz. Perphiry, Tusper, all Sorts of Marble, red, black
and whice; affo Cepper and other Metals; and fometimes ordinary Stone.
We fee often an Affar near them, whereon they uled to offer to the
Memories of the Deceafed.
Of


Chap.  Landskips.
Of Coltages and other By-ornaments.
Cottages and Country houfes are ufually low, having their greateft
Conveniency and Extent below; and as the Inhabitants poffels bur few
Goods (no more than what will fupply their Neceffities) their Rooms
are but few. Thefe Dwellings are plain and mean, moftly built with
Wood or common Stone: They have neitber Order, Disposition or Di=
visson. They fometimes wattle them with  Weaving of Reeds and
Russes, clayed over. The Roofs are thatcb’, and not much window’;
commonly dark within, and Imeared without with  light Colour, Red,
White or Grey, that they may be feen at  great Diftance. Thefe
Houles have often Wells or Water troughs near them, or elle Fountains
or Cifferns hollow’ out of  Tree, or made of Stone. The Fountains
are mean and artless; but near the Town, they are sumptaous, and
magnificently adorned with Starnes and ether Ornaments. We allo
find Vafes or elegant Pots with Balsreliefs, fanding on high Pedeftals,
above Reach, to preferve them from Damage. Sometimes they are 
little decayed and broken, or ruined by Time and Weatber; as allo by
the Barbarity of Soldiers; as may be perceived in the Fragments of
Columns lying up and down in the Reads, or near them; likewife Pieces
of Frizes with Balsreliefs; and beautiful Cornices, the Remains where-
of, and their Basements are still fanding. We fee alfo, about the Place,
Pieces of broken Coleffes; tome half within Ground, others lving tum-
tid into  Morass. nd, in the Weeds appear Stene-lions and Lioneffes,
ieting on Pedeftats, and spenting Water eut of their Mouths. On Hand-
jails they ufed anciently to place Sphinses, if their Meanings did not
allude to the Secret of Sciences; for then they commonly supported Co-
Juns, Pyramids and Tombs. They uted frequently, as tis Kill fome-
times the Cultom, to raife Heaps of Stones bearing Inscriptions and
Charafters. They likewile fet up Pofts for Guides, or Figures for the
Wame Uic; elpecially in winding and cress Ways; where we offen fee
Hrms at the Ends of Reads or Lanes, to advercite Travellers of Dan-
fer, in cafe  Morats, Water or other Stoppage thould cross the Way.
Mhence, the Word (Term) takes its Origin, lignifying, Bound or Li-
Wit. Thole Terms are like  reversed Pyramid; (quare, with  gaping
Head on Tep, generally of Copper or other Metal; in the Mouth of which
the Wind by its Play made  great Noife. All thefe Things have 
he Decorum, and give  Piece uncommon Grandeur, if well placed,
bt suitably adiagted; especially in Landskips. To conclude this Chap-
t Landskips.
Book VI
  advite the Arnift nor to use these Ornaments too prosufely; nor re.
Fea. hem cittest some Diverfty, becaute otherwife he will prove cloy-
ing, to his lstle Honour or Advantage.
CH AP. . Of brautiful Colcuring in Landskips.
 any thing charm the Sight,  think tis the beautiful Green of
Trees. How do we long for the lovely Spring! Is any thing more
refrething to the Eye than the firff Greens of that Seafon! Spirits
and Diverfions feem then to revive in all Crearures. If  real Prosped
have fuck Effect, that of an arrful and agreeable Landskip has not
much less, wherein the bright Green and other delightful Colours
thine.
But, tho' it is not probable, that  Landskip painted intirely Greet
should pleate more than one in sout and Grey-green Colours, yet we
ought not to use Verdegrease to ferch out  fine Green; fince, tho' it be
the moft beautiful, ver is not the mot pleasing to the Eye; and moreo
ver, very fading and changing.
It is neverthelels to be lamented, that Men who pretend to great
Skill in painting Landships, incirely banith beautiful Green out of
their Works, and introduce, in its Place, Black, Vellow and other
tuch Colous.
Iis true, that Plants and Herbs differ as well in their Natures and
Qualiries as Chapes and Colours; that some are of  beautiful Green;
others, Blue; some, Vellow or Ruffet; others, Grey; some, of  fenny;
others, of  warry Colour; nevertheless Art reaches us not to imitate
the faded and mean, but what is moft charming and agreeable. In the
Diverfity aforefaid we fee the abject and the mean, and the beautiful anl
most beautiful.
If now it be faid, that the Artiff ought to exhibir every thing that
is beautiful, as well as the contrary, and that he only apes Nacure;  it; but then he muft be an imitator of well-formed Nature, and
elecantly paint her mot perfect Parts.
But by my Pofition, that beautiful Green is beff and moft charmif
in  Landship, let me not favour the perverfe Opinions of some, tha
Colours cannot be too beautiful, either in Hiftory or Landship, do
they exceeded Nature irfelf (of this  have largely fpoken in the Chap
tor of the Harmony and placing of Colours) for at that Rare, how cs
 Landskips.
Chap.  Colour fet off another! What becomes of the Harmony or Con-
junction of Colours, when, as in Musick, high Tones do not agree
with the low? How can Gold be fet off by Gold; or Pearls, by
Pearls? Were all Thinge compoted of thofe two precious Bodies,
Richnels would not be apparent. The Proverb fays, Tenues ornant Di-
ademata Cund. That is
The Gold of Crowns may beaft its native Worth,
But meaner Objects bring its Lusire forth.
Many Painters have err’ in this Parricular; of which  shall give
one Inftance.  certain Artiff had once painted  Landskip, wherein
the firft and second Grounds, and every thing belonging to them, ap-
peared beautiful and nacural; but on the third Ground all was grey
and foul: On this laft Ground he had placed  Man in  beautiful ut
tramarine Garment, as bright as if he had been on the Fore-ground.
He was told, that thole two Things were unnatural and Oppolites; 
mean,  soul and muddy Green and so beautiful  Blue Garment; which
was moreover (as the Man was walking in the Sun) painted as bright
and beautiful in the Shade as in the Light, tho' the Light should have
been more broke. But the main Error lay, in breaking the Green of
the Ofskip too much, and not at all bringing down the beautiful Blue
Peffment, tho' at the same Distance. This Example may fuffice to thew,
that the Parts ought not to be broken or fouled to suddenty, tho' we
fee it done by many, in order to make the foremolt Parts look beau-
tiful and Rrong. Nature thews no such sudden Afteration, nor clear
Weather tuch Miflinels in Sun-Chine.

CHAP. VI. Of the leating of Tiees.
 NY Painters find the leafing of Trees an hard Task. Moft
 of them in this Point ape the Manner of this or that Mafter,
without confulting or fludying the Life: By which means,
their Leafing commonly becomes fet and fliff, and alreays of one Man-
ner; infomuch that we cannot diftinguith, in their Pictures, the Elm
from the Willow, or the Oak from the Linden.
Nature inftrults us to know them from afar, by their different Co-
lours as well as by their Growths and Shapes; wherefore, to proceed
regur


 Landships.
 VI
reguiarly and gain Eminence, in this Study, you ought exactly to
objerte the Life, and the soveral Sorts of Green and Leafing seen at 
Didance, whether they are close and mafty, or thin leaved and branched,
and whether they hang in Clufters, or unformly on their Boughs. Mind
miely the Difference of their Colours in their feveral Kinds, as well
while growing, as in Perfection and Decay. Allo the Sizes of their
Bodies, ber: or long; and whether they grow ftrait or crecked, in dry
or Uutry Plices.
Another ditticult Point, but which caufes the greateff Decorum, is
the Roundness or Relief of the Trees:  good Method for effelting
this, is, to obferve how large the Spread of the Tree is; fuppole it z  Feet. The apper Roundnys or Nearlide mult have the srongel
Light and Shade; diminithing gradually every gor  Feet; and the
Extrenmities to melt into the Sky or other By-work, tho' the Light should
happen to fall, into the Piece from  Side; for the more the Light
approactes you, the pronger it touches: nd if, on that Occafion, you
light and heighten the uimoft Edges, it can add nothing to the Relief
becaute the Light rounds off too faddenly; and having once painted
it too flrong, you cannot help it by glazing, without muddling; fince
it will always appear diffind from the other Parts as well in Colour as
Nealncks
There is alfo as great  Difference between the Bodies of Trees as
their Leaves; fome are more beautiful and Painter-like than others;
thefe again more ftrait and found; those differing in Colour from 
there, cec. But  chief Regard is, not to place Asp or Linden-leaves on
Oaken Bodies, nor those of the Willow upon Elm; for each Stem muf
proditce its own Leaves; tho' this Condult be not heeded by many.
Vou ought alfo not to put young and beautiful Leaves upon an old
Stem; for the former is liks fetting  Mans Head on  Monkey'
Carcals, and the latter like parching  Childs Face upon an old and
decayed Man' Body.
We likewife often fee, in Commonlight Landskips, the Leafing le
very sarp and edgy againft the Sky: whereas Nature teaches, that even
the Leaves of the foremel Trees unit with the Sky on their Extremi
-ies, and appear dull againtt it; and in the Offskip ftill more dubious.
CHAP



Of Landskips.
  AP. VIl. Of the placing and fellowing of Landships.
 IN  nothing more difadvantageous and irkfome to  Painter,
than to wed himfelf to one Manner of Representation: Nature her-
felf and the following Precepts will shew the Error of it.
Firft, with respect to the feveral Places where the Piltures are to be
hung; for  hope no one will argue, that  Piece fuits any Place; and
without  Variety in the Manner of  Mafter,  cannot judge whether
he be  true one, or how rich his Thoughts are.
Secondly, Becaule the Artiff ought, in his Ordonnances, to comply
with the Fancy of the Preprietor, as far as Reafon and the Rules of
Art and Decorum permit.
As to the firft, common Nature thews him his Error. Do we not behold
Sun fhine and fine Weather with greater Pleafure and Attention after  And can it have aless Effect on our Senfes in  Picture? Theres
even no Country to defpicable, but in less than nine Miles Diftance it
will exhibit  new Prospect. How can it difpleafe  Painter fometimes
to reprefent fformy Weather, and then calm and delightful Sun fhine?
Since the great Unlikeness caules Variety, and this charms the Eyc.
Now, we fee  fhady Grove; then,  Wilderness; next,  repofed
Landskip, Coc. Great Waterfalls, huge Oaks, Rocks and the like
Objects, well handled, look allo very plealing in  Room. Thus we
might, as  may fay, thew the World in Epitome, and behold it at one
View.
If  Painter always follow one Manner, how often will he expofe
his Weakness and Incapacity? If it be Sunfhine, what Places will he
find to fait all his Pictures? Can he place them always in the Sun, in
order to thew their Naturalness? but granting the Work to be placed
in luch  Light, another Unhappinets will Hill artend it; for the Sun-
light will fall into the Pilture from  Side, and the real Sun fhine will
come upon it fronting.
From which Premifes tis apparent, that the common Light is not
only neceffary, but always the moll advantageous for Chamber-
pieces.
 good Painter ought to be prudent in the Difpolition and Choice
of his Work, carefully obferving the Nuture of the Place, that his
Art may not disjoin, but aid the Archicecture; making his Landships
(  Landskips.
Book VI
 order to lock like Nature) the further they are from the Light of the
Reem, so much lighter than those which are near it; for otherwife, they
will look but like Piftures.
The second Confideration (which is  great Addition to Ornament)
respelts the fellowing or matching the Pictures well; and tho' Matching.
pieces be very well known, yet many People entertain wrong Notions
about them. Their Opinions, touching what is necelfary in  Fellowing-
picture, are various: But they generally agree, that it confitts of an
Umformiry of Conception and Difposition of Objects, Colour and
Light: To which, fome add, that if one Landskip be  flat Country
the other ought to be the fame; if one be rocky, the other ought to
be to roo: In thort, they mult be to much alike, that, on coming to
gether, the one feems to be an Impreffion of the other; in both, 
qual Sky, equal By-ornaments, equal Filling; nay, to very equal, that
there mull not be  white Speck in the one, but the other muit have
if allo
My Belief is, that chefe Niceties are owing to the Wilfulness of
Arrifts, and that, in  Matching piffure, nothing more is requifire, than
an equal Point of Sight and Unifermity in the Figures, when it mut
bang at  like Height with the other. He who would join the reft of
the Particulars, feeks the fifth Wtheel on  Waggon; for why, affer
fatisfying my Curiofity in viewing  Colicary Wildernets, should  not
enjoy the Pleature of  pleafant Plain? Or  woody Landskip in Op
polinon to an agreeable Warer-view and  delightful Prospect?  think
the Word (Felfows; fufficiently implies, that they are two Pictures
of equal Size, alike framed, receiving the same Light, whether the
hang above of next each other, motly alike filled with Work, and the
Figures of equal Magnitude, and leffening towards the Peint of Sight.
And as for the Thoughts or Defign, the more different they are, the
more agreeable; and the better thewing the Richnets of the Mafters
and Ar-
Fancy. in  Word;  Landship suits bet with  Landskip,
cbitsiture with Archirefture; and more is not, in my Opinion, required
in well-fellowing  Picture.
CHAP


 Landships.
ChaftS.
   . VIII. Of the Lights in  Landship.
 THO we have largely treated of the Lights in the prece-
( ding Book, yet  find myself obligated to fay fomewhat about
it, with respect to Landskips; especially Frent-lights in Picces
which face Windows: This Point purzles many Painters; and not
without Caufe, fince tis  critical Proof of their Capacities.
The chief Reafon of this is, that Arcifts will not venture to under-
take any think that is unprecedented; and no one has Courage enough
to fet the Example. They plead  main Difficulty arifing from hence;
namely, that, having  Front-light, they cannot make Shades on the
Ground or Objects, but mult find their Effects going off and Force on-
ly by the darkeft Touches:  if the driving Clouds did not caule large
Ground-fhades; which daily Experience thews they do. In the next
Place, thefe Men tacitely confels their ignorance of the Force and Har-
mony of Colours, in chuling dark Objects againft light ones, and the
contrary; for, placing againtt an Offskip of green Trees, light colour-
ed Objects, fuch as Whice, Rofe-colour, light and frong Vellow, and
the like, you have so need of large Shades. Would you make Ob
jects againt  light coloured Building, let them be of dark Colours;
or,  Vafe of  warm and brown Colour, and againtt it,  lighter Ob-
ject again; and againtt the Offskip the foremoll Work, is made flrong
by the Diminution of the Tints; fince all that goes back or retires be-
comes darker and more dusky; as the Shades, on the contrary, grow
fainter and weaker the further they are off. Again, the Grounds
themfelves can afford us great Helps; one may be light Vellow, ano-
ther Green, another bluith, according to their Qualities, as we shall
further thew.
As to the Figures, they may have  fufficient and natural Side-ade
for fetting them off; for thofe, which are on the Side of the Piece,
which moft goes away from the Light, will receive much more Shade
than the middle ones; as allo  Ground-shade; becaute they go to much
aside from the Point of Sight, and the further, the more.
We conceive alfo, that if any Houles or other upright Works running
towards the Point of Sight were placed quite on the side, the one high
and the other low, as here,  Grotto with  Viflo, there again fome-
thing elfe with ruflicated Stone, or Ballultrades, Coc. and before them
Nn  Water,


Of Landskips.
Book VI.
 Water, along the Extremity of which, some Vafes or Figures were
Standing on Pedeftals; thefe Objects,  fay, altho' they had no perfect
Shade, yer, with respect to the Light, would fuffice; and moreover,
throw Ground hades againlt each other: Which would give the whole
York  great Dicorum and Elegance.
If it be objected, that this Management would caufe too great 
Force on the Objects without the Piece; and make it look empty in the
middle, and the Eye of courfe be drawn too much to the Side; more-
over, the rce Corners of the Piece would then be too confining:  antwer,
that, if the Ordonnance be difpoted on fuch  Ground as aforelaid,
and the Coloars well chosen and ordered, the large Light in the middle
will be found the prongel, and the Side-work more close and compact;
and by ordering some Pedeftals with Vafes, here and there, againtt the
large and broad Shades of the Buildings, they would produce  fine
Ested.
Many dare not introduce any Ground thades on the Fore-ground, in
fuch  froming Light, in order to break  kctle that large Light, and
make it goot; alledging, tharthe Wall covers it, and thinking, that no
more Ground-thade can be feen on the Ground than that of the Wall:
But thefe Menare much mistaken; they sland and behold the Place, but
do not corfder what is built over their Heads; what high Stories, and
what large Ground skales thofe Tkings ought to cause on the Fore-ground

going of, which ther mult imagine to be feen without Doors above the
Opening of the Piece; for, tho' it fland againtt  plam Wall, yet it
attully reprefents an incire open Pannel in the Room, the Light where
of falls directly into it.
To be the better underffood in what  mean by (Objects without the
Pirce, or Out-works)  adl the following Demonfration in Plate
LI
in the Part  place  Point of Sight , and draw from it two vifual
Lines  and : Now all thar is without thote Lines, is without the
Piece , and called Out-werfs, and may be suppoted to reprefent  con-
cinned Stone work united and jorned to the Wall , whereby Shades
and Groundhades fall on the Ground; and all above it being Skj,
you can, as is faid, thew the Height of the House or Chimneys, by
 faurg into the Pillure.
Here it may be asked, whether the Figures in the middle (which on
this Occafion make the principal Light) ought not to be altogether, or
always the major Part of them, in the Shade? To which Lastwer, that
the Heught or Lowness of the House must govern in that Point; for, if it
be



Of Landskips.
  high, the Ground fhade will be longer; if low-roof’, neither fo
long nor broad.
This Method, to far as it relates to Frenting-pieces, is as well founded
as helpful, and, tho' never prattifed, tis however not to be rejected:
Butno body will lead the Way, without feeing the Examples of others.
And yet, every Day, as we walk in Sun -thine, we may make this Obfer-
vation in Nature; the Sun thews us Examples enough. Moreover, tis
natural in viewing Things, rather to have the Sun behind than in our
Faces, and yet many reprefent the Sun-light behind in the Picture, and
not one does it fronting; as having no Knowledge of the Natures and
Effects of Colours, nor of making Lightness and Darknels againtt pro-
per Grounds, and, confequently, do not underfland due Harmony.
Pourtrait and Bats releif Painters dare venture to do it, and find to much
Advantage in it, as thereby beft to deceive the Eye; to their great
Honour.
If the Artiff think he can apprehend me better by an Example, 
will freely give him one. See Plate Ll. aforefaid
 place then, on the right side of the Piece,  Row of Houfes run
ning towards the Point of Sight. The firt is square, with  Step into
the Door-way; the Doorishalf hidden behind the Frame of the Piece,
and ornamented with two Pedeltals with Sphinses. Two or three Feet
orer the Doof is  fmall Moulding which fupports the Roof. Near this
Building flands another, rifing fomewhat higher; the Side-walling
whereof is plain, and in Front are  Door and Window. On each Side
of the Entrance flands  Pillar supporting the Entablature, and there-
on is  Compats (pandrel. Next this, are feen Rails running up to an
other Houle, which is higher then the firft, and lower than the fe-
cond. Ten or twelve Feet further off flands an bigh Wall, running cross
the Piece; and in this Wall, on the left Side of the Point of Sight, is
 large open Gate-way, thro' which we fee the Offskip.  Above this
Gate, on the right Side, appear the Tops of some large and high Trees,
which fill the Sky. In the middle of the Piece, we exhibit an oftan-
gular Stone, and, againft the Front-cant,  Watertrough. This Stone
is about  or to Feet high, and has, on Top,  Ball. On the left Side,
without the Piece, fland some Trees running towards the Point of Sight.
Now, obferve the Light (which, as has been intimated, falls into
the Piece fronting) and what Ground-sbades the Objects give each other,
and their Course with Respect to the Sun’ Height.
He now, who underllands Perspective, may cafily guels, what Shades
tuch Objects will give on the Ground, how large and long they will
be


 Landships.
Book VI
 os what they will fall, across, and runing towards the Point of
Sghe: Likewite, how much this Frone-light will exceed  Side-one,
in Brighiness as well as Colours. All Things parallel with the Herison
are intirely lighted by the San; and contrarily, those which are paralled
with the rifual Lines, are dark and without his Reach, and so exactly
timited, that the lead Projecture, even of an Inch or  Straw’ Breadih,
witreceive Light; as the Example thews.
As for the Ser-off or Harmony, no one will doubt whether it is less
to be found in  fronting Sun thine than  fide one; for, what is wanting
in Shade the Colours and Tints will doubly fupply.
This Sort of Light, how odd foever ir may teem to thofe who never
tried it, nevertheless affords many beautiful and advantageous Accidents
very pleating to the Eve; but  mult obferve, that the xider and larger
the Piece is, the more charming it becomes, than in  narrow and high
one; becaute, the more the Objects appreach the Point of Sight, the less
Stade they gice, and the further they go off fidewise from it, the broader
are the Sbades.
 did not propofe to favany Thing further about the Lights and their

Qyalnes; but in the Courfe of Wruing, fomething of Moment touch
ing them sill occurs to my Thoughts, which  think worthy of Ob
fervation, as being to uncommon, that  doubt whether any Inftance has
been before given of it; it is touching the Air or common Light falling
from on Figh thre an Opening into  round and close Temple, or any Place
of Retirement, rocky Reposstory for the Dead, Cec.  luppole the Open
ing as the Delign will permit. Now we have formerly thewed, that
common Light, contrary to that of the Sun, illuminates the Objects
with widening Rays; wherefore, all Things, going away from the
Center of the round Tempie, have longer and narrower Ground-udes;
as the nearer the laid Center, the porter; even to much, as if, flanding
julf under or upon that Center, they give not any Ground-shade at all,
except under Foot. On the contrary, it will be found, that fuch Ob-
jeltsreceive fronger Light from on high than thofe which go off fide
wife, and the further they go off, fill the less: Vet we perceive the
contrary in the Reflexions from the Ground. The more the Objects ap
proach the Center, the lighter they are in Reffexions, be the Ground
even Whire, or Blue, Red or Vellow, Light or Dark.
As for the Courfe of the Ground-Chades of the Objects, let them fland
where they will on the aforefaid Plan or Ground, they flow from the
Center or middle Point directly under the Light.
CHAP






Of Landskips.
  IX. Of Landships in  small Compass.
 have formerly afferted, that Reprefentations in  small Com-
pass are necelfary as  general Rule for all Choices; which we
shall exemplify in Landskips on almoft the fame Balis as that of
Hifery; to wit, that there is  Difference between  Landskip in  fmall
Compass, and the contrary; and that the former is much more artful
and troublefome than the latter, tho' having lets Circumflances: To
which, we shall fubjoin the Requilites necellary to borh, in order to
make each in its Kind equally good; together with  Remark touch-
ing the By-ornaments.
As to Landskips in general, they are, as we have thewed, in the same
Caleas Hiftories; to wit, that  large Ordonnance in  fmall Compais,
carries more AArt, Knowledge and Elleem than the contrary; becaute
the Objects require more Work, and  more plain and dittinct Ex-
prestion of their Qualiries; which in fmall Objects, in  large Com-
pass, is not fo nicely requilite; for the nearer we approach the Objects,
the more fentible they become. As in Hifories, Variery of Thoughts
and Objects occur (for compoling Ordonnances, either imall or large,
with    go, even an  Figures) in Palaces, Halls, Galleries,.
Towns, Villages, in the Field and Woods, ( So in Landship offer
an intinity of Objects for making fine Views, both in small and large
Compass, fuch as Woods, Plains, Rocks, Wilderneffes, common.
Roads, Buildings, Fountains and Statues, folitary Places with Tombs
and Groftos, Sea-ports, Caicades or Water-falls, in order naturally to
exhibit theren all Sorts of Occurrences, the herokc and pafforal as.
well as the fatyric, mournful, joyful and merry. And tho' we could
order all the aforefaid Particulars into one Piece, yet they cannot pro-
duce fuch an Effect, in reference to Art, as each lingly will do; it be
ing certain, that Things feen from afar, as we have formerly obfer-
red, never fatisfy Curioficy fo well as thofe which are near; whereby
they become to us more diffinct, as well in their Exifience and Form
as Colour. We Know, that the more the Objects diminith and go
off from us, the more they abate of their Lirclenelles, not only in their
Superficies, but alfo in their Out lines and Sways.  Trees Body full
of Holes and Knots, appears fmooth and even at  Diftance; even.
the


Book VI
Of Landskips.
 crooked will feem almoft ftreight, and the whole Leafing as one
Mate.
Iis true, that  large and concife Landskip does not give general
 yet we know, that an Affembly of few (out People of
Fa gm) will never break up without doing Buliness; when, con-
trarly,  Meeting of the Vulgar feldom does any thing without Con-
fution. Irs the fame in Mulick, with many Voices; they make 
great Noife, but never affect the Senfes like the single Voice of  fine
Toman, accompanied with the Basso centinue; which incirely charms
us, make us ligh, even fometimes thed Tears and this is only cauted
 By the Force which les in  Sole, fupported by the Bass.  By
the Diltinctness of the Words tweerly utter’; and lattly, by their
Senfe or Pattion: All which is not to be found in  great Concere;
becauie we cannor underfland the Words, much less the Sente, bur
fix our Attention on the general Harmony only. It is true,  great
Performance of Mufick will pleafe common Senfe, but an artful Sol
is for People of Judgment; the former does, in some meafure, af
feet the Body, but the latter rouches the Soul, and leaves lafting im-
Prefficus.
The principal Difference between small and great Landskips lies in
the Peint of Sight. in the Great in  small Compass, the Horizon is
commonly fomewhat low, and in the Small in  large Compass, high:
In one is  high Ground, in the other  Valley; the one is  natural
Reprefentation, and the other looks like  Map: The one keeps  good
Decorum, let it hang ever fo high, and every thing looks upright; in the
other all teings teem to be tumbling; and it appears well no longer than
while on the Eafil. In  great Landskip in  fmall Compats all is
ieen plain and diftinct; at leall one Part, according as the Choice is;
in the small in  large Compass we can perceive nothing perfectly but
the General; parly, becaute the great Light creates  Faintness, and
partly, becaule the Piece is viewed at  great Diltance, as hanging
commonly above other Paintings: Tis even  certain Maxim, that as
Pitures never hang below the Eye, unless in an Auction; to  Land
ship with an high Horizon, mult always needs be falfe.  leave the
contrary to any one' Judgment, how much more Decorum and Advan
tage it hes, when of fuch an Extent as to be placed high or low, ever
up to the Cieling, without Fear of being hung below the Eye, when
the other muft find its Comfort under its fer Height, without Hope
of ever gaining its Decorum, unlets by coming calually on the Ealel
again.
Affel


Of Landskips.
  having thown, that  great Landship in  small Compass,
with  low Horizon, can bear hanging above the Eye, and look be-
coming; and that  small one in  rarge Compass, becaute of the
high Horizon, lofes its true Quality, to the Detriment of the Paint
er; we conclude, that there is no better Method to be uled with 
Landship of large Extent, in order to make it becoming and natural,
chan to fet, as aforefaid, the Horizon fomewhat lower; fince fuch
Pieces are always placed above,  may fay far above, the Eyc.
But here, perhaps,  Difficulty may be ffarced; namely, that if the
Horizon be let to low, the Sky will over-power the Principals of the
Pilture: But in Antwer, let me ask, whether the Sky is to be look
ed on as an ufelets Parch? Does not the Sky moft adorn and invigo-
rate  Landskip, and make it look agreeable! Mult we suppofe the
Earth to excel the Heavens in Magnitude? Ay, But, fay they, there
is nothing to be seen in the Sty.—— But is  beautiful Sky tuch 
Triffe, and to eafily to be painted? Is it not more artful to reprefent
thin driving Clouds than  flat Ground, here and there an Hill or Plath
of Water, Grass or Herbs?  beautiful Sky is  Proof of  good
Malter; but if it feem too large, we have an Help for that Make
the Fore-ground fomewhat large, and then  Treeor tco, thick or thin-
leav’, will take up enough of the Superfinicy, and break any thing
that is obttrulting. Likewife  Building may ferve, either fronting,
of in Profile; or, inflead of it,  Pyramid or Obelisk: Thefe, not to
be flung into the Offskip, according to ufual Practice, but brought on
the Fore-ground great and firong; letting the Tops of thote Objects ad
vance high, in order to fill, and thereby, as  have faid, in some mea-
fure, here and there to break the Sky. But, here it may be again ob-
jelted, that fuch larse Trees would not look fine, becaute their Leaf
ing cannot be feen : But is the Leafing of  Tree of more Value than
the Top of  beautiful Building, Pyramid, or any fuch uncommon Ob-
jell? Muft thefe give place, and be left out for the fake of  Tree?
Would it not look wonderful, and be  great Pity, that one in an hun-
dred should lofe its Leafing? Let one, two, or more Boughs fhoot forth;
there are enough without them.  fay then, that, by this means, the
Shy will be sufficiently filled, and the Difficulty removed. nd now
the Sky is moderated, and the greateft Force lies in the Landskip and
By-ornaments; the Fore ground is eleganrly embelliffied; the Offskip
broad and deep, with an Excent equar to my With; and the Hotizon
tich, as  need not fear the rumbling of the Objects.
   VI
Of Landskips.
  peak of placing forwards, great Trees, elovated Buildings,
Prramids and Large Figares for By-ornaments, fome may poffibly fay;
That then the Greand goes down bebinl, and rises forwards; fince they
cannot relith any thing they are not ufed to, and which requires the
Objects to be fomewhat more finithed and larger than in their common
Way: But altho'  have thus thewed the Preference of one Manner of
Painting before the other, yer  do not prefcribe it as  Law to be al.
wars followed. My Delign is only to illustrate what is fine in the one
abore the other.
CH AP. . Of painting Reems with Landskips.
 HIN  this Point to be of Moment, and weighty enough to
be contidered with Attention; the rather, fince some Painters often
happen to fee different Management with respect to the Rules for
painting Halls, Parlours, Cc. and therefore cannot refolve on what is
molt fntable and advantageous for thofe Apartments; and when they
are to perform fomething therein, to many Difficulties arife, and their
Opinions fomuch vary, that they are at  sland whether they shall re-
prefent  Picture, or,  Painting in the Manner of Tapestry, or, Ny
ture itfelf.
As to the firl Sort, we muft be fenlible, that the Piltures, being
all of  Size, and placed orderly, will be taken, by the Knowing, for
abAratted Painings, breing no Relation to the Room; according to the
Notions of thofe, who, being Mafters of  good Collection, are indif
ferent where ther Pictures hang, whether againtt bare Walls or Hang
ings As to the fecond Sort, is certain, that Paintings, made in the
Manner of Tafefiries, will never be taken for real Iapeftries, be their
Borders ever to beautiful and elegant; and therefore have not the Ef.
feet which the Mafter purpofes. The third Sert,  to reprefent
Narure, is certainly the betl: For, what can be wanting, when the
Work is natural, artful and proper to the Place?
 Reprefentation of Tapeltry is  lame Picture. And  Picture,
not agreeing with Natare and the Place, is alfo deficient; wherefore
 Mafter, who paints fuch, is unpardonable; becaufe, inftead of 
dorning the Room and preserving its Arcbiteffenic Order, he at once
Spoils bott.
Ivas


 Landskips.
Chap.  was one Time asked, whether any certain Rules, befides the Light
and Point of Sight, were neceltary for Hall-painting.  antwered, that
the Architecture ought to be observed throughout, as far as concerned the
Compartition and Ornaments; and that, whether painted or real, they
mult correfpond with the Deor, Mantle-piece and Alcore, and the whole
Work take its Proportion from one Order, that it may look proper,
and make up one compact Body. Now, if  Wall were to be covered
with  fingle Picture, it mult be handled in the Manner of an Hlang-
ing: But  Picture is fomewhat more brittle than  Tapetiry, and
fooner damaged by hanging to low. Chairs mull not be fet againtt
it; if it get Hure or Dents, they are not eafily repaired;  Surbafe is
much better; and belides, the Wall is fomerimes to long, that it can-
not well be feen at one View. Wherefore, when the Dillance is too
imall, it is better to divide the Wall, and to ufe more than one Point
of Sight.
If now there be  Door in the middle, or on each Side, they ought
to be left free, tho' they are without Mouldings, and even with the
Cloth; for the Room mult have at leaff one Pallage: But not painted
over, according to the Practice of some, with Trees, Hills, or Stone-
work, as if it were not there:  very common Error, and which no
Mafter will jultify, unlets he have  greater Eye to Preft, than the
general Elegance of the Werk. Wherefore tis more advitable to enrich
the Deor or Doors with fine Mouldings or Ornaments, If the Deor
happen to come in the middle,  beautrful Frontispiece; adorned with
Carving, will look magnificent: This, in order to fave Buildingchar
ges, might alfo be reprefented on Cloth; yer some Artifis, who are not
uted to it, will not eafily be induced to undertake ir, but rather to
much more Landskip; tho' on due Confideration, and for the lake of
Decorum and Naturalness, they had better call in the Affiftance of an
other Hand for their Help. When now there happens to be  Door,
but not in the middle, it will be proper, for obtaining Regularity, to
order alfo one on the other side; unless it be even with the Wall,
and the Moulding of the Surbafe run cross it; in which Cafe, you may
make fomething or other on its upper Part, fuiring with the Land
ship, fuch as  Stone with Batsrelief either diffant or near.  lay
jou may do fo; but for my Part,  should not much like it: Where-
fore my Opinion is, that two Doors are much better than none; and
tho' you might neverthelels incline to the laff Propofal, in order thus
to have  larger Piece, yet Tis inconfiffent, fince the Cieling muft
have its Support according to its. Comparement Under each Suim
MCf
  Landskips.
Book VI
mer ought to be fomething, either  Pilafter or Term, or elfe the
Piece mst bave  circular Head. But Rooms are feldom to ordered;
perhaps, becaute fome Men love to engross all the Gain to themfelves,
exclutive of the Affictance of others; and were some permitted to do
as they pleale, they would paint over every thing, with Flowers, Fruit
or Ejfory; an Architecture painter, every where Mouldings. They
may, even in Time, go fuch Lengths, that could the Floor be paint-
ed as well as the Cieling, we should fee, in every Stone, either 
Flower-por, Viilo, or an Hinery, as fomerimes we fee it in lron
Chets.
 fay then, that an Arciit, tho' the whole Work be undertaken by
him only, muit not incroduce more of his particular Branch into it,
than Reafon and Decorum require; taking the Affictance of  Friend
in tuch Parts, if there be any, as he has not tiudied; for Variety re.
frethes the Eye.  think an Hall or Room, with one Sort of Pittures,
like  Shop wherein are fold but one Sort of Goods. To give an in
ftance, ler us suppofe  Room, with  Side-wall, go Feet long, divid
ed into three Pannels; and the Surbafe round the Room and the Pi
lafters between the Pannels, to be either of Painting or Wood, as  it proper; and ever the Chimney  propese  Piece with Figures. .
tho'  Landskip painter, undertake the whole Work; but, not being
able to manage the Chimney-piece, defire the Affiftance of  Figure
painter; becaute  generous Painter, if he expect Praife and Honour,
mult not so mach regard his Gain as the Decoram of the Room;  Cloth
of or  Feet, more or less, in fixh  grand Undertaking, is but 
Triffe; ler another Hand get fomething by it, if it tend but to the Or
nament of the Work. Iorder  Figure-piece over the Chimney; be.
caute tis the principal Place of the Room; for, what Buliness can  have there, the Herison whereof ought to be without, naj,
much lower than the Pirture! Wherefore in to principal  Place nothing
would be seen but Sky.
We are very fentible, that if, in fuch  Room, we reprefent Na-
ture, we cannot introduce, into one Pannel,  Morning; into the fe
cond,  Ahid day, and into the third, an Evening, nor wfe various Cour
rries; all mult have one and the fame ir. We grant, that, were
the Room comparted into four Pannels, we could exhibit the sour
Cardinal Poists, or the four Seafons, provided each Fiece had  parti
Tuler Point of Sight.
As for the Difficulty of the left and right Light, to which the Side
pieces mull needs be subjett, and the Light falling on the Wall fronting.
from


Of Landskips.
 II.
from the Windews, we have fufficiently fpoken of it, in the Book of
Lights and Shades.
And now, if throughout, we fee  continued or natural Landship, the
ir alike, and the Leafing of the Trees running from one into the other
when they are extenfive enough,  imagine the Painting mult look well,
and Nature and Art be fully facished. If  am not followed by every
body,  am fufficiently honoured by doing Juffice to Art and the Cu-
rious.
CHAP. XL. Of ornamental Painting without deers.
FT ER having treated of Room-painting with Landskip, 
  think this the fircelt Place to (peak of ornamental Painting with-
out-doors. This Point is very ufeful for two Realons; firft, be-
caule by certain Paintings, adapted to Places, we difcover what Sort
of Places they are, and what Ufes put to. Secondly, becaute it will
be of Service to Arcifts frequently concerned in painting Viftos, Foli-
afe, and other Things withourdoors, in leading them to further
Thoughts.
 think it moft proper to ornament Summor-houfes (which are at the
Ends of Walks, and ufually benched) with Grottes, set of with Fi-
gures and Fountains; bur shallow and Side Jummer-Houfeslook beft with
Bassreliefs of  darkith Colour. In Houses of Pleafure, for Drink-
ing, Talk or other Amufements, fuit Grottes, Fountains, Figures, Urns,
and Pases. The Ends of Galleries become Architeftonic Views, and
the Piers between the Windows, Niches atth Fifures and Bassreliefs,
according to the Thickness of the Wall. in Gateways, having Rooms
on each Side, Figures and Bassreliefs are proper; as alfo fine Archi-
tetture, fet of with Terms and other fuch Things: yet on the Sides
and Sofitas of Windows ought to be Foliage only.
But, to return to the Summer-bouse-Painting, we mult confider, that
as the Kinds are various, to there fuit to each, particular Reprefenta-
tions as will in Defign as Colours, according to the different Lights.

If the Building be square, and have the Opening in the middle; and
the Painting exhibic  Bass-relief, the Light ought to be frenting; but
if it be cdole roafed, the Light muft come more from below. Again, it
this Building be desg, or the Opening, which gives if Light far from
the Wall, it ought to be lighted mesity from the Reffexion of the Ground;
ICl..


Of Landships.
 VI.
yet, if the Cpening be wide, the Light may proceed someribat from
the Sik: But contrarily, when the Summerhoufe is shallow, or
the Opening near, and one Part of the Painting is in the Light, and
the other in Shade, its own natural Reffexion mut be seen in the sbady
Part, that the Work may look like  real garred Bassrelief: And,
becaute no Tendernels or Pleafaniness can be ufed in it, as being
in Sback;  think the Parts there ought to be handled, fomewhar
more large and rong,  mean, with few Littleneses, in order to make
them cor ex, and for preventing Confulion, that at  further Di
Rance the Work may look becoming. Thus much as to Light.
The Coloars in this Cafe, if well chosen and put together, add no
small Ludre; of thefe,  think the three folloxing Sorts the molt pro-
per, namely, Free, fore, blue Stone and chite Mharble, by reafon of the
Grcens of the Bulding, which cover ir, and commonly Bade the
Pining, and impart to it more or lets of their Colour: Which, how.
ever, looks lovely and fweet, especially upon the Whirs. The twoo-
thers, Blus and Free, fone, may be used for By-works; fince Purple, Vi
olet or Red cannot have here  proper Place, by reafon of the dif
cordunt Green, producing an inharmoniou; Mixture. But, if  ckan
Light fall on the Painting, without being shaded, then the three laft
named Colours appear well, as does alfo  Fleh-colour, and have, with
the Green,  good Effet, as being, by means of it, improved: And
the Green thereby becomes beautiful and lively; especially when pla-
ced between Blue fione Ornaments, which every where unite with
the Green, and keep together. But in this Management let me be
underffood to fuppofe the Summer houle to be wide; where what has
been faid is, on each Side, next the Opening without, painted on
Boards, giving little of no Shade.
In the Painting ought alfo to be confidered its Shape, whether cir-
cular, square, offanguler, oral, or any other, which will beft fuit
there.
As for the Subjects or Designs, they mult be governed by the Sity-
ation of the Place. Flowers are facred to Flora; the Spring, to Veaus;
Fruits, to Pomona; Fines, to Bacchus; Herbs, to Iiculapius; Corn,
to Ceres; Musck, to Rpollo, who is alse the Parent of the Seasons;
Procreation, to Priapus; and Fruitfulness, to Diana: From thele Heads
may be drawn Abundance of Matter for the Ornament of Summer
houles.
Now, to be more plain in what  have before afferted,  shall ex
hibit two Examples.
For


 Landskips.
 II.
For the one,  place Zephyras and Florg in the middle of  square
or round Piece, as occalion requires; thefe are both feen fronting, my-
cually embracing in  lovely Manner. He, fitting on her right
Side, has his lett Arm about her Neck, with his right Hand holding
hers, which refls on his Knee, and the peaking to him very friendly
and lovingly, almoll Mouth to Mouth. Her Head inclines over the
right Shoulder. Wich her left Hand the is taking up  Wreath out of
 Basket of Flowers. Her Lap (ways to the left, and his to the right;
and between them are fitting one or two Cupids twilling  Garland
about  fiaming Torch. He is almofl naked and winged, having 
Trumper lying by him. She is airily and finely dreft.
The other Example confifts of three Figures, and exhibits Florg on
the right Side, Pomony on the left, and Apollo in the middle, touching
his Lyre, and firring fomewhat above the two others. Flora has 
Corne Copie full of Flowers, and Pomonas is filled with Fruits, and
the holding  Pruning-Knife. Apollo fits fronting. Fforg looks forward,
with  Finger on her Mouth; and Pamona, as in Surprize, tolfes her
Head backwards and fideways. Thefe Goddeffes fit in Profile againtt
each other. The By-ornaments, round about, confift of Childrenor
Capids.
Such Defigns as thefe, especially the former, are moft proper in
Flower-gardens; but where there are moy Fruits, Pomong takes place.
Here you mult oblerve, that  order thefe two Compolitions for Bass-
reliefs, fomewhat more than half rising, and lighted fronting; but when
the Light comes from  Side, they ought to be very faint, or little re-
lered; as we shall further illuftrare in the Book of Statuary, treating
of the three Sorts of Bass-reliefs.
in Flower-gardens fuit bed diffant Vizes, or Groves; contrarily, in
Walks with Trees, the Ornaments should be Rivers, Sea-bavens with
Hills, Buildings, Rocks, and fuch like; as they are not shaded by Trees,
bit receive  pure and open Light. Vet in Summer-houfes and Places for
Rql, which are fomewhat thaded by the Greens, Viffes are not proper,
but rather Bass-reliefs, contilting of one, two or three Grounds.
On the Court-yard Walls, between the Houle and Garden, fuit alfo
fuint Bass-refiess of one or other of the colour’ Stones aforelaid; like-
wile Terms, Urns and Vafes with Greens, in cale no natural ones be
there; or elle, Fountains, with their Water-falls. Againt  green
Hedge or Wall fuit well circular Hellows, with Bufts in them, if alto
thereabout fland no natural ones. Thefe Bults may be painted of wbite
or light Red Marble, or other light-coloured Sione.
The


 Landships.
Book VI.

The Plaes before -mentioned are the principal and moff common,
bit feldom happen to be together; yet if they should, the Methods
aforefaid will be of uic, and you may enrich your Thoughts by their
means; tince they are laid down as well for Hints as Examples: And
if vou allo confult the fine Deligns of le Patre, you will never be at
 Gard. But, the better to aid the Conceptions of  young Mafter,
 willngly fibjon another Ordonnance of my own Invention, as
follows
 place Txrs in the middle of the Piece, fitring quite naked between
Povins and Flera; this latter flands on her right side, crowning her
with  Chaplet of Flowers; and Pomond, on her left, offers Her 

Branch of Peanes; which Jenas receives with her left Hand, who,
tisting high and almok Rrair, maincains  fine Air and charming De-
portment; and this by her Tripliciry affording an agreeable Har.
mony of Barky, Smell and Tagre, (for here, Beauty implies Sight)
and if the Place be higher than broad, you may join Apotto to their
Company, fomewhat off and fainter, fitting playing on  Cloud; and
thus you may, in the moft proper Manner, exhibic the five Senfes.
However, Apelo is not to abfolurely necelfary here, fince Venus, or
Beauty, alfo implies Harmony; but  bring in Pomong, becaute Fruits
and Flowers generally go together; for Flowers grow and appear all
the Vear round, as well as the Frusts in Summer and Autumn. There
are allo Fruits which bloffom at the fame Time as the Flowers do,
to wit, Peaches, Apricots, Almonds, Cer.
in  Pimfical and Kirchingarden,  would place Esculapins, the Son
of Spells, God of Phyfic, as the Principal of the Piece, and to whom the
Gardenis facred, flanding in the middle between Apolle and Diamy; the
one, with his Quiver at his Back, fits on his right Hland, or near him, hold
ing  Sceptre topp’ with  Sun, or elle  Hlaming Torch; and the 
ther, on his left, adorned with  Moon, either on her Head or in her
Hand, and equipp’ with her Bow and Arrows.  sculapins holds 
Staff rwined with  Serpent.
The Moen, or Earth, caules the Seed to rot; which Apolls, or the
Sun, by his warming and fearching inflvence, caules to rife. As to
Phifical Herbs, three firtues are alcribed to them; warming and coot
ing, and  Nixture of both. Thefe may be appolitely reprefented by
the aforefaid three Perfons; fince, by Asculuprus, with his Staff twin
ed with  Serpent, is underflood Prudence, in moderating one Herb
by another, and by Art to make them work their Effects.
Having

Of Landskips.
 II.
Having thus largely handled this Point,  shall confirm it by fome
figural Examples respecting what has been before faid, in order to thew
what Sort of Paintings and Ornaments are moft proper in fuch Places
where we ufually reprefent any thing, and which mult govern 
careful Mafter, in order to make his Deligns conformable thereto.
Obferve then, beginning with the firff Skerch, what  shall further
 If the Proprietor be defirous of having the Place painted all
round, what Sort will be the moft proper; Colours or Bass-relief.
 What Obfractions may be there, to hinder the Nacuralness of the
Work in some Deligns.
 At what Diffance it ought to be feen either from without or
within; fince it muft be executed boldly or neat accordingly.
 Whether the Painting is to remain there conflantly Winter and
Summer.
Yow fee then, in the firtt Example of Plare LII,  Place inclofed by
two Side walls, at the End of which is  Summer-house equal to the
whole Breadth; the Entrance into it is in the middle, and on each
Side is an Opening, through which, the Reprefentations of  and .
the one on the right and the other on the left, receive their Light; as
the middle Piece  has it fronting.
Over the Summerhoule and
Wall appear the Tops of the Hindbuildings . Now the Quettion is,
what Subject is proper for ,  Villo or  Balsrelief?  green Pro-
Spett, such as  woody Country, of Flower-garden, would have no good
Efielt in this green Summer-house, when feen from without, where it
ought to be viewed; becaufe  Mixture of Green with Green affords
nerther Variety nor Delight.  Sea-baven, or  Court, adorned with
Statues, Fountains, Cafcades and fuch like Elegancies, would appear
exceedingly fine, vieiwed from within (for thole Colours look well among
the Green) but feen at its proper Diftance without, they will be found to
be falfe and contrary to Nature, by reafon of the Tops of the Houses .
which, being behind, and rifing above them, difcover  general Step-
page: Whence it follows, that nothing is more proper for the Middle-
piece, than  Bass-relief.
Let us now confider what is beft for the two Side-pieces seen from
within; the one, as faid, recieving its Light from the left, and the -
ther from the right.  Bass-relief cannot, in my Opinion, be deco
jous there, becaute the Eye) mult not be to clofely confined. They
ought to be Viffes, as not having the inconvenience which attends
the middle Piece, to hinder their Naturalnets: The Summer-poute be-
No.  Landskips.
 VI.
ing roofed in, the Light therefore falls more advantageous on thefe
two Places than the middle one, as being without the Glare of it:
Wherefore, Viffes mult be beft there; and even the fainter and blser,
the bewer, as before intimated. An Hoven with Shipping,  Court
with Fountains, Ilands with Hills,  Street-view of fine Buildings,
Temples and Galleries, together with  blue Ofship, &cc. Thele are
very delightful Objects, and produce, between the Greens,  Variety
and Decorsm: Now, we ought to obferve that the two Pieces  and .
tho' they receive their Light from the Place, yet, if we plcafe, may
be lighted etterwise; becaute they are Without-deer-Prospetts, having
 Communication with this Within door Place as the Bats-relief has,
which is confined to it. Thus much as to that side; the fame Obfer.
vations are proper for the Sides  and .
The fecond Example, in Plare Lll aforefaid, exhibits  Garden
with Parterres, alfo walled in. In the middle is  Gate of letticed
Work; and, on each Side,  shallow letticed Seat covered over with
Greens, noted  and . In the Back of each Seat is  circutar Re.
presentation; and over them appear the Tops of Irees, as of  large
Orchard, marked . Now let us confider, what Subjects will be mott
proper for the Seat  and . Firft then, obferve the Diftance whence
the Work is to be feen, which is from without, on the Nearfide of
the Parterres. Here, as in the preceding Example, Viffes are not
proper; and, becaute the Place is to full of Green, more Green would
not look well: Wherefore, balf-raifed Bass-reliefs would be beft. As
for the Cclear we have before prefcribed it. The Sides may allo be
afforned as before in the laff Example, oblerving what Objects rife be.
bind and above them. Here, on one Side, are Hloules, and on the 
ther  green Wall
Behold now,  third Sketch in Plate Lill difcovering  Walk with
Trees; at the End of which flands the painted Object . Herein you
have great Liberty, and may ule your Pleafure; fince the Defign flands
free from any Obftruction. This only is to be noted in it, that, be
caute Tisalong Walk, and, in Nature itfelf we are oftentimes tired with
travelling fuxh an one, we have no Occation to make it longer by Perspect-
ive and other Views, tur rather slop the Walker by  fine Prospett, and in
wite him to  little Contemplation and Refl, that he may afterwards the
better go forward: Wherefore, we bere fuppofe,  beautifiul Imagery,
Fountamlike, of white Marble, placed in  Grotto or Niche arched
with Green, and therein painted, in full Proportion, and with all
Strength, Cepbahes and furera, Lepbyrus and Flora, or Verus and Ade
 Landskips.
Chap.  and fuch like: Of, you may reprefent there, in  Rock, having
Leveral Holes difcovering the Sky, Cadmas killing the Dragon; or, 
Diana with ber Nymphs; of  Term or Faunns accompanied by Baccha-
nals and Satyrs, with their Inftraments, some of which spest Water; or
elle you may exhibic  skeping Silenus, with the Nymph Egle squeezing
Mulberries on his Face. All thefe are proper Subjects for the Place,
and fuitable to the Occation.
You may alfo paint fome Terms on Boards cut away, and place them
againtl  green Wall en both Sides of the Niches, Windows, or circu-
lar Hollows; wherein may be fet Bults or Calls, as you fee in the fe-
cond Example, of fuch Colours as before-mentioned, and which ap-
pear lovely among the Green: Thefe Terms may reprefent Eaccha-
nals, Satyrs, Gods and Goddeffes, fome naked and others drell, ac
cording to the Seafon and Place.


CH  . KIl. Tables or Ordennances of Venus and Adonis, for
the Embellissment of Landskips.
     may conceal nothing from the Arcills, but as much as
poftible rouze and enrich their Genins,  have pitch’ on this sub
ject for the Ornament of Landskips. And tho' it be common,
yet  question whether it was ever handled in fuch  Manner. Idr
vide it into three Ordonnances.
The firtt is, Venus' making Love to him.
The second, His taking leave of ber, to go  Hanting; or ratber to.
be killed. And
The third, Her finding him dead.
The Fable is this. Venus was, according to the Poets, very much
enamoured with the Vouth Idenis, notwichflanding his Celdnels and
infentibility: And yet he refrained not from Kiffing and careffing her
for  Seafon; which much incented Mars, and raifed his Jealouty and
Rage, as often as he law the Vouth in her Lap.
Tbe first Ordennance.
The Place opens,  pleafant and agreeable Country, ffored with 
very thing that can delight the Eye, Woods, Hhills, Valleys, Rivers,
and Stone-work, except Houses and Temples.  fer the Point of Sight
II
 P Landskips.
 VI
in the middle of the Piece. Between it and the left Side, on an Hil.
lock,  place the Goddess and her Spark, attended by the three Graces,
who are to adorn her; one of thefe is twitling  Wreath of Flowers,
another is crowning her with  Chaplet of them, and the third is
bringing  Basker of Fruir. Some Capids are toying about her; one
elpecially is fitting ar her Feet, blowing Adoniss Horn: At whom he
fmiles; when fenus, with her Arm about his Neck, with her Hand
preites hs againtt her Breaft, or kiffes it. Behind the aforefaid Hil.
lock, againtl the Offskip,  place some thick-leaved Trees; the high-
eit in the middle of the Piece, and thofe to the left fomewhat lower
and thinser. Behind them we difcover the Remains of  Colonade,
riting and appearing half behind the Hillock, and running towards the
Point of Sight. On the fame Side forwards,  fet  cross low Wall,
which the Hillick fems. Againtt this Wall, which is but  or 
Feet and an half in Rife,  place  Water-god fitting alleep by his
Vafe, and encompaffed with Greens: And in the Corner, againt the
Frame of the Piece,  place  large Willow-free or one and an half
And thus half the Piece is filled. On the right side forwards, 
plant  Knobby moffy Body of  Tree about  or  Feet high; and
clofe behind it,  large and beautiful one fully leaved. Somewhat be
youd appears an high (quare Pedeftal, whereon flands  large and ele-
gant Vafe. Thefe Objects are in  Line running towards the Point of
Dight, making  Way between it and the Hillock, which is wide for
wards, and diminithing at the End of the Fore-ground, where the fe-
cond begins and runs out into an open Field; whence to the Horizon
are feen some faint Hills.
Let us now come forward again. In the Right fide Corner, Enry
Kindles the Fire of War; the is flying with  broken flinking Pitch
forch in her Hand, and her Head beler with twining Serpents, secret
ly thewing Mars the two Lovers. And now we fee, the devouring
God of War on his Belly, with one Leg over  Stone, lurking be.
hind the Pedeftal, and ftaring earneftly, between it and the Green of
the Trees, at the Caule of his Jealouty; his Spear and Shield lie at
his Feet.
lonce faw  Print of Tulie Romane, wherein he has placed Mars
in the Offskip, purfuing Adonis Sword in Hand; which  think too
oblcure and far fetch’. The Senfe may be colerable; yet tis againt
the Fable; for Ovid does not meation, that Adonis was killed by
Mers, with  Sword, but by  wild Boar, thro' his Infligation.



Of Landskips.
  the mean time,  doubt not but this my Sketch and Dispofition
will feem Rrange: Nevertheless, if well executed, it will certainly
appear fine with the Pedeftal, low Wall and Colonade; fince such
Things creace great Decorum and Variety in  Landskip.
The Light,  affiga, is bright Sun thine.
My Intention here is, to reprefent the Month of May, or the
Spring, when every thing is coming forth and bloffoming; tho'  am
very fentible, that the Green of the Trees, by the Diverfity of Co-
lour, is, in the Summer, more Painter-like; however this mult not
be like  Summer; belides, the Ifland of Cyprus is not like Helland, or
other cold Countries,, where the Greens come up late; for otherwife,
 should not introduce  Basket of Fruit.
Now, if it be asked, becaufe  sill fet, on the large Pedeftal, 
Vale, and that directly againtt the Hillock, where Venus and Adonis
are with the Graces, whether this would not throw  very large
Ground-fhade over thofe Figures!  fay, it would not; becaute  af-
fign the Sun  Meridian Alrude. Moreover,  do not fet the Pede-
Ral to near the Hillock as to be any Obftacle to the Figures. The
foremoll Tree, becaute it rifes to high, can alfo as littie prejudice
them, its Ground-hade paffing by them, over the Willow in the Cor-
ner, or at leaft  Part of it; which makes the Colonade, againtt
which it preads, fall back, tho' the Trees behind the Hillock can
fufficiently effect the fame; fince  make them either dark Green, or
elfe in Shade, and the little Leating hanging over the Lovers, in the
Light; in order thus to have below, tome Darkness for fetting off
the Lovers: My Incention being to place that Group directly in the
Jun, in order to have there the principal Light.
But here  may be reproved, on  Suppolition that  alt counter to
my own Polition; namely, that in Sun-shine, People do not sland talk-
ing, without sbading their Eyes: Which  do not deny; but let it be
confidered, that the Gods are not fubject to human Frailties, and
therefore they can look againtt the Sun: And to folve the Difficulty
with respect to Adonis, who is not  God,  make his upper Parts in.
Shade, receiving agreeable and Rrong Reffexions from Venus and the
Graces.
From whence arifes another Difficulty; namely, by what Means.
this Ground (hade can fall on him only, fince they are fitring to clofe to
gether, that Venurs Arm is about his Neck, and one of his Hands.
preffes her Breaft; and therefore the mull needs take Part of the same
Shade? To which,  anfwer, That there are Means enough, by one
Thing


Of Landships.
 VI
Thing or other, to find that Shade. And as for Venss, the may be to
dispoted, either  litile backward or forward, as to receive Light -
nough. Now, that Alars and Eary, at the Stone-work, may not
draw the Eye too much from the Principals, by making them in the
Light,  bring not much Sun into that Quarter;  mean that  fet
the foremoff whole Seem of the Tree, and  great Part of the hind
mofl, with Part of Mars, in  Ground Chade, occafioned by fomething
wirboat the Piece; and to let that Shade run, on the Fore-ground, jutt
to the low Wall breaking the Relidue here and there fomewhar
with Buthes and Shrubs:  might alfo place there  Priapus-term, of
other Object, in order  lictle to fill that Corner.
We have before faid, that neither ffoufes nor Temples muft enter the
Composition. Why not they, fay fome, as well as the Terml To which that the Fable makes no mention of any fuch Objects: And
let me ask, who should live in the Houfes! lis not faid, that Adonis,
tho'  Man, had any Houthold, or that he worshipped in  Temple.
This Piece may be richly embellished with ten or twelve Figures,
tho' Afars and Enny are but partly Figures. Some Landskip-paint
ers may poffibly object againtl fo great  Number, for that, thote,
well execuced, would better become an Hiffery than  Landskip: But
the Aniwer is ealy; the Figures are fmall, and the Landship,
large
We shall now proceed to the Colours and Aftions of the Figures.
We reprefent tenas in her Linnen, yet with her Opper-parts and
Legs almoft bare; under her, on the Grass, appears Part of  light
Red Garment.
Adonis' Garment is greenith Blue or dark Violet.
The two Groces, standing next to Venys, are drest in light coloured
Garments of changeable Sruff and broken Colours, preferving, about
that Group,  great Mats of Light: For which Reafon,  chule fich
Colours, as do not caute any unteemly Reffexions in the Carnation
of Venss or Adonis. Her Garment, who is crowning Veus with 
Chaplet, is Rofecolour;  second, more forward, and with one Knee
bent, is in Whire, and has  Flower in her Hand; and the third hav-
ing the Fruits, and flanding on the left Side, and fomewhat higher
on the Hillock, has an furera or Straw-coloured Garment. We need
not fay much about Mars and Envy; fince Cafar Ripa relates enough
conching them. Nothing is more proper for Mers, than  rulty Fil.
lemot of blood colour’ Coat; and for Exny, than  black one.
As


Of Landskips.
Chap.  for the Motions of Venus and Adonis, they are fronting in both;
but their Feet more or lets turned to the Light.
donis, on the right Side inclines his Upper-parts towards Venys,
with his right Hand on her Breaft, and his right Shoulder coming for-
wards; his Under-parts are fronting, and his left Leg excended, and
his right drawn in, as if he were about to rife; his Face froncing in
clines  little over his Shoulder to the Child who blows the Horn.
Contrarily, Venus, relling on her right Thigh, applies, in some mea-
fure, both her Knees to his extended Leg; her Face, in Profile, turn-
ed cowards him, fronts the Sun; her Breaft is alfo feen fronting;
the draws back her left Elbow, in order to prets his Hand on her
Brealt.
On due Confideration, thefe two Figures will be found to have  and ealy Contraft or Oppofition, in Motion; fince  have en-
deavoured to give myfelf full Satisfaction touching all the Actions
exhibired, before  fet the Layman.
But,  mult return again to the Ordonnance.  forgot to place two
Children behind the foremoft low Wall; of whom, the one is leaning
over it, and, with  Finger on his Mouth, and Head funk, is thew-
ing the other the fleeping River-god.  place them there, firft,
for Decorums Sake; and fecondly, in order to break, in some mea-
fure, that long and fliff Piece of Stone-work. The Watergod is of 
brownith Vellow Hue, almofl as dark as the faid Stone-work; and for
two Reafons; firil, for the Sake of Repofe; and secondly, to prevent
 Mass of Light there with the Children, to the Detriment of the
Principal: Belides  further Purpofe; to adorn the Pedeltal of the Vafe
with  Balsrelief, reprefenting  Bacchanol or dancing Nymphs; and.
tho' it come in Shade, yet  affign it frong Reffexions. There ought
allo to beadded, one of two Dogs afleep; of which, the one awak
ing, ftares back with prick’ up Ears, at the Sound of the Horn.
 have before faid, that one of the Graces should be dreffed in Whire;
but now,  caff  beautiful blue Veil over it, as proper to break the
Srength of the White.
 Piece, thus executed, is fufficient for the Production of many
others; especially, if we duely confider, how many Things are obter-
red in it, which by few is taken notice of,  the Qualiry of each
Figure, iis Origin or emblematic Signification, Coc. Many Fictions
are painted from the Poefs Dekcription, but few People weigh the Writ-
ors Meaning, tho' attended with an Explanation; which however is
oaly general, without the ddition of the Circumftances, tho' well
Known


Of Landships.
 Vi
Khnown to the Writer; as, the Shapes, Dreffes, Colours, Paffions and other
Remarkables: II hence wemay conclude, what mult be the Cafe of thofe
Men who do not make themfelves Mafters of all thefe Things; and
how eafily they may miftake, even pervert the Senfe of the Writer or
Poec. If the Fact lay in the Spring, they reprefent it in Summer; if
in  Winter-morning, they exhibit an Aurumn-evening: Ought the .
pening to be  folicary Place, or Wilderness, they will incroduce Di.
vertions: Should any Perfon have  red Drapery, as proper to him,
is made blue, yellow, Coc. We grant, that the Fable may be re.
prefented plain enough; and, who the Charaffers are, and wrat they
are doing, prefently conceived; but the Drift of it is wanting.
Iis unnecellary to enlarge on this Table or Ordonnance further than
to oblerve, that Mars here figaines Vengeance; Adonis, the Winter
and Jenss, the Spring; which is the Realon, why thefe two latt can-
not agrec.
The Poets wrife, that there were four who went under the Name of
Fenus. The firlt was the Daughter of Calum and the Day. The fe
cond was brought forth of the Frorb of the Sea, being conceived in 
Morber of Pearl, and conduted to Cypras by the airy Eepbyrs: Ii
was the who bore Capid to Afercury. The third was the Daughter
of Tupiter and Dione, who was wedded to Valcan, Chief of the
Cuckolds; and the fourth was the Syrian, called Aftarte, who courted
the Love of Adonis, and to whom Solemon erected Allars to pleafure
his Concubines. Whence we may judge, what great Dilparity there
is between thefe fenuss.
Asfor the wild Bear, it implies the Night, lgnorance, Impiety, Fil.
sbiness, Lewdness, &cc.
The second Ordonnance: Or, Sequel of the foregoing Story.
When Adonis was now tired with Kiffing and Flattery, or, to fay
better, when his forrowful Fate drew near, and the Dogs fcenting the
Boar, fet up  Cry, he, deaf to Venur' Intreaties, wretted from her
Embraces, and jumped up eager for Sport.
We muft previoully underfland, that we are obliged to confine our
felves to two principal Points; namely, the general Disposstion, and the
Ligbt. And tho' on  due Confideration, it may poffibly feem to be
cholenless advantageous, than if it were  fingle Piece (which  willing.
ly allow) yet as it now ferves to motch anotber, it therefore requires
the same Light, tho' revers’ one might better become it; becaute
then



 Landskips.
Chap.   should be at greater Liberty : But even then, the Dispesstion
would not be different enough from the former.
We have, in the Book of Ordennance, thewed, that when two Pieces
hang together, they ought to have  certain Conformity; efoecially
Landships with small Figures: As if, for inftance, the heaviell. Work.
be in the one on the right Side, and the Viftoon the left, in the other
or Matching-piece it mult be contrary; and yet, notwithflanding that
Neceffity or Rule, which however fublifts,  find fomething which gives
me greater Satisfaction, and better expreffes the Seafe; as may appear
in the Sequel.
 place, as in the preceding Ordonnance, the Point of Sight in the
Middle of the Piece, and on the right side an Eminence, alcended by
 or  Steps, fronming or parallel with the Horizon. Upon it, at the
End againl the Oftship,  reprefent an open Niche, almoll (quare and
Compals headed, adorned, on both sides, with Pilaffers, fupporting  but elegant Cornice, here and there fomewhat broken. About
the Niche hang Feltoons of Poppies, which are fatten’ to the Crown
of the Niche, and being buttoned up on each Side, their Ends en-
twined hang down together. Thro' this Niche, having  Seat before
it, we difcover an agreeable View of Woods, Lawns, Rivers, Roads,
Co. This Eminence takes up  third Part of the Piece, running off
keep on the inner Side. Forwards, againtt the Steps, which are moff=
ly in Shade by Trees without the Picce, to the Corner whereon flands
the Goddels, we place her gilt Chariot drawn by two Pidgeons.
On the left Side, between the Point of Sight and the Frame of the
Piece, fland  or  great and beauriful Trees, in  Row, running from
the Fore-part of the Piece, and by the Hillock towards the Point of
Sight. In the Corner, behind the Eminence, rifes an high and rough
Rock, alfo running towards the fame Point, making between both 
parrow Pallage, which forwards is over run with Buthes and Gorfe, and
behind is bare, to as to ditcover, through it, the Oftskip and End of
the Rock. Forwards in the Rock,  make  large craggy Hollow,
into which the Warer falls with imperuoficy. Thus much mottly as to
the Fore-ground. At the End of it runs  narrow croffing River,
from the Eminence to the back Part of the Rock; along the side
whereof,  thew  Plantation of high Trees, in order to make the Off-
ship, which is feen through them, appear as in  Valley. On the Le-
vel whereon fands Adoms,  fet, between two Trees,  white Marble
Balis, with  broken Term, and its Trunklying near it.
Thus
No..  Landskips.
Book VI.
Thus  have thewed the general Delign; which  queftion not will
appear more incommon and Woodlike than the other. The third  to make kill more wild than this; becaute the Subjelt requires it.
Some mar poffibly think ris to be an agreeable and delightful Ordon-
nance; bu: the Sequel will thew it to be otherwife; for in this,  repre-
fent the Month of Turxt, and the Sun Comewhat darkened and fiery,
 of ining briohtly; the Air gloomy and cloudy, as if it were
gong to Thunder; the Wind alfo blows, and every Thing is thaking
and in Aforon, nor one Wiv, but as in  Whirtwind, the Dutt, like

 Vapoir, irg from the Ground in Come Places.
Perkap: yo: dd nor expet this Sore of Management, but on die
Confideraron of te Cate, it will be found both nacural and artful.
We nsw proceed to dispote the Chara.Ters.

The Giays, fieing the Evening approsch, doubled her Courthip.
The cold  ars, contrarily, eager for Sport, hearing the Noife of the



 hinv arnss from the Eminence. Now, all Things are in an
hurry, fines follows him with Intreacies; but in vain; Fare feizes and
pulls him along with her. The Graces are in Confution; one runs
after him; another, fearful of the Goddets' Swooning and tumbling
down the creps, fuppores her the third, fadly shricking and crying,
lifts up her open Hands on high. The Bors are in Contention; one is
halng fdimms avar, and the other sopping him. Capid lies thrown
on the Ground. Cthers ren with the Doos before. The aild Boir
 in the before-mentioned narrow Paliage, between the Eminence
and the River; for on by cruel Rage with  Pirch -torch in her Hand
Now this Ordonnance feems to have much more Work than the pre-
ceding; and yer, if confidered, it will be found otherwife; and that in
the former, the Figures are only more fcattered: Befides, in hearing
Things related, they always feem more to us, than in the Pilture it
Self.
Veans,  exhibit as coming down the Steps, as alfoone of the Grases,
who runs after Adonis, fince he is flipt out of the Goddels' Hands.
The Touth  reprefent running juft in the Middle of the Piece, betwees
the Eminence of the Trees, zor  Paces beyond the Steps, whereon
the Goddess flands befeeching him in Tears. He is almoft half in the
Ground shade of the Eminence; for  have faid, that the Sun is fetting
The Children who attend the Dogs, are entirely shaded by the Stone
work on the Eminence; which is to high and large, that the Bodies
of the laft Trees do not elcape it. Venus flands with her right Foot
on the lowermoff Step, and with the left on the Middlemoff on the inner
Cornet,


Of Landskips.
  flooping; her under Parts almofl fronting, and her upper Parts
turned Sideways towards him; preffing her folded Hands, with the El.
bows forwards againft her Body, and linking her Head, looks from him
towards Heaven.  place one of the Graces by her Side as coming
down, embracing the Goddets about the Waiff with Fear and Con-
cern, and, with Amazement, looking to the left after Adonis. The
other Virgin, who run after him, is now with one Knee on the Ground,
with her lefe Hland shewing him the Goddefs, and with her right Hand
holding  Skirt of his Coat; to that the is moff feen from behind.
The third has, as is faid, her Hands frecched on high; and her Face
is fvelled by the Violence of her Outirys. Adonis, as in great Halle,
advances his right Leg, turning his Breaft to the right to the Light;
he holds  Spear in his right Hland clofe to his Side; which  Boy is
withholding with all his Strength; for which, another angrily firikes
him with his Bow. Adonis looks downwards, with his Face froncing,
at the Virgin who is at his Feet; pointing, with his left Hand, which
is forethortened, at the Wood; by which Arm Fure is pulling him
thither the is fying, and has  Rudder of  Ship on her Shoulder
her right Shoulder and right Breaff come forward, her other Parts be-
ing forethortened, and her Face turned backwards. Before him,  re-
prefent  Cupid alfo firing, and pullins him towards the Wood by the
String of the Horn which fiwings by his Side. This Boy is feen quite
from behind, with his Feet flung out, and holding his Bowin his right
Hand, with which he is threatening another, who is tumbled down,
and lyes alfo forethortened, with his Head forwards, and Feet towards
Adoms; he is all in Shade, except his Head, and the Hand with
which he feratches it; his Torch lies near him extinguished
 Flappet of Venursred Garment comes about her right Arm, and
fivings behind over her left Leg. The Chaplet of Flowers falls from
her Head down her Back. Fore is dreft in Black, with  fmall flying
Veil over it.
Behind the broken Term are feen the Arms of Afurs, viz. His Ar-
mour, Helmer, Shield, Sword and Spear, lying on the Ground in
Shade. Now, altho' Mars does not appear in his own Shape, but in
that of the Boar, in which he was metamorphiz’, yec we need not
wonder at it; becaufe, we muft not fuppofe, that as he was  God.
he entered into it Stockined and Shoed. Some may. poffibly ask.
Whether he could not do it in his full Habiliments! And,  fay, he
might: But then  mull ask again, flow we should know it? The
Dreffes of Gods and Men have no Senfation, either good or bad; they
 Landskips.
Book VI.
 even of no other Signification than to make the Perfon Known;
for, were they subject to the Paffions arifing from Heat or Cold, they
would alfo fhare the Punithments of the Body, as the Head, Hands,
 do.
Vet it may be very reafonably asked here, in cale we were to repre-
fent the cancrous Iglaara, meramorphir’ by Mercury into  Touch.
ftone, whether her Garments should not be quite black? nd  an
fwer, that naiking but her Body should be fo; for otherwife, my Affer.
tion falls to the Ground, tho'  have faid, that the Drets makes the
Perfon Known. Nevertheless,  shall in this Point, further explain
mrfelf.
The King Lincas approaches the Bed of his fleeping Guelf Trip.
tolemss, with Incention to flay him. Ceres appeared at the very in
ftant, and took the Weapon from the King; at the same Time trant
forming him into  Lynx,  Beaft like  Tyger, for violating the
Laws of Hofpiraliev. This Story  would reprefent thus. The King
is not there the Beaft  make taking to flight, thaking from him, -
bout the Floor, the purple Garment and Crown. This  think moff
agreeable to Narure and Probabilirv. Add to this another Inftance.
June, fays the Poet, in wrathful Jealouty, beat the poor Califfe fo
much, that the was metamorphiz’ into  She bear. Now, How is
this to be reprefented, in order to know what the was, Manor Wo-
man?  would repreient the frighted Bear as taking to flight, not
cloathed, but dragging her Garment behind her along the Ground.
Here, the Bow, there, the Quirer of Arrows, Strap, and other Or-
Damenis
Tei, in what  mean Manner have  feen the King Lyncus repre-
fented by  He slands with the Dagger in his Hand, cloath’ and
crown’, having for Legs the frightful Paws of  Bear.
Thus  have affirmed, that Cloaths ferve God and Men only for Di.
prnction: Which brings to my Remembrance,  Print of Poyfin, con-
firming what  have faid. It exhibies the Elyssan Fields, with the
happy Souls ar reft, and Touth, or eternal Spring, dancing and
Rrewing Flowers. Here, we fee Hyscintbus, Narciffas, Crocus, Add-
nis, Ajax, and many others, in fitting Poltures, as when living:
Whence, we may eafily perceive, how difficult it would be to know
them without their particular Badges of Diffinttion, as the Spear,
Hers, Fountaixn, Helmet, Chaplet of Rofes, &cc and how impostible
it was to Pouffin, to excellent and learned  Man, to make Ajax
Known, feeing he there repretents him in the same Rage or Despair,
 Landskips.
Chap.  wit, Rabbing himself, as when he was before Troy.  great Mit-
take, in my Opinion, with respect to Probabiliry.  should rather
have left it out; as allo the Chamber-pet or Ciffern wherein Narciffus is
rieving himself.
 can hardly believe to frange  Delign to be of Pouffin himfelf;
fince Ajax is placed in to truel  Peffare among the happy Seuls; 
Man who being  Felo de se, rather deferved Hell. Why may not
Sippbus, Ixien, Promethens or Tantalus, who are doomed to hellith
Punithments, be of their Company? Ies true, that Ajax alted only 
gainll himfelf on account of the rms of Acbilles, to which he had
 Claim, and the others offended the Gods; one fiole the Fire from
Heaven, another had the impudence to trepan the Goddefs Tune to his
Lut by an Ambuth, Coc.
Teta has, in my Opinion, in many Particulars, exhibited the fame
Reprefentation, better and more intelligible than Pouffin, as being
much larger, and more plealant and Painter like: But yet he runs
counter to the Probability of that Place of Reft; as we may perceive
in the two Figures of  Boy and Girl, where he is taking lome Flow-
ers out of her Lap, and the, in Return, is ready to feratch out his
Eyes; being an old Quarrel revived. Now, in Falt, neither Ha-
tied, Quarrel or Fealoufy, nothing but Repase and Peace should appear
theic.
But methinks,  hear some fay, that  derogate from the Worth of
thole two great Men, by thus expoling ther Miltakes, and that Tis
caler to find Faulrs than to make  thorough Compofition: Which 
perfectly own; neverthelels, my Incention is not in anywife to build
 Reputation on their Errors; fince it will appear, throughout this
Work, that  am no Kinder to my own Mifakes than to thole of others;
and this, with  View of thewing Artills  Way for avoiding fuch
common Defects, and of making them more careful to mind Probubi.
ity in all Parts. Here let us make  Comparifon between an Archi-
 and  Painter.  good Archifeft ought firft exactly to know,
what Ground is moft proper for his Purpofe, in building  Temple, Pa-
lice, &cc. as, whether it be firm or marthy, and to which Quarter
the mult order his Front; and then to proceed to Work. If  Painter
intend to reprefent  Courtship or  military Exercife, Offering, or -
by thing elle, he will alfo look for  proper Place wherein to lay the
Subjecl. The Arobitect makes  Plan of his Court with all its Ap.
purtenances; of  Temple, with the Choir, Alfar and other Particu
ars, COc. of  Fortification, with its Baftions, Ravelines, Rendezvous,
 Landskips.
 VI
C  Puiater likewife exhibies the Elipan Fields, or the Garden
of Ffery for Carelles;  Temple, for dirine Service;  Court, with the
King and his Retinue; or,  Foreff, for Hunting. Now, if  Per.
ion enter the Temple, during divine Service, with  Sword in his Hind,
or be patsing himself in the Elpan Fields, among the happy Souls, in
order to gize iis so  secend Renore; Would you not conclude thote
Things to be very improper for such Places, and fitter for Troy?  the lacred Temple and Fichis are not thereby profaned;
and were Dogs to be huned in the Palacecourt or Place of Render.
vous, would in not be ridiculous: , uxnever enter’ the Elipan Fiells
before his Souls Separation, ver here, he subs himself again; has he
another Soul to dpart from him?
Let us Low procel is the Dekiption, Divifion and Confideration
 T and ly Ordernance.
The Golizs of Love perceiving all her Endeavours to be fruicless,
and growing imparent for  Return, took her Chariot drawn
by two Swans, and drove fwifily towards the Wood, in order to feek
him, leaving her Grares behind as ufcless at this Juncture; as we shall
further explain at the End of this Ordonnance. Cupid follows her
thricking. The unhappy Fouth, bit by the wild Boar in his Gron,
les gaiping againt  large Oak; where, at laft, Venus finds him in his
Blood. Wt herefore, flepping from her Charrot, like  Frantick the
bewails him, abhorring her Godhead, and curting the cruel Tyranny
which prescribes Law to Heaven and Earth. In the mean time,  expires, and his waving Soul is taken by Mercary, and carried to
the Ehsun Fields.
This Fable  reprefent thus.
Adonis is lying on his left Side, forethortened, with his Neck 
gainft the Trunk of  large Oak; and his right Breaff and Shoulder
upwards; his left Arm extended; and the right clofe to his Bodj,
holding the Spear which is parcly under him; his Head hangs ilmol
on his left Arm,  litle foreight, with the right Cheek upwards;
his Feet are turned towards the left Corner of the Piece, forwards; his
left Knee, refting on  fnall Rifing or Stone, is half drawn up; al
Hunting horn lies at his Feet. The Dogs at his Head, on the lot
Side. howl and yelp. Cugid, on his right Side, ftoops down, an
looks at Verus Chricking; at the fame Time opening Adouis' Gar
mert



Of Landskips.
Chap.  in order to thew the bloody Wound to his Mother; who, af-
frighted, Rarts back, and raifes ker Hands towards Heaven. Cupids
Back is, by the Goddels, partly in the Ground thade; his Breall is
forethortened, his Feet clole, and Knces fomewhat bent; holding 
Torch in his right Hand. Venns, as has been faid, raifes her Hands on
hich, putting out her right Leg, and drawing back her left Foor on
 Cloud, which, behind her, runs up to the right under the Chariot;
her upper Parts incline over the said left Foor; her Chin is funk into
her Breatt; and thus the beholds the Wound. Her Breaft is fore
horrened, and her right Hip is fronting. Behind the aforefaid Oak,
againtt which Adois is lying, the Chariot is feen in Profile, on fome
waving Clouds alike with the Horizon; which about Penus defcend
gradually lighter and lighter to underneath her Foor. The Charior,
tho' gilt, yer kept dark by  Cloud, is elegantly wrought with Chil-
drea, Fehoons and Foliage; behind, on top, is  large Star, and the
Chariot partly hid by the Eody of the Oak. Forwards, besween the
middle and the left Corner, flands  Stone, about three Feet (quare,
with the broken Trunk of  Term, the Refidue whereof, as the Head
and  Part of the Body, he on the Ground, among the Buthes and
Shrubs. This Ccone flands Comewhar obliquely, with the left Corner
towards the left Side of the Piece; clofe to which Side rifes an high
Tree; and  little further, another, quite oversrown  or  Feer
high. Behind the Stone, among the Shrubs, Thiftles and Thorns,
the Boar, attempting to fly, lies wounded in Blood and Dirt on its
Forelegs, with its Mouth wide open. On the second Ground, on the
right side, goes Atropos with her Scilfors in her Hland and Diftaff on
her Shoulder; being almoll to the middle, hid behind the Ground and
in Shade, except her Head and  Part of one Shoulder.
The principal View is on the left Side of the Point of Sight 
little above ir flies Afercury with the Soul of the Vouth, in order to
carry it to the Elyssan Fields. They are both feen forethortened,
with their right sides fronting. The Touth is quite naked, having his
Arm cross his Breaft, his Legs clofe, and his left Foot  little above
the other. Afercary holds him with his left Arm behind about the
middle, and looking at him, with his Caduceas forwards, points to the
Place they are going to.  small Garment, of this winged Meffen
er, is flying benind him upwards.
The Ground is craggy and rocky, here and there over run with
Grats, Thiflles and Hollies.
The


