i Cin



   
ii
INIRCDUGTION.

A HE urility of the following CoMPENDIUM, will
appear to all who consider the variety of substances
which are employed in composing many colors, and
other materials, used in the Arts. It is to be re-
fretted that some professors are not more intimately
acquainted with this part of science; but, to the
student;; for whose service this compilation is chieffy
intended,: such information is evidently of great

Retvantage.
1
That an injudicious mixture of pignents, contrary
in their natures and properties, produces very dis-
agreeable consequences is universally agreed;as
indeed might naturally be expected from the various
53
and dissimilar origins of the ingredients, of which
some ate productions of the animal, others of the
regetable Kingdom; fossils afford some, and mine
fals others, Beside this, they have undergone vari-
ous modes of preparation for use; for some cannot
be used without calcination, others will hot bear the
fire; some constantly retain their proper hues,
others, though brilliant at first, after a while become
totally corrupted, and by their corruption they in-
jure, or destroy, their companions, which might
otherwise have stood well. It appears evident, there-
fore, that, a Knowledge of the origin of any pis-
ment, may conduce much to a beneficial association
of it with others.
No doubt, many other substances beside those in
common use, might be of great service, if their pro-
A 2
Perties


5


(4
perties were more sausfactorily understood, or if
better methods of managing them were discovered,
which can only be the result of experiment. More-
over, we know, that foreign countries afford a variety
of materials different from our own; which are used
by the artists of those countries: it would be a des
sirable acquisition, as well to the study: of natural
history in general, as to the arts, if gentlemen who
have opportunity; would inform themselves on such
subjects; of their origin, their manner of tieatment,
and their mode of preparation for use; of their Han

tures and their effects; and, if they could import

samples for examination by our own artists, not
only those artists, but, perhaps by: some happy dis-

covery; the nation; might become obliged to their

ry 
laudable endeavours.
Our own Kingdom and its dependencies afford a
variety of substances which we now receive from
foreigners: it would be well worth while for examine
our nlative productions with reference to theirt fure
ther utility; not to mention the pleasure arising from
investigation of every part of the works of nature: It

i5 submitted to gentlemen; and to artists, who reside7n
various parts of the Kingdom, that such intelligence of
British productions might be very acceptable to ariists
in other parts of the Kingdom, whose situation detains
them from such knowledge : and in particular, it is
submitted to artists, that, as the perfection of art is
only to be attained by liberal communication of im-
provements which becur to individuals; by such
generous behaviour, and by such only, can the arts
attain that excellence which is the earnest desire of

every genuine artist.
Such


5)
Such information would be valuable to the public,
since thereby many expensive materials might be su=
perseded, by others equally serviceable, at a much
less price; or improvements on those now disre-
garded, might render them objects of greater atten-
tion; whereby, not unfrequently, our manufactures,
as well as the arts, might derive great advantage.
In some degree, on this principle, a few articles not
in general use are admitted into this collection; for,
though their own services are but small, they may
afford hints to aid the discovery of others more
valuable; it has indeed been our endeavour, to insert
chiefly those articles whose utility may be depended
on; for it seems injudicious to burden this part of
L




 
5
qiei i
s
4
science, especisliy in a work like the present, with
F
F  3
3 
Cipp on re on i
is in for 333 : at Tr.
 
33 ig his slss 3
nnumerous recipes, even while we have endeayoured
intre id

  neren

  
 e
.
that nothing really worthy our readers. attention

  

should be omntted.




2
The intent of this work is not to instruct masters,
but learners; nor can much novelty be expected on
the subject, though there are many original recipes;
but let it come from what quarter it may, INFOk-
MATiON Is equally useful, and valuable, to the
student.
To close these remarks:—It should be recoilected,
that some colors, &cc. are dangerous to health, with-
out due circumspection in preparation, and manage
ment; to guard against accidents from such is very
desirable, and is sufficient to prove the ntility of the
present work, in which somewhat of their natures
and effects are explained.


 The


ar



ag

o

i 
  




Li 


S
 
 f
1














S 
 

nis  


 p

 



4
Te 7

 



id      Tlect at


 piits

t
F 1
 Tite ii



:
eni

1
1
F
& The prices marked to many of the following articles, may serve
T

P

t
as useful bints in purchasing Colors, ESc. but must be taken with
o  




some liberty, according to the quality of the article, and of the stafe
i  


of the wholesale market, ESc.



These under a sbilling per pound are marked cheap.
3


8 







aptotent  ot   
i a aaent a at anhet a asadegadd to do




COMPENDIUM
10F.
C.OL.O R.S. Ec.

LACACLA: The flowers afford that bright yellow
which bears washing in the Chinese silks, exc. and
i5 used by them in painting on paper. The flowers
are gathered before they are fully open, then put
into a clean earthen vessel, and kept over a great
heat (stirring them continually) till they become
dryish and yellow. Then to half a pound of
fowers, they add three spoonfuls of fair water, or
just enough to hold them incorporated. This they
boil, till the water has extracted the juice from the
fowers; then strain it. To the liquor they add
half an ounce of allum, and one ounce of calcined
oyster-shell pulverised.
It is not impossible that Great Britain (or very pro-
bably some of its tropical dependencies) may pro-
luce a regetable similar in its nature, or that may
2
SeIve


8
serve the same purpose, at a small expence. The

a

procees to -obtain us color, would most likely be
much the same.
ANACARDIUM. Or CASHEW.NUT: From the
sweetish liquor contained in its shells, the Indians
extract an oil, said to preserve wood from putre-
faction, and to render black colors lasting.
ACTHICTE, called by the French Rovcov, by the
Dutch ORLEANE, is the flower, or seed, of a tree
which grows chiefly in very hot countries. The
grains of Acbiate, are soaked in an earthen vessel,
and repearedly washed in warm waters, till they
have discharged their vermillion colour, the sedi-
ment is formed into cakes, &cc. which when pure
15 much valued. Some boil the grains to obtain a
greater consistence of colour.
2
some use it to compose CARMINE, but it gives too

smuch of an orange cast. It is used to dye wax
vermillion colour.
ALLURI, a inmeral chrystalizable salt, of an austere
taste; dissolves in cold water; but much better in
boiling water.  It is obtained abroad from sundry
Kinds of earth in England from a whitish bluish
Kind of stone called Irich slate. It is a principal
ingredient in -dying and colouring.. Its styptic
astringent quality binds the finer parts of the colors
together, and prevents their exhaling. Hence it

preserves paper impregnated with a solution of it,
from sinking when wrote upon.
ALLUR WATER is made by dissolving four ounces
of allum; in a pint of boilingwater filtre it through
Drown paper.

RoCk


9
ROCK ALLUM, Or ROCHE ALLUM, is prepared

from pyritous stones, cut from quarries, and 1s
distinguished from the common allum extracted
from earth, e&c.
PURIFTED ALLUM, is prepared by dissolving it in
hot rain water, and evaporating it, till it shoots
again into chrystals.
ROMAN ALLUM, is of a red color, not superficial-
ly but throughout; by breaking it, it may be dis
tinguished from counterfeits dyed red.
Price 4d. per 1b. Rock Allum 1s. per 1b.
AGUA-FORTIS, is a corrosive liquor, prepared
from nitre and vitriol; it dissolves all metals except
gold. It is made by distilling purified nitre, with
calcined vitriol, or rectified oil of vitriol, in a strong
heat: The vapour, which rises in blood-red fumes,
15 the Aqua-fortis.
If to the liquor thus procured, be added sea-salt,
or sal-ammoniac one-fourth of its weight, it becomes
AGUA-REGYA, and ceases to dissolve silver, but will
now dissolve gold.
The chiefuse of Aqua-fortis in the arts, is in faci=
litating the progress of ErchINC. Being poured
of a proper strength on the copper-plate previously
prepared, it corrodes the lines drawn through the
ground, or varnish, on the copper. See Etching.
Aqua-fortis as sold in the shops, requires no very
considerable addition of water, to decrease its
strength; but smoking SPIRTT OF NITRE, which
is the strongest kind of Aqua-fortis, must be reduced
to a proper strength for use, by the mixture of four
times, or at least three times, its quantity of water,
VOL II. Edit. 7.
B
The


I


10
The temperature of the weather, has a great effect

oh its operation.
Price about 4s. 6d. per pound weight.
ARCIIILL, is a white moss; which grows on the
rocks in the Archipelago, the Canary Islands, and
Cape de Verd Islands; it is said by LINNEUs, to be
found on the western coast of England. Prepared
Arcbill will yield a violet color to water, which
stains marble deeply; and renders it more brittle.
LINNEus thinks many common mosses might
yield celors; at least, the experiment on the most
5.
promising is worth making
ARSENIC, native, is called ORPIMENT. It is of
a yellow, or orange, color, Though always yellow,
its color admits of different shades and mixtures,
golden, reddish, or greenish.
The satal effects which may by accident arise from
this substance, will justify our forbidding its admission
into the collection of colors, of our young friends.
C
ASPHIALTUM, is a solid, bristle, black, inflam-
8
nable, brtuminous, substance, resembling pitch.
It is chiefly found swimming on the surface of the
Lacus Aspbathtes, or DeadSea, where anciently stood
the cities of Sodom, &cc. being thrown to the surface
of the water, it there swems like other fat bodies,
and gradually is condensed by the heat of the sun
and its own salt. It burns with great vehemence,
in which it resembles naphtha; but it is firmer in
consistence. Genuine Asphaltum has no smell, is
not acted on by water, by aqua-fortis, or by olive
oil. It is a principal ingredient in etching ground:
and is used in oil painting, but must not be too much


trusted


11

rusted to; it gives the appearance of age to pic
tures, &c. Price 6d. to 1s. per ounce.
ASPHALTUM is excellent in the shadows of flesli,
draperies, fore-grounds, Exc. and particularly in
scumbling, but when used alone it is apt to turn
black; it is therefore necessary to imix it with lake,
or blue, or terra de Sienna, any of which colors
mix well with it, and effectually prevent its chang=
ing. This color being now much in use, perhaps
t00 much, we give the following receipt for mak=
ing it.
Receipt for making Asphaltum.
Put two ounces of balsamo de capivi, into a peal, or
Dipkin, over a slow fire until it boils, then put in one
1
ounce of aspbaitum, and as much oil of turpentine
as will make it liquid; care must be taken to pre-
went its taking fire. This receipt; with the method
of using the asphaitum, was communicated by Mr.
Mengs, and is used with success.
. B. After glazing, it will be proper to put the
picture in the sun, in order to hasten the drying of it.
Another Method of preparing Asphaltum.
Welt two ounces of oleo dAbezzo, or Venice tur.
pentine, over d slow fire in a glazed vessel, then add
one ounce of aspbattum a little bruised; when
melted, thin it properly with oil of turpentine.
N. B. When you add the turpentine, take it from
the fire.
The best method of preparing asphaltum is
to melt it over a slow fire in the clearest bal-
B 2
SatIIO


12
samo de capivi, observing it continually until it is
quite melted: and never to use it before the picture
is very dry, then rub the part which you design to

glaze with a little of Mengs' varnish, which must
also be dry before you attempt to glaze it; mix the
asphalrum with a little oil of poppy, to prevent its
being too sticky in glazing. This is the best me.
thod of preparing and using aspbaltum, for which
we are obliged to Mr. West.
AVIGNONBERRY, called also PRENCH-BERRT,
and TELLOw-BERRY, is the fruit of a shrub, grow-
ing plentifully in the neighbourhood of Avignon,
and elsewhere, in the south of France.
The berry is somewhat less than a pea; its color
is green approaching to yellow, its taste is astrin-
gent. Dyers make a yellow of it. A tincture for
Wash colors is thus extracted:
Put a pound of berries to a gallon of water, with
half an ounce of allum : boil them in a pewter, or
earthen, vessel; filter them, and eraporate the
fiuid. Or more simply  into a small earthen tea-
Pot, or other convenient vehicle, put a small quan-
tity of berries, pour on them boiling water, and let
them stand by the fire side till the tincture is strong
enough; add allum in proportion. When meant to
be kept, some add a small quantity of spirits of
wine. The tincture may be drawn very deep.
Price 2d. per ounce.
BICE, is a blue color, prepared from the lapis arme-
nus, formerly brought from Armenia; but now
9
from the silver mines of Germany.
3
II


13
Ii bears the best body of all bright blues, used in
common; but is in its color the palest. It requires
good grinding to prepare it for use, being inclined
to be sandy, and should be well washed. It works
indifferently well. GREEN EICE, is made by addr
ing orpiment to the Blue Bice.
Price 1s. per ounce.
7
DISTRE, is composed of the most glossy, and highty
burned soot, finely pulverized, and sifted, then bak-
ed with a little gum water, and made into Cakes.
The best is prepared from the soot of dry beech
rood, by grinding it with urine, or with water,
Into a smooth paste; then diluting it with more
water: after the grossersediment is settled, pour off
the liquor, and let the finer particles, which are
the bistre, sink to the bottom. The best is of a
warm, deep, transparent brown, when moistened
with water.
This color may be used in the same mapnner as In-
dian ink, and is warmer in its appearance.
Price 8d. to 1s. 6d. per ib.
B L A C E S.
BLUE BLACK, is the coal of burnt regetables; the
best is said to be procured from vine-stalks, and
rendrils. Price 8d. to 1s. 6d. per ounce. Kept in the
color-shops in bladders ground in oil, at 3d. each.
LAMP-BLACK, originally perhaps the soot collect-
ed from lamps, is, generally, prepared by melting
rosin, or prick, in iron vessels; then setting it on
fire under a proper receptacle for the smoke; which
is the tamp-black. It is brought chiefly from
Sweden


14
Sweden and Norway, where it is frequently obtains
ed from the refuse of the tree, left in preparing
rosin, or pitch. It is the basis of the ink used by
letter-press printers. The black takes fire very
readily; the best method of extinguishing it, is by
linen, hay, or straw wetted; water alone will not
succeed. This color is not much in request for oil
pictures, as it requires forcing to make it ary.
LvoRY-BLACK, is made of ivory burnt, or char-
red, between two crucibles well luted; being thus
rendered perfectly black, and in scales, it is ground
and made into cakes, ecc.
The goodness of vory-black, may be known by
the fulness of its color, free from any blue cast; and
by its fineness. A little white sugar-candy prevents
this color, when used in water (and others), from
Cracking.
It is used in painting in oil: but is commonly
rejected from use in water, INDIAN INk answering
much better.
Price 1s. 6d. per 1b. Bladders 3d. each.
HORN-ELACK, is inferior to ivory-black; it is
made of bones burnt.
GERMAN, OF FRANKFORT, BLACK, is made of
the lees of wine burnt, and washed : and afterwards
ground in mills on purpose, with ivory, or with
peach stones, burnt. It is a principal ingredient in
the ink used by rolling-press printers. The French
15 superior to the German. To try its goodness, it
is pat into the mouth; if free from grit, and of 2
deep black, it is good.
EARTH


15)

EARTH BLACK, is a kind of coal which well pul-
verised, is used in fresco.
Burnt paper, ground finely, is said to make a good

black.

Peach stones burnt, make a very fine black of a
bluish cast, much used in France. Cherry stones
may be substituted.



INDIAN-INK is an admirable composition, not
laid like our writing inks, but solid like our mine-
ral colors, though much, lighter. It is made in all
figures, but the most usual is rectangular, about 2
quarter of an inch thick. Sometimes the sticks are
gilt with various devices.
To use this ink, there must be a little hollow
marble (to be had at any :color-shop) or other
stone, with water in it, on which the stick of ink
must be rubbed, till the water becomes of a suffi-
clent blackness. A Dutch tile, or piece of ivory, or
other neat substance, may serve as a substitute.
It makes a very black shining ink; and though apt
to sink when the paper is thin, yet it never runs or
spreads; so that the lines drawn with it are always
smooth, and evenly terminated, how large soever
they be. Itis of great use in designing, because its
tone of color may be augmented or dimiaished
of gs p
at pleasure. It is imitated by mixing. any
plack, prepared from linseed oil. (by hanging
a large copper pan over the flame of a lamp to
receive its smoke; with as much melted glue as is
requisite to form it into cakes; these cakes, when
dry, answer well enough in regard both to color,
and to freedom and smoothness of working. Irory
black





16
black and other charcoal blacks, levigated very
fine, have the same effect with lamp-black.
It is not easy to distinguish the best Indian-int
from the inferior; the usual manner is by rubbing
the stick on the back of the hand, or any other
place previously werted; but, frequently the sticks
are coated with a fine sort, and the part within is
worthless. The makers generally scent the best

1
ink with the best musk.
In using Indian-ink it should always be remem.
hered, that a light color may be darkened by addi-
tional washing but that which is too deep cannot
3
be lightened; the safest and best way 1s, to proceed
gradually from a weak tint, to a stronger, till the
Farious parts obtain the force intended.
Price, per stick, from 6d. tc 5s.
B L V E S.
BICE. See Bicl.
BLUE ASHES, Cendres blen, corruptly Sunders
blse; are used in water colors; some are very live.
ly: but in oil they become dull. They are found
among coppermines; water only is used in levigat-
ing them, to reduce them to a fine powder. This
blue ought to be used in works to be seen by candle
light (as scene painting) for though mixed with
much white, it retains its beauty.
There is nothing to be found in the shops under
this name but common verditer or some species
of it.
BLUE, PRUSSTAN, is a modern invention, conside.
fably in use among painters, though inferior to
ultramafine





17
hiltramarine blue. It was discovered by accident;
about the beginning of this century. A chemist of
Berlin, having successively thrown upon the ground
several liquors from his laborttory, was surprised to
see it suddenly stained with a most bedutiful color.
Recollecting the liquors he had thrown on each
other; he made a sinilar mixture in a vessel; and
produced the same color. He did hot publish his
process; but prepared and sold his thie, which was
substituted for ultramarine. The account of it was
first published in the Berlin Memoirs, 1710; but
without a description of its process.
In a paper of Dr. Woodwards; communicated to
the Royal Society, 1724; there is given a short way
Ofmaking Prussian Blue; which was found to answer

perfectly well; and occasioned several experiments;
whereby was discovered the nature of the substances
iused in that preparation.
The method was this; Four ounces of bullock's
blood dried, and four ounces of sait of tartar; pre-
pared from four ounces of crude taftar; and as much
hitre, were calcined together; two hours after
which; a black spungy substance remained in the
crucible; weighing four ounces; a solutioh of which;
being made itn boiling water; and afterwards filter-
ed, left a remainder which, when dried; werghed
hine drams: An ounce of English vitriol was
dissolved in six ounces of rain water; and eight
ounces of crude allum was also dissolved in two
quarts of water: These, being mixed hot with the
blood; became green; but on adding two; or threey
ounces of spirit of salt, they became of a fine blue:
VOL. II: Edit. 7.
6
which


18
which subsided, and left the water clear: The pros
duet was an ounce of very fine color, fit for the
palette.
3
Among the experiments made by mixing; in dif-
ferent manners, and proportions, the several liquers
of which this color was prepared, all produced a
blue but in different degrees, some being deeper,
others paler. In one experiment, the allum was
wholly left out, and a very pale blue was produced;
in another, the allum and vitriol were used in equal
quantities; then the blue was extremely deep.
in all receipts given for making Prussian Blue, the
liquors are ordered to be mixed together boiling
hot, except the spirit of salt; and the color, is most
readily, and beautifully, made this way.
128
The method of making Prussian Blue in perfec-
tioh, has been purchased as a very valuable secret.
Its process is very extraordinary, and could scarce
be derived a priori, from any reasoning about the
nature of colors. It is allowed to be an excellent
blue pigment in point of color; but its durability is
justly suspected : It should not, therefore, be used
in works of consequence.
The goodness of Prussian Blue must be distin-
guished by is brightness, deepness, and coolness.
Four different processes given for making the
finest sort of Prussian Blue with quick lime, are
given in the Hist. of the Acad. of Sciences at Parss,
for the year 1756.
Process I. Take 316. of ox's blood, dried and re-
duced into a kind of small scales, an equal quantity
Of


(19
of quick-lime newly baked, 21b. of red tartar; and
11b. 8oz. of saltpetre; pulverise the whole grossly,
and put it into a crucible, placed in the midst of a
great furiace, and give it a gradual fire. After
four hours, when the matter is reduced into a Kind
of paste which emits no more smoke, and is equally
red, throw it by spoonfuls into two pails of boiling
water; and, having fillrated the lixivium, mix it
with a solution of 6lb. of allum, and 1lb. 8o2. of
green vitriol. This operation will yreld but 702.
of secuta; but its beauty will make sufficient amends
for the small quantity, as it will surpass, in this
respect, all Prussian Blues, prepared by other me-
thods. It has also as good an effect as the finest
ultramarine; and has, besides, the advantage of
resisting the impression of the air.
Process Il. Take 3lb. of dried ox'sblood, an equal
quantity of quick-lime, 216. of red tartar, and 21b.
of nitre; let them be calcined and lixiviated, as in
the former process; pour the lixivium into a soln-
tion of 416. of allum, and 1lb. of green vitriol.
This operation will yield more of the blue secula
than the other, but the color will be less beautiful.
Process III. Take 31b. of dried oxs blood, 41b.
Soz. of quick-lime, 21b. of red tartar, 11b. 802. of
saltpetre, proceed as before. This operation will
produce a most beautiful blue; but the quantity
will be only about 802. and 4 drams.
Process IV. Take 316. of dried ox's blood, 6lb. of
quick-lime, 21b. of red tartar, and ilb. 802. of nitre.
Calcine and lixrviate as before; pour the warm lixi-
vium into a selution of 41b. of allum, and iltgret
C 2
Preen


26
green vitriol; the secula precipitated in this waywis
be as beautiful as those of the first process, and the
quantity nearly 26 ounces.
The price of that kept in the shops is from 8d. to 2s.
5
per ounce. Bladders, ground im oil, 6d. each.
INDiGo. Vide Indigo.
VERDITER. Vide Verditer.
ULTRAMARINE. Vide Ultramarine.
BLUE, POWDER, of SMALT: This is a troublesome
color, pot much in request. Price from 1s. 6d. to
125. per ounce.
BLUE, TURNSOL, is made of the seed of that plant,
by boiling four ounces of turnsol in a pint and an
half of water, in which lime has been slacked.
NIT. BoyLE has given us the following method of
making trapsparent blue, nearly equal to ultrama,
rine. The principal ingredient is the eyamis, of
blse corn-bottle-flower; which may easily be pro
cured during the summer months.
This flower has two blues in it, a pale color in the
large outer leaves; and a deeper blue, in the middle
of the flower : these produce much the best color.
This may be observed by rubbing the leaves, while
fresh, on a piece of writing paper, so as to express
the juice, which will yield an excellent color; that,
by the experience of two or three years, has not been
found to fade.
A sufficient quantity of these middle leaves being
procured, let the juice be pressed from them; to
which a little allum being added, will give a lasting
transparent blue; scarcely inferier in brightness to

ltramarine.
1
7



(21)
It is very probable, that if the chives of these
fowers were cured in the same manner as saffron,
they would produce a much greater body of color,
from which a tincture might be drawn with more
case than when pressed fresh from the field.
Mr. BoyLE also recompmends another fine BlvE,
produced from the blue leaves of rue, beaten in a
stone mortar with a wooden pestle, and then put into
water for fourteen days, or more, washing them
every day, until they are rotten, These, beaten up
at last, water and all, until they become a pulf

and then dried in the sun, will make a fine blue for
shading.
BLUE, TRANSPARENT, for washing maps, &cc.
Take half a pound of the best French verdigris,
add six ounces of red argil : let them soak together
about six and thirty hours, in about two quarts
and a half of fair water: then boil them till the in-
gredients are dissolved, let the liquor sertle and pour
It off.
United with the tincture of Avignon-berry, it
makes an excellent green, and will keep well; to
secure which you may add a little spirits of wine.
It is necessary to caution our friends against morst-
tening the pencil used in this color, with the
fongue; or by any other means admitting the color
into the mouth, as the verdigris is apt to occasion
a disagreeable sickness.
BRALIL-WOOD, is a South American production,
variously denominated according to the places from
whence it is brought; as from Fernambuc, Japan,
F
wt. Martha, &cc.
E.
3
The
42


(22
The tree grows in dry, barren, places, or on rocks,
is very thick and large, usually Knotted, and crook
ed. The thickness of the tree is chiefly owing to
2 gross coat of bark, which when removed, reduces
the trunk to less than half its former size. The
Howers, which are of a finered, exhale a very agree
able scent.
This wood is very heavy and dry; that of Fernam.
buc is the best. It should be chosen clean, close,
sound, and free from bark.
From the best Brazil-wood, is procured a kind of
carmine, by means of acids. A tincture is drawn
from it thus:
Infuse a quarter of a pound of Brazil-wood (which
may be bought in chips, or shavings) in about two
quarts of water; when it boils, add nearly an ounce
of rock allum powdered. Strain the liquor when
of the strength desired. This may be evaporared
to a very deep color: or, the wood once boiled,
may yield a weaker tincture. It requires no great
Skill in using.
RED INK, is made of it, by boiling a quarter of
a pound of the raspings, in vinegar, wherein it has
been infused two or three days; then, while hot,
filtering it through paper, in an earthen cullender;
then heat it again, and add half an ounce of gum
arabic, and, when that is dissolved, of allum, and
of white sugar, half an ounce each.
Acids turk a solution of Brazil-wood yellow, alka-
lies change it to purple; so that lemon juice, or spi-
rits of vinegar, render it yellow. oil of tartar, violet.
Price of the raspings about 1s. per 1b.
BRONTE


23 )
BRONTE PAINTING, is used to color plaster
figures, &cc. and is of two sorts: Fellow, which is
merely the finest copper dust applied with varnish:
and Red, which is a little red ochre well pulverised,
added to the former.. The work is dried as soon as
bronzed.
B R O W N. S.
ERowN OCHRE, is a cheap color. Vide Ocbre.
BRowN PIk. Vide Pink.
COLOGNE EARTH. Vide Cologne Earth.
SPANISH BROWN, a coarse dull color, chiefly used
by house-painters, but may be employed in some
parts of landscapes, for variety, Exc.
SPANISH LIAUORTCE, diluted with water, makes
2. brown color useful for variety among water colers,
TERRA DI SIENNA, in its native state.
TERRA DI STENNA. Burnt.
MEER, in its native state.
TMEER. Burnt.
BICKTHIORN BERRIES, furnish three Kinds of
colors. Being gathered green, dried, and steeped
in water, a yellow; when ripe, a SAP-GREEN (vide
sap-green;) when fully ripe, and ready to drop from
the branches, a purple.
BOKES FoR CoLORs, are of many various con-
trivances, according to the purposes of those who
use them.
The general principles to be regarded in construc-
ing Boxes, are, that all articles of a similar nature
should be collected nearly together; colors in oil
by themselves; colors in water by themselves, &c.
Boxes


24
Boxes complete to hold a variety of colors, vaf:
nishes, &cc. are sold frohm 2l. 2s. to 2l. 10s. each:

Portable boxes afe much cheaper; but are usually
contrived by their proprietors.
CKLCINATION, differs from mere burning; in
that the latter leaves the substance butnt; of a black.
Color; the former leaves it white. Calcination in-
creases the weight of lead, which thereby becomes
red (I. E. MINTUM) almost one-fourth.
CALAUING; is a term used where the back of any
design is rubbed over, or coated with a fine powder;
such as black lead; red chalk; &xc. and the lines of
the drawing by a point traced over them; are trans=
ferred to a paper laid beneath the back so coated.
This operation is useful where an original is to be
copied of the same size: care must be taken; that
neither the original, or the copy, be moved, from
their exact situation with respect to each other;
during the operation; lest the parts transferred
should be false.
Drawings intended to be made in fed chalk, should
be calqued by red chalk : not by black lead, as that
has a greasiness which refuses to cut chalk properly;
nor by black chalk, since the lines may then injure
the drawing by their different color from the rest
Of it.
CALAUING, is likewise used to signify the taking
an impression from a drawing in chalk, by passing
it through a rolling-press, with a sheet of wet paper
upon it. The use of this procedure is to transfer
on the wet paper the powderly particles of the chalk
used in drawing, and to fix those remaining in
Greater


25
greater security from their being rubbed, and
sneared. The tone of the drawing is rather deep-
ened than lightened by this operation; the copy on
the paper will be an exact reverse of the original.

several drawings laid on each other, may be passed
atwace; but if they are passed more than one way,
there is a hazard of their being moved and isplaced
in their passage back.
Sometimes prints are calqued by dissolving part of
their ink, by means of soap, and transferring it to 2
fresh ground; or, white paper, ec.
A drawing in water colers may be calgued by pass-
ing over the outlines with a good black-lead pencil,
them warming the plate on which the ground is
laid, so as hardly to melt the ground; and, laying
the drawing on it, pass them through a rolling-press
properly adjusted. This method succeeds very well
for landscapes. Or, if a tracing be made with red
chalk, ground with water only, the colors will,
wheh passed through a rolling-press, be transferred
to the ground on the plate.
CAMPEACHY-WOOD, is nearly related to BRa-
21L, and by no means superior for its utiliry in the
arts; but it furnishes a good purple.
CARMINE, is a bright, deep, rich, crimson color,
bordering something on purple, used constantly in
water colors, but very rarely in oil; because it
will not mix kindly in oil, as well as because of its
high price. It is a color which spends well. Car-
mine is the most valuable product of the cochineal
mestigete, it is a fecula, or sediment, of water wherein
i5 steeped cochinesl, erc. thus:
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
D
To


26
To rain water, wherein thirty-six grains of chougn
have been boiled three times, and strained, care
added five drams of cochincal, and this likewise ys
boiled three times; then add eighteen grains: of
Achiotte, or roucou (if thought proper), and the
same quantity of rock allum; this liquor is boiled
once; then filtered through a linen cloth, and suffered
to stand till it has deposited its sediment; which,
when dried, is the carmine.
The additional ingredients are perhaps better
omitted (and we believe at present generally are
omitted), since carmine is nothing more than the
coloring particles of cochincal dissolved in an alka.
line lixivium, and precipitated by allum.
Some give the following process to obtain carmine
from scarlet wool; Boil the wool in a strong ley of
pot-ashes till it has lost its color; then filter off the
ley, with which incorporate a sufficient quantity of
allum, and filter the liquor the carmine will remain
in the filter.
An inferior Kind of carmine is made of Brazil
tgood, by steeping one pound of raspings in white.
wike vinegar, during three or four days, with some
gold leaf beat fine in a mortar: boil the liquor
about half an hour, and strain it through a coarse
sieve, temper in another vessel eight ounces of
allum, which add to the crunson liquor, stir them
well together, the scum is the carmine.
An extempore carmine tincture is made by putting
thirty, or forty, grains of cochineal bruised, into a
gallipot, with as many drops of tartar ley as will
just pmoisten it, then add as much fair warer as you
desire


( 27
desire the color to be deeper or fainter: it is now
purple, but by adding a small quantity of allum
very finely pulverifed, or scraped, it will become
crimson. Strain if, and use it speedily, for it will
not Keep.
Cochineal tincture is heightened in its coler, by
spirits of urine; is turned purple by saccharum
saturm; andby quick-lime is rendered fading
though extremely beautiful.
In no commodity is a purchaser more likely to be
imposed on than in carmine; its brightness of color
and fineness as a powder; should be attended to.
Prices, 16, 20, 24,-28; to 32s. per ounce. None
good under this price, some bigber; up to two guineas
per ounce.
CHARCOAL, is an artificial coal, or fuel; being
wood half burnt, and then extinguished. It is an
excellent material to sketch with in beginning a
design, as it may be brushed out even by a feather.
The softest kind is preferred, which is that made of
the willow.
CHALKS, are very useful in the art of design,
being usually put into the hands of beginners. We
have WHITE, RED, and BLACK CHALKS.
WHITE CHALK, of the best quality, is usually
brought from Ltaly, which country does not possess
our common chalk, but a distinct species. Italian
chalk is in its texture more firm and compact, its
touch is uch smoother and neater than any other,
consequently it may be used on smaller subjects.
The same remark is just on the black chalk of
Laly.


D 2
PRENCH


35
1
FRENCH WHITE CHALK, is soft, and adapted oufr
f
for large subjects, as are all the chalks of France:
its black chalk is only fit to be used where expedi
dition admits of stumping. Considerable quantivies
of SPANISH chalk are imported; which is in
fexture between the foregoing, but not very smooth,
RED CHALK, is very much used in design. it is in
general of a kind and moderate temper, and readity
forms a grain. It is, however, very far froth cleanly
inits nature, and is apt to smear, and stain; whatever
it touches; the precautions necessary to guald
against this quality, in fact, contribure to its useful
hess, since whoever having been Habitnated to red
chalk can draw clean with it, is secure from injury
by using other materials.
Red chalk is best used simply on white paper, but
some shadow it with black chalk; or, stump in black
chalk first, into the shades, and relieve with red.
Black and wbite chalks mutually assist each other,
On a paper whose color serves for a demi-tint. The
bad is quite worthless. Chalk to be good, should
be free from grit, and not too hard. Price varies
according to quality, from 6d. per ounce to 1s. 6d.
COCHINEAL; is a drug used by the dyers in dying
red, especially crimson and scarlet; and, it is the

basis of that excellent color CARMINE.
It is brought from the West Indies; and said to
8
be produced by an insect which inhabits the leaves
of certain plants of the opuntia Kind.
17
13
ane finer sort, which is gathered frem trees plant-
87
ed and cultivated on purpose; and manazed with
great care, is called mestique; the other is named
2  
wild,


29 
wild, being found on usculrivated plants, and is

very much inferior in beauty.
Some are of opinion there is yet another sort,
which is not an insect, but the seed of a tree; of
which DxMPIER speaks in his voyages.
 Ctiptr
In the scare it is brought to us, Corbineal appears
to be small bodies of rregular figures, but usually
convex, ridged, and furrowed on one side. The
color of the best is a purplish grey powdered with a
Kind of white dust.
COLOGNE EARTHl, is of a deep brown color,. 1s
used in oil, but mere in water colors.
It is a very singular substance, reckoned by the
colormen not a little troublesome to manage. It
has been, and still is by some accounted a genuine
earth; but athers say it contains a great proportion
of regetable matter. It does not form, like other
earths, a regular; of entire, stratum where it. is
found, but is gathered in large flat separate masses,
7
from among, other strata.
It is moderately dry while in the earth, and of a
texture soft and crumbling, when dried it becomes
more compact, and united; 1t is very light, smooth,
and easily reduced to pieces, adheres firmly to the
tongue, and is very astringent, and austere, in its
Faste, resembling the taste of oak bark; from these
o 
eriterid it seeims to be the produce of wood, pernaps
ofeak, long buried in the earth.
It is principally procured frem near Cologhe, in
Germany, (whence its name) but is found near Bir-
Ct
Fry
mingham, and in Wendippe Hills; in Somerseiehiney
but not perfectly pure.
2
COPAL



30
COPAL, is a shining transparent, citron-colored sub¬
stance, in smell allied to that of frankincense, it
melts easily. It is a production of New Spain,
where it ooses from incisions made in the bark ofa
tree, much the same as wine is drawn from some
trees, or, as many kinds of trees yield their sap, in
the spring of the year, when cut.
Genuine CoPAL is very rare; but in default of
this, is brought from the West India islands, another
Kind, which is the only one to be procured from the
druggists.

From this guin, as it is called, but improperly is
9
procured a varnish; which being digested in oil, is
esteemed friendly to oil pretures, and is in request.
A proper quantity dissolved in linseed oil with
nearly heat enough to boil, or discompose, the oil,
is diluted with oil of turpentine, and forms a transpd:
rent varnish, which when slowly dried becomes very
hard; so hard indeed, that, it is said, if the picture
underneath it wants alterations, they may safely be
inserted on the varnish, instead of first clearing the
Varnish from the picture. Price of the varnish, 1s.
or upwards, for a vial of two ounces.
CRAYON, is a general name for all colored earths,
or other substances, used in drawing, or painting
dry, 1. c. without oil, or water, ecc.
CRAYON substances are erther natural, or artificial;
natural, when the material is of a proper color, and
consistence, and admits of being cutinto a convenient
Size and form; such are chalks, whose uses we have
nouced, such are black lead, charceal, Ec. but, in
general


31)
general, crayons are compositions of colored pig-
ments previously reduced to powder, and re-com-
posed into proper mixture and form.
The art of composing crayons, depends principally
on the mixture of the component colors, and on the
adaptation of the vehicle by which they are held
incorporated. This is evident, if we consider, with
respect to the brilliancy, or the truth, of the tone
of color, that it depends on the admission of more,
or less, of any certain pigment; and that all com-
pound colors, by possessing too much of any one
color which enters into their composition, may
prove, when used, unfriendly to their neighbours.
That the vehicle 1s of importance, appears from the
consideration that scarce any two earths are equally
tenacious; whence it follows, that as some naturally
of a loose texture are not without difficulty held by
strong binders, others naturally compact, would be
rendered, by such binders, almost stones; and; in-
deed, these are the prevailing faults among those
usually offered for sale.
It is perhaps proper to remark, that, although sofi
crayons are preferable generally, yet crayons may be
100 soft, even for large works; and that for smaller
works they may be never the worse if a little firmer;
yet preserving the utmost distance from bardness.
Soft crayons may, however, be used in large per-
formances; but those which are too hard to give
their colors freely, or without wetting, are to be
rejected, as totally useless.
For smaller works, CRAYON PENCILS have lately
been composed; whose utility depends, like thar of
the


 32 7

the former, on their temper; they have unquesting.
7
56
ably an advantage in neatress, and a security: from
being broken by accidents. Price about 1s. eath;
Many very different vehicles have been suggested
5
t bind the colors which form crayons: catmes
boiled thick, milk, ale-wort, gums, glues, be
V
Without entering into the merit of their varion
Pactensioks, we believe that pale ale-wort, as a ve.
hicle sufficiently strong to hold the tender pigments,
which yet may be weakened to accommodate the
firmest, has been most used. But, as this has som
Color, which is most sensible in the higher tints,
others prefer spirits of wine, which has no color n
any tint.
CRAYoNs must be made in a great variety of tints,
t0 supply readily what tone of color may be requin.
ed; this variery is obtained by mixture with each
other; hence it follows, that according to the judg.
ment of the composer, their tints will vary.
Though we do not suppose that many of ou
readers will take the trouble to make sets of crayons,
yet as it may happen that some acquaintance will
the manner of proceeding for that purpose, may be
of use occasionally, we shall offer some notices of
the mode best esteemed.
Procure a large flexible pallet Knife, a flat stone of
a proper size, and a smaller, with which to grind the
xolors: also two or three large flat pieces of chall
3

whose use is to absorb the moisture from the colow


after they are ground (or from the crayons, after
they are made): a piece of Hat glass, which cover
ing the colors, ec. will prevent them from drying
100





33
while other parts of them are under ope-
160 fast;
3
26
fation, folling into foriti, &cc. Atso proper vessels
to hold spirits, water, or other figuids; as they may
56

be wanted.

White chalk is so readily offered by nature, that
it seems perfectly adapted; without receiving any
labour, to be used as a crayon of the first order;
but, as chalk is rarely so free from grit, or small
stones; as might justify our placing any confidence
in it, to purify and improve it is the province
1

Of art.
5
Purified chalk is whiting; and as whiting is. ex-
tremely cheap, we consider this material as Miost
8
convenient for our purpose: Yetas whiting may be
Capable of still further putiry, we proceed to re-
commend the washing of it in the following mafi-

her:—Take a large vessel of warer, put the whiting
 
into it, and mix them well together; set this stand
 l 
about half a minute, then pour off the top into ane-

ther vessel, and throw the gritty sediment away; let
what is prepared rest about a minute; atid pour

it off as before, which will purify the whiting, and


ee 125

render it free from all firt and grittiness.
THeH
tofi 81:5.3
52
this is done; let the whiting settle, and pour the

F.8
3
water from Ii; after which, lay it on the chalk to

dry; and keep it for tse; either fof white crayons; of




for the purbose of preparing titts with other colors,


t p  

  t
a
for, with this, all other filits ttlay be saiery p
repared.

d  

74

If the student chooses w mane trayons of whiting




Inmediately after it is washed, it is not necessary to
12

37

1
Dik
dry it on the chalk, for it hay be mixcu jusianfly
18
.

with any other color; which will save Considerable

VOL. II. Edit. 7.
E
frouble.


34
d t
trouble... All colors of a heary, or gutty nature
35
S.
5
5

Si  
espectally biae veraner; must be purined by wash.
he Tttes
5
N 3 5

1hg atter this method.

2t
et 

25

te

We observe that if crayons are too thin, s. e. if they
have too much morsture in proportion to their quan.
Lity of color, they will dry too flat; if they are too
tBock, ne. if they have too much color in prover.
5

to to their moisture, they will occasion a waste

1.
-of color, by their adherence to the palette, knss




&c., The general rule is, when the crayon o
made, to lay it on the chalk, that its moistune
may: be absorbed to a proper deoree- that decrees


 

a
determined by the feel of the crayon in the hand,


3



3

if it. lose the greater, part of its adhesive quality, and
in n to te bots in t at d
seem of a. prover consistency, then it may be lad

3.
on the glass; which will not dry it so fast as the

3 
52
chalk would have done; but will allow time for




:rolling at into cravons, Otherwise the cravon when
t
5

  FI

-completely dry would be brittle, and full of cracks
27



32

which is. a great inconvenience to the artist p

I
  2
o0

ASigI
00 88

5

83
 We have now got a. body of white eravon which




 
willserve fo lighten all. ethers that are to be made,
D
33



2
5
10r,as We have alregay Opserved, cravons, are con
I
P
Stit
Eo.
iaod or
i
positions of different celors; now if to a portiond

IA PiRadhis 



WV8
AhIs body Dr wale we ady a Doiriesl &c. tidtng.

3os
is      
Stiall Compose a grey; if we add a deew biue, W
✓
27 3

t
-shals compose a. dent Diue; if a brown, we suad

73
Daa
 gai

Produce-a brown so much ugater, as Cofrespopn.

vor
5
 as ot it   f 
5
to the quantity of white which we have admittel

it 8
the   
    3 t t

.
varied at
into the mixture; upon this principle,
1
3

sno dd
es 

r ad
Ei2
223
to the taste, the rudgment, or the skne, I
Gordin
8
rn    did

e hnd 1th
16

L
23
  idh e


(33)
the composer, are all crayons made; and an endless
variety of shades results from their different com-

  
 
binations.
The different compositions of colors must be cut
into proper lengths, after they are prepared, in
order to be rolled into pastils for use. Each crayon
should be formed by being rolled in the left hand
with the ball of the right; and be formed firstcylin-
drical; then taper at each end. If the composition
be too dry; dip the finger in water; if too wet; the
composition must be laid on the chalk again, till
more of its morsture is absorbed. The erayons
should be rolled as quick as possible; and, when
finished, must be laid upon the chalk again; to lose
all remaining morsture. After the gradation :of
tints from one color are formed, the stone should
be well scraped; and cleansed with water, before it 1s
used for another color.
It is impossible to lay down rules for mingling
of every tint necessary in composing a set of Cray-
ons, there being many accidental compositions, en-
firely dependant on fancy and opinion. The stir-
dent should make it a rule to save the leavings; of
his colors, for of these he may form many. varioils
tints, which will occasionally be useful.
We suppose now, that we desire to make crayons
of any color: In this case, we first prepare the
simple color, grinding it with spirits of wine, till it
be perfectly smooth, fine, and even; then, taking
a proper quantity of it, we lay it on the chalk, till
somewhat advanced toward dryness; then we roll it,
and form it, and return it to the chalk to be finished
E 2
67


(36)
By drying theroughty. Of the cofor which remaing
ready ground we proceed to compose tihts of vai
ous shades, by mixture with the purified chalk,, o
whiting, already mentioned,—as thits:
Take some of the simple color, and levigate i
with spirits of wine, adding about one part of washed
whiting to three parts of color, of which, when
Properly incorporated, make two parcels. The new
gradation should be composed of two equal quant.
ties of color and whicing, of which four crayons may
be made. The third composition should have ope
fourth color, and three fourths whiting, of this mate
sir arayons, which will be a good proportion with
the rest. The last tint should be made of whiting
very faintly tinged with color, of which make abou
eight crayons, which will complest the above-mes
tioned proportion. As these compound tints are
levigated, they are to be laid immediately on the
chalk, that the morsture may be absorbed to the
groper degree for their formation into crayons. I
Its consistency be right, the composition may ther
be laid upon the glass, which will prevent it from
beceming too dry before it is convepient to form i
into crayons.
CRAYbNs when complete should be kept in a ber
by themselves, each sufte of colors distind,
t0 prevent injury from its neighbours; in the order
from lightest to darkest; and, if numerous
the lighter ones separate from the darker of the
same color.
CRAYONs should be pointed, if requisite, by draw.
ing the Knife from the point of the creyon upreards.
WWHIITE


(37)
.
WHITE CRAYONNS
Are made of the best tempered CHALK, sawed int:
convenient lengths.
TELLO CRATONS
Should be divided into several degrees of coler.
I. Mix flowers of SUL.PHUR, an due proportion to
produce the color desired.
II. Kinc's VELLow makes a fine bright eolor-—
but, remember it is of a porsonous quality.
III. NAPLES TELLOw, in various fints.
IV: Reduce TELLOW OCHRE to powder by very
fine grinding; mix with it, purified wHITE CNALk
to your mind.
V. TELLOw OCHRE Sunply, ground very fine.

VI. ENGLISH PINK, mixed with chalk, to form
a proper gradation to the preceding color.
VII. ENCLISH PInk, simply.
VIII. DUrcH Pink.
It is easy to perceive from the foregoing specimes,
that the principles on which crayons are composed,
are, the heightening a certain color; by means of
one somewhat lighter, and decpening the same
color, by one somewhar darker; by gradating the
colors according to their natural tones on a general
scale; and by composing the requisite variety of
tints, by reciprocal mixtures of the original pis
D0o
Mments.
As the variations from any fixed scale of colors
are infinite, and only to be regulated by the fancy
or inclination of the composer; we shall content
ourselves


38)
ourselves with hiating at their general mixtures, an.
7 787 
 

shall leave their gradations ad nortrim.
 
65  7
3 ad said in is ci 1
iita aad  it ya w he bd  h  a
0
RANGE CRAL.O.WS.
I. YELLCW ORPIMENT, mixed with, VERMILIOy
133

II. ORPIMENT AndRED LEAD.
III. ENGLISH PINK; mixed with VERMILION
IV. ExCLISH: PINK; with RED LEAD, fine
ax fcjs

ground.
1
osas

V: DUrCEPINK,mixed WithRED LEAD.
A28 

1



RgE D S.




I. RED LEAD, finely oround; also varied by chall

.D
II. RED OCHRE; used as chalk: also varred.


III. VERMILLION, ground fine; also varied wih
chalk. The best vermition is inclined to the car
mine tint; nothing is required to prepare this color
nore than to mix it on the stone with soft wate
or spirits, after which it may be rolled into crayons
The different tints are produced by a mixture of the
simple color with whiting, according to the pro
Portions already given.
27
IV. LAKE, finely oround; also varied with chalk

LAKE Is a color very apt to be hard; to preven
which, observe the following particulars:
Take about half the quantity of Lake intended for
the crayons, and grind it very fine with spirits of
wine; let it dry—then pulverize it, which is easily
done if the lake be good then take the other hall
and grind it with spirits, after which mix it with the
pulverized lake, and lay it out directly in crajons
on the chalk. This cofor will not bear rolling
The


6 39. )
The:simple: color being thus; prepared; proceed
with compound crayons, as directed before, and in
the same degree of gradation as thecarmine tints.
VINDIAN RED; finely ground; also varied with

e  i 
chalk.
VI. CARMINE, is so very dear that a small crayors
of it costs five shillings. Carmine crayons are thus
prepared: As their texture is inclinable, to hardness,
instead of grinding and folling them, take a sufficis
ent quantity of carmine, lay it upon the grinding-
to with spirits of
stone, mix it with a levigating knire.
wine, till it becomes smooth and even. The chalk-
stone being ready, lay the color upon it to absorb
the spirit, but be careful that it is laid on. in a pro-
per shape for painting. It has its advantages; but
for ordinary works, instead of it, may be used; 
VII. ROSE PINE,  sumply

which indeed 1s. iot
1

-durable: but it is much cheaper for ordinary uses.
&
Sf 3t
 2x 1 " " 23
and i
P V. R P L. E S.
J. ROSE PINk; finely ground; mixed with cenares
Heit; for ordinary use only, as it fades.
II. LAKE, with blue ErcE; simply; and heighten-

ed by white; in several proportions.
.TII. LAKE, with PRUSSTAN BLUE, sunply, and in
several proportions.
2
Now, as all purple colors are mixtmes of red and

5
plie, it is evident; that, by inserting a greater pro-
portion of one than of the other, a variety is obtain.

ed, which inclines toward that color of which there is
o
7

the greatest quantity; ared purple, or a blae pi-ple,

n 
C
2


os aeid yI wis disas low mes
n he to  t
453





4

or
28
s therefofe rasly produced, by admitting inord of
the color desired.
1
The same remalk applies to greens, which being

xetipesed of yellow and blue, may incline mere; of
less; to either of those primitive colors.


p
B L. V.E.
5



T. Bres is the lightest blue used, finely ground
simply; also heightened by white, in several pro

Bortioris.
H: VERDTTER, simply; and heightened in vail
ous proportions. It is a color naturally gritty, and
thefefore it is necessary to wash it well. Iis part.
cles are so coarse as to require some binding mattef
to nite them, otherwise the crayons will neres
adhere together. To accomplish this, take a quas.
fity sufficient to form two or three crayons, to which
add a piece of slack Plaster of Paris about the sile
of a pea; mix these well together, and form the
Crayons upon the chalk. This blue is extremelf
Brilliant, and of great use in heightening dra
Beries, &c:. The tints must be formed with whit
ing as directed in the former instances, and at
highly serviceable for painting flesh, to produce
Those pearly tints so beautiful in crayon pretures.
It is not necessary to mix the compounds with
Spirits, as clear water will be sufficient.
HII. PRUSSLAN BLUE, simply; and heightened in
several proportions. This color is very apt to bind,
and is rendered soft with more difficulty fhan cat
thine and lake. The same method of preparstiel
Fiast be followed with this as is directed with respect
6


42)
46 lake, only it is ecessary te grind a larger giuggi-
tity of the pure color, as it is chiefly used for
painting tlraperiss. The different tints may, be made
according to necessity, or to the fancy of the painter.
IV. Iwnice, heightened in several proportions,
and simply; mixed as Prussian Blue.

3

B L A C E S.
I. CHARCOAL; the soffest is the best.
II. LVoRY ELACK, ground very fine.
III. LAMP BLACK. It is the only black that cat
be used with safety; as all others are subject to mils
the process
dew. Good lamp-black is scarce; for
55
of making it, see BLACkS, LAMiF BLACK.
It is obvious that black heightened in several pro-
poitions with white, will make a GkEx: and this
2
D
grey may be varied at pleasure, by admitting a little
blue, brown, ec.


B.R. 0 W N S.
I. FULLER S EARTH, ground finely: in Several pre=



Portions.
II. FULLER S EARTH, inixed with ry
Dafish brown,
heightened.
III. SPANISH EROWN, simply.
IV. SPANTSH BROWN; mixed with INpLSN KED,
heightened variousty.
V. COLOGNE EARTH, is a fint dark brown. After
six of eight of the supple crapons are prepared,

several rich compound fints may be produced from

in
5
it, by a mixture of carmine, in various degrees


23
ad
 2i


5
VOL TI. Esit.. 7.
F
SaCk.
Bildis 15
8




42

1
Black; &carmine; and this color, mixed together
tndke useftil tints for painting hair; several grads
tions may be produced from each of these py
heightening, &c.
 

Va: ROMAN, OFEROWN OCHRE is an excellent co.
lor, either simple, or compounded with carmine
Whiting tinged, in several degrees, with either of
these, will prove very serviceable.

TII. UMEER, may be treated in just the same man.
her, only it is necessary to levigate it with spirits of
Wille
 
G RE E N S.
I. VERDIGRIs, boiled in sharp vinegar, add tot
while boiling, a little powdered tartar; evaporall
the moisture, the color will then become solid;
this dissolved, mix with white chalk, as required.
II. VERDIGRIs, ground with vinegar and repeat
edly washed.
III. VERDIGRIS, prepared as above, mixed with
PRUSSTAN BLUE in several proportions. These min
tures may be heightened as usual.
IV. INDiCO, mixed with ENCLISH PINK.
V. Bick, mixed with DUrcH PINk, in Severd
Proportions.
VI. Rock INDiCO, mixed with flowers of Svi
PHUR, in several proportions.
V
II. INDiCo, mixed with DUTCH PINK, in seve.
ral proportions.
OTHER COMPOUND COLORS
VERMILION mixed with carmine.—This is a com
position of great use; and tints made from this witl

Whiting will be found very serviceable:
CARMINP


(: 432)
CARMINE and black is another good compound;
of which five or six gradations should be made,
some partaking more of the black, and others hav.
ing the carmine most predominant, beside several

tants with a mixture of whiting.
VERMILION and black is also a very useful com-
pound, from which several different tints should be
182

nade.
PRUSSIAN BLUE and black is another good cam-
pound, and will be found of singular service in
 f
Painting draperies.
By the combinations to be gathered from these
hints, may be composed an nexhaustible variety of
tints. It is seldom that an: artist procures a com-
plete set of crayons (price not less than three guineas)
but selects what he chooses from among others, to
form his collection, which is more or less numerous
at pleasure.
When the set of crayons is completed according

to the rules prescribed, they should be arranged in
classes for the convenience of painting with them.
Some thin drawers, divided into a number of par-
titions, is the most convenient method of disposing
them properly.— The crayons should be deposited
" 
according to their several gradations of lightness.
The bottom of the partitions must be covered with
bran, as a bed for the colors, because it not only pre-
serves them clean, but prevents their breaking.
The box made use of, when the student paints,
should be about a foot square, with nine partitions.
In the upper corner, on the left hand, (supposing
the box in the lap) let him place the black and grey
25
F 2
Crayons,


4
Crayonsy those being the most seldom used s: in the
setend partition; the bhies; in the third; the greens
and browns; in the fifst partition on the left ham
of the second row, the Farmines, lakes, wermiliong,
and all deep reds; the yellews and prange in the
middle; and the pearl tints next; as these last gie
of a very delicate ndtilre, they must be kept very
clean, that the gradations of color may be disting
guished. In the lowest row, let the first partition
contain a piece of fine linen rag to wipe the crayong
with while they are using; the second, all the purs
take, and vermition tintsy and the other partiids
may containn those tints, which, from their compley
nature; cannot be classed with any of the former.

PORTECRAYON, is a convement ifstrulient for
using thalks; &c. II is made of brass, sreel, of
Silver
:price; in brass, 6d.; in sizel; from 1s. 6d.
   
  
upwards.
7
DISTEMPEH, is a mode of painting, wherein the
vchicle used to compound and fit the colors for ap.
plication; is size, white of eggs, of some simily
gluten.
The best method of compounding colors in diss
temper, is, to mix the size in water, id a proper

strength, then to grind the colors in part of it, put
ing each color separately in a proper pot, &cc. Add

a sufficient quantity of size to gllow for the dimipnu.

tion of its strength by a subsequent addiion of waym
Water, as wanted, either to grind the color, of in

the working of it. The pots should be securely tied
with bladders,


(1 45.
It is evident that distemper paintings will not abide
the injuries of the weather; their utility is confined
to internal decoration, and to spacious areas, where
the eye may be deceived by the perspective; with
out coming sufficiently near to serutinize the hand-

 e

ling, &c.5 
The seefies at the theatres are painted in distemper.
n


3
To make Size for painting Scenes; and otber Candle-

3
light pieces
Steep a quarter of a pound of the cuttings of white
glove-leather in water for some time; then take
them out, and boil them in three quarts of water till
it is wasted to a pint, and strain it through a cloth
into an earthen pan.. When the size is cold,, if it:
feels firm under your hand, it is sufficiently strong
Lou may prepare any golors with this size while it
1s warm, and it will take off the glare which would
appear upon them by candle-light, if mixed with

gum-Water.
DRIERS, are used to those colors which when along

are long in drying; Those chiefly used, are drying
oil, (vide oil) and ofl, or spirits of turpentine; the
latter from its clearness, is less likely to injure the
lighter colors.
DIITCHPINK, is the coloring parucles of the Ayig-
non-berry, procured by reducing the berry to pow=
der, and boiling it till the color is extracted.
Price 1d. per ounce, bladders 3d. each.
EGGSHELL WHIITE, is used in water rolors,
ith success,
er
14


3





(46.)
It is prepared by washing the shell very carefully
and peeling off the thin film on the inside; the
grinding the shell to an impalpable pewder wih
sum-water, or about a twentieth part of white suggs
candy. Some order it to be washed before the
gum is added, by rectified spirit of wine.
This is said to be of great service as a white, and
with the oyster-shell powders, will contribute to the
security of colors with which they are incorporated
ENGLISH PINK, is of the same nature as Dutch
pink, beingobtained from the same substance.

ENGRAVING, is an art of which we shall trear by
itself; also of
ETCHING; and of

ENCAUSTIC PAINTING, by means of wax.
FLAKE WIITTE, is lead corroded by the vinous
acrd. The purest and best is brought from Ltaly.
It is very useful in oil, and varnish painting;
because those vehicles prevent the access of the ar
so as to act upon the lead; for, it is to be observed,
that however prepared, lead constantly retains a
lisposition to recover its natural color, Hence,
in water colors, the air to which it is liable, injures
it, as also does every ferruginous mixture. Water,
impregnated with iron, will in time turn the white,
with which it is used, into a dirty black: and will
even hurt the lighter colors, into mixtures of which
the white has been admitted.
To prevent this in part, some use distilled water;
others, content themselves with grinding the white
lead first in vinegar, till it becomes thoroughty
2
blacks


47
black; then washing it with water, till it returns to
whiteness: and this they think will maintain its

Color.
It. is a commodity very liable to be adulterated:
What a person grinds himself, from the lumps in
which it is brought over, he may best depend ofn.

Price 2d. per ounce, in bladders 6d. each.
FRUIT.—As many of the colors used in the arts are
extracted from vegetables, it should seem by parity
of reason that many might be procured from FRvIT-
but all :endeavours to this purpose have hitherto
failed; for however bright the colors thus extracted
may seem, they quickly fade. It is true, the juises
of currants, mulberries, elder-berries, morello, and
black cherries, may be dried, and if worked up
again, they give nearly their first color, but it
cannot be depended on, especially if exposed in the
i
open 2ir.
3
It might, nevertheless, be worth while to examine
the juices of fruits natives of warmer climates, which
require and receive most solar heat to bring them to
perfection: since those juices which are naturally
most exalted, are usually most durable, and best
admit of extracting in tincture. The bright red
fruit of the opuntia, or prickly pear, is said to fur-
nish a durable red.
GALL STONES, are concretions of earthy matter,

found in the gall-bladders or bile ducts, of begsis,
especially of oxen.
When moistened with water, and treated as gam-
Doge, GALL STONES yreld 2 deep, and very wattin

Fellow.






6


48
yellow, verging toward orange; which is servicesfl
On account of its brightness, and durability,; and
especially, because it is a very applicable shade o
other colors. It is of different degrees of goodness,
2

Price 15.0d. per dram.
33
is the quantity of this substance is but small, pot
being generally found in the hodies of beasts, a sib.
stitute, more readily procured; and much cheapes
is thus obtained:

Borl a quart of the fresh bile of oxen, with a quas.
zer of an ounce of gum-arabic, in a peiwter vesse)
Isuspended in water; evaporate the mixture to abou
an eighth, which remove into a cup, or hason, and
let it becoms dry, collecting it into a mass as it
hardens. Thrs, if not equal to the natural concis.
tion; is yet very useful where that cannot be had
Or; the tincture from the Rurgnon-berry, may be
drawn so deep as to serve for an occasional suby
Stttite.
5
YAWNIBGGE is a very useful color; ats appearante
7n a lump, is of a fine orange color (the decper the
better) but when softened in water, and used, its
of a bright yellow. It requires no preparation, but
may be bought at the chemists, being sometimes
rsed ii medicihe.
Price 6d. or 8d. per ounce.
GLTR, or WHITE OF EcGs, is sometimes usell ass
varnish for pictures. It is beat with a spoon to an
unctuous consistence, till it rises in froth; then by.
standing all night, it becomes clarrfied into a good
GLATR, and to make it work freely, is mixed witha
fittle brandy, and with a lump of sugar, to prevent
113


49)
cracking; which, however, it very imperfectly per-
forms, so that it is apt to crack the colors of the
picture it covers, and therefore should not be used
to pictures of value.
GOLD SHELL, is used to write gold letters in
mottos, &c. It is made by grinding very finely
gold leaves, or gold-beater's fragments, with a little
honey, and afterwards washing the honey from the
gold by water. The gold thus procured, may be
transferred by a little gum-water to the shells for use.
Another process is thus given :—Grind the finest
leaf-gold with strong gum-water very fine, adding,
as you grind it, more guim-water as you see heces-
sary. When you have ground it as fine as you
can, wash it in a large shell; then temper it with a
little mercury-sublimate, bind it in the shell with a
little dissolved gum, shake and spread it equally all
over the shell, and use it with fair water only.
Price 6d. per shell.
GOLD-LEAr, is used by washing the part on which
it is to be retained, exactly with gum-water, on
which, while drying, must be laid the leaf of gold
as evenly as possible, pressing it down close with
cotton. To make the gold leaf take the colors
wherewith it is to be shadowed, stroke it over with
a weak liquor of ox-gall.
The proper shadows to the gold itself are gall-
stone; of, a deep tincture from the Avignon berry.
In some manuscripts may be seen golden letters
which rise above the surface of the vellum: To
imitate them : beat up vermition very strongly with
the white of an egg, into a kind of paste; this paste
VO4. II. Edit. 7.
5
13


(50
is fixed in its proper form on the vellum by sun
arabic, and secured by a strong pressure; on ths
figure wash some strong gum-water with a percl
then lay on the gold leaf as before. When digy
will bear polishing, which is always performed
with a dog's tooth. This manner of gilding hes,
good effect in coats of arms, &c.
It should be observed, that base gold, or gdd
feat, will not answer when used in water, but wil
change color quickly. In varnish, it is said, p
stand well enough,
Price of gold leaf about 1s. 8d. per book.
CTUMS are very useful materials in the arts, whetfa
we consider them, as in water colors, the vehiclef
the application of colors; of as varnishes to secup
oil pictures.
Those used in the arts, are in their pature greeff
27
similar; and chiefly vary as they are more of is
compact in texture.
GUM-ALABIC, is of a moderate and friendly te
per, to bind and apply water-colors, Price 2d. p
OnCe.
GUM-SANDARAC, price 2d. per ounce, and Gvy.
MASTiC, are yet stronger; the latter is used chieff
in making varnish for oil pictures. Price 6d. p4
gunce.
There are other gums occasionally used by capricl
the soffest of all is GUM-TRAGAGANTH.
TRAVER, is a steel instrument, useful to engratl
on metals. It consists of four sides, the two which
form the belly are polished very smooth; their dt
clingen is more, of less, angular; the painth

forpiel


C51 )
formed by the two inferior sides. When ground,
the breadth of the end of the tool is termed its face.
Gravers should be made of the best steel; they are
nsually too hard as sold in the shops; the best way
of tempering them, is, by infusing into them gra-
dually a quantity of heat (which is readily done, by
holding them on a red hot poker, or other heared
Body, Erc.) till they change to a light straw color,
or deeper, according to their previous hardness,
then, dipping them in oil. The graver which yields
tod file, is too soft, and worthless. If the point
breaks often, it is too hard. Gravers are made of
various forms, and more of less lozenge in shape,
for various services.
Formore of their management vide ENGRAVINC.
2 
GRELN:is very rarely a simple colot; but is
a
compounded of blue and yellow.
A mineral GREEN is said to be brought from
Hungary.
VERDIGRIS, and SAP GREEN, are the greehs most
used in water colors.
GROUND for Etching. The importance of this
article to engravers is very considerable. There
are several compositions which have been employed
a5 grounds; (called varnish by some) as for instance:
REMERANDTS GROUND. Take half an ounce of
asphaltum burnt, and gum-mastic the same quan-
tity, one ounce of virgin wax; beat, or grind, the
mastic and asphaltum very fine; melt the virgin
wax, in a new earthen pot, over a gentle heat, add
to it, when melted, the mastic and asphaltutn, by
degrees, strring the mixture till they are thorough-
2
1


52
ly incorporated; when intimately compounded
pour the whole into clear water, and make it into
a ball. In using this ground the plate must not be
to0 hot, and the thinner it is laid the better.
CALLOTS GROUND. Take a quarter of a pound
of virgin wax, and half a quarter of a pound of
asphaltum, the same quantity of mastic, one ounce
of rosin, one ounce of shoe-maker's pitch, half an
ounce of common pitch, half an ounce of varnish;
melt the wax, and add the other ingredients gra.
dually, as before, and, when incorporated, pour it
Into Water.
If the quantity of mastic be greater, it renders the
ground softer; which, if the quantity of mastic be
less, will be proportionably harder.
Another ground is made thus; To a quarter of a
pound of virgin wax, add, half a quarter of a pound
of asphaltum, one ounce of amber, one ounce of
mastic, grind the asphaltum and mastic very fine,
melt, &c. as above.
Grounds have been composed, among other in-
gredients using nut-oil, ecc. but these are obsolete.
Some proportion the ingredients thus; virgin was
Six ounces; mastic four ounces; asphaltum two
ounces.
Ground is sold in balls, price 1s. or 2s. each. The
French make very good ground.
HORTUS SICCUS is a name given to a collection
of dried plants. As the manner of preserving spe-
cimens of this Kind may occasionally prove very
serviceable to artists; we shall transcribe the pro-

Cess from Dr. HILL:
Take


53
Take a plant in flower, with one of its bottons
leaves on it, if it have any; bruise the stalk, if too
rigid, or slit it if too thick; spread the leaves and
flowers on paper, as nearly in their natural order as
may be, cover them with more paper, on which.
place a sufficient weight. In a day, or two, or
whenever perfectly flat, lay the plants on a bed of
dry common sand; sift over them more dry sand,
and let them lay three weeks, or a month. After
they are perfectly dry, and hardened, they are
placed in books by the following cement: Infuse
for a considerable time before it is wanted, two
ounces of camphor in three quarts of water, shake
it from time to time. add, when the plants are
ready, two ounces of carpenter's glue, and two
ounces of isinglass, to a pint of water; let them
stand a day or two, then boil the liquor, and strain
it through a coarse cloth. Smear the backs of the
plants with this cement when warmed; lay them on
paper, and gently press them; then expose them to
the air a few minures, and finally lay them to dry.
under a small weight.
To preserve flowers perfectly; we are told, to
gather them when not yet thoroughly open, in the
middle of a dry day.; put them into a good earthen
vessel glazed within; fill the vessel up to the top
with them; and when full, sprinkle them over with
some good French wine, with a little sait in it;
then set them by in a cellar, tying the mouth of
the pot carefully down. After this, they may be
taken out at pleasure, and on setting- them in the
sun, or within reach of the fire, they will open, and
retain not only their color, but their smell.
Sit


54
SIF ROEERT SOUTHWELL has commanicareds
method of drying plants, by which most of them
preserve their proper colors. Two plates of iron
of & proper size, must be made so thick as to pre.
vent bending, and must have a hole near each comes
for the reception of a screw.
3
These prepared, lay in readiness several sheets of
Paper, gather the plants with their flowers; wher
quite perfeet, in the middle of a dry day; laythemor
one of the sheets of paper doubled in half, spreading
out the leaves and petals nicely. If the stalk bo
thick, it must be pared or cut; lay several shees
of paper over and under the plant, then put the
whole between the iron plates, screw them close,
and put them into an oven after the bread is drawn,
to two hours. After this, mix equal parts of
Chirine
aqua-fortis and brandy, and rub the ffowers lighty
over with this liquor; then lay them on freek browt

8
paper, and press them gently till the wet of thess
2
Equers is dried away. The plant thus prepared;
put the quantity of a nutmeg of guin dragon, intog
pint of fair water cold, and let it stand till dissolved
ttren with this liquor daub over the backsides of
The leaves, lay them carefully down on white papet
sid press them lightly. Care must be taken, that
the Heat of the oven be not too great.
Arrother way of keeping both flowers and frun the
whole year, by the same author. Take sait-perr
ane pound; Bole-armoniac, two pounds; clean com
Mtork sand three pounds mix all well together; then
father frurt of any Kind, that is not full ripe, with
2
the stalk to eacls put these one by one into a widl
mouthed


(58.)
mouthed glass, laying them in good order; tie an
oil-cloth over the top, carry the glass intoa dry cel
lar, and set the whole upon a bed of this prepared
matter four inches thick, in a box; fill up the
remainder of the box with the same preparation, and
let it be four inches thick over the top of the
glass and round all its sides. Flowers, thus pre-
8
served, may be taken up after a whole year, as
plump and fair as when buried.
INDIAN RED, is an earth of the ochre Kind, of a
fine compact texture, very heavy, and of a purplish
deep red. It is said to be, while in the earth, of a
deep blood color, and so hard as to resist a spade.
It is of a rough dusky surface, and abounds in glit-
tering particles, it adheres firmly to the tongue, is
harsh to the touch, and stains the hands deeply.
It is so strong a color in oil, that it overpowers
those with which it is mixed, unless cantiously used.
Price 1s. per ounce, bladders 3d. each.
INDIGO, is the product of a plant cultivated in
the hot countries of America, the West Indies, &c.
It is procured by rotting the plants in water, by a
subsequent fermentation, &cc.; the very best is said
to be brought by the Portuguese from Brazil.
It is the deepest of blues, and is a soft pleasant
color, after it has been finely ground. In using
indigo, try its tone first, lest it should prove
stronger than is supposed. Price 8d. to 1s. 6d.
per ounce.
INK, INDIAN, the best is brought from China, but
the makers are such cheats, that it is not to be
Known whether good of had, but by breaking.
3
I8


(56)
It is sold in little square cakes, price from 6d. j.
wards to 55.
7
ISINGLASS, is one of the purest anmal ghes
being the product of certain Kinds of fish.
It is used in the arts much on the same principh
25 gums are used, 1. s. as a proper vehicle, when
with occasionally to apply water colors; and being
of great strength, it is of much service. It dissolre
in brandy, or in spirits of wine, better than in bot
ing water.
IINGLASS SI2E.—To half an ounce of beates
Isinglass add a pint and half of water, to be boild
until the ssinglass is dissolved, and strained through
& piece of fine linen while warm; Ler it be divided
 Into two equal parts; to one of them add an equl
quantity of warm water, this keep in a vial for use
the other keep undiluted; that you may be furnish
ed with a strong, as well as a weak, size.
7
WORY furnishes the tablets used in miniature.
Painting.
To prepare them for receiving the colors, i. e. t
take off the greasiness which injures their supeit
cres, some only rub them with a fine piece of pr
snice stone, or scrape them with a fine-edged knife;
others wash them over with ox gall; and others,
prefer as the best method, the rubbing them ore
3
with the juice (or a clove) of garlic. This lat
article has been kept as a secret.
VORY BLACK. Vide BLACKS.
RINGS VELLOW, is a very bright yellow, used
sometimes in oil; it is a preparation of arsenil
Prise 1s. ta 2s. per ounce.
LACCA


(57
LACC, STICK-LAC, improperly called CUnr LAc,
15 a red, brittle, transparent substance, brought
from Malabar, Bengal, and Pegu, used in painting
13
making varnishes, ec.
It is a Kind of comb, such as bees, and other
insects, make. On being broke, it appears divided
into many little cells, of a uniform figure, contain-
ing little bodies, or other parts, of the insects that
produced the lacca. These little bodies are of a
beautifulred; and, when broken, make a powder
as fine as cochineal. It is most probable they are
the embryos of insects, or, perhaps, their skins.
To obtain the fine red lac used by painters, boil
the stick-lac in water, filtre the decoction, and
evaporate the liquor to dryness over a gentle fire.
This being the first bright color obtained by this
process from similar materials, has given the name
of LACAUES, Of LAKEs, to several pigments not
otherwise related to it.
LAKE, is drawn from several flowers; a yellow
lake from flowers of juniper, a red lake from the
Doppy, a blue lake from the iris, or violet, esc.
The tinctures of these flowers are extracted by
digesting them several times in aqua vitz, or by
boiling them over a stove fire in a lixivium of pot
ashes and allum.
An ARTIFICIAL LAKE, is made of Brazil-wood,
boiled in a lixivium of the branches of the vine,
adding a little cochineal, turmeric, calcined allum,
and arsenic; it is incorporated with the bones of
the cuttle-fish, pulverized, and made up into little
fakes, and dried.
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
H
To


58
To render it very red, add the juice of lemon; p
make it brown, add oil of tartar.
DOVE-COLORED, Of COLUMEINE LAKE, is made
with Brazil of Fernambuc, steeped in distilled vine
gar for the space of a month, and mixed wif
allum incorporated in cuttle-fish bone.
TELLOW LAEE, is made by the following po
cess: Take a pound of turmeric-root in fire
powder, three pints of water, and an ounce of si
of tartar; put them into a glazed earthen vessd
and boil them over a clear gentle fire, till ite
water appears highly impregnated. Filtre the
liquor, and, gradually, add a strong solution of
roch allum in water, till the yellow matter is pre
cipitated; this, filtered again, will leave the yellon
matter behind. It is washed repeatedly with frest
water, till pure. In this manner may lake bo
procured from any of the tinging substances that
are of a strong texture, as madder, log-wood, &c
but it fails in the more tender species as the
flowers of roses, violets, &cc.
A VELLOW LAKE Is also made from broom
flowers, thus; make a ley of pot-ashes and lime; in.
this, boil over a gentle fire, fresh broom-flowes
till the ley has extracted all their color: then bol
the ley in earthen vessels, adding as much allum s
the liquor will dissolve; empty this liquor intor
vessel of clean water, and the yellow color wil
fall to the bottom. Let all settle, and decant it;
wash the powder till the salts of the ley are washed
off; then separate the yellow matter, and dry it i
the shade.
REd





59
RED LAkE is at present seldom prepared from
any other substance that scarlet rags, cochineal,
or Brazil-wood. The best of what is commonly
sold; is made of the color extracted from scarlet
rags, and deposited oh the cuttle-fish bone; it is
prepared thus:
Dissolve a pound of the best pearl-ashes in two
quarts of water, and filire the liquor; add to this
solution two more quarts of water and a pound of
clean scarlet shreds; boil them in a pewter boiler,
till the shreds have lost their color: take out the
shreds, press them, and put the colored water
yielded by them to the other : in the same solution
boil another pound of shreds; and likewise a third,
and fourth pound. While this is doing; dissolve a
pound and a half of cuttle-fish bone in a pound of
strong aqua-fortis, in a glass receiver; adding
more bone; if it produces any ebullition in the
aqua-fortis. Pour this strained solution gradually
into the other. The crunson sediment deposited
by the liquor is the LAkE: pour off the water, and
stir the lake in two gallons of hard spring water,
and mix the sediment in two gallons of fresh water;
repeated four or five times. If no hard water can
be procured, or the lake appears too purple, half an
ounce of allum should be added to each quantity of
water, before it is used. Having freed the lake
from the saits, drain off the water through a filter,
covered with a worn linen cloth. When it has
been drained to a proper dryness, let it drop
through a convenient funnel on clean boards, and
H2
the


60
the drops will become small cones or pyramids, n
which form the lake must be suffered to dry.
RED LAKE may be prepared from cochineal, by
gently boiling two ounces of cochineal in a quart of
water; filtre the solution, add two ounces of peal
ashes dissolved in half a pint of warm watet, and
siltered. Dissolve cuttle-fish bone as in the forme
process and, to a pint of it add two ounces of
allum dissolved in half a pint of water. Putths
mixture gradually to that of the cochincal ad
pearl-ashes, as long as any ebullition appears po
arise; and afterwards proceed as above.
A beautiful RED LAkE may be prepared fron
Brazil-wood; by boiling three pounds of it, duiing
an hour, in a solution of three pounds of common
salt in three gallons of water; and filtering the hot
faid through paper: add to this a solution of fie
pounds of allum in three gallons of water. Dissoly
three pounds of the best pearl-ashes in a gallon and
a half of water, and purify it by filtering; put this
gradually, to the other, till the whole of the cold
appears to be precipitated, and the flaid be left co
lorless. But if any appearance of purple be seeh
add a fresh quantity of the solution of allum, by
degrees, till it becomes scarlet. treat the sediment
as before. If half a pound of seed-lac be added to
the solution of pearl-ashes, and dissolved in i
before its purification by the filtre; and two pount
of the wood, and a proportionate quantity of com
inen salt and water, be used in the colored solutiof
a lake will be produced that will stand well in of
or water, but it is nnot so transparent, in oil, a
without the seed-lac.
The


61
The lake from Brazil-wood may also be made by
adding half an ounce of anotto to each pound of the
wood. The annotto must be dissolved in the solu-
tion of pearl-ashes.
LEAD, BLACK, is used to make pencils; not being
fusible, it is cut into form. It is a mineral sin
Teneris.
Price in powder 1d. per ounce. Pencils 6d. each.
RED LEAD, or MINIUM, is a cals of lead, of a
vivid orange colour, or yellowish-red; which colour
it acquires by the very slow calcination to which it
1s exposed. It is chiefly brought from Holland.
This colour would be very valuable, if it was dur-
able; but, like every preparation of lead, it 1s
liable to become black. It is used in water colors,
and requires a moderate proportion of guin-Water,
and to be frequently stirred up while using, as its
weight inclines it to settle.
Price 6d. per ounce.
WHITE LEAD is kept in the colour-shops under
the name of Nottingham, and is used in oil for
COarser purposes.
Price in bladders 3d. each.
LITMUS, is a blue pigment, procured from archil,
by adding to the archil (previously bruised by
grinding), quick-lime, and spirits of urine; the
mixture being evaporated becomes at length of a
due consistence. It is chieffy brought from Hol-
land. This colour is liable to change towards crim-
Son, by the least approach of acids.
Litmus may be thus prepared for use: boil an
ounce in a pint of small-beer wort till it acquires a
proper colour; then pour off the liquor, and let it
Cool;


62
cool: by degrees it will become solid. This may
afterwards be liquified by water, for use.
LOGWOOD furnishes an excellent purple undure
to obtain which some proceed thus:
Boil together Brazil-wood and logwood, till the
Lquor is of a due colour. More logwood makes y
more purple; more Brazil-wood inclines it to red
Or thus.—
Boil two cances of logwood in three pints of water,
It is how brown, but by the addition of roch allum
one ounce, it becomes purple.
MASTICOT is lead gently calcined till it becomes
more, or less, yellow.
METAL, DUrch, is used where genuine gold would
be too expensive. It is kept in leaves, in books.
Shells 1d. each.
MILINUM, famous for being the only white of the
ancient artists, is a fine white marley earth of a com
pact texture, and remarkably light. It is found
chieffy in the East, or the Levant.
Since white lead is so very deceitful, especially in
water-colours, might not this, or an earth of the
same species, well supply its place!
OCHIRES are an extensive genus of earths. The
most common are, yellow and red: but there are
likewise blue, brown, and green, ochres: and of
these several distinctions. Dr. HIrLL describes of
red, eleven sorts; of yellow, the same number; of
blue and green, one each, and of black two.
There are several Kinds dug up in England, and it
i5 probable, more might be found on examination.
They are cheap colours; from one penny to two
pence per ounce, and are divided in the color
2
shops


(63
shops into yellow, brown, red, roman, stone, bright,
Exc. Their hues are varied by burning.
OlLS are very principal objects of a painter's care,
being so intimately mixed with the colors; on
which they have unquestionably much influence.
OIL, LISEED, is used to colours of deep shades,
but injures the lighter : it is sometimes rectified by
exposing it in a bladder to the sun, &cc. which ren-
ders it more transparent. Some painters reject it
totally, notwithstanding such rectification, which
they regard as of little use.
Price 6d. per pint.
OIL, NUr, is very much in use; it is not so sub-
ject to change as linseed oil 1s.
Price 2s. per pint.
OrL, Porpy, is by some preferred above all, as
being very clear and transparent.
Price As. per pint.
DRYINC OTL, is linseed oil boiled with sugar of
lead, litharge, or red lead, exc.
As these substances are by no means of any benefit
to the oil, we advise a very cautious use of drying
oil. In general, it is used to pictures painted in
haste, or in damp weather, &cc. (which we have re-
marked to be deficient in durability.
Price from 7d. to 2s. per pint. Small bottles of oil
may be had at 3d. or 4d. each.
The following has been recommended as a useful
recipe to make a strong and colorless drying oil:
Take of popp
y, nut, or linseed oil, one quart, put
it in a deep glass bottle; put to it one pound of the
best litharge in the gross; shake these well toge-
ther two or three times a day for a week, then let it
Setile


64)
settle clear; and pour it off for use, taking care thee
none of the tallow-like grease thrown down by the
litharge comes off with it, it will be found a good
strong dryingoil, with very little afteration in the
color; the longer it is on the litharge the stronge,
It will be. The oil designed for grinding up the
white, &ec. must have only half the quantity of ii
tharge, and be only half the time upon it, wih
the same shaking, exc.
N. B. The litharge will do several times, aftr
draining the grease from it.
ORPIMENT, is a color, whose properties, as ne
have before observed, require great care in the
using of it: and, in fact, rather prohibit it.
PALLETTES, are of various shapes, held on the
hand while painting, by passing the thumb through
a hole near the front. Their use is to contain ile
colours, which are to be applied to the canvas.
Price from 8d. to 2s. 6d. and 3s. each.
17
PALLELTE-KNIFE Is a thin, well-tempered blade,
to grind and mix colors, &c. on the palleite.
Price 9d.
PAPER, various sorts, for various uses, and of vai
ous prices; which are best known at the stationers
PINKS, are a class of colours of several hues.
BROwN PIwk, is a transparent colour, used in eil
and pretty much to glaze with.
It is the tinging part of some vegetable, of a deep
yellow, or orange color, precipitated much in the
manner of takes; it gives a deep color if good
E. gr. It is procured from Avignon berries, by boit
ing them with fustic wood in chips, and pearl-ashes,
equal


C 65

equal quantities, in a tin boiler; strain the tincture
when strong enough, and add alum-water. When

filtered, the substance is the color.
Price 1s. to 1s. 6d. per oz. in bladders 6d. edch.
DUTCH PINK, is made by boiling Avignon berries
one pound, and turmeric root four ounces; strain it;
add alum one ounce, and boil it, till evaperated to
a quart. Prepare in the mean time four pounds of
erind the
chalk, by washing it, and let it dry:

E.
chalk and tincture together, and dry the color.
It should be a full gold-colored yellow, and very
bright.
ENGLISH PINK, differs from Dutch pink, only in
the greater proportion of chalk.
ROsE PINk is procured exactly in a similar man-
ner, only changing the Avignon berry, for Brazil.
wood; it is a mighty pretty color, but fading.
Price 2d. per o2.
PENCIL. Under this title we shall notice the vari-
ous sorts mostly in use.
CAMEL SHATE PENCILs; to choose this kind of
pencils, draw them through the lips, morstening
them a little; those are good which terminate in a
true and complete point. Price 1d. to 2d. each.
FITcH PENCILs are used, by some who wish for
a smoothness in their pictures, to scumble the
colors, after their being laid on with a camels-hair
pencil, and to drive them into each other; while
those who wish to impart a bolder appearance to
their works, paint wholly with fitches.
Price 2d. each.
Tools are a larger kind of pencils, not inserted
into a quill, as the foregoing, but bound round a
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
1
stick,


66
stick, and stronger in their nature. Some paintey
use them constantly.
Price from 2d. to 1s. each.
BADGER TOOLs are the largest in common yn
and are longer in the hair than the former.
Price from 8d. to 2s. each.
Besides these, there are other kinds of pencib-
such as, those for shipping painters, very longi
the hairs, and slender; useful to insert the ropy
Exc.—Those for miniature painters, very delict
and snall, exc.
PICTURE-CLOTTIS, are of several sizes, enlargh
progressively, and are kept in the shops at the price
of 6d. 8d. 10d. 1s. 1s. 3d. C8C.
The regular sizes commence at
KIT-CATs, 3 feet high, by 2 feet 4 inches will
Price 25. 6d.
THREE-AUARTERS, 2 feet 6 high, by 2 feet 1 wilh
HALF-LENGTHs, 4 feet 2 high, by 3 feet 4 will
Price 3s.
BYSHOPS HALF LENGTHS, 4ft. Shigh, by 34.9
Price 8s.
WHOLE-LENGTHs, 7 feet 10 high, by 4 feetI
wide. They may be made pet larger if bespoke.
Price 1l. 25.
A sort of TICKING is made by Mr. W. Minpis
TON, of St. Martins Lane (colorman to artists, al
who furnishes the necessary implements to artieff

at the following prices:
THREE-GUARTERS, price 1 or 5s.

HALF-LENGTIS, price 7s.
in si
WHOLE-LENGTHS, price 26s.
.


67
In general, landscape-painters choose their cloths
of a smooth surface. Portrait-painters choose a
very thin priming. Perhaps cloths are yet better
without priuning.
PRIMING is a colour laid on the cloth, &cc. previous
to those which are to form the picture, and should
be chosen of a tint rather light than dark.
PLASTER OF PARlS is a very useful commodity
in the arts, as it not only receives impressions from
copper-plates, erc. but, being cast into molds,
affords copies of any piece of sculpture whatever,
at a very reasonable rate; and, perhaps, nothing imore
contributes to the acquisition of knowledge in de-
sign, than a careful study of excellent Plasters; since
they are, in some respects, superior even to a living
model, always retain their situations and attitudes,
and greatly assist an artist in the projection of
shadows, ec.
Plaster of Paris is dug out of quarries in a substance
like a stone, and is then termed crude: To prepare.
it for use, the stone is calcined thoroughly; then
pounded and very finely sifted.

This powder mixed with water, qurckly: 50½s; or
hardens into a solid consistence; and; when setting;
increases in bulk, which property renders it so highly
and singularly applicable in forming casts; ecc.
To take dn impression off a plate, by means of plas-
ter of Paris, nothing more is requisite, than after
having prepared the plate with ink; and cleaned the
surface; to thix the plaster with water, and pour it
on the plate, in a few minutes it will dry, and easily
part from the copper, extracting the ink with ir.
2
4513


48


68



2
Casts are taken from a mold, previousy
176
3
 
oiled; and thereby rendered impervious to the
s
1
water with which the plaster is mixed. The plastes
8
in its liquid state being poured into the mold thee

5
sets, and takes the form of the mold.


BIEREST
tiasier will sink to the bottom of a quantifif
water, and will harden even there. After having

been once used, it has lost its valuable propertifs
and no grinding can restore them. Beingvery log
kept in powder injures it.
RED, LIGRT, is of the ochre kind, and very pows
fiil; it is much used by some painters, even in Hesh

Price 2d. per ox. Bladders 3d. each.
RED, EROwN, is kept in bladders at 3d. each.
RED, INDTAN, vide Indian Red.
RED, VENETIAN, is a cheap color, used to pint
copper-plates in imitation of red chalk. It should
be finely ground. Mixed with black it formss
brown.
SAFFRON affords a yellow orange-colored tinclute
to obtain which, it need only be steeped in boiling
Water in a tea-cup.
As it is probable that many vegetables, if treated in
the same manner as saffron, might afford permanent
calors, we shall transcribe from the Philosophicd
Transactions an account of the method of dryingi
1757
4ne styles,or chives, being separated from the
other parts of the plant, are dried on a Kiln. of a pro
per constructien; over which they lay, a, net-werk

of Iron-wite, or a hair-cloth, and over. this five of
six sheets of white paper; upon which they spread
the saffron two or three inches thick.  They corel
this with other sheets of paper; over the whole they
127


69
i

Jay a coarse blahker, rve or six rirfies doubled, or a

canvass pillowfilled with straw; when the fire, which
is made of charcoal free from smoke has warmed it,
they lay on the whole a board; having a large
weight. When the chives have been sweated and

dried, for about an hour, they turn the papers and

saffron cakes, and treat the fresh side as the other.
The cakes are repeatedly turned, till thoroughly
dry, which usually takes about twenty-four hours.
English saffron is the best in Europe.
SAP-GREEN is furnished by buckthorn berries,
which being gathered when ripe, are bruised and put
into a brass Kettle; with some pounded alum, where
they are suffered to remain for several days; they
are then pressed, and the liquor hung up in a blad-
der to dry and harden. This is afterwards dissolved
in water or wine, (Canary is said to be the best to
preserve it from starving), this again consolidated,
is sold in the shops.
Price from 8d. to 1s. per ounce.
TERRA SINOPICA, by many called BLOOD STONE,
is an earth of a purple color, varying in tone, and
depth of color, found in plenty in the Jerseys in
America, and probably elsewhere. Its color renders
further acquaintance with it highly desirable. Its
texture is close and compact: its weight consider-
able. It is not very hard, melts slowly in the
mouth, is perfectly pure and fine, and retains its
color in the fire. Why should it not be brought
into further use ?

TERRA DI SIENNA, like other earths, is denomii=
nated from the place where it is native. It is of a
Watin


29


70
warm browh color, preity much used in landscape
in oil, for roads, buildings, &c. as well burnt as un
Durnt.
Price raw 4d. per ox. bladders 6d. burnt 6d. per or

bladders 6d. each.
TERRA VERTE, is found in the earth, not in strata
but in large lumps. It is fine, regular, and smoolh.

when scraped, and the finer parts separated, it p
ready to be ground in oil for use; it makes the bes
standing color of any simple green; but is a tends
color, easily overpowered by any stronger color.
Price in bladders 3d. each.
An earth is dug up in Mendippe Hills, which is
very closely allied to terra verte; why should it not
be examined and tried ?
TROY WHIITE is a native chalk, found near O.
leans in France, which is finely powdered, washed
and tempered for use.

5411
Artificial TROY WHITE, called also Spanish white,
15 chalk washed repeatedly, and its finer particks
united to alum-water, frequently sterred, then filler
ed and dried; it is used sometimes in water-colors.
TURPENTINE. Oil, or spirit, of turpentine is
used in oil painting, as a drier to the clearer colors,
and to fit some colors for use in spirits of wine; to
clean pencils from their colors, when they are to be
quitted, erc.
Price 6d. or 8d. per pint—sometimes much more.
Colors ground in spirits of turpentine, after being
thoroughly dry, may be used either in oil, or in
Water.
TURMERIE


71)
TURMERIC ROOT is in form not much unlike
oinger : as it grows old, it becomes brown. To ex-

tract a yellow tincture from it:
Put two ounces of proof spirit, and one ounce of
water in a phial, with two drachms of powdered tur-
meric root; let them stand three or four days, shak-
ing them often. It is brighter, and cooler, than
the tincture of Avignon berry.
TURBITH, OF TUEPITH, MINERAL, 1s a yellow pre-
cipitate of mercury. Itis of a great body, like ver-
milion, a very bright, true, and lasting yellow;
works in oil or water; is cooler than King's yellow,
and not so bright. It makes a good green; it must
be previously well ground.
VARNISII is used to give a gloss, and lustre; to
works. Also to defend them from the weather,
dust, Eec.
There are divers kinds of varishes; some of the
principal are as follow:
AMEER VARNISH is prepared in the following
manner; put four ounces of amber into a crucible,
and melt it with a small degree of heat; pour it
out upon an iron plate; when cold, reduce it to
powder, and add to it two ounces of drying oil, 1. e.
linseed oil, thickened by being boiled up with
litharge, and one pint of oil of turpentine; dissolve
the whole together into a liquid varnish.
This simple amber varnish is of great use for many
purposes, and is said to be the basis of the fine var-
msbes which we see on coaches, and might be ap-
plied to pictures with good effect,

COPAL





 72
COPAL OIL. VARNISH, called in France sepis

Markn, is made by pouring into a strong well pap
F7  7

ed earthen pot, in shape resembling a choee
late pot, and in size-large enough to hold abouy
vallon, and made warm, four ounces of Chie a
23
Eppras turpentine, and when this is dissolved, cop
ounces of finely powdered amber; mingling then
well, and setting them on the fire for a quarter of n
hour: take off the pot, and pour gently into its
Pound of copal, finely bruised, bur not powdered
stir the mass,, and add four ounces of Chio turpes
tine, and a gill of warm turpentine oil; then setp
on a brisk fire for about half an hour, and takings
off, stir the contents well, and add two ounces of the
finest and whitest colophony. Ler the pot be piu
on a very brisk fire, and remain till the whole s
5
dissolved, and become as flaid as water; let it be
removed from the fire, and remain for a few minutes
and then gradually pour in twenty-four ounces of
pop
nut, or linseed oil, made drying and boiling
her, and stir the mass with a deal suck. When the
oums and oil are thoroughly incorporated, set then

8 1
over the fire for a few minutes, still stirring
about, and let them boil once up; and having taken
:off the pot, pour into it a quart of hot turpenting;
n
stir them together, and give them one bon up;
take off the pot, and pour into it a pint more of hol
turpentine, still sturring 14 well.. If the gums gre
thoroughly melted, and well incorporated, the
varnish is made; which, being cool, is strained
through a close cloth into another vessel, and if i

3
be too thick, thinned with oil of turpentine, allt
becomes


73
becomes of the consistence of linseed oil: strain
it a second tune, bottle it for use, and let it stand
a month, at least, before it is used. This varnish
is used for coaches, cabinets, &cc. as well as for pic-
tures. UUsed also sometimes for prints.
Price 1s. or 1s. 4d. a phial of two ounces.
A finishing varnish for paintings in oil :—The
finest and clearest coach varnish, made of copal
one quart, (the Birmingham varnish is yet better,
there being no oil in it) put it into an earthen pip-
Kin, set it over a very gentle fire, it need not boil, if
pretty hot it is enough; at the same time set
ahnother pipkin over the same fire, containing three
half pints of turpentine and half a pint of strong
drying oil mixt together; when hot take both pots
off, and pour the varnish in very small quantities
into the turpentine and oil, every time replacing
the pots on the fire to preserve the heat; repeat
this several times, a dozen at least, till the whole
15 mixt, keep it continually sarring to incorporate
them well; take it from the fire as soon as possible,
lest it brown the varnish.
N. B. Were they put together cold, too hastily.
or in too large a quantity at a time, the copal
would be precipitated to the bottom.
Let it stand to clear, well stopped in a bottle for
use. So much oil being thrown into it, prevents its
Cracking, and makes it more proper for oil paintings;
D
it is long in drying, and must be kept free from
dust; after two or three days it sets, and retains no
stickiness, as mastic, &cc. always does.
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
12
Very


. 72
Wery small pictures may be neatly painted with
this varnish alone.
This varnish hardens so strongly on the picture,
that it cannot be taken off again, but must be
painted over if any alterations are intended.
A varnish that may easily be removed is made of
isinglass diluted with water, with the addition of
one-fourth or one-fifth the weight of the isinglass,
of sugar, or honey. A sponge and hot water will
readily remove this from the picture, ec. over
which it is used.
MASTIC VARNISH is made by putting five
ounces of powdered mastic into a proper bottle,
with a pound of spirit of turpentine, and setting
them to boil in balneo Marix, till the mastic
be dissolved, and straining the solution through
Hannel. This varmsh may be converted into a
varnish for painting with, by grinding one ounce
of guin anme on a stone with water, till it becomes
an impalpable powder; then drying it, and grinding
it again with half an ounce of turpentine, and after
wards with the proper colors, and morstening it with
the mastic varmsk, till the mixture be of a due
consistence for working with the pencil. It must
then be kept in phials or in vessels, and diluted, as
there may be occasion, with spirit of turpentine.
Price As. or 5s. per pint.
Others recommend the following mastic varnish,
as very useful for glazing:—Twelve ounces of pure
mastic put to one quart of spirit of turpentine in a
glazed earthen pot, (for safety have a large iron
heater made nearly red hot, on this set the pot in
SOIE


(75
some open place, where free from danger) let it boil
very gently about a minute, it is easily dissolved
even without boiling; keep stirring it with a stick,
when melted set it by to clear itself. Keep it in a
bottle well corked for use.
To make the VARNISH recommended by NENGS.
To two ounces of the finest mastic in powder add
fourounces of aqua di Rbasa, mix them in a glazed
pot, which must be set in a pan of boiling water,
and there continue over a slow fire for one, two, or
three hours, as shall appear necessary to bring it to
a proper degree of consistence for drying in a short
time after it is laid on the picture. This varnish
may also be prepared by being dissolved in the
sun. In using this varnish great care must be
taken that the picture is quite dry, and has been
painted five or six days at least, even then it will
be proper to let it stand for a short time, either be-
fore the fire or in the air, but the varnish must not
be laid on before the pieture is quite cold. After
the picture is varnished, it will be proper to let it lie
for a day or two free from dust, after which you may
work upon, re-touch or re-paint it as often as you
shall think necessary: but it will be proper to re-var-
nish the piece when you have completely finished it.
N. B. Aqua di Rhasa is spirits of turpentine.
To make white or re-touching VARNISH.
Mix one ounce of gum-mastic with half an ounce
of hut oil, and a quarter of an ounce of spirit of
turpentine, dissolved in the same manner as in
Mengs mastic varnish.
VIRNISHES
E 2


( 76
VARNISHES for preserving paintings.

For this purpose some have recommended the fol-
lowing composition : viz. half a pound of guim san-
darac; an ounce and a half of Venice turpentine;
three quarters of an ounce of each of the gums
anime and copal; half an ounce of mastic; benzoin,
gum elemi, and white resin, each two drachms, and
one pound of rectified spirit of wine. The benzoin
and gum anime powdered, are put with the Venice
turpentine into a phial, with eight ounces of the
spirit; the copal and resin powdered are also put
in a phial with six ounces, and the powdered gum
elemi with two ounces of spirit of wine. The seve-
ral phials are frequenily shaken, till the guins, erc,
are dissolved; then the solutions are strained
through a fine linen cloth into one bottle, and when
the mixture has stood some days, it is decanted off
clear, and kept in a separate boitle for use. Some
have substituted sarcocolla for the copal,
Another composition is formed, by dissolving mas=
tic and sandarac, gressly powdered, of each six
ounces, and Venice turpentine half an ounce in a
quart of highly rectified spirit of wine, and strain-
ing off the solution. If it be required harder, an
equal weight of the gums apime and copal may be
added, and the quantity of spirit of wine doubled.
In the use of this varmsb, the painting should be
thorgughly dry, and it should be spread very gently
with the pencil. The varnish should be laid on in
a very wartn place, or the picture irself warmed to
a moderate degree, in order to prevent the chilling
of the varnish. in which case another coat should
B6


C 77
be added. And, indeed, two or three coats. are
necessary to preserve the painting, and to bring out
a due effect of its colors, if they are in that state
called sunk in, occasioned by the attraction of the
cloth, on the oils mixed with them.
An oil of turpentine yarnish may be made by
grossly powdering mastic and sandarac, of each four
ounces; two ounces of white resin, and sarcocolld,
anime, copal, and olibanum, of each one ounce, and
putting them into a phial with two pounds of oil of
turpentine, stopping the phial lightly, and placing
1
it in any gentle heat, so that the mass may not boil,
and straining off the solution for use.
Or, a varmish more simple, and equally good, may
be made by powdering two ounces of sandarac,
mastic and olibanum, of each an ounce and half;
or three ounces of mastic and Venice turpentine
half an ounce; and dissolving then in half a pound
of oil of turpentine, and proceeding as before.
WHITE VARNTSHiS usually made of guin sandarac
and gun mastic, dissolved in spirits, left to settle
two days; then strained through a linen cloth, and,
after standing some time, the clear poured off, and
bottled for use.
The more curious artists dissolve the two gums se-
parately; and, having made a separate varnish of
each, mix them occasionally, as their work requires
a stiffer or a softer varisb.
But for the best white varish more gums are re
quired; viz. Venice turpentine, gum copal, elems,
Ben2Ol, anune, and white resin,
VARNISH.


78
VARNISH FOR PRINTS—Take 1singlacs four o2.:

separate it into small pieces, boil it in a quart of
brandy, or other strong spirit when it becomes the
Consistence of a strong glue, by being a little ex-
posed to the air, it will answer the purpose. With
this glue, while hot, wash over the print as quick as
possible, and let that stand for a day or so, to dry
well; wash it over again in the same manner, and
afterwards brush it over at such a distance from the
fire that it may not blister; do this also, two or
three times. Varnish it with white varnish, and let
it stand; afterwards varnish it again. If it should
at any time be soiled by flies or the like, you may
wash it with a sponge and water, to clean it.
The print should be previously mounted: 1. c. past-
ed on a cloth, and secured by a straining frame.
VERDITER ought to be procured from the lapis
armenus, prepared by grinding and washing; but

this kind is very rare.
VERDITER is obtained by adding chalk to a solu-
tion of copper in aqua fortis. It is prepared by the
refiners of silver, which metal is thought to assist
the copper. Some say pearl ashes would produce a
blue superior to chalk. When good, it is a cool,
full blue, but must not be greatly trusted to for du-
rability, either in oil, or in water.
Price per ounce 6d. or 8d.
VERDIGRIS is a kind of rust copper, i. e. copper
corroded by vegetable fermentation into a blueish-
green substance. Generally, it is obtained by cor-
roding plates of copper by the vinous acid. The
crystals of verdigris distilled, make a very good.
3
blue-


(79)
blue-green tincture, which mixes well with yellow
for a green; or, if dissolved in the juice of rue,
makes a green at once with a decoction of log
wood it strikes a black, which diluted, is a fine blue.
Price of distilled Verdigris per o2. 6d. or 8d.
VERMILION, natural, is found in some silver
inines in the form of sand: this requires good
T
grinding.
VERMILION Is a imercurial production, made of
artificial cinnabar, ground up with white wine, and
whites of eggs repeatedly; the more it is ground,
the finer and paler it becomes.
Price from 8d. to 2s. 6d. per ounce.
ULTRAMARINE is procured from the lapis lazuli,
by a tedious process of calcination, grinding, ec.
It is the first and prince of blues, warm, rich, and
noble—but very dear.
Price from three to ten guineds per ounce.
King Charles I. presented to Nirs. BEAEE, the
paintress, 500l. worth, which he held in his hand.

ULTRAMARINE-ASHES are of a suilar nature.
These are usually sufficiently good for most pur
poses to which they may be applied.

Price from 18s. to 2l. per ounce.
UMBER, is a dark brown earth of the ochre kind;
when burnt, it is considerably deepened in its tone;
it is used chiefly in oil; is cheap in its price.
Bladders 3d. each.
NAPLES YELLO was formerly thought to be a
species of yellow ochre; it is very beaunfal, of a
bright yellow, of a loose, porous, spongy, and shar-
tery texture: remarkably heavy, of a dusty surface;
Pritty


(80
gritty to the touch, breaks easily between the fine
gers, and stains the hands; adheres but slightly to
the tongue; ferments briskly with aqua fortis.
It has lately been demonstrated to be the produc-
tion of art: on muxing together intunately twelve
ounces of ceruse, or white lead, one of alum, one of
sal ammoniac, and three ounces of diaphoretic anti-
inony, in an unglazed earthen pot covered over;
and exposing the mixture to the heat of a moderate
fire, during seven or eight hours, a substance is
obtained, possessing all the properties of Naples
yellow.
It makes in oil a very useful, mild, and lastingco-
lor: it should be very well washed for use in water
-colors. Price 6d. per ounce: In bladders 6d. each.
V
LELLOW BERRY, vide Avignon berry.
TELLO is obtained from the plant CELANDINE,
by infusing it in water, and pressing it gently; then
boiling the liquor with alum.
Also, from theroots of BAREERRTEScut, and put into
a strong ley of pearl ashes: From the roots of the
mulberry tree; and probably from many other roots.
LEDOARY RooT affords a fine yellow, by boiling
an ounce in a quart of water, till the infusion is
highly colored, then strain it. It is as bright as
Saffron, and cooler; being excellent for painting of
Howers.
TINK, has lately furnished an elegant white, which,
if all said of it by the French, who prepare it, be
"true, is a noble production; as it stands perfectly,
both in oil and water. It is not yet used in Eng-
land&i is said to be deficient in bearing a body.

The


81
The foregoing list contains those colors which are
generally adopted into use every master has some
nethod peculiar to himself in their management, as
well as a certain set of colors which may be termed his
favorites. Some, indeed, so perpetually resort to
the same combination of colors, that their per-
formances strongly evidence the mannerist; a cha=
racter to be avoided by all who desire excellence.
The minutia of nany articles we have omitted,
supposing the leading ideas to be sufficient: and the
same in the preparation of certain colors—no doubt,

by similar methods many additional pigments might
be procured.
In marking the prices to many articles; we suppose
we have done service to those who choose first to
count the cost: it may perhaps obviate objections in
the minds of some, to observe how reasonable are the
principal requisites for attempts in most branches of
the arts.

We shall how proceed to offer a few hints of the
management of these materials; advancing from the
simple to the more complex methods of application,
in the following order:
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
INTRODUCTORK:
2





(82)
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS ON THE USE OF COLORS

IN GENERAL.
WATER COLO RS.
OF COLORING OR WASHING MAPS, EcC.
OF COLORING PRINTS.
OF TINTING DRAWINGS.
OF PAINTING IN WATER-COLORS.
OF PAINTING IN MINIATURE.
C R A T ONS.
OF CRAYON DRAWINGS FINISHED WITH CHALkS
OF CRAYON PICTURES.
OIL COLO RS.
OF BACK-PAINTING PRINTS.
OF PICTURES IN OIL.
OF CLEANING PICTURES.
OF TRANSFERRING PICTURES.
ENG R A VIN G.
OF ETCHING.
OF ENGRAVING IN STROKES.
OF ENGRAVING IN CHALkS.
OF ENGRAVING IN MEZLOTINTO.
OF AGVA TINTA.
OF PRINTING IN COLORS.

SCUL PT TR E.
OF MODELLING.
OF SCULPTURE.
3
REMARES








17









5

















  a an a a a


258
SFE


2583

D
18



5
229

20
53
i


ttir at
1


3







JWUrAH
in the Ose of Colours.
London, Pub Sep2179r by CTavtor Ne105 Hatton-Street, Holborn

















37
37
4
83
in
C


nl
R EM A R E S
7

INTRODUCTORY TO THE




USE OF COLORS IN GENERAL.

BEFORE we proceed to explain the use of colors,
and the materials for practice, it may be proper to
premise a few observations, as introductory to the ap-
plication of them.
In general the more simply, and distinctly, colors
are used the better; they are not oply more easy to
work, but they are also brighter, and more durable.
Of colors produced by composition, such as green,
and purple, those tints which contain the fewest in-

gredients are usually to be preferred.
Some colors very necessary in painting in oil, are
entirely useless in water; others, of great service in
water, agree not with oil; and some which in appear-
ance promise well in other manners, are found defi-
cient in effect and durability, when used in erther.
Few colors are, in their natural state, fit for imme-
diate use, but must undergo previous preparation,
according to their texture or temper—of these pre-
parations, the principal are WAsHINc and GRIND-
INs; but some require CALCINATION.
OF
1o2





84
OF WASHING COLORS.
Colors are wASHED, by being mixed with, and
F
etrongly stirred about in, a proper quantity of fair
water, till the water having dissolved them, is tho-
roughly colored by them; if the sufface of the
Water appear greasy, take off that scum; then pour
the colored water into a clean bason, leaving the
grosser sediment behind: the water thus poured off,
will in a little time deposit a quantity of color.
This operation may be repeated, till the color obtain-
ed is sufficiently pure, which appears by its fineness,
and its prilliancy. The use of vinegar; of milk, or
of other liquids, is occasionally adopted by some
artists, for certain colors.

OF GRINDING COLORS
Colors are ground by means of a large muller, on a
flat stone; this operation requires strength and care;
they are occasionally collected together, as the mul-
ler spreads them, by means of a large knife; the
oil, or other vehicle, with which they are ground,
being added as wanted.
In grinding colors the motion of the muller should
not be too swift, but gentle, lest the color by being
heated, lose part of its lustre; especially, if it be a
color of no great body. In grinding white, observe
to cease, before it becomes greasy, or dirty.
Colors are liable to injury by being ground on a
stone not thoroughly cleaned from the color which
preceded : many persons who are curious, grind
their


85
their own (at least the finer colors) that they may
depend on their purity.
The GRINDING of colors should be continued,
till they are capable of uniting so intimately with the
wehicle they are compounded with, as to seem only
a liquid of that color, (which is termed bearing a
body); and those colors which permit this, are al-
ways most agreeable in using; whereas, some will
not embody, but are apt in working to separate, and
disperse. This remark chiefly concerns colors in-
tended for oil; many of the best water colors are fit
for use by being dissolved in gum water.
Colors ground in oil can be used only in oil. Oil
colors kept too long grow fat, and become useless.
Colors united with cUnrs, for the purpose of water
colors will not readily mix with oil.
Colors ground in SPIRITs may be preserved after
grinding, and used either in oil or in water, being
capable of mixture with either.
OFCALCININGCOLORS.
Some colors require CALCINATTON, to render
them fit for use; some are burnt, merely by putting
them in the fire till thoroughly red hot; others, are
rather dried than burnt, being placed in an iron
ladle over the fire, and kept there, till the smoke
they ennt ceases. Ivory, is burnt between two cru-
cibles, well luted together, and covered with coals.
OF


. 86

OF TEMPERING WATER COLORS.
The colors being free from those impurities which
are natural to them, to TEMPER them, take a small
quantity of any color, put it into a clean shell, or
cup, 3xc. add to it a few drops of guin water, and
incorporate them, by working them about the shell;
let them dry, and when dry, touch the color with
your finger; if any of it comes off, it requires a
stronger gum water; if the color shines, and glisters,
when dry, the guin water was too strong, and must
be qualified by lowering it with fair water. lways
let it dry before you use it; then, having wetted it,
take a proper quantity in your pencil, transplace it
on the pailet, and mingle such colors as the subject
requires.
GUM WWATER is made by dissolving a quantity of
sum arabic (the clearer the better) in fair water. The
strength of the gum water required must determine
the proportien of the ingredients. Take a quarter
of an ounce (or, perhaps, half the quantity) of
gun arabic, and pour boiling water on it in a tea-
cup, when dissolved it is fit for use. A little colo-
quintida added to the solution, will prevent flies
from injuring the work if exposed.
The wATER with which colors are united, is of
more consequence than is generally imagined; and,
unless limpid and pure, contributes to their fading.
Flake white, used with water containing particles of
Iron, soon becomes black, and disagreeable. To
remedy


r


87
remedy this evil, the curious use only distilled water,
which is easily obtained from a common tea-Kettle,
by condensing the steam; which, if the Kettle be not
too full of water, may be done, by binding round
the spout, a cloth wetted in cold water; or, by the
addition of a tin spout to fit the kettle, wetting, and
cooling, the cloth occasionally. There are mineral
waters, Erc. which produce very singular effects with
Sotie Colors.
But beside the colors which require the use of
guin water as above described, there are several use-
ful colors (extracted chiefly from vegetables) in the
form of tinctures; to obtain which, the customary
method is, to boil the ingredients, with the addition
of alum, in a quantity of water, till the water has ac-
quired a sufficient strength of color : sometimes the
nixture is boiled yet stronger; and sometimes, but
not often, the sediment of the mixture after boiling
15 of use.
To use a color in tincture, (generally called a
WWASH COLOR) try first whether its strength be what
your subject requires; if it be too deep, it may be
lightened by the addition of fair water; if too light,
It may be deepened, by setting a saucer of it to sim-
mer over a gentle fire, till it acquires the strength
desired. The watery part may, by this means, be
nearly, or even totally, evaporated. Red Brazil
wash, for instance, will hereby take a solid form,
and afterwards work up pretty enough.
Boby ColoRs (as they are called, to distinguish
them from washes) may be ligbtened by being diluted
with water, but cannot be deepened beyond the
natural


88
natural state of the original material; to shadow
which, when used of its full color, recourse must be
had to a darker color, of a similar species.
Care should be taken to keep the drawing, &c.
Hat, and free from sinkings, lest the colors, if thin,
should ruh to those parts, and there make patches of
darks, Ecc.
If the paper will not readily take the colors, a
lirle fish-gall, or ox-gall, mingled among the colors,
will help them.
To prevent colors from sinking in, take roch alum
two ounces, and boil ir in a pint of spring water;
wet the back of the paper with a sponge dipped in
the water while warm. Some use starch applied at
the back. A yet stronger mixture, which will pre-
went the color from sinking not only on paper, but
likewise on sattin, is made, by boiling isinglass in
waters brandy, or spirit of wine, till the liquor is
strong, and clammy, then, after your outlines are
drawn, wash them over with this solution while hot.
Repeat it if wanted.
OFOIL COLORS.
A principal advantage of oil colors is, that after
they are dry they afford a constant opportunity of
being retouched, or even changed, either in whole,
or in part; thus, black may be re-colored white, or
brown, blue, &c.; but, though this be undoubtedly
a great advantage, yet it is only to be used when re-
quired by necessity: for, the under color; if allied
to the superficial, promotes both force, and har-
mony; and it somstimes happens, that if the under
Color



89



color be, cold, and powerful, it tends to injure the
 

tone of the upper.
Oil colors, are not, in usual practice, heightened,
by being diluted with oil, as water colors are with.

water; but, by being mixed with any color, or
5


pigment of a lighter tone—as, light red upon dark

CD
yellow upon light red; white upon yellow
3
5
red; 

&c. or, simply white. But if a part should be
7


heightened beyond its due force, it may be lowered,
by diluting some similar color with oil, and (as it. 1s

termed) GLATING It over till it is brought to the tone.
5i
required. Glazing is sometimes used on a more im-
2.
portant, or at least a more extensive plan; as when
great richness is wanted in some particular color, as
criison, &cc. after having painted and finished it, as
highly bright as he can, the artist glazes it over
with a coat of lake. Sometimes this is repeated, and
the lights re-touched; and instances have been, where
an artist has glazed a bright white into a crimson,
by means of carmine and lake, erc.


Glazing is best performed with colors naturally
transparent, such as lake, &cc. but, after all, it is
not applanded by those whose skill enables them to
produce equal effects without this practice.
Those painters who have attained nearest to a just
representation of nature, I have usually composed on
their pallettes, a great number of tints related to the
subject on which they were about to employ them;
and, by mingling these tints, they have approached
nearer to truth, than those who mingle the secondary.
colors of the pallette in their pencils, and immediafely
apply them to the cloth; for by this latter manner
MI
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
which






15


57


90
(which yet is too common) the colors are not only
less incorporated, but they are apt to become dull;
i  en  
and dirty.
The usual way of painting in oil; is to lay on the
colors with one pencil, and then soften them into
    
each other, with a clean tool : this is terrhed scum=
1935
bling; but whether scumbling be really beheficiar to

a picture, is much doubted; certainly where strength
15 desired, it may well be omitted, as also in the
 edlo is e obb is ed hd Iho
finishing touches.
A pencil for each color is necessary, where clean
  
tints are desired.
The smell of oil colors would not be bad (as it
C
sometimes 1s) were the oil of the best quality.
Colors are ranged on a. pallette, beginning with
white on the front, then yellow, &cc. according to
the darkness of the color, ending with black.
3
OF DISTEMPER COLORS
Colors incorporated with SI2E, are useful, in works
required to be free from glistening that they may be
seen to advahtage in all stuations; such as the scennts
of a theatre; 8sc: but they are not used for pictures.
Of late, fashion has introduced them into apartments,
1528 v all is lodnchar
instead of wailiscotting, Ecc.

7
They are likewise used in FRESCO-PAINTINGS In

in

warm countries, but these are very rare in Britain.

Fresco-paintings are performed on the mortar of a
wall while wet, and dry with it; which circumstance
totally prohibits the use of oil.
1
The



(91)
The incorporation of colors with wax is very
farely practised: for the method of procedure, vide
ENCAUSTIC.

OF RANKING COLORS.


Colors are ranked as follows, wHITE, FELEOw;
ORANGE, RED, PURPLE, BLUE, BLACK. WHITE,
and BLACK, are the extremes of color; yellow is
the color next to white; then green; then blue;
green is composed of a mixture of yellow and blue;
2
orange of a mixture of yellow and red; purple of a
mixture of red and blue; these compound colors
admit an infinity of tints, as they incline most to
either of the primary colors of which they are com-
    
pounded.
Some persons divide colors into dark, and light;
including among the first, black, umber, bistre:
3
among light colors, white, and those which ap-
Proach it.

is sine te i n Riclll 2r
Hlaving thus given some general hints on the nature
of colors, by way of introduction,, we proceed to nor
fice, more particularly, the various manners of their
applications.
OF
M2


(92






OF COLORING MAPS, &c.
THEcolors fittest for this purpose, are those
which are perfectly thin and flaid, usually called
wasb-colors, or tinctures; they should be diluted
with water, intimately mixed with them, by their
When the desired tint
being well stirred together.
of color is thus obtained, with a brush proportioned
to the size of the space intended to be stained, briskly
apply the wash; always endeavouring to avoid—

I. All passing over the proper limits of that color;
2. All rannings of the color into spots, or parts of a
deeper tint than the rest; occasioned by the settling
of a greater quantity of color in some places than in
others: or, sometimes, if one part of the space be
dry before the rest, by a second coat of color passing
over it. Begin the boundaries of your space first,
that you may not exceed them.
Be careful that no two limits, which touch each
other, are of the same color; since the prime intent
of this business is distinction.

Distribute yourcolors, if practicable, so as to pro-
duce a pleasing effect in the whole.
 After the various divisions are faintly washed, the
boundary lines should be very neatly colored with a
much stronger color of the same kind.
3


i


03

3
OF COLORING PRINTS.
In this business regard should always be had first
to the paper on which the prints are printed; if it
sinks, it may require the assistance of roch alum, or
other strengtheners,
The body of printing ink, which remains on the
surface of the paper, should proportion, in many
cases, the strength, and consistence, of the color to
be used, according to the effect required. If it be
intended only to stan the print, the effect of the en-
graving will be useful as forming shadows, and as
keeping the drawing.. If it be proposed to color the
print highly, as advancing towards a picture, the
engraving, although it must be attended to as the
regulator, and guide, of form, and of effect, yet may
be concealed by a surface of color.
Ouit white color wherever you can do without it:
c. 5. in the lights, or parts approaching to lights, let
the thipness of color supersede the admission of white.
Omit black color on the same principle : if you
cannot do entirely without it, take especial care to
use as little as possible, that it be not heavy.
 In the broad lights, rather mingle colors of nearly
a similar tone, to produce the effect required, than
admit white; the same principle adopt in the shades.
Take great care that the outlines of all objects are
mellowed, sweetened, and softened; and hnerther
sudden, nor rugged, nor cutting to the eye.
Sometimes a print may be washed, and afterwards
finished with body colors to good effect.
Farmony and tenderness of color should alwaysbe
much attended to: then distribution and warmth.
The proper colors are those for wATEk CoLoRs.
2
OF



(94


.
a
OF. TINTING DRAWINGS.
Drawings are tinted on the following principles:
I. Sometimes after being outlined with a black-
lead pencil, they are stained; the sky and distances
in landscape with a thin wash; the ground and front
objects with body colors, then wrought up to effect
with stronger colors alone, or united with Indian ink.
II. Sometimes they are more perfectly ourlined,

and washed with Indian ink;, then the colors are
added afterwards to finish the whole.
Drawings done in colors only, seldom look well,
being usually deficient in effect and repose; for be
it always remembered, glaring colors are purtful.

The best way for slight drawings, is to, procure an
effect with the Indian ink, and then a brilliancy, and
Variety of tone, Ecc. with colors.
Flesh colors should be very tender—the less the
Hish is loaded with color the better.
In general, the lights require more finishing than
the shades; in which a breadth of pencilling has
usually an excellent effect. Warmth is very neces-
sary in all drawings; opposition of colors -should be
carefully attended to—a heavy effect in a drawing is
very bad.

The middle tiht is the beauty of all drawings, and
should predominate throughout the whole.
The proper colors are those for WWATER CoLORS.
OF



3


195



OF PAINTING IN WATER COLORS.



This part of art is seldom practised in historical
ot
5
compositions, or figures, they being generally treated

2.3

n 
in oil; yet it has both its uses, and its beauties: The
2
colors are free from smell, and often rich, and pleas-
0
ing; they are mixed on the principle of oil colors,
84 
2
not rejecting white where proper.

As it is impossible to convey by words exact ideas

of the numerous combinations, tones, and variations

912
of colors, it is evident, that the following directions
i igs
must be understood with great latitude. They may
serve to impart the rudiments of a principle, to be


3
varied according to the efrects desired; but the same

proportions of colors will not serve every occasion
equally well, nor produce the same harmony, or even
appearance, if surrounded by different neighbours.

Directions, therefore, are, at best, but very imper-
 
feet; and, though we think it to the advantage
33.
1
of students to insert these directions, yet we are
aware of their imperfections to many purposes which
may be required in treating of different subjects.
The materials are guin-water, pencils, a pallette

of ivory, if thought proper but a Dutch tile, or

any glazed surface of a light color will serve the pur-
pose); a pallette-Knife of ivory (steel is injurious to

the colors); a pen-knife, Erc.

The CoLORs to be used are:
WRITES. Flake white, Spanish white, Troy
white, Egg-shell white, ecc.
BLACES.





(96

BLACKS. Burnt cherry-stones, Ivory-black, Lamp-
2
black, Indian Ink, &cc.
BROWNS. Spanish browh; Spanish liquorice;
Umber.
REDs. Burnt ochre, Carmine, Indian lake, In.
dian red, Red lead, Vermilion, exc.
VELLows. Gall-stone, Gamboge; Masticot, dark
and light; Pinks, yellow, dark, and light; English
Ochre, Roman Ochre; Saffron, &ec.
BLUEs. Blue Bice, Verditer, Indigo, Litmus,
Smalt, Ultramarine, Prussian blue, &cc.
GREENS. Green Bice, Green pink, Sap green,
Verdigris, Verditer, ecc.
Directions for making a Variety of Colors by Compound.
ASH-COLOR. White and Lamp-black; Indigo
and Black; Cherry-stone and White, shaded with
Ivory-black.
BAY-CoLOR. Vermilion, with a little Spanish
brown, and black.
BRIGHT RED. Indian Lake and native Cinnabar,
or Vermilion.
CARNATION. Lake and white, shaded with Lake.
CLOvD CoLoR, White, light Masticot; Lake and
White shaded with blue Verditer.
CRIMSON. Lake and White, shaded with Lake.
FLAME CoLOR. Vermilion and Orpiment; Red
Lead and Masticot, heightened with White.
FLESH CoLOR. White, with a little Lake, and Red
Lead; add Vellow Ochre for a swarthy complexion.
FRENCH GREENN. Light Pink and Dutch Bice,
shaded with Green Pink.
FLASS


37
Ceruse, with a litile Blue.
ELASS GREY.
it i
HAIR COLOR. Magricot, Umper, Fellow Ochre
 9
Ceruse, and Cherry-stone Black.
LEAD CoLOR. Indigo and White.
LAGHT BLUE. Bice, heightened with Ceruse.



LION LAwNEY. Red Lead and Masucot, shaded
with Umber.
MURREY. Lake and Flake White.


ORANGE. Red Lead and a little fine Masticot,
shaded with Gall-stone and Lake.
DRANGE TAWNEx. Cinnabar, light Pink, and a
little Masticot, shaded with Gall-stone and Lake.
Indigo, Spanish Brown and White;
PURPLE
Blue Bice with Red Lead and Flake White; or Blue
Bice and Lake.
RUSSET. Cherry-stone Black and White.
SCARLET. Red Lead and Lake, with or without
Vermilion; Carmine and Indian Lake; native Cin-
abar and Red Lead, shaded with Indian Lake.
5
SEA-GREEN. Bice, Pink and Whire, shaded with
5
Green Pink.
25
SKY CoLoR. Light Masticot and White, for the
lowest parts; Blue Bice and White for the next de-
free; Blue Bice alone for the highest part: all sof-
8
tened into one another at the edges, where they unite,
18
so as not to appear harsh.
Blue Bice and
SKY COLOR FOR DRAPERY.
Fine Ceruse; or Ultramarine and White, shaded with
Indigo.
STRAW CoLOR. Fellow Masticot, and a very lit
5
4e Cinnabar shaded with dark Pink.
IV
VIOLEF
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


(98


17
VIOLar CoLOk. Indigo, White and Cinnabar, or
Lake; or fine Dutch Bice and Lake; shaded with
Indigo; or Litmus, Smalt, and Blue Bice; the latter
Mmost predominant.

WATER. Blue and White; shaded with Blue,

5.
and heightened with White:
It is evident, even on a slight inspection, that the
proportions of the several ingredients in these com-
bound colors must vary the tint, the tone, and the
effect of them when used : as no general rules can
be laid down which shall suit every subject, we
leave to the accuracy of the students eye and judg-
nent the making of those peculiar variations; which
every different composition requires.
Directions for laying on the different Colors.
Before you begin, have all your cofors ready before
you; a pallette for the conveniency of mixing them;
a. paper to lay under your hand, to keep your work
clean, as well as to try your colors on; also a large
soft brush, or fitch, to wipe off the dust when your
colors are dry.
F
Lay your colors on very thinly at first, decpening
them and mellowing them, by degrees, as you see
occasion. The quicker you lay them on, the evener,
and cleaner, your drawing will appear.
Take care to preserve all your colors from dust;
and before you use them, wipe your shells, and pat
lette, every time with your fitch.
When you have done your work, or, would lay it
aside, be careful to wash out your pencils in clean
 
Waril Water.
For


99)
For face-painting, mix up carnation, or ffesh
color, with gum-water, in a shell by uself. For a
fair complexion mix vermilion and flake white; for

a swarthy one, add a little masticot, English ochre,
Of Doth.

Let your Hesh color: be always lighter. than the

 89 7
working
Ceplexion you would paint; for, by w

Cn It, you may easily, lower it, but you cannot rea-

F.
diay heighten it.
2
 3 

for the cheeks and lips, use a mixture of lake and
red lead, or carmine, as occasion requires; and fof
blue tints, (as under the eyes, and in the veins
3 
indigo, or ultramarine, and white.

In coloring landscapes, at first only lay dead co-
lors, smooth, all over the piece, leaving no part un=
covered; use a masterly freedom; and the work,

though seemingly rough at first, will have a good
a
effect when finished.
Let not the roughness of the color dis=ourage you;
0
for, it is easy to soften it by degrees, with the other
shadows, observing only to sweeten, and heighten,

them, according as the light falls.
In some places lay on strong touches, and in those
places bring your work up together to an equal
strength; tempering, and sweetening, your colors,
with a sharper pencil than the first, that no lumps,

or harsh edges, be left, but that all your shadows
may be soft, and smooth, and gliding gently, as it
were, into one another.
You are not to finish any part before another, but
work up all the parts gradually alike, that you may
judge of their effect on each other, and on the whole.
N2
Hlaving








100
Having laid your dead colors, begin first with the
distances, and lighter parts, as the sky, sun-bearns,
Eic. then the yellowish beams (which are to be done
with indsticot and white); next the blue of the sky
(with ultramarine, bice, or smalt alone); making
jour Colors deeper as you rise upwards from the hori-
20, except in tempestuolis skies. The tops of
distant mountains must be worked so faint; that they
ay seem to lose themselves in air.

All distant objects imust be made imperfect as they
t

appear in natiure. and all distances must be finished
with colors laid as thin, of in as small quantities as
possible.
R
749
 your colors forward as you advance to the
MAIF
front; till you come to the fore-ground itself:
where you may employ not only stronger colors, but
a greater quantity of them, and in a bolder manner.
In coloring trees, boughs, and branches, touch in
all the dark shades first, raising the lighter leaves
i
apove the darker; the uppermost of all are to be
done last; tough lightly the extremities of the leaves,
and set off the darkest shadows with sap-green and
indigo; or other strong colors.
The intentofevery picture, &c, is to imitate nature;
therefore, where nature indicates different compo-
sitions of colors, from what we have given above,
T Seoce
compose them as fear as possible; if you fail at first,
you may sacceed afterwards. It is not to be sup-
posed that the real effect of colors in combination,

can he understood or attained till after the hand and

the eye are inatured by practice and re-consideration.
OF





( 101 7

AF PAINTING IN MINTATURE.
Painting in minlature has many advantages over
other branches of art. It. is nearer, and not so

incumbered with materials; as you may easily take
with you all that are necessary, and entertain your-

self wherever you please, quit and resume it when
you will, without such a variety of preparations as
are necessary in oil coloring.
The colors are those used for water colors; they-
must be of the best quality, finely ground, cleanly
14
washed, erc. and mixed in the shells with gum water
5
which must be reserved in a phial kept corked, and
observe never to take any out with a pencil that has
color on it, but with a quill cut for the purpose in
the form of a scoop.
To Know whether yourcolors are properlygunmed,
draw your pencil when filled with color on your
hand, which dries immediately, and should you per-
ceive that it cracks or shines, it is then too highly
gummed; but if it rub off, by lightly passing your
finger over it on your hand, it has too little gum in
it, and must have an addition put into the shell, tak-
ing care not to use too much gum, which makes they
color hard. Gum adds strength to dark colors;
and when you choose to give a greater force to any
color than it naturally bears, increase the quantity
of sum.
To correct the greasiness of dark colors, mix a
little of the gall of an ox, carp, or cel, particularly
3
the





(102
the latter, dried and dilured with brandy for use;
this makes the color work free, and prevents its
scaling.
Ivory is generally used to receive the colors, but a
card is very useful, and may be sufficient for slight
subjects.
The choice of good pencils is a great matter,
therefore wet them a little as you draw them through
your lips, and if the hairs keep close together (as
you turn them on the back of your hand; and make
but one point, they are fit for use; but if they make
several points some longer than others, they are use-

1sS. When they are too sharp pointed, with only
a few hairs longer than the others, they must be trim-
ined with a pair of scissars, taking care not to clip
dway too much. It is necessary to have different
sizes, the larger for laying grounds and dead coior.
ing, and the smaller for dotting and finishing.
To bring the hairs of your pencil to join close
together, and make a fine point, just put it between
your lips, moistening and pressing it, leaving only
so much color on it as is sufficient to give fine and
equal touches. None of the colors used in miniature
painting are porsonous, of prejudicial, except King's
yellow, and orpiient, which are seldom, or never
O
used. This method is particularly used for dotting
and finishing the naked parts of a picture, that the
touches may be neat, and not too much charged with
color. As for draperies, and other large masses; it 1s
sufficient to draw the pencil over the edge of the
shell to unload it, giving a few strokes upon a card,
or paper, before you use it on the picture.
The


( 103.).
A North light as desirable for the painting-roomi,
as by that light we view objects most truly, and with-
out glare; it is necessary to admit the light at one
window only, and that confined to your work,


placing your left side next it, and your desk on 2
table, just high enough to wark at, in an easy, and
graceful manner,, without stooping, or crampness,
&c. which is very detrimental to health.
Sketch the outlines of the picture with thin car-
mine; this being finished, proceed to dead color;
making the shadows, tender, that they may afterwards
be heightened by dotting, and brought to proper
color, and spirit.
There are several methods of dotting, and every
painter has that peculiar to himself; some make their
dots perfectly round, others make them long, but
the best and most expeditious manner, is by little
strokes that cross each other every way, till the work
appears as if it had been dotted; softening them, so
as to give your picture a fleshymellowness, and avoid.
ing all dry, or hard touches.
After you have dead-colored a picture, begin the
back-ground. First, lay in a light tint of the proper
color, then pass a layer of the same color over that;

laying it as smooth as possible with large strokes of
the pencil, i. e. not with dots.
 Dark back-grounds are composed of bistre, umber,
or Cologn earth, with black and whire, others more

yellow, with a great part ochre. Black, white, and
a little indigo, for grey back-grounds: Dutch pink,
12t
white and black, make a greenish, or olive ground,
which makes the naked part of a picture annear
nsw    
VeT



1 10½ 7
A
very fine, and gives by cohntrast, a warmth to the

coloring.
3
Having drawn the eutlines of your picture very
correctly, begin the shades with vermition and car.

mine; giving the strongest touches at the corners of
the eyes, next the hose, under the nose, the ears, and

inder the chin; the fingiis; and in every part where
you would mark out separations in shades that are
obscure.
Next lay in the blueish tints with indigo, on such
parts as go off; or turn from the light; as the temples,
under, and in, the corners of the eyes, on both sides
of the mouth, a little on the middle of the forehead,
between the nose and eyes; on the side of the checks,

the heck, and such other parts as nature indicates.
Fellow tints are composed of ochre and vermilion,
and are given on the sides of the nose towards the
Bottom, under the eye-brows, a little underneath
the checks, and on the other parts which rise, and



come forward, to the sight. It is particularly: in
these tints the complexion is to be observed.

Vhen you have done your dead-coloring, and laid
in the several tints, proceed to finish, by dotting
over the shadows with greenish tints, and finishing
the yellowish and blueish tints before directed. Soften
the extremity of your shades on the light sides, pre=
serving the color of the vory for a middle tint, which
adds a fine sofiness to a picture. Finish your strong
shadows with bisfre and vermition, or terra di Siennd;
and in some parts with pure bistre, according to the
subject you are painting, laying on your colors as


o
clear as possible.

Dot


. 165
Dot the clear and bright parts, with carmine and
a little vermition, using a very little ochre, to lose,
or blend, them; in the shadowy parts, and make the

tints die away insensibly into ohe another; taking
care as you dot, to round the parts, by giving your

Ir
strokes the differeht turns of the flesh.
t
The whires of the eyes are shaded with blue; the
23

oro
corfiers next the hose with vermilioh and Carfnine;
the sight of the eye (or the iris) with indigs and
white, adding bistre if it be brown; or black if it be
grey; the pupil with pure lamp-black. Shade the
sight with indigo, bistre, or black, according to its
Mi

color; the marking of the eye-lids shadow with car-
mine and bistre, which must be softened with the
other tints; this done, give the litile touch of light
F
that falls on the chrystal with pure white. ais

gives d brilliancy, and life; to the eye.

The lips are dead-colored with red lead; of vers

milion, and shaded with carmine, of lake. The

st atd 
markings; or dark touches, with bistre and carmine.

at to bat 

The hands are colored as the face, observing that
the joints, and ends, of the fingers, are a liftle redder
than the rest. The markings, as directed for the
eyes; lips, &c.
Hair is dead-colored with bistre, ochre, and white,
or black, according to its different colors; and finish-
ed with pure bistre, mixed with ochre or black; the
5
lights with ochre. The roots of the hair nexi the
face must be softened into the blue tints; and great
care must be taken to paint the hair light and soft,
857
and to avoid a hard, wiry, manner. 4nd eye-brows
afe done as the hair.
2d
Colors
VOL. II. Edit, 7.


8


106
s
Ezs Cotors composed for Draperies, Lace, ESc.

1
53
Prussian blue, or ultrama-
FOr ELUE DRAPERY.
Tits  
ne and white, shaded with indigo.—Verditer, shaded
27
FtinnHisnt 
with indigg.





REp DRAPERY.—Red lead, or vermition, shaded
n
with carmine, or lake.—CARMINE DRAPERY. Form
 Si 
the shades with vermition, and finish with carmine,


the dark touches with bistre.-
PURPLE DRAPERY.—Lake, blue and white, fi-

nished with lake and indigo. Varied—by adding

of more lake.
more, blue,
.

KELLOW DRAPERY.—Fellowochre, Dutch pink,
i 
gamboge, or Naples yellow, shaded with terra di
3



Sienna, and bistre.


GREEN DRAPERY.—Prussian blue, or verditer,
and Dutch pink, shaded with sap green. Remem-
different greens are mixed by using more, or
Det,

less, of blue, or of yellow.
BLACK DRAPERY.—Lamp-black and white, shad=
ed with pure lamp-black. To give the lustre of vel-
Fen
Vets, &c., use indigo in the dark shades.

WHITE WOOLLEN DRAPERY.-
White, and a lit-

82.

te ochre, or gamboge, to give it a yellowish tint;
shade with bistre.
Draperies should be done with broad strokes of the
pencil, as the back-grounds. Several other kinds of
.
draperies may be painted, according to what is desired,
always takingcare to preserve harmonyin the coloring.
LACE.—Dead color with blue, black, and white,
finish with pure white : when it lies transparent over

diaperies, or carnations, finish the under parts first,
then



107

then paint your lace over them with pure white, and

shade with the first color.
 GOLD LACE.—Dead color with ochre; and finish
with Dutch pink and red lead.
SILVER LACE.—Blue, black, and white, finished
with pure white.
" PEARES.— White and a little blue for the dead-
3
color, shade with light blue; the speck of light in
the middle with pure white, and a little yellow tran-
sparent tint on the shadow, side, to round them,
DIAMONDS.—Lamp-black, the lights touched
with pure white. All other jewels are painted in the
same manner, only changing the dead-color.

It is a frequent over-sight in artists to think
when they have completed the head of a portrait,
which being drawn from nature, possesses in conse-
quence a considerable degree of truth and force, that
the picture is finished, and their work is done;
whereas much of the grace of the picture, and very
much of the general effect of it, depends on the

addition of accessaries, which are to complete its
these, if well disposed, and apply suited to the
main subject, not only embellish that subject; but
confirm and invigorate its effects, by imparting a
splendor and brilliancy throughout the whole:—
whereas if unsuitable and unfit, they enfeeble what has

been already well done, and spoil that which in itself
had spirit:—In short, for these also consult Nature.




82
BP
s


1 198
5

LAF CRAYGNDRAWINGS.
The following article will furnish much informa-
tion in the manner of using crayons, which may with
propriety be adopted in drawings, intended afterwards
to be finished with chalks; to that article, therefore,
we refer, as illustrating the present.
The procedure, in this instance, is, by preparing
the masses of light and shade with crayons, either
lightly touched with the finger, or more accurately
defined with a stump, according to the size of the
subject. The drawing being thus inserted in proper
colors, the chalks (chiefly red and black) are very
neatly stippled into every speck, or interstice, agree-
ably to the color of the part, 2. a. using red chalk,
where the flesh inclines to red, and black chalk in
the shalows, or, in the parts inclining to blne, ec.
 In working some subjects, it is a good way to
Scrape a little powder off each crayon that may be
requisite, and to lay the several listle heaps of color
in order on white paper: then (the outlines being
Dreviously drawn) with small rolls of paper carefully
made, rub in the colors; and finish with chalks.
Stumps made of Kid-leather (gloves, if not soiled
in that part, serve very well) rolled up tightly, will
answer the purpose yet better, Some use stubbed

camel's-hair pencils.
Several crayons made of earths, when thoroughly
dried, then gradually warmed, or rather heared, and
dipped into linseed oil, till saturated; may be shar=
pened to a very fine point; and the lines drawn by
them, will not be injured without violence. Perhaps,
by judicious experiments, a complete set might be
Cemposed.
OF


109 )


OF CRAYONS.
The perfection of crayons consists much in their
being kindly tempered; for it is impossible to exe-
cute a brilliant pieture with them if they are not; on
which account great care should be used in forming
them, to prevent their being hard. We have al-
ready forbid white lead in their composition, because
it will certainly turn black; which white chalk;
tobacco-pipe clay, or whiting, well washed, will
ot do.
Whether a painter works with oil colors, water
colors, or crayons, the grand object of his pursuit
is still the same—a just imitation of nature: But
each species has its peculiar rules, and methods.
Painting with crayons requires, in many respects, a
treatment different from painting in oil; because
colors used dry are generally warmer than when wet
with oil.
The proper paper for crayons is a strong
Daper,
it
either brown, or blue; the thicker the better, if not
t0o coarse and Knotty. The Knots should be levelled
with a pen-Knife, or by hard rubbing; then pasts
the paper very smooth on a linen cloth, previously
strained; but, some artists reckon it most eli-
gible to delay pasting the paper till the subject is
dead-colored.. The method of doing this, is by
laying the paper thus dead-colored, on its face, on
a smooth table, and pasting the back of the paper;
the frame, with the strained cloth, must then be laid
on the pasted side of the paper, after which turn the
painted side uppermost, and lay a piece of clean
Paper
2


110)
paper on it to prevent injury: this done, it may be
stroked gently with the hand, by which means the
air between the cloth and the paper will be forced out.

1
22  
with a box of crayons in the lap, is the
Sitting
most convenient posture to paint in.


The box made use of, when the student paints,

should be about a foot square, having nine partitions

in it. In the upper corner, on the left hand, (sup-


posing the box in the lap) place the black and grey

crayons, those being the most seldom used; in the
second partition, the blues; in the third, the greens
and browns; in the first partition on the left hand

of the second row, the carmines, lakes, vermilions,


and all deep reds the yellows and orange in the

middle; and the pearl tints next; as these last are of
2 very delicate nature, they must be kept very clean,
that the gradations of color may be easily distin
guished: In the lowest row, let the first partition
5
contain a piece of fine linen rag to wipe the crayons
with while they are using; the second, all the pure
lake, and vermition tints; and the other partition
may contain those tints, which, from their complex
nature, cannot be classed with any of the former.
That part of the picture which is immediately
painting, should be rather below the face of the
3
painter, for, if it be placed too high, his arm will
be fatigued. The windows of the painting-room
should be darkened, at least to the height of six feet
from the ground (as before directed for miniature
and the subject to be painted should be situated in
such a manner, that the light may fall with every

advantage.

PROGRESS




( 111.

 


PROGRESS OF A PORTRAIT.

 sie
15
The features of the face being correctly drawn
with chalks, take a crayon of pure carmine; and

carefully draw the nostril, and edge of the nose HIcxt
the shadow, then, with the faintest carmine tint,
broadly lay in the highest light upon the nose; and
the forehead. Proceed, gradually, with a secondr
tint, and the succeeding, to the shadows, which must
be covered brilliant, enriched with lake, carmine; and 

deep green. This method will, at first, offensively
strike the eye, from its crude appearance; but will
be a good foundation to produce a pleasingieffect, in
finishing; colors being much more easily sullied,.
when too bright, than raised to brilliancy. The:
pearly tints of fine complexions must be imitated
with blue verditer and white; but if the parts of a
face where those tints appear, are in shadow, crayons
composed of black and white must be substituted.
Though all the face should be laid in as brilliant
as possible, yet each part should be kept in its proper
relation of tone, and of color, to the others.
i
Touch in the eyes with a crayon inclined to the
carmine tint, brilliant, not loaded with color, but
lightly: incline the light of the eye- very much to a:
blue cast, cautiously avoiding a staring white; pre-
seiving a broad shadow occasioned by the eye-lash.
Avoid a heavy tint in the eye-brows; treat them like
a broad, glowing, shadow, on which afterwards the
hairs of the brow are to be painted; by which method
the former tints will shew through, and produce a.
pleasing effect.
Begin


112 )
Begin the lips with carmine and lake; the streng
vermilion tints should be inseried afterwards. Mark
the corner of the mouth with carmine, brown ochre;
2fid greens, intermixed. If the hair is dark, pre-
serve much of lake, and deep: carmine,, therein;
This may be easily overpowered by the warmer
hair hats, which will produce a rich effect when
finished.
Having dead-cofored the head, sweeten the whole
together, by rubbing it over with the finger passed
very lightly, beginning at the strongest light on the
forehead, uniting it with the next tint, and, so off
till the whole is sweetened together, ofien wiping
2
to prevent sullying the colors. Be caus.
the finger,
frous not to shnoothen, or sweeten, a picture, too
Ofteny because it will produce rather the appearance
of 2 drawing; than of a painting. To avoid this,
replenish the picture with crayon wherever, and as
often, as necessary.
When the head is somewhat advanced, let the
back-ground be laid in; which must be treated in a
different manner, covering it as thin as possible. Near
the face, the paper should be almost free from colot,
for this will do the head great service by its thinness.
In the back-ground, no crayon that has whiting in its
composition should be used, but chieffy such as are
least adulterated. The ground being thin next the
hair, will give an opportunity of painting the edges
of the hair in a light manner, when finishing.
The face, hair, and back-ground being covered,
carefully view the whole at some distance; remarking
what


F13 J
what parts are too light, and what too dark; being
particularly atteative to white, or chalky, appears
ances, which must be subdired with lake and cakminnes
The next step is to complete the back-ground and
the hair; because the dust, in painting these, will
fall on the face, and would much injure it if that was
completed first. From thence proceed to the fore-
head, finishing downward till the whole picture is
cempleted.
In painting the forehead the last time, begin with
the faintest vermilion tint, in the same place where
the faint carmine was first laid, keeping it: broach
In the next shade work in some light blue tints; in=
fermixing with them somewhat deeper vermition
tints, melting them into one anether. Some light
yellows may also be used, but sparingly; toward the
roots of the hair, strong verditer tints, intermised
with greens, will be of use. Pearly tints, compesed
of verditer and white, are to be preserved beneath
the eyes, under the nose, and on the temples; be=
heath the lips, tints of this kind are proper, mixing
them with the light greens and vermition.
In finishing the checks; let lake clear them from
any dust contracted from the other crayons; then,
with the lake intermix bright vermilion; and, last of
all, (if the subject should require 1t), a few touches
of orange-eolored crayon, but with extreme caution;
after this, sweeten that part with the finger as little
as pessible, for fear of producing a heavy effect.-
The beauty of a crayon picture consists, ipn one color
shewing itself through, or rather between another;
beautiful
this being the only method of imitating
complexions to advantage.
The
P
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


114
The eye is the most difficult feature to execute in
crayons, as every part must be expressed with the
utmost nicety, to appear finished; at the same time
that a painter must preserve its breadth, while partn-
cularising the parts. To accomplish this, it 1s a good
general rule to use the crayon in sweetening, as much,
and the finger as little, as possible.When a point
to touch a small part with, is wanted, break off a
little of a crayon against the box, which will pro-
duce a corner. To dark eye-lashes, use some of the
carmine and brown ochre, and the crayon of carmine
and black; and with these, touch the irns of the eye
(if brown, or hazel). Red tints of vermition, car-
sine; and lake, will execute the corners of the eye
properly; but if the eye-lids are too red; they will
have a disagreeable appearance. The pupil of the
eye must be of lamp-black; between this and the
lower part of the irns, the light will catch very strong,
yet it must not be made sudden, but be gently dif-
fused round the pupil till lost in shade. When the
cye-balls are sufficiently prepared, the shining speck
must be made with a pure white crayon, first broken
to a point, and then laid on firm; but, if defective in
neatness, it may be corrected with a pin, by taking
off the redundant parts.
The difficulty, with respect to the nose, is to pre-
serve the lines properly determined, at the same time
so artfully blended into the check, as to express its
projection, and yet no real line to be perceptible on
close examination. In some circumstances it should
be quite blended with the check, which appears be-
hind it; and determined entirely with a slight touch
of
-




115)
of red chalk. The shadow caused by the nose 1s,
generally, the darkest in the face, partaking of no
reflection from surrounding parts: Carmine and
brown ochre, carmine and black, and such brilliant

2
crayons will compose it best.
5
Having prepared the lips with strong lake and
carmine, &c. with these colors; make them com-
pletely correct, and, when finishing, introduce ver-
milions, but with great caution, as they are extremely.
  
predominant.
In coloring the neck; preserve the stem of a pearly
hue, and the light not so strong as on the chest. If
any part of the breast appears, its transparency must
be expressed by pearly tints; but the upper part of
the chest should be colored with beautiful vermis
lions, delicately blended.

It is evident, that the foregoing principles are ap-
plicable only to the finest complexions; it would be
absurd, to treat the portrait of a sea-officer with
transparent blues, and pearly tints. A variation of
colors, according to the subject, is indispensable;
but such variety is not difficult to whoever reflects.

on what has been already hinted. Crayons usually
appear to greatest advantage, in the tender blendings
of their tints, in female countenances: the warmer
and bolder colors succeed best in oil.
H
y We have been particular in noticing the

places of the colors, because the same rules apply in
many other subjects, and are drawn from nature
itself.
P2
OF


C 116 p
i


2


I.57.
OF DRAPERL. AN CRAYONS:


62 



Dark blue, purple, black, pink; and all kind of

red draperres, should be first tinged with carmine,
which will render the colors more brilliant than any
other method; over this, should be laid the middle
iiht, except the masses of dark shadow, which may
be laid on deep.

With the light and dark fints, the smaller parts
are to be made with freedom, executing, as much
with the crayon, and as little with the finger as pos-
sible: in each fold touching the last stroke with the
crayon; which stroke the finger must never touch.
In reflexions, the simple touch of the crayon will be
harsh, therefore, fingering will be necessary. With
respect to reflexions, in general, they must always
2
partake of the same color as the object reflecting;
but in the case of single figures, of whatever color
the drapery is, the reflexion on the face must partake
thereof, otherwise the picture, like paintings on glass,
will have but a gaudy effect.
Linen, lace, fur, &c. should be touched spiritedly.
with the crayon, fingering very little, except the lat-
ter; and the last touches, even of this, should be
executed by the crayon, without sweetening with
the finger.
The coat of crayons should be but thin on the
shadows, but in the lights a body of color will con-
tribute to force, and to durability.

81


( 119.)
OF PAINTINC ON GLASS; OR BACE-PAINTING.
This manner of painting is executed with great
facility: it gives all the softness that can be desired,
and is easy to work; there are no outlines to draw;
nor shadows to insert, but the colors are put on.
without the trouble of either.
The prints for this purpose are done in mezzotinto;
but many of those well-finished, engraved in the
manner of chalks, are very proper; fory their sha-
dows being blended together, when rubbed on the
glass, appear soft, and united, as drawings in Indian
Ink.

From such prints cut off their margin, then on a
piece of fine crown-glass, very clean, the size of the
print, and free from Knots and scratches, lay some,
Vepnice turpentine on one side, quite thin and
smooth, with a painter's brush. Lay the print flat.
in water; when thoroughly wetted (which requires
four-and-twenty hours for some sorts of paper, but
other sorts are ready in two hours), take it carefully
out; and lay it between dry papers, that the super-
fluous water may be absorbed.
Next, lay the damp print flat on a table, with its
face uppermost; then, holding the glass over it,
without suffering the turpentine to touch it rill it is
exactly even with the print, gently press the glass
down in several parts; and turning it, press the print
with your fingers, drawing them from the centre to
the edges, till every part is quite smooth; and free
from blisters.
This


(118 )
This done, wet the back of your print with a
sponge, till the paper will come off with your fingers;
then rub it gently, and the white paper will roll off,
and leave behind it only the ink which formed the
impression. When dry, with a camels-hair pencil
dipped in oil of turpentine; wet it all over, and it
5
will be transparent, and fit for painting on.
A sheet of white paper placed behind, will contris
bute to its transparency; and assist in determining



the coloring, exc.
Lay the lighter colors, first, on the light parts of
your print, and the darker over the shadows; and,
having once laid on the brighter colors, it is not ima-
terial if the darker sorts are laid a little over them 
for the first color will hide those laid on afterwards.
The glass, when painted, must stand three or four
days to dry, and be carefully covered from dust.
The proper colors are those used in oil; for their
management take the rules laid down in the follow-
ing articles.
3
Some years ago, the ingenious Mr. VIsPRE exhi-
bited a number of paintings on glass, the subjects,
Fruit, Flowers, Exc. As in this kind of painting the
lights must be first inserted, the pictures are apt to
suffer by a coldness; which is evident in the per-
formances of those who are not perfect in the prin-
ciples of their art. This must be guarded against;
and care must be taken to give spirit to the pencil;
otherwise the smoothness of the glass will impart a

tameness to the picture.

GENERAE


11


11


11













2



16

























































 n









 




 












n











Articte COLOURING Dictionary














Landon, Publishd by CTaylor Hatton Garden Holborn, Jan1; 1797.
 1 111 1 11(4








C. 119.)

P

er
1 2
7
 

GENERAL ELEMENTS OF PAINTING IN OIL.

3
Notwithstanding the predilection of many persons
for pietures in miniature, of in crayons, there are
scarce any who are not sensible of the superiority of
oil pictures: their more accurate coloring, and their
greater force, as well as their services in subjects of
considerable dimensions, render them principal ob-
5
jects of attention.
 Of the ChoTHs necessary for this kind of painting
33
also of the pencils, tools, pallette, and pallette-knife;
&c. see the respective articles in the Compendium

of Colors.

n
To these urensils most painters add, what they
 
ty

term a mall-stick; which is a slender. rod, or stick;

at one end of which is tied a ball of soft rag, cotton,
Ec. to prevent bruising, or hurting the pieture,
against which it rests. This stick is held in the left.
hand, and its use is, to, support the right hand while
at work, keeping it steady, and firm; but many
artists who possess command and freedom of hand,


decline the mall-stick as a bad custom.
EASELS are of various forms, and contrivances,
but generally composed of three uprights orlegs, the
longest behind. In the two which are in front are a
number of holes, corresponding in height to their
opposites in each leg, so that when a peg is placed
in them, whatever is laid on these pegs, is kept even.
It is usual to place a slight piece of board (termed a
shelf) on these pegs to support small pictures.

1
The






( 120
The colors proper for painting in oil, ase usually
kept in the color shops in bladders, at certain prices;
and this is the best method of purchasing small quans
tities of them, except ultramarine, carmine, and
vermilion, perhaps also the lakes and Prussian blue,

which should be bought in powder, as in that state

they will be best preserved; the least touch of these
will give the picture a cast: mix up no more of these
Colors than you want for present use, which must be
with a drop, or two, of nut-oil on the pallette, with
the pallene-knife.

To get the color out of the bladders, prick a hole
in the side of each, and press it, till you have suffic
cient for present use; as what remains will dry and
skih over, and so become useless.
A great variety of colors are used in oil; the fols
lowing is a list of the principal:
I. PEAKE WHITE.
2. PixE NoTTINGHAM LEAD.

3. NAPLEs KELLOw.
A. PATENT VELLOW.
S. TELLOW LAKE.

6. VELLOW OCHREs
7. DITTo BURNT.
8. RED OCHRE.
9. LICHT RED.
10. PiNE RED LEAD.
11. VERMILION.
3
12. INDIAN, Of CHINESE VERMILIONs
13. PALE, or BRIGHT VERMILION.
14. INDIAN RED.
2
15. SCARLET


(121
15. SCARLET LAKE.
16. PURPLE, OF DEEP LAKE.
17. CARMINE.
18. BROWN OCHRE.
19. SIENNA EARTH.
20. DITTo BUENT.
2I. ANTWERP BROWN.
22. BROWWN PIE.
23. UMEER.
24. UMEER BURNT.
25. DLTRAMARINE.
26. PRUSSIAN BLUE.
27. LAMP BLACK.
28. IVORY BLACK.
29. BoNE BLACK.
30. BLvE BLACk.
1. FLAKE WHITE, when pure, is the very best
white; though it has not the body of Nottingham
7
White Lead. This color should be ground with the
 
finest poppy oil.
White is a very friendly working color, and
comes forward with yellows and reds—but retires
with blues and greens. It is the nature of whites to
sink into whatever ground they are laid on; there-
fore they should be laid on white grounds to preserve
their brilliancy: or, a considerable body. of the

color should be laid on to allow for sinking in.
2. Of NoTTINGHAM LEAD there are two sorts;
the best is little inferior in whiteness to the best
Slake white : it will stand well.

3. WAPLES
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


2


(122
3. NAPLES TELLow will not bear iron to touch
it, without altering its tint. It should be a clean
tender color.
A. PATENT YELLow a new invented coler, very
bright and durable—dries very well.
5. TELLOw LAk should be used sparingly; time
will deprive it of its beauty, unless it he well secured
by varnish—it is a bad driey.
6. TELLOw OCHRE. The best stone ochre is
very difficult to procure genuine; but the want of it
may be supplied by Sienna earth and Nottingham
white; which will produce pretty much the same
tint, or rather brighter, with this advantage, that it
is deeper in its tone, with less of the lead in it: the
great body of the lead supporting the Siennd earth,
which alone is semi-transparent.
S. RED OCHRE is a valuable color, when prime
and genuine, for though cheap, it is often to be had
only of an inferior quality. The best is that which is
very hard and stony, difficult to grind, more difficult
to procure in perfection; this, with a little deep
lake, is not inferior to the best Indian red, in many
effects that may be produced by it. It is a friendly
mixing color, of great use—should be ground with
put ail, though lipnseed oil is commonly used for it,
9. LIGHT REp is fine light ochre burnt: this
mixes very agreeably with white, and produces a
flesh color of great use.
10. FiNE RED LEAD. By an improved method
of pusifying it, is rendered very bright, and stands
well
11. Of


123
II. Of VERMILTON the true native cinnabar: is,
by some artists, reckoned the best. It will not
plate, but is a fine color when glazed. It is ground
with linseed oil; and should be used with dryingoil.
13. PALE, or BRIGHT VERMILION, is esteemed
much the most useful of the vermitions; as the
effects of the others may be produced with this and
good lake : but they cannot equal the brightness of
this, by any mixture wharever.
14. INDrAN RED, is a strong, pleasant working
color; but will not glaze well, and when mixed
with white falls a little into the leadch tone. It is
ground and used as lake; a mixture of red ochre
and lake is occasionally a substitute for Indian red:
nevertheless this is a useful and powerful color—in-
deed it is often rather too powerful, and especially
while wet, in which state it differs from itself when
dry: experience alone can justly foresee its true
effects.
15. LAKE is a tender, sympathising decpred, but of
no strong body, therefore it should be strengthened
with Indian red. It is the best glazing color: It is
ground with linseed oil, and used with drying oil.
17. CARMINE Is a most beautiful crimson between
lake and vermilion, is a fine working colot, and
glazes. It should be ground with nut oil, and used

with drying oil.
18. BROWN OCHRE. A color allied to this may
be made from yellow ochre, and other mixtures of

the ochres,
D 2
19. SIENNA


(124
19. SIENNA EARTH. A fine color, but little
in use, except for landscape : in which this color
Burnt is of considerable service.
20. SIENNA EARTH BURNT, mixed with dark
yellow and Indian red, makes a fine tint. The best
sort burnt mixed with white and a little ultramarine
makes an exquisite flesh color for skies, &cc.
21. ANTWERP BROwN. This brown is not al
ways kept in the color-shops, we shall therefore give
here the manner of preparing it: it is valuable from
its great depth of tone; it has great body, and will
stand well, being produced by fire.—Put some good
asphalrum into an iron ladle, set it over a very slow
and feeble fire, taking care it does not boil over;
keep it there till it will boil no more, but is become
nearly a cinder; when cold, put to it the proportion
of half an ounce of sugar of lead to half a pound of
C
the calx, grind it in the strongest drying oil. It
will work free, and dry well. NV. B. This operation
is called burning of asphaltum. asphaltum thus burnt

i5 used in some compositions of etching ground-
TTde CROUND.
22. BRowN PiNk is a fine glazing color, but of
no strong body; in the flesh it should never join or
mix with the lights, because this color and white are
enemies, and mix to a warm dirty hue; for which
reason their joinings should be blended with a cold

middle tint. In glazing of shadows it should be laid
before the other colors, that are to enrich it: it is one
of the finishing colors, and therefore should never be
used alone in the first painting. It is strengthened
with burnt umber, and weakened with terra verte
15


(125
is ground with linseed oil, and used with drying oil.
A better color (in the opinion of some artists) and
more certain, may be made from Antwerp brown
and patent yellow.
23. UMEER, burnt or unburnt, is especially use-
ful in dead-coloring; it forms outlines, ec. well, or
washes in a subject, &xc. to advantage.
24. BURNT UMBER is a very quick drier—is a
fine warm brown, and a good working strong color:
it is of great use in the hair, and mixes finely with
the warm shade. It is highly commended by some
artists, and highly blamed by others, as a sullyingcolor.
25. ULTRAMARINE Is the finest blue Known in
the world : it stands even in the fire; it is tender,
glazes beautifully, and never glares—it is a retiring
color. From its great value should be used with the
purest oils.
26. PRUSSTAN BLUE iS a fine blue, and a Kind
Working color; but apt to be cold, and rarely or
never stands well : it should be ground in nut oil, as
grosser oils injure 1t. Ir should only be ground
as Wanted.
27. LAMP-ELACK Is a troublesome color, and
should be burnt in an iron box till red hot; being a
greasy color, and when mixed with the strongest
drying oil, still requiring the assistance of a little
sugar of lead, to force it to dry.
28. IvoRY BLAcK is far preferable to lamp-black,
as it mixes much berter with other colors; it is a
good shade for deep blue. Ivory black and a little
Indian red make a good general shadow colot; it is
eround with linseed oil, and requires the assistance
6
5
Of


126
of drying oil. Black is in its nature a cold and tes
tiring color, except where by the force of contrast if

comes forward, in which case it has great power.

TO SET A PALETTE
1
A quantity of color being squeezed out of its blads
ler, on the centre of the pallette, work it into a
proper form (with the addition of what oil is requi=
sitel by the pallette-Knife, and transplace it into its
Station on the upper part of the pallette, beginning
with the lighter color, placed next the hand. From
these originals compose a row of secondary tints; by
mixing them together, in such proportion as appears
most likely to suit the subject to be treated. A third.
row, still nearer to the subject, may easily be formed
from the former.
To be somewhat more particular: We suppose
the original colors placed in their order on the upper
part of the pallette: To compose a second row of
colors; take, for example, Lake and Naples yellow,
to these we imagine white to be added; this compos
sition we place in the second row, and so of the rest.
If we wish for a lighter tint of the same colors, this
15 produced by an addition of white; or, perhape,
we want a red somewhat different, varying to light
red, of to vermition; these united, form a compound;
admitted lower on the pallette: or, the secondary
color, instead of red; requires yellow, or a different
Kind of yellow; or; in short, any other coler which
ay be a departure from the first mixture. This
combination is termed breaking the colors; its use is,.
10


127.
to prevent glare, and rawness, and its judicious
exercise is a principal token of a masterly hand.
Nature never presents a pure, unmized, strong,
color, of any cast: but every color has an inclination
to, of a tinge of, some other. A blue sky seems at
first an exception, yet it is not so in fact; nor the
color of the sed, nor the green of a field; for an in-
humerable variety of lights, reflexes, exc. are perpe-
jually playing upon it, and thereby diversifying,
debasing, and confusing, the original color. Even
draperies vary in the colors of their lights and shades:
the yellow light of the sun, the red light of a fire, a
white light, &cc. alter their appearances; and the
deprivation of light in the shades, as the parts are
more or less retired, is too obvious to need expla-
nation. yet, even shadows are altered by reflexions
from their neighbours.
It is evident, from this mode of reasoning, that to
set a pallette well, requires no meak skill; and per-
haps, if those who consider it as labour lost were to
bestow more attention on it, their pictures would not
fare the worse for it, we shall therefore give a variety
of modes, as practised by the best masters:
Method of setting the Pallette as used by Chevalier
Menss, and others.
1. The principal light of fiesh is composed of
white and Naples yellow, or light ochre, or brown
ochre, according to the complexion of the person;
of these form the first and second tints.
2. White, light red; with a little yellow.
3. The same a little darkes.
For


 128
C
For Middle Tint.
1. White, black and yellow, tempered with :
bittle red.,
2. The same a little darker.
For Shadorws.
I. Tellow, black, with a little red : in three de-
grees of strength. In all these shadow tints a little
asphaltum may be used, in order to give a transpa-
rency and an harmony.
For a Warm Tint.

1. Naples yellow and lake.
2. Lake and vermilion.
3. Lake and light red.
4. Lake and terra de Sienna, burnt.
A little asphaltum must be used in all these
Warm tints.
Likewise make two other tints composed of black
and white only—and two other tints of a purplish
hue, which are composed by mixing a little vermis
lion with the black and white.
Another Method of setting the Pallette.
1. Light. Fellow ochre and white.
2. Ditto. The same a little darker.
3. Ditto. Light red, a little yellow ochre and
white.
4. Light.
3


(129
4.. Light. The same a little darker.
For a very fine complexion add a little vermi-
lion in the tints, No. 3 and 4.
5. Ditto. Vermilion and white is also necessary
in the checks, &cc.
6. Demi-tint. The same as No. 1, with peach
black.
7. Second tint. Fellow and black, in the dead a
little red.
8. Third tint. Terra de Siennd burnt, yellow
and black.
9. Reffexion. To No. 3 add yellow ochre and
brown ochre.
10. Dirto. To No. 4 add lake and burnt ochre.
11. Black. Lake, burnt ochre and terrd de Sienna.
In setting a pallette it is good to observe to lay
those colors near each other which harmonize: for
example, first, white, then Naples yellow, next light
yellow, dark yellow, light red, vermillion, terra de
Sicnnd burnt, lake, blue, umber light and burnt, and
black; also, observe in mixing the tints on the pal-
lette to place them under in like harmony, begin-
ning with the lightest of each, and so placing those
of the next degree of strength one beside the other.
OF THE PRINCIPAL TINTS FOR PAINTING FLESH;
MADE BY MIKTURE FRGM THE PRINCIPAE
COLORS.
1. LIGHT RED. TINr, of lightred and white;
it is the best conditioned of all colors; for a general
ground for flesh. With this color, and the shade-tent,
we should make out the flesh,like claro obscure, or
T

R
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
MeTZOuntO.



130
mezzounto. We should also remember, that this
color will grow darker; because it is naturally too
strong for the white; therefore we should temper it
ii Ehs
by mixing some vermilion and white with it, in pro-
portion to the fairness of the complexion; and though
i
thus mixed, it may yet be called the light red tint,
to avoid confounding the vermition tint with it.
2. VERMILION TINT. Vermilion and white, mix.
ed to a middle tint; it is the most brilliant light red;

1
it agrees best with the white, light red, and yellow
tints.
3. CARMINE TINT, is carmine and white, mixed
to a middle tint; it is the most beautiful red, for the
cheeks and lips : it is a finishing color, and should
never be used in the first painting.
4. ROSE TINT, made of the red shade and white,
mixed to a middle degree, or lighter: it is one of the
cleanest and most delicate tints used in flesh, for
up the heavy dirty colors; and therefore,
clearing
.
in changing, will sympathize and mix Kindly.
5. TELLOw TINT, is often made of Naples

yellow and white; or of light ochre and whice,
which is a good working color. Remember, the
ochre is too strong for the white; therefore it re-
quires a little allowance in using it. It follows the
light red tints, and should always be laid before the
blues. If we lay too much of it, we may recover the
E
ground it was laid on, with the light red tints.
6. BLUE TINT, ultramarine and white, it is a
pleasant working color: with it we should blend the
gradations. It follows the yellows, and with them
1t Miakes greens; and with the red it produces pur-
ples.


137)
ples.. No color is so proper for blending down, or
softening the lights into keeping.
7. LEAD TINT, ivory black and fine white, mixed
to a middle, degree; it is a fine retiring color: is of
great use in the gradations, and in the eyes.
S. GREEN TINT, is made of Prussian blue, light
ochre, and white: this color will dirty the lights, and
should be laid sparingly in the middle tints. It
15 most used in the red shadows, where they are too
strong. It is of a dirty anripathizing nature.
9. SHADE TIwr is made of lake, Indian red,
black, and whire, mixed to a murrey color, of a mid-
dle int; this is the best color for the general ground
of shadows; therefore called the shade-fint: it mixes
with the lights, and produces a pleasant clean co-
lor, a little inclined to the reddish pearl. As the
four colors of its composition are of a sympathising
tiature, this mixture will be the same; and therefore
may be easily changed, by the addition of other color.
10. RED SHADE, is lake and a very little Indian
red. it is a good working color, and a good glazer.
it strengthens the shadows on the shade-tint; and
receives, when it is wet, the green and blue tints
agreeably. It is a good ground for all dark-shadows.
11. WARM SHADE, is made of lake and brown
pink, mixed to a middle degree. it is a fine color
for strengthening the shadows on the shade-tint,
when they are wet or dry. We must take care, that
It does not touch the lights, because they will mix
with it to a dirry snuff-color; and therefore should be
softened with a tender cold tint.
R2
12. DARK


(132
12. DARK SHADE is made of ivory black and a
little Indian red only. This color mixes very kindly
with the red shade, and sympathizes agreeably with
the middle tints in the dead-coloring. It is a glazing
color for the eye-brows and darkest shadows. It is
an excellent shadow-color, and one of the finest
Working colors.
FIRST PAINTING.
THE COLORS AND TINTS NECESSARY FOR THE
FIRST PAINTING OF FLESH.
1. FINE WHITE.
2. LIGHT OCHRE—and its two tints.
3. LIGHT RED—and its two tints.
4. VERMILION—and its tint.
5. A tipt made of LAKE, VERMILION, and
WHITE.
6. ROSE TINT.
7. BLvE TINT.
S. LEAD TINT.
9. GREEN TINT.
10. Half-shade tint—made of INDIAN RED, and
WHITE.
1l. SHADE TINT.

12. RED SHADE.
1.
13. WARM SHADE.
2

The finishing pallette for a fine complexion re
quires more; viz. carmine and its tint, lake, brown
Pihik; ivory black, and Prussian blue.
The first lay of colors consists of two parts—one
the shadows only, the other the lights.
The


(133
The use of the shadows is to make out the drawing,

very correctly, with the shade-tint, as if it was to be
done with this color only; and remember to drive the
color, or lay it sparingly. The lights lay in with
the lightred tint, in different degrees, as in nature:
these two colors united produce a clean tender middle
int; to go over the darkest shadows with the red of
warm shade, will finish the first lay.
The warm shade, if laid on the shade-tint, improves
it to a warther hue; but if laid insread of the shade-
tint, it will dirty and spoil the colors it mixes with:
if the red shade be laid first, instead of the shade-
tint, the shadows would appear too red and bloody;
the shade and light red tints are so friendly and
delicate in their natures, that they will not dirty each
other, though we are continually changing them.
To finish the first painting, improve the reds and
yellows to the complexion, and after theim the blues;
239
observing, that the blues on the reds make purple,
and the yellows green. The same method is to be
understood of the shadows; but be sure to leave
theim clean, and not too dark; therefore allowance
should be made in their grounds with the light red;
because glazing will make them darker. Acloth of
2 dark, or bad hue, requires a strong body of color

all over the shadows, such as will not sink into the
ground, but appear warm, and a little lighter than
the life, that it may be of the same forwardness to
finish, as if it had been on a light oround; for, the

o
business of dead-coloring is, that we leave i7 always
in proper order for finishing.
The


(134
The grounds of shadows, in the dead-coloring,
should be such as will support the character of the
finishing colors; clean, and a little lighter than the
finishing colors, because the finishing of shadows
consists, in a great degree, of glazing; all shadows
and colors, that are to be glazed, should be done
with colors of a clean solid body; because the glar-
ing is then more lasting, and has a better effect.
The light red and white improved is proper for
the first lay or ground; which should be always done
with a full pencil of suff color, brighter than the
life, because it will sink a little in drying. The
greater the body and quantity of color, and the stiffer
it is laid, the less it will sink: every color in diying
will sink, and partake, in proportion to its body, of
the color it is laid on; all the lights of the flesh, if
not laid on a light ground, must consequently change
a little from the life, supposing there is no allowance
made. The shade-tint for the shadows should verge
upon the rose tint, in proportion as the complexion
15 delicate.
It is thought the great masters of coloring seldom
sweetened, or softened, the colors; but in uniting
the first lay, were very careful in preserving the
brightness of their colors, and therefore did not work
them below the complexion. The first painting
should be left bright and bold, and the less the
colors are broken the better: We should forbear
using any colors that will prejudice them, and te
contented to add what is wanted in the next painting,
2
SECOND


(135
SECOND PAINTING.
The second painting begins with laying on a very
small quantity of poppy oil; then wipe it almost all
off, with a dry piece of silk hankerchief, leaving only
a moisture remaining from it.
The first lay of the second painting; is, scumbling;
the lights, and glazing the shadows: then finishing
the complexion with the virgin tints, and improving
the likeness, as far as we can, without daubing.
Scumbling, is going over the lights, where they
are to be changed, with the light red unts, or some
other of their own colors, such as will always clear
and improve the complexion, with short stiff pencils;
scumbling only such parts as require it.
The light red tint improved, is a good color for
scumbling, and improving the complexion, in gene=
ral. Where the shadows and drawing, are to be cor-
rected, employ the shade tint, driving the color very
stiff, and bare; the easier to retouch, and change it;
with the finishing unts. Parts of the shadows should
be glazed with some of the transparent shadow colors;
such as will improve them, and come near to the life,
taking care not to lay on too much, for fear of losing
the hue of the first painting, the ground of which
should always appear through the glazing. In umt-
ing the lights and shades, they should not mix dead,
and meally; the more the lights mix with the shades,
the more meally those shades will appear.
Go over the complexion with the virgin tints, to
improve the coloring to the utmost, both in the
lights


136.
lights and shadows. This should be done in the
same manner as we laid them in the latter part of the
first painting; with the reds, yellows, and blues;
blending them with delicate, light, touches of the
tender middle tints, without, softening. We should
leave the tints and their grounds clean and disimct;
and be content to leave off while the work is safe
and unsullied, leaving what, is required farther, to
the conclusion; for, in attempting the finishing.
touches before the colors are dry,, we lose the spirit;
and the drawing, and dirty wherever we touch.

2
THIRD PAINTING, OF FINESHING.
It is now supposed the complexion, wants little.
more than a few light touches; therefore there will

be no occasion for ofling before we, begin.. We

begin with correcting all. the glazings hrst,, where
the glazing serves as a ground, or under part; then
I
we determine what should be, done, next,, before we
do, it, that we may make, the alteration with one.

stroke of the pencil, thereby preserving both the
glazins and the tints; but if we, cannot lay such va=:

riety of unts, and finishing colors, as we intended; it

is better to leave off while the, work is safe,, and in
good order; because those few touches, which would
2
endanger the beauty of the coloring, may easily be
33
done, if we have patience to stay till the colors are

dry; and then add those finishings with, free light
D.
strokes of the pencil.
It is much easier to soffen over sfrong tints when

3 h
they are dry, than when they are, wet, because we


ay


5H
10

ndy add the very colors that are wanting, without
endangering the parts that are dry. If any of the
colors of the pallette want to be changed to the life,
when we are painting, it is better to do it with the
r
knife on the pallette, than with the pencil.
OF BACK-GROUNDSs

The principal colors necessary for painting back:
grounds in portraiture, as walls, buildings; or the
like, are white, black, Indian red; light and brown
ochre, Prussian blue, and burnt umber, from which
the eight principal tinis are made; as follows:
I. PEAEL is made of black, white, and a little
Indian red.
2: LEAD, of black and white, mixt to a dark
lead color.
3. TELEow, of brown ochre and white.
4. OLIVE, of lightochre, Prussian blue, and whites
5. FLESH, of Indian red and white, mixt to a
middle tints
6. MURREY, of Indian red, white, and a little
black, mixt to a kind of purple, of a middle tint.
7. STONE, of whice, umber, black, and Indianred.
8. DARK-SHADE, of black and Indian red only.
Here the lead tint serves for the blues; the fiesh
tint mixes agreeably with the lead: the murrey
i5 a good blending color, and of use where the
olive is too strong. The umber, white, and dark
shade produce a Variety of stone colors: the dark
shade and umber, used plentifully with drying oil,
Make a warm shadow color. These colors may be
laid
3
VOh. II. Edit. 7.





138 7.
laid with drying oil, because they mix. and set the

better with the softener.
Begin from the shadowed side of the head, and
paint the lights first; then, the gradations and sha-
Iir
dows, with a large, stuffish, tool, sparingly, with the
dark shade and white, a little changed with such
colors as will give it the hue required, but very nedr
in regard to tone and strength; leaving them like

ne2zotinto.
The dark and warm shadows should be laid before
the colors that join them with the dark shade and
umber, because, if those colors were laid on first,
they would interrupt and spoil the transparency,,
which is their greatest beauty. The more the first
lay is drove, the easier and better we may change it
with the finishing tints; therefore we may lay them
with the greater body.
As we heighten and finish the lights, we do it
with warmer colors; accompanied with tender cold
tints. The lightest part of the ground is always
hearest to the shadowed side of the head; and this

part governs all the rest; it should be painted with a
variety of light, warm, clear colors, which gradate;
and lose their strength imperceptibly. We. must
take care not to cover too much of the first lay, but
consider it as the principal color.
. When the lights are. well adapted to support the
head, it is easy to introduce whatever kind of sha-
dows we find most proper; then soften. and blend,
the whole, the tints will sink, and lose a little of
their strength and beauty in drying.
Grounds,
walls, &cc. may be finished at once painting; or at
terwards



139

terwards glazed with a little of the dark shade and
dryingoil, drove very bare; and their hue improved
with a few light touches of the color that is wanting.
The dark shadows may also be strengthened and im-
proved by glazing, after the subject is nearly finish-

ed; for fear of making them too strong.
Curtains should be dead-colored when we paint
the ground; with clean colors, of a hue near to
the intended curtain, such will support the finishing
colors, with a tender sort of keeping, in regard to
their tone in the lights, but much softer in the sha-
dows, mixing and breaking the whole with the colors
of the ground, as Fresnoy says, & bodies that are
back in the ground, should be painted with colors
633
allied to those of the ground itsen. If we cannot

set the folds the first painting; we should leave the
masses of light and shadow, in regard to the keeping
of the picture, broad and well united together, such
25 may appear easy to finish on. The colors of the
landscape, th back-grounds, should be broken and
softened, with those of the parts which join them:
hereby bringing them into keeping, so that the parts
do not stare, nor cut at their extremities.
The sky should be broke with the lead, and the
Hesh, tints: the murrey tint is of great use in the
grounds of distant objects; the umber and dark shade
in the near grounds: the greens should be more
beautiful than we intend them, because they will
1d
Lade, and grow darker. After all is painted, we should

go over the whole very lightly with the softener.
2 siar ic is

i
82
OF


C 140
5
OF PAINTING DEAPERIES.
The rightmethod of painting draperies in general,

is, to make out the whole, with three coloys oply:
22: the lights, the middle rint, and the shade tint.
The middle unt should be very near to the general
hue of the drapery; and the shade tint dark enough
O
for the general hus of the shadows.
The lights should rather incline to a warmish hue:
3
the middle tint should be made of friendly working
colors, such as will mix of a clean tender cool hue,
and the shade tint should be made of the same colors
as the middle tint, only with less light; with these
three colors we should make out the whole like
Me2zotinto, before we add any of the reflexions,
of finishing ints.
. The refiexions of draperies, &cc. are generally pro-

ductions of their own, and lighter than the shadows
on which they are found; being produced by light,
they will have a light, warm color, mixed with the
local color that receives them. Here it will be ne=
cessary to observe the general method in managing
the colors of the first lay, and those of the reffexiopns
and finishing tints.
In the first lay, the high lights should be laid with
plenty of suff color; then shaped, and softened
into chgracter with the middle tint, very correctly.
Where the gradations of the lights are slow, as in the
3

large parts, it is proper to lay the middle tint first at
(D
their eatremities, with a tool that will drive the
colery


14½
color, and leave it sparing: because, the lights will
mix, and hie the better, upon it. Next make out all
the shadows with the shade tint drove bare. After
this, the middle tint, which fills up, and serves as a
kind of second lights and gradations, should be ma-
naged very nicely, to produce character, without
touching any of the high lights which finish the
t
irst lay.
Reflexions and finishing tints, are in general anti-
pathies to the first lay; they will, without great care,
dirty the colors on which they are laid; and there-
fore should he laid with a delicate light touch; with-
out softening: if overdone, it may be recovered
with the proper color of the part, either directly, or
when dry.
17
When the color of the cloth is very improper for
the ground of a drapery, we should change it with
those colors which are most likely to improve; and
to support, the finishing colers. This method will
preserve them in their greatest lustre. In dead color-
ing, the lights, and shades, need only hint at the
shape and roundings of the figure, but if we have a
design to work from, it will be proper to make all the
large and principal parts in their places, with a clean
color, lighter than the intended drapery, though in
general of the same hue, while the shadows are no
darker than a middle tint: these should be mixed
and broken in a tender manner; then softened with
a large tool, that nothing rough, or uneven, be left to
interrupt or burt the character of the finishing colors.
Instances


t 142. ).




Instances of particular kinds of Drapery.
2
3

WHITE SATTIN.
All whites should be painted on white grounds,
laid with a good body of color; by reason this color
SINkS more into the ground than any other.

there are four degress of colors in the first lay to
white sattin: 1st. The fine white for the lights.

2d. The first tint, made of fine white and a very little
ivory black, mixed to an exact middle degree be-
tween the white and the middle tint. This color
follows the white, and with this, we should give the
lights a character, taking care that this tint appear

distinctly between the white, and the middle tint.


3d. The middle tint should be made of white,
black, and a little Indian red, mixt to a beautnful,
clear color, of a pearly huc. Remember to allow
for the red hue changing a little toward lead color.
If there be occasion to make any part of the middle
int lighter, we should do it with the first tint only.
This color should also be laid, sparingly, before the
white, in the lights that happen in the middle tints
and shadows; on which we should lay the white with
one light rouch, not covering all the part made with
the first tint: but, preserving a softening edge, or bor.
der, between the white and the middle tint. 4th. The
shade tint should be made of the same color as the
middle tint; but with less white, so that it be dark
sough for the shadows in general; with which we
should make out the shadows into character.

I





1 143. J
In the reflexion and finishing tints of white sattins
brown ochre, mixed with the color of the lights,
is a useful color, in general, for all reflexions pro-
duced from their own colors. Accidental reflexions
are made with the color of the parts from whence they
are produced, and the local colors that receive them.
Two reflecting tints are wanted for draperies, in ge=
neral, one lighter than the middle tint, the other
darker. These may be changed on the pallette with
the first, and the middle tints, as occasion requires,
or be lightly broken on the part that receives them:
but this last method is not so safe as the other. The
tint for blending the dark shadows to the mellow
tender hue, is made with the shade tint and a little
brown ochre; laid on very sparingly, with soft light
touches, for fear of making them heavy. If it be over-
done, we may recover it with the color it was laid
pon.
We often see a little blue used in the first tint of
white satfin. When a warm, or dirty color; is mixed.
with a clean light one, they will form a dirty color.
It is the want of the red hue which makes white sat-
tins often appear like pewter.

BLUE SATTIN.
Blue sattin is made of Prussian blue and fine white.
The best ground for blue is white for the lights,
and black and white for the shadows.
The first lay of colors for blue is divided into
three degrees:
m
3
1st. The
53


F44

25t. The middle tint of a beautiful arure. 2d.
The coler for the lights about a middle degree be.
ween that, and white. 3dly. The shade tint, dark
enough for the shadows, in general. The broad
67
lgats should be lard with plenty of color, and
shaped to character with the middle tint, before we
lay on any other colors. The less the colors are
miked, the better they will appear, and stand; for
the lights of blue should be managed with as much

Care as those of white sattin. Next follows the rest
ofthe middle unt, and then the shadows. The more
we drive the shade tint, the better it will receive the
refiexions and finishing tints. The shadows should
be strengthened, and blended, with ivery black,
and some of their own color, mixt into a tender
mellow hue:
The reflexions are made as those of white sattin
with ochre and some of the lights: which should be
Jane at ence. The shadows, when dry, may be im-
Droved with the colors they were made of. The
Prussian blue best to be used, is that which looks the
most beaunful before it is ground: the soorner it 1s
used after it is ground, the better.
VELVET may be painted at once. The method is,
to make out the first lay with the middle tint, and
shade tint; on which place the high lights with light
touches, and finish the shadows as those of sattin; but
the nearest imitation of velvet is procured by glazings
having first prepared a ground, or dead coloring
with such colors as will, when dry, bear out and
support the glazing color. The glazing color is, of
a fine transparent quality, used smply with oil only;
50


( 145.

so that whatever, ground it is laid on, the whole may
10 he
applar distinctly through it.. The best ground for


blue is made with white and ivory black: the white
7
is for the high lights, which, with the middle tint

5
and shade unt, makes out the first lay like mezzo-

tinto. The middle unt should be lighter, in propore
19.
tion to the grazing, because that will make it darker.
It is often necessary to cover all but the high lights
8
with a glazing, laid with less quantity than if it was
to be done once only. If any of it touch the lights,
17
we should wipe it off with, a clean rag. The very
high lights should be improved, and made of a fine
7
white, and left to dry. 1he glazing color is Prus-
sian blue, ground very fine with nut oil; and should

be laid with a large stitlisn fool, that will drive the
color as occasion requires. On the last glazing
strengthen and finish the shadows.
We observe, in this instance, that glazing the
middle tint, which is made of black and white, will
not produce a color so blue, as if it had been pre-

pared with Prussian blue and white; yet this color
will preserve the beauty of the lights, in their per-
fection, by reason of its tender obscure hue, when
the blueness of the other would diminish them.
This method of glazing blue is the general rule
for all glazing.
The greatest fault in colofing draperies of any kind,
15, painting the shadowed parts with strong slarins
C
tndliy
colors, which destroy the beauty of the lights. This
is not only the reverse of art, but of nature, whose
beauty of color is always diminished in proportion to
the light: for this reason we should blend, and soften,
T
the
VOL II. Edit. 7.


146
the shadows, with such friendly colofs as will agree



y
with their local character, and the requisite degree
8
of obscurity.
5 7o

in grazing blue, the ughts may be glazed with

x
i owri
ultramarine, though the other parts are done with
 
Prussian blue, hereby saving a great quantity of that

valuable color,

Though this general method of painting sattuns,

1s, to make the first, lay of colors, with three degrees,
5
wod
 produce, two
them, they
of tints; yet, in using
33
in 
more : for, the mixing of two different colors on the
55
10
cloth, makes another, of a middle tint between them:
so do the lights and middle fint, and the middle and
 

ngi
shade tint: the first mixture answers to the first tint
L3
5.2
in white sattin; and the last is a sort of gradation, or
half shade.
If the lights and middle tint mix to a beautiful
clean color, of a middle hue between both, there

will be no occasion for a color to go between them,
as in the blue sattin,: but if in mixing, they produce
92
a tint inclining to a dirty warm hue, then there must
be another made of a sympathizing nature, to be
0
said between them, to preserve the beauty of the
F



lights.
3
It is necessary to understand these principles of
the first lay of colors, as comprehending the general


rule of coloring, and that on which the practice of

25
id i
excellent coloring depends.



 SCAREEF



(247
SCARLET AND CRIMSON.
A light vellow red, made of light ochre, lightred,




and white, is the proper ground for scarlet; the

3
shadows are, Indian red, and, in the darkest parts,
5
mixed with a very little black.


r

The secopnd painting should be lighter than we

0.
intend the finishing color to be in proportion to the
glazing, which will make it. darker.
327

The high lights, are vermition for cloth, and ver.

milion and white, for gartin, and relvet; the middle

2
fint is vermition, with a very litile lake, or Indian
red; the shade tint is Indian red and lake, with a
litile black in the darkest shadows. The difference
between scarlet and crimson, is, that the high lights
5

of crmson, are whiter, and the middle tint is made
darker. Their reflexions are made with light red and
vermition. The high lights should be laid and ma-
naged in the same manner as those of the blue, for
fear of dirtying them; and sometimes they require to
be touched over a second time, before we glaze them.
The more the colors of the second paintingare drove,
the easier and better they may be managed to cha-
racter but the high lights should have a good body
of color, and be left with a delicate light touch.
After it is well dry, we should finish by glazing the
whole with fine lake, and improve the reflexions and
shadows. Scarler requires but a very thin glazing.
It is better to glaze crimson twice over, than to lay
100 much at once painting.
PINE
F.2





C 248
PYEH CoLep.

23
49
3
There are two different methods of painting a pink
t
m 
5
22
  re

glazing; the other, by a body of
Color: one; Dy
3
Colors at one painting. The same grounds do for
both; which should be, a whitish color, inclining
to yellow, for the lights; and Indian red, lake, and
white, for the shadows.
The second painting, for the glazing, is done with
the same colors and a litile vermilion, for the re-
flexions; and vermition and white for the high lights;
when dry, glaze it with fine lake, then break and
soften the shadows into character, and harmony,
directly.
The other method is, to make the high lights with
carmine and white; the middle tint with lake, white,
and a little carmine; and shadows with lake and
Indian red, with a little vermition for the reflexions.
But the shadows require to be broken with some
tender obscure tint.
VELLOw.
The ground for yellow should be a yellowish
white, for the lights, and a mixture of the ochres,
for the shadows,
There are the same number of tents in the yellow,
as in the white, sattin; the method of using them is
the same. The lights are made with King's yellow,
ground with clean, good, drying oil. The first tint
i5 light ochre, changed with a little of the pearl tint
made


149
made of the dark shade and white: which should be
laid, and managed, as the first tint in white sattin.
The middle tint is, a mixture of the light and brown
ochre, softened with the pearl fint. The shade tint
is made with brown pink and brown ochre. These
belong to the first lay.
The reflexions are light ochre; sometimes, in the
warmest parts, mixed with a little light red; the

shadows are strengthened with brown pink and burnt
MIIiber..


3

3

GREEN.
4

5
. The proper ground for green is, a light yellow
5
green; made of light ochre, a little white, and Prus-
8
3
san blue, for the lights; and the ochres, brown
pink, and Prussian blue, for the shadows.
 The finest green for drapery, is made of King's
yellow, Prussian blue, and brown pink. The high
lights are, King's yellow and a very little Prussian
7
blue; the middle tint has more Prussian blue; the
shade tint is made with some of the middle tint,
brown pink, and more Prussian blue: but the darkest
shadows are brown pink and a little Prussian blue.
The lights and middle unt should be managed in the
same manner as those of the blue sattin. The shade
tint should be kept entirely from the lights, because
the brown pink that is in it, will, in mixing, dirty
them, as the black does those of the blues; they dry
2 little darker than they appear when wet. The
King's yellow should be ground with good drying
oil; for, the longer it is in drying, the more it will
change





150

change and grow darker: and the soopner it is used,
C

5
 
 l ho Pat i
better it will stand. It is proper to have two
the
 

3
  ggi

7
sorts of Kings yenow, one very light for the higa


3 sare agon ths d 

lights of velvet.

2


Sating   






CRANGEABLE COLORED SILKS.

ls 

Changeable colors have four principal tints; viz.
the high lights, middle tuit; shade unt, and reffect.

ol hndly ae is 
edtint.
The art lies in finding the exact color of the mids
dle tint, because it has more of the general hue of
the silk than any of the others. The shade tint
is of the same hue with the middle tint, though

dark enough for the shadows. The high lights,
5
though often very different from the middle tint,
should be of a clean, friendly, working color, that
will, in mixing with it, produce a tint of a clean
Sympathizing hus.
The method of painting silks is to make out the
folds with the chade unt, and then fill them up in the
lights with the middle tint. This first lay should be
done to satisfaction before any other colors are added;
the stiffer the middle tint is used, the betier the high
lights may be laid on it. The reffected tint falls
generally on the gradating half shades, and should be
laid with tender touches, sparingly, for fear of spoil-
ing the first lay.
This method of painting answers to all the colored
silks, as well as changeable, with this difference only,
that the plain colors require not so much art as the
changeable do in matching the tints. The last part
Of


151




1423
3
J855
to d
of the ork is the hnishing; and sffengthchning the
873

1ag0t
9.13.
shadows with an obscure tint, incuning to a mel-



13

lowish hue. such as will not catun tue eye, and in-

211  22x
  
tertubt the beauty of the lights.
1

3
e hil.50 t   
 
e fr
n hin holilon  bi
    t

BLACE

 Fan 
2




s po


the best ground for black, 1s ught red for the
5

f
2
s

lights; and indian red and a littie black for the





edyo
Shadows.

22



sgdd

5
colors are, for the lights, black,
The Hnishing

-
in o o 
5333 




y


white, and a hitle laxe.. 1he middle tint has iess
0

 
 9295
1he shade tint 1s
white, and more lase and black.


4.



9  7 7

made of an equal quantity of lake and brown pink,


 35
4 757
Dt
with a very litzie biack.

The method of painting black is very difterent
from that of other colors; for, the principal thing in
them, is to leave the lights clean and brilliant—but
in black, it is to keep the sbadows clear and transpa-
F
19
1ei. Therefore we should begin with the shade


int; and glaze over all the shadows with it. Nisi,
1
lay in the darkest shadows with black; and a litile of

the shade tint, very correctly. After that, fill up
the whole breadth of lights with the middle tint only.
Allwhich should be done exactly to the character
5
5
of the drapery, and then finish with the high lights.
Here observe, that the ground being red, will beap
out and support the reds, which are used in the
finishing colors: the lake in the lights takes off the
cold huc. If the shade tint was of any other color
than a transparent warm hie, the shadows would
consequently be black and heavy; because no other
2
Colors


152
colors, equally with lake and brown pink, can pres
 212 11
s

which is wanting in the
serve the warm. briflancy
3.
2
i

shadows of the black. Black is of a cold heavs.
5F
witis o n


D7
nature, always too strong for any other color; there-
5

3
fore it requires an allowaice in using it. There will
be a few reflexions in sattin, which should be added
as those of other colors; they should be made of
strong colors, such as burnt umber, or brown ochre,
5
mixt with a little of the shade tint.
Though these grounds mentioned for draperies, are


necessary for the principal, and nearest, figures, in a
Picture, for a portrait, or the like; yet figures placed

deeper in the picture, and such as are behind the
35
principal, or front, figures, should always be fainter



in the tints of their grounds, in proportion to their

local finishing colors, and their just effects.

3



LINEN.

The colors used in painting linen are the same as
those in white sattin, except the first tint; which is
made of white and ultramarine ashes, instead of the

black, mixt to a very light blucish tint.
In the dead coloring care should be taken that
the grounds be laid white and broad in the lights:
the shadows are composed of black, white, and a
little Indian red, like the middle fint of white sattin.
These should be left very light and clean, to support
the finishing colors.
In the second painting the lights are glazed, with
a stiff pencil and fine white only, drove bare,
with
oil.
little oil: the shadows scumbled with pop
PP.
and


153
C
and some of the color they were made of. The
middle tint of white sattifi is the best color for the
general int of the shadows. Wich this, and white, in
different degrees; make out all the parts to their
character, with free light touches, without softening.
Then with a large long pointed pencil, and fine
white, lay the high lights very nicely, at a touch.
After this the fine light blucish tint, mixed light,
is laid in the tender gradations very sparingly and
lightly, without filling them up.
The first lay should be left clear and distinct: the
more it appears the better. It is the overmixing and
jumbling all the colors together, which spoils the
beauty of the character; therefore it is better to let
it dry before we add the reflexions and finishing
tints.
This inethod of letting the beautiful cledr colors
dry, before we add the warm, reflecting, and har
monizing tints, prevents them from mixing with,
and dirtying, each other.
The principal blending colors used in the reflexions
are the yellow tint, green unt, and rose tint; which
last is made of lake, Indian red, and whice. The
dead coloring should be as white as we intend the
finishing colors to be, by reason they will sink
a little, in proportion to the color of the cloth, which
the glazing with pure white, only, will recover.


13
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
0E


o



154
EF PAINTING LANDSCAPES IN OIL.
5
The principal colors used in landscapes are:
I. FINE WRITE.
2. CoMMON WRITE.
3. FiNE LIGHT OCHRE,
4. BROWN OCHRE.
5. BROWN PINK.
6. BURNT UMEER.
7. LVORY BBACK.
S. PRUSSTAN BIUE.
9. WLTRAMARINE.
-
I0. TERRA-VERT.
1I. LAKE.
12. INDTAN RED.
13. VERMILION.

14. KINGS TELLOw.
172
1ne principal tints used in landscapes are s
1. Light ochre and white.
2. Light ochre, Prussian blue, and white.
3
3. Light ochre and Prussian blue.

4. 1he same, darker.
i
5. & Aid-vert and Prussian blue.
6. Brown pink and Prussian bluc.
7. Brown pink and brown ochre.
8. Brown pink, ochre, and Prussian blue.
0. Indian red and white.
10. Ivory black, Indian red, and lake.
✓





The


1


(155
The colors necessary for dead coloring, are com-
mon white, light ochre, brown ochre, burnt umber,
Indian red, ivory black, and Prussian blue.
The principal colors and tints for painting the sky,
are fine white, ultramarine, Prussian blue; light
ochre; vermilion, lake; and Indian red.
The tints are a fine arure, lighter azure, light
ochre and white, vermilion and white, and a tint
made of white, a little vermilion, and some of the
Like aTurc.
LANDSCAPES should be painted on. a sort of tan=
ned leather-colored ground, which is made of brown.
ochre, white, and light red. This color gives. 2.
warmth to the shadow colors, and 1s very agreeable
and proper for glazing.
SKETCHING, of rubbing in the design, is the first
work of the picture.
This: should be done with burnt umber, drove.
with drying oil, and a little oil of turpentine, in a
faints slight, scumbling; free manner, as we shads.
with Indian ink on paper, leaving the calor of the
cloth for the lights, and leaving no part of the sha=
dows so dark as we intend the first lay, or dead colors
1n8s which is to be lighter than the finishing colors.
Though the foliage of the trees 1s. only rubbed in,
with a faint sort of scumbling, yet the trunks and
bodies should be in their proper shapes, with their
breadths of light and shadow. Buildings should be
done in the same nanner, leaving the color of the
cloth for their lights; the figures on the fore-ground,
ofthey are determined, should also be skerched in the
same piethod; and then the whale leff to dry.
OF
32


 156



OF DEAD COLORING.
Let the first lay, or dead coloring, be without
Any bright, glaring, or strong, dark; colors; so that
the effcet is made more to receive and preserve the
finishing colors, than to shew them in the first
painting
The sky should be done first; then the distances,
working downward to the middle group, from that
to the fore-ground, and to the nearest parts; all parts
of each group, as trees, buildings, &c. should be
painted with the group they belong to.
The art in dead coloring, is, to find the two colors,
which serve for the ground of the shadows in general,
the sky excepted, and the method of using them with
the lighrs: the first of which is, the dark shade with
a litile lake in it; the other is, burnt umber: these
should be changed a little to the naiural hue of the
objects, and then laid and drove with drying oil, in
the same manner as we shade with Indian ink, which
15 a scumbling kind of glazing; and as such they
should be left; otherwise they will be dark and heavy,
and would be epurely spoiled for the finishing glaz=
ing. Both these colors mix and sympathize agreeably
with the lights, but should be laid before them.
When the landscape is designed, begin with the
sky, which should be laid with a good body of
Colors, and left with a faint resemblance of the prin=
cipal clouds; more in the manner of claro obscuro,
than with finishing colors; the whiter it is left, the
better it will bear out and support them. The dis=
(aCES


157
tances should be made out faint and uncertainly with
the dark shade, and some of their lights, in different
degrees; and laid so, as best to find and shew their
principal parrs. Advancing into the middle group,:
we introduce, by degrees, the burnt umber in the
shades: all the grounds of the trees being laid, or
rubbed in, enough only to suggest an idea of their
shapes and shadows faintly. The grounds of their
shadows must be clean, and lighter than their finish-
ing colors, such as will support their character, and
seem easy to finish on.
In painting the lights, it is better to incline more
to the middle unt, than to the high lights; and to
leave them with a sufficient body of clean colors,
which will receive and preserve the finishing colors.
the better; which may be done with a few tints.
SECOND PAINTING.
Begin with the sky; lay in the azure and colors
of the horizon; then soften them; after that, lay in
the general unt of the clouds, and finish on it with
the high lights, and the other tints that are wanting
3
with light, tender, touches; then, soften the whole
very lightly. The finishing of the sky should be
done at once painting, because the tender character
of the clouds will not match so well when dry, as
when the whole is wet. The stiffer the azure, and
colors of the horizon, are laid, the better the clouds
may be painted upon them.
F
The greatest distances are chiefly made with the
color of the sky; as they grow nearer and darker,
flaze and scumble the parts very thin, with such
glazing


(:158
C
glazing shadow colors as come nearest to the gene-
ral hue of the group the objects are in. so that the
first painting, or dead color, should be seen through
its on this add the finishing colors.
"If this plazed ground be properly adapted to the
object and place, it will be easy to find the colors
which are wanted for the lights; and for the finish,
5
ings.. That we may not spoil the glazing,
we should
be very exact in making those colors on the pallette,
and in laying them with light free touches.
Here it may be proper to say. samething of the
Most useful glazing colors.
Lake, terra-Vert, Prussian blue, and brown pink;
are the four principal. The more they are managed
Like Indian ink, and the more distinctly they are left,
the better their transparent beauty will stand, and
appear. After these, burnt umber is a good glazing
warm brown, used in the broken grounds and hearest
Parts; but the most agreeable color for the darkest
shadows, is the dark shade improved with lake,
drove with drying oil : it mixes harmonniously with
the lights; the shadows, the trunks and the bodies
of trees, and the buildings,
The ground of the objects should be made out,
with such glazing shadow colors, as seem nearest to
the natural hue of the object, in that situation; and
as the principal glazing colots themselves, are often
too strong and glaring, they should be a little softens
ed by such colors as are near to themselves and the
objects; thus, if in the distances, the terra-vert and
azure, which are their principal glazing colors; may
.
pe improved and made lighter, with some of the sky

 FHEES



159
tints: and as the distances come nearer, with the
purple. As we get more into the middle group, the
terra-vert and Prussian blue may be varied with some
of the green tints, made without white, for white is
the destruction of all glazing colors. As we approych
the first group, there is less occasion for changing
them; but the fore-ground and its objects require all
the strength, and force, of glazing, which the coleys
are capable of producing.
After this glazing ground, we should follow with
strengthening the same in the shadows and darkest
places, in such manner as will seem easy to finish.
The colors that come next, for finishing, are in the
degree of middle tints: these should be carefully lant.
over the greatest breadth of lights, in such manner as
not to spoil, and cover too much of, the glazing:
with a good body of color, as stiff as the pencil can
agreeably manage, to character. The colers of the
25

30
3
middle unt should be clean and Buannfal, finmshing
all the second painting downward, from the sky,
s
through the middle group. At the firsi group, :all
1Ege
the objects should appear perfectly finished: then
under or distant parts should be finished, before, any
of the other which are nearer, down to the last, and
hearest, objects of the pieture. Where it happens,
that painting one tree over another, does not please,
forbear the second, until the firstis dry. Thin near
AtFAT
trees, of different colors, will dobsucr, af we let the
under parts: dry before we add the finishing colors;



THE


C. 160

THE THIRS ANB LAST FAINTINC.

Ifoiling be necessary, lay the least quantity that
can be, with a stump tool, or pencil, proportioned to
the place that is to be oiled; then wipe the place that
is diled with a silk handkerchief, leaving no more
:oil than is proper for the purpose.
When finishing any objects, we should use a great
variety of tints, all nearly the same color, but most
of all, when finishing trees; as this gives a richness
to the coloring, and contributes to produce harmony.
As the greens will fade, and grow darker; it is neces-
sary to improve, and, in some degree, to force them,
by making an allowance in using them so much the
lighter; the same reasonn applies to the glazing;
which, if over loaded; will be dull and heavy, and
consequently will grow darker.
The method for painting near trees, is, to make
the first lay very ear to nature, though not quice so
Hark, and to follow it with strengthening the shadows;
then the middle tints; and last of all, lay the high
:lights and finishing colors: but all this cannot be
:done, as it should be, at once painting. The best
way is to do no more than the first lay with the faint
shadows, and leave it to dry. Then improve the
uddle tints and shadows, and let them dry.
: The conclusion is, adding all the lights and finish
ing colors, in the best -manner. This method of
leaving the first and second part to dry separately,
not only makes the whole easier, and thore agreeable,
but leaves the colors in the greater perfection;
BeCause,


161 )
because, most of the work may be done with scums.
bling and glazing, and some parts without oiling.
The lights also, may be laid with a better body of
color, which will, not be mixed and spoiled with the
wet ground : what is said of trees, answers to all
Kinds of shrubs, and bushes.
The figures in a landscape are the last work of the
picture; those in the fore-ground should be done
before those in the distances; the shadows of the
figures should be of the same hue, or color, with
those of the group, or place, wherein they are
3
Situated.
As a picture is generally intended to be viewed at
a distance, the artist should frequently consider his
performance at, or near a similar situation; since
whatever loses its effect at that distance, however
25
32
neatly executed, is labour lost.
The shadows, if large, may approximate nearly to
the same tone according to their situations, and may
he thin of color; but the lights should be distinct,
bold, spirited, and will not suffer, even if loaded
with color; on the contrary, it will contribute to
durability.
To use only one fint to one color, promotes clean-

hess and freshness of the colors; too much mixing,
8
S
teases and injures them.
8
If a teint different from what are on the pallette, is
wanted while at work on a preture, it is better to
2955

8125

5
mingle the colors proper to compose it on the pai
S
lette with the Knife than with a pencil.

There is in somie persons a strange predifection
for smgoth pictures in oil; this, however, is far from
being
5
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
3


C. 162 7
being meritorious, unless a picture be very small.
but in larger pieces a bold and free pencil shews to.
advantage, especially in the lights, in the smart
touches, and firm markings and drawing
In general, colors look more brilliant while wet
with oil, than when they are dry; a little observa-
tion will accustom the student to this circumstance.
It is usually the too great quantity of oil (espe-
cially of the grosser Kinds) which occasions the
decay of the colors: and, it is observable, that pic.
tures generally begin to fade in the darker parts; and
in the glazings, where the color is thin; the lights
ingiitaining themselves long after those colors are
obliterated.
A. color cannot have a worse property than that
of a tardy dryer, as it holds what dust unavoidably
falls on it, and consequently sullies the beauty of the
fints; some artists, aware of the bad qualities of the
oils in use, make too free with turpentine to work
thin, but this not only leaves the picture dead, but
carries off part of the force in evaporation.
To know when an oil pieture is dry, breathe
firmly upon it; if it take the breath, it is safe. I
is proper to let the first coat of color be thoroughly
dry, before a second is applied; this should be care-
fully attended to in winter.
The pencils, when done with, should be cleaned
by spirits or oil of turpentine; or, if meant to be
laid by for a time, they may be washed with soap.
The pallette should be constantly cleaned.


n 
C 163
OF CLEANING OF PICTURES.
Water is the first material and of the most general
use in cleaning pictures. This will remove many
Kinds of glutinous bodies, and foulnesses; such as
sugar, honey, glue, and many others; and it will
also take off any varnish of guim arabic, glair of eggs,
or isinglass, and is therefore the greatest instrument
in this work; it may be used without any caution
with respect to the colors, as it will not in the least
affect the oil which holds them together.
Olive oil, or butter, though not generally applied
to this purpose, through an ignorance of their effi-
cacy, will remove many of those spots or foulnesses,
which resist even soap, as they will dissolve or cor-
rode pitch; rosin, and similar bodies, and they may
be used very freely, not having the least effect on
the oil of the painting, nor the dangerous effects of
spirit of wine and oil of turpentine.
Wood ashes, or (what will better answer the pur-
Pose, when used in a. proper proportion) pearl ashes,
being melted in water, make a proper dissolvent for
most kinds of matter which foul paintings, but they
must be used with great discretion, as they will touch
of corrode the oil of the painting, if there be no
varnishing guin or resin over it, by very little rub-
bing; the use of them, or scope is, however, in
many cases unavoidable, and in general they are the
only things employed for this purpose.
Spirit of wine, as it will dissolve all the gums and
gum resins, except guin arabic, is very necessary
for
F2


(164
for the taking off from pictures varnishes composed
of such substances; but it corrodes also the oil
of paintings, and softens them in such a manner
as to render all rubbing dangerous, while they are
under its influence.
Oil of turpentine will dissolve likewise some of
the gums used for varnish, but spirits of wine will
in general much better answer the purpose: there
are, however, sometimes spots of foulness which will
gave way to the spirit of turpentine, but resist most
other substances used for this purpose; It may,
therefore, be tried where every thing else appears to
fail, but even then very sparingly,, and with great
caution, as it will very soon act even on the dry off
of the painting;
Essence of lemons is of the same dangerous tenr
dency with oil of turpentine, but is a much stronger
dissolvent, and should therefore only be used in the
most desperate cases, where spots seem indelible by
all other methods; spirit of lavender and rosemary,
and other essenrial oils, have the same dissolving
qualities as essence of lemons, but they are in general
dearer, and some of them too powerful to be trusted
near the colors.
When paintings appear to have been varnished
with those substances that will not dissolve in water,
(which is seldom done by painters who are acquaintr
ed with the present practice, as they destroy the
more delicate tints and touches of the painting,
they are, however, very easily and safely removed by
the following method:
of Place



165
C
e Place your picture or painting in an horizontal
situation, and moisten, or rather ffood by means of
a sponge the surface of it with very strong rectified
spirits of wine; but all rubbing beyond what is ne-
cessary must be avoided. Keep the painting moist
by adding fresh quantities of the spirit for some
minutes, then flood the surface copiously with cold
water, with which the spirit and such part of the
varnish as it has dissolved may be washed off; but
in this state of it all frietion, and the slightest vio-
lence to the surface of the painting, would be very
detrimental. When the painting is dry; this opera-
tion may be repeated at discretion, until the whole
of the varnish is taken off.
To prepare the pearl and wood ash ley, used in
gleaning pictures, let an ounce be dissolved in 2
pint of water, to be stirred frequently for half a day;
then to be decanted from the settlings.
N. B. This mixture is said to epliven the Brazil
WWash.
To make a stronger ley of the same, let two
pounds of wood-ashes and three quarts of water, be
managed as just directed, and evaporated (or even
boiled) to one quart; or a less quantity, as you find
it acrid to your. taste. A strong ley is made by
pouring hot water on a quantity of ashes, and when
It has filtered through them, collect it for use.—
These leys are to be used warm with a sponge, and
with the caution just directed. When thick spots
are nnot easily removed, a strong soap-lather may
te of use, not suffering it to touch any other part
of the pieture but the spot it is to be engaged with.

For


166 
For using spirits of wine and other dissolvents,
the picture is to be laid on a table, and flooded with
the liquor, or well dabbed with a sponge, so as to
keep the picture very morst. Add fresh ley, &&c. as
wanted, then with cold water wash off the whole.
All dissolvents must be washed off with plenty of
water, and should it be necessary to use any of them
again, take care that the painting is quite dry; this
must be attended to at every repetition.
All spots, ec. of dirt are attached to a picture,
either before it is varnished, or during its being
varnished, (in which case they dry with the varnish)
of after the varnish is dry. If the latter, plenty of
warm water generally succeeds; but if it be damaged
while varnishing, or before that operation, the coat
of varnish must be removed ; then the spot cleaned,
and the whole picture be re-vaynished.
It appears, from this observation, that it is of
consequence to set pictures, while drying, in a place
free from dust, &cc. since whatever dries with the
colors cannot be removed.
It sometimes happens that a picture grows dull
and obscure, and it may be necessary to revarnish
it; this may be very safely done, after inspecting
whether the first varnish be clean, &c.


 167)


OF TRANSPERRING PICTURES.
The art of removing paintings in oil from the
cloths on which they are originally done, and trans-
ferring them to new ones, is of great use. The me-
thod is as follows:
Let the decayed picture be cleansed of all grease
that may be on its surface, by rubbing it very gently
with crum of stale bread, and then wiping it with a
very fine soft linen cloth. It must then be laid, the
face downwards, on a smooth table covered with fan
paper, or India paper; and the cloth on the back
must be well soaked with boiling water, till perfectly
soft and pliable. Turn the pieture face upwards,
and having stretched it evenly on the table; pin it
down with nails at the edges. Having melted a
quantity of glue, and strained it through a flannel
cloth, spread part of it on a linen cloth of the size.
of the painting; when this is set, lay another coat
over it; when this is become siff, spread some of
the glue, moderately heated, over the face of the
picture, and lay over it, in the evenest manner pos-
sible, the linen cloth already prepared, and nail it
down to the picture and table. Then expose the
whole to the heat of the sun, in a place secure from
gain, till the glue be perfectly dry and hard; when
this is the case, remove the picture and linen, cloth
from the table. Turn the pieture with the face
downwards, and let it be stretched and nailed to the
table as before; then raise round its edge a border of
WVaE
3





(. 168.
Wak as in biting of copper-plates, into which pourd
corroding fluid, as oil of vitriol, aqua-fortis, of
spirit of sali; but the last is to be preferred; dilute
either of these with water, to such a degree, that
they may destroy the threads of the original canvas,
or cloth, of the picture; without discoloring it.
When the corroding ffuid has answered this pur=
7o t
Pose, draim it off, and wash away the remaining paiv
by quantities of fresh water. The threads of the
cloth must be then carefully picked out till the whole
be taken away. The reverse surface of the painting
being thus wholly freed from the old cloth, must be
well washed with water, and left to dry.. In the
mcan time, prepare a new piece of canvas of the
size of the painting; and having spread some: hot
glue, purified as before, and melted with a little
brandy or spirit of wine; over the reverse of the
painting; lay the new canvas evenly upon it; while
the glue is hot, and compress them together with
thick plares of lead, or flat pieces of polished mar=
ble. When the glue is set; remove these weights,
let the cloth remain till the glue is become perfectly
dry and hard. Then the whole must be turned the
other side upwards, and the border of wax being re
placed, the linen cloth on the face of the painting
must be destroyed by means of the corroding fluids
because the face of the painting is defended only by
the coat of glue which cemented the linen cloth to
it. The painting must then be freed from the glue
by washing it with hot water. The painting may
afterwards be varnished, and if the operation be well
 conducted,


(169
conducted, it will be transferred to the new cloth in
a perfect state.
When the painting is originally of wood, the sur-
face of it must be covered with a linen cloth, ce-
mented to it by means of glue, as glready directed.
A proper table being then provided, and overspread
with a blanket, of thiner woollen cloth, laid on in
several doubles; the painting must be laid upon it
the face downwards, and fixed sready; the board or
wood on which it was done, must then be planed
away; till the shell remains as thin as it can be made,
without damaging the paint under it. The process
is the saime as already given for the front.
When a picture is by accident torn, or otherwise
injured, it is repaired, by placing the separated parts
as nearly in their first state as possible, then attach-

ihig, by a strong glue, a piece of cloth, of a proper
shape and size, to which the threads of the torn
Parts firrmly adhering; retain their situations. The
place in the preture where the rent is, must then be
very exactly colored as before, so as effectually to
conceal the damage.
When a fresh cloth is applied behind a picture;
35

to cover the back throughout, and to strengthen the
7
original canvas, it is termed, lining a picture; and
very much contributes to its preservation; espe-
Ea
3
5
C
fally, if the canvas be ancient, or thin in its sup-
Stance.
9F
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
7





C 170
OF ENCAUSTIC, OR PAINTING IN WAK.

Miss GREENLANDs Method of making a Composition
for Painting in imitation of the Ancrent Crecian
Manner
Put into a glazed earthen vessel 42 o2. of gum
arabic and So2. of cold spring water; when the gum
is dissolved, stir in 7o2. of gum mastich, which has
been first washed, dried, picked, and beaten fine,
which is very soon done: set the earthen vessel,
containing the gum water and gum mastich, over a
moderate fire, continually stirring and beating them
hard with a spoon, in order to dissolve the gum
mastich. When sufficiently boiled, it will no longer
appear transparent, and will be stiff, like a paste; so
soon as this is the case, and that the gum water and
mastich are quite boiling, without taking them off
the fire add 502. of white wax, broken into small
pieces, stirring and beating the different ingredients
together till the wax is perfectly melted, and has
bailed
s then take the composition off the fire, as boil-

ingitlongerthan necessary would only harden the wax,

and prevent its mixing so well afterwards with water;
the composition is taken off the fire, and in the
E

 
glazed earthen vessel, it should be beaten hard, and
while hot, but not boiling, mix with it, by degrees,
1002. of cold spring water; then strain the compo-
Sition, as some dirt will boil out of the gum mastich,
and put it into bottles.
3
The




(171)
The composition, if properly made, should be
like a cream, and the colors, when mixed with it, as
smooth as if with oil. The method of using it; is
mixing the colors with ir, as with oil; then paint
with fair water. The colors may be used by putting
2 little fair water over them, but it is less trouble to
put some water when the colors are observed to be
growing dry.
In painting with this composition the colors blend
without difficulty, when wet, and even when dry the
tints may easily be united by means of a brush and a
very small quantity of fair water.

When the painting is finished, put some white
Wax into a glazed earthen vessel over a slow fire;
and when melied, but not boiling, with a hard brush
cover the painting with the wax; and, when cold,
take a moderately hot iron, such as is used for iron-
ing linen, and draw it lightly over the wax; when
the picture is nearly cold rub it with a fine linen
cloth to make it entirely smooth; and, when quite
cold, rub it again to make it shine.
Painting might be executed in this manner upon
wood, or plaster of Paris, without requiring any
other preparation than mixing some fine plaster of
Paris in powder with cold water to the thickness of a
cream; then put it on a looking-glass, and, when
dry, take it off, and there will be a very smooth
surface for painting upon.
Paintings may also be done in the same manner
with only gum water and gum mastich, prepared the
same way as the mastich and wax; but instead of
putting 702. of mastick, and, when boiling adding
82
5O2n


(172)
8
302. of wax, mix 120s. of gum mastich with the
sum water before it is put on the fire, and when

sufficiently boiled and beaten, and is a little cold,
stir in 1202. of cold spring water, and afterwards
strain it.
It would be equally practicable painting with
wax alone, dissolved in sum water, in the following

Mmanner:
Weigh 1202. of cold spring water and 4202. of
put them into a glazed earthen vessel,
guin arabic
and, when the gum is dissolved, add 8o2. of white
wax. Put the earthen vessel with the guin water and
wax upon a slow fire and stir them till the wax is
dissolved and has boiled a few minutes; then take
them off the fire, and throw them into a bason, as,
5
by remaining in the hot earthen vessel the wax
might become rather hard; beat the gum, water and
wax till quite cold.. As there is but a small propors
tion of water, in comparison with the gun and wax,
it would be necessary in mixing this composition
with the colors, to put also some fair water.
It should be observed that the water used by Miss
reenland in these preparations came from a chalk
fock, and was remarkably soft: possibly any other
water might answer equally well.
nother Recipe by Miss CREENLAwD for the Incient
Grecian Method of Painting in War.
Take an ounce of white wax, and the same weight
of gum mastich in lachryme (tears) that 1s, as it
comes from the tree, which must be reduced to a

fine



1
173)
fine powder. Put the wax in a glazed earthen
vessel, over a very slow fire, and when it is quite
dissolved strew in the mastich, a little at a time,
stirring the wax continually, until the whole quantity
is perfectly melted and incorporated; then throw
the pasts into cold water, and when it is hard take it
out of the water, wipe it dry, and beat it in one of
Mr. Wedgwood's mortars, observing to pound it at
first in a linen cloth to absorb some drops of water
that will remain in the paste, and would prevent the
possibility of reducing it to a powder, which must
be so fine as to pass through a thick gaure. It
should be pounded in a cold place, and but a little
at a tine; as after long bearung, the friction will
in a degree soften the wax and gum, and, instead of
their becoming a powder, they will return to a paste.
Make some strong gum arabic water; and, when
you paint, take a litrle of the powder, some color,
and mix them together with the gum water. Light
colors require but a small quantity of the powder,
but more of it must be put in proportion to the body.
of darkness of the colors; and to black, there should
be almost as much of the powder as color.
Having mixed the colors, and no mare than can
be used before they grow dry, paint with fair water,
as is practised in painting with water colors; a
ground on the wood being first painted of some
Proper color, prepared in the same manner as 1s
described for the picture. Walnut-tree and oak,
are the sorts of wood commonly made use of in Italy
for this purpose. The painting should be highly
finished,


C 174
finished, otherwise, when varnished, the tints wilf
not appear united.
When the painting is quite dry, with rather a hard
prush, passing it one way, varnish it with white
wax, which is put into an earthen vessel, and kept
melted over a very slow fire, till the picture is var.
ished, taking great care the wax does not boil,
Afterwards hold the picture before a fire, near
ehough to melt the wax, but not make it run; and,
when the varnish is entirely cold and hard, rub it
gently with a linen cloth. Should the varnish
blister, warm the picture again very slowly, and the
pubbles will subside.

When the picture is dirty it need only be washed
with cold water,
Extract from Maty'’s Review for April, 1785.
66
M. Febbroni, who was in England some win-
ters ago, has discovered a new method of encaustic
painting, of which he writes me the following
2CCount:
66
M. Lewis, of Gurtenbrunn, the friend of Mengs,
and who may be called his successor, has lately
executed a picture according to my manner. It is a
Thalia done upon wood, prepared with wax; and is
remarkable for the vivacity and splendour of the
coloring. I believe I have already mentioned to
you, in what this new method consists. You melt,
or rather dissolve some good white wax in naphtha
petroler without color, till such time as the mixture
has acquired, by cooling, the appearance and con-
Sstence


175
sistence of an oil beginning to freeze by the cold.
You mix your colors with this, and then keep them
in small tin boxes. You dilute them more or less
with the same naphtha, according as they dry, or as
you wish to use them. This painting allows time
enough to give all the finish you desire, and if you
wish to work in a hurry, you may dry it as fast as
you please; by exposing it to heat. When the pic-
ture is finished, it is of that fine tone, which is pre-
ferable to every varnish, or if you choose a varnish,
you need only warm the pieture, and all the naphtha
will evaporate. When this is done, you must wast till
the picture cools, when you must polish it, by run-
ning it over neatly with a cloth, as the ancients used
to do. If you wish to have it still brighter, you
must melt white wax on the fire, without suffering
itto boil; mix a little naphtha with this, and draw
a layer of it over the picture already heated, by
means of a brazier, which you hold under, if the
picture i5 small, or before it, if it is large. The
colors at first appear spoiled, but you restore them to
their first beaury, if, when the layer of was is
cooled, you polish it by rubbing with a cloth. It is
then that the colors take the high tone of oil. If
you fear the effects of fire for your picture, you are
to make a soap of wax, which is to be done by boil-
ing white wax in water, in which you have dissolved
2 twentieth part of the weight of the wax of marine
alkali, or sel de souda very pure. Rub your picture
with this soap, and when it is dry, polish it as above.
If you do not choose either of these methods, give
your painting its usual varnish of sandarac and spirit
Of


C 176 7
of turpentine. This method has been found prefers
able to all those that have been tried; and superior
to oil for the beauty of the colours. There are hanp
fine colours which canhot be used in oil; which may
be made use of with great success in this method.
66
As the haphtha entirely evaporates; one may be
assured that this is the true tmethod of painting in wak
There is likewise much to hope for the duration of
pictures paitited in this manher, as wax is much less
liable to alteration than oil; and does not so essily part
93
with its phlogiston.

This extract seeins to suggestd there probable plah
of attaining the ancient secret, than that of Count
Caylus, of Mr. Muntz; whose rule was, to saturate
a.cloth, &c. with wax, then to paint on it with waters
Colours, or Crayohs, and fix the colours by gradually
advaficing the pieture to the fire, till the wax; being
melted, had absorbed them; then equally gradually
withdrawing the piece. The thought was ingenious;
but should seem to be more troublesome than that of
Nir. Lewis, as above.
After all, it may justly be doubted; whether some
bitumen, of a still more exalted and spirituous nature;
was not the vehicle which compounded those colours
whose brilliancy has remained from the remotest ages:
That the ancients were well acquainted with bitumelin,
ical productions we are well assured, and possibly
the East may possess some spring of springs of supe-
fior or more preservative qualities. Might not the
ingredients they used in embalming afford a hint!
Naphtha petroler is a bituminous Kind of oity
1SSuing


&


17
issuing out of certain rocks in the territory of Mo-
dend. There are three sorts, more or less pure and
colourless. It is used medicinally, and considered as
good for sprains, bruises, &ec. (This at least is the
sort sometimes imported into England). It is very
spirituous and volatile.

5
OF ETCHING.
This is one branch of the art of Engraving, and
possesses some qualities in which it is superior to
others; being executed with the utmost ease and
ffeedom, and when well managed, expressing many
ubjects with great truth, and character.
The first preparation for etching, is to lay a ground
vide GROUND) over the plate, which operation is
thus performed.
At the most convenient part of the plate, as well
for holding it, as for the work which is to be executed
on it, is tightly fixed a hand-vice; then, the plate
is heated, till the copper shews a small change of
color; or, till the back part of the plate, being spit
upon, rejects the spittle. The ball of ground, which
Istied in a thin covering of silk, is now passed gently
over the plate so as to distribure the ground evenly
to all parts, the heat of the plate melting it through
the silk: then with the dabber, which is nothing
more than a small quantity of cotton tied in silk, the
ground is beat, of dabbed, to a perfect thinness and
evenness; (in this part of the business much address
is required, since, if the ground, when finished, is
thicker in some places than in others, it will deceive
VOL. II. Edit. 7.
2
the






C. 178)
the point employed upon it) the ground is then
smoked, till thoroughly black, for the clearer dis-
cerning the strokes of the etching
A wax taper, twisted together four, or five, or
more times, is the most convenient candle to smoke
with; but any will serve for this purpose.
The plate must be perfectly clean, and free from
grease; as greasy spots, &cc. prevent the ground from
holding in those parts. To clean the plate, scrape a
little whiting on it, and wipe it off with a clean rag;
which will carry the grease with it.
While the plate is cooling, after the ground is laid,
Scrape some fed chalk on the back of your print,
tracing, or drawing, and rub it in all over with a
clean rag. Then place the reded side on the plate,
making it fast at each corner with soft wax. Lay the
etching-board under your hand, to prevent brussing
the ground; and, with a blunt etching-needle, trace
lightly the cutlines, and the breadths of the shadows,
till the marks of them appear on the ground, which
you must take care not to penetrate by tracing too
heavily
It will be proper at intervals to lift up a corner of
and to examine whether every part be
the tracing
perfectly traced before you take it off; as it will be
extremely difficult to lay the paper down again ex-
actly in its former position, if once removed.

Having completed the tracing, the off-track, or
drawing traced, is removed; and the subject is ready
for etching.
The practice of etching is easily attained by profi-
gients in design; since it is little more than drawing,
in
2



179)
C
in strokes, with a point, on the plate, what is other-
wiss drawn with a pen, pencil, ec. on paper.
The etching-board (by some termed a bridge) is a
thin piece of board, generally of mahogany; of a
proper length and width, raised by small supports at
each end, to a convenient height for the hand to rest

Oh It.
The points, or needles, are almost similar to sewing
needles, but are stronger, and are inserted into han-
dles four, or five, inches long, for the convenience
of being properly held.
The best way to begin a subject, is; by forming
the outlines very carefully, then inserting the shadows,
beginning first in the darkest places.
Lines drawn in etching may be crossed by others,
if wanted.
Two lines drawn, by the side of each other closely,
will unite into one under the operation of biting,
whereby this line will become of great breadth, and
color: this mode is very usefulfor dark fore-grounds
in landscape, and has a good effect in architecture,
&c. but the use of etching in historical subjects, 1s
chiefly to prepare the figures, to be afterwards treated
by the graver.
The characteristies of etching, are, a certain rough-
ness (compared with performances of the graver
which does not suit glossy, and shrning, objects, but
which applies with good effect to coarser parts; such
as, in landscape, the barks of trees, the broken, and
looser touches of fore-grounds, &c. In architecture,
it represents very happily the ravages of time in old
buildings, mouldering walls, exc. Another charac-
Feristic
2 2


(180
teristic of etching is, its freedom; for which reason,
it suits well the leaves of trees, light clouds, ec.;
and, beside these properties, it is of great service
where a true, even, and uniform color is wanted, as
it is not only much quicker, but also more certain
than simple graving, in general : hence it suits the
blue parts of skies, the even teints of (new) archi
fecture, back-grounds to portraits, &c. which are
conducted by a parallel-ruler.
It is evident from the services required, that the
points to be used, must vary in their fineness, some
:lines being made broad, others very thin. To whet
a. point with perfect truth, free from angular projec.
tions, &c. requires time, patience, and practice.
The plate being etched, the next process is to ex-
cavate the lines drawn, by subjecting them: to, the
action of aqua-fortis; which operation is termed
biting.
DIRECTIONS FOR BITING.

First, examine your work carefully, to see that
nothing be omitted, or any thing redundant; if any
Scratches appear on the ground, or any mistakes be
committed in the etching, they are to be stopped
out; which is done, by covering them with a mix-
ture of lamp-black and varnish, laid on with a pencil,
which, when dry, will resist the aqua-fortis. But it
to.
15 soimetimes best to stop out these, as they occur in
the course of the work, for by this means they will
beless liable to escape notice among the mulaplicity
0f






C181
of other lines and parts; and when the varnish is dry,
you may etch over it; if necessary.
The next thing 1s, to surround the work with a
rim, or border, of soft wax, about half an ich high,
forming the wax into a spout, at one corner, by
which to pour off the aqua-fortis: and that it may
not jun out at any other part, take care to press the
wax close and firm to the plate.
Having poured the mixture, of aqua-fortis on the
plate, let it continue a short time corroding the lines
drawn; wipe off the bubbles, as they rise, with a
feather, which may remain on the plate during the
biting; after a proper time, pour off the aqua-fortis,
and wash the plate, carefully, with fair water, pour-
ing it on and off; then let the plate dry, and, by
scraping off part of the ground from the faintest part
of the work, try if it be sufficiently bitten; if not,
stop out the part you have tried with lamp-back and
varnish; and when that is dry, pour on the aquas
fortis again, for a further operation.
When the faint parts of your work are bitten
enough, stop them out with the varnish, erc. and
proceed to bite the stronger parts, stopping them
out, as occasion requires, till the whole work is suf
ficiently bitten: then, warm the plate, and take off
the soft wax; after which, heat the plate till the
ground is melted; pour on it a little oil, and wipe
the whole off with a linen rag. When the ground is
taken off, rub the work well with the oil-rubber, and
wipe the plate clean; then proceed to finish with the
raver what parts of the subject require that process.
The wax for the border, is made, by mixing with
a pound


1


182
2 pound of bees-wax; one quarter, or one third, of
2 pound of Burgundy pitch, to soften it. As for any
color added to it, it is useless; because, after a little
while, the wax becomes black.
II is to be observed, that in biting a plate, much
attention is required. If a plate be under-bitten, i.e.
if the parts have not attained their proper color and
force, there is usually no remedy; but by following
every line with the graver, in order to blacken it.
25 on the other hand, if very much overbitten, a
plate cannot be rendered neat and delicate; let never
so much time and skill be wasted on it. If bitten
but little above the color wanted, a few strokes of the
burnisher will lower it at pleasure.
If the air rising from the copper and forming bub-
bles kisses very much, ipn biting, it may be suspected
that the aqua-fortis is too strong; or acts too sud-
denly on the copper, which for tender work is
Injurious.
OF ENGRAVING STROKES.
The tools necessary for Engraving are, an oil-
Tubber, burnisher, scraper, and oil-stone, also needles,
or points; also gravers, compasses, a sand-bag, pa-
Tallel ruler, eic.
Gravers are of different shapes; square, and lo-
2enge: several of each should be provided. The
Square is used in cutting the broad strokes; the
lozenge for the fainter and more delicate parts.
Gravers should be in length five inches and a half,
of thereabouts, the handle included.
The


183
The sand-bag is used to lay the plate on, for the
conveniency of turning it about to follow winding
lines. The oil-stone must be of the Turkey sort;
and, while in use, must never be kept without oil.
Great care is required to whet a gravernicely, par-
ticularly the belly: lay the two lower angles of the
graver flat upon the stone, and rub them steadily till
they are polished like a irror; and till the belly rises
gradually; so that, when you lay the graver's edge
on the plate, you may just perceive the light under
the point; otherwise, it will dig into the copper, and
it will be impossible to execute work with freedom.
When the belly is whetted: to whet the face, place
the flat part of the handle in the hollow of your hand,
with the belly of the graver upwards; on a moderate
slope, and rub the face on the stone, till it has an
exceeding sharp point, which you may try upon
your thumb-pail.
For tempering the graver, if too hard, vide
GRAVER.
Cut off that part of the handle which is on a line
with the belly of the graver, to make that side flat.
Hold the handle in the hollow of the hand, and
extend the fore-finger toward the point, resting it on
the back of the graver, that you may guide the tool
with more ease.
Take care that your fingers do not interpose be-
tween the plate and the graver, but let the whole
machine slide, as it were, along the plate; and trust
to the resistance of the copper for its stegdiness,
Delicacy of feeling is a prme quality in a good
Chgraver.
Let


148
Let the table or board you work at, be firm and
steady.
For strait strokes, let the plate lie flat on the table.
For circular or crooked strokes, place the plate on
the sand-bag, and hold the graver firm, noving
your hand, or the plate, or both, as you see, or rather
feel convenient.
Learn to carry your hand with such dexterity, that
you may end your stroke as finely as you began it;
and, if you have occasion to make one part deeper,
of blacker, than another, do it by re-entering that
Stroke.
In the course of the work, scrape off the barb, or
roughness, which arises, with the scraper; but be
careful, in doing this, not to scratch the plate. Ne-
ver scrape directly acress a line, but always at an easy
angle along the course of the stroke.
Mistakes, or scratches in the plate, may be rubbed
out with the burnisher, if of no great depth, and the
part afterwards cleared with the scraper; polish, it
again at last lightly with the burnisher.
When you wish to examine what work you have
done, rub it with the oil-rubber, which, by filling
the strokes with black, will shew them, when the
plate is wiped, to advantage. Too much oil-rubbing
injures the finer work; as does (very materially) too
Mruch scraping.
Engraving in strokes, or hatches, as it is the most
ancient, so it is the most noble, manner of engraving:
it requires most skill, affords most scope for judg-
ment, and genius, as well as for manual dexterity;
611



185 7
but is, accordingly, more difficult to execute in a
masterly, and superior, manhner.
It is evident, that any line drawn, may be crossed
by another line; or any number of lines, by a second
number of lines; but it is equally evident, that not
every such crossing can be graceful. If it follows
too nearly the course of the original lines, it will
form, by its intersections, a number of areds, of too
sharp, and disagreeable lozenge; shapes; if the first
lines are crossed at right angles, the areas formed
will be so many squares, which, by possessing a Kind
of hardness in their appearance, apply only to certain
subjects. The medium admits an infinity of degrees.
If we examine any Clarge) well-executed print, we
observe, in some places; (1) single lines, or strokes;
of considerable length, according to the drawing;
(2) lines crossed at an agreeable lozenge; (3) lines
crossed at right angles, where a kind of obscurity is
wanted; (4) two lozenge lines, crossed with a third,
isually much softer, and more tender than the two
former, but following, or rather attending their course;
5) lines at right angles, crossed by a third at a lo-
zenge, to divest the squares of their hardness and
stifiness; (6) lines at a considerable distance from
each other, and of a firm color, with a thin line be-
tween them; this is called interlining; (7) the same,
sometimes crossed in the saime manner; (8) round
dots, in the flesh; (9) long dots, for the same pur-
bose; (10) long dots, crossing each other; (11) thin
lines crossing lines of dots; (12) very thin lines,
made by the dry point, in the lights, &cc. and many
other contrivances for producing variety. These,
applied
A 
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


6 286.)
applied according to the indications of the design, or
5
to the taste, and skill, of the artist, impart to capital
prints a richness and character, which no other man-
er of engraving can boast of; and which is yet far-
ther angmented, by a judicious introduction, and
mixture; of etching, engraving, and dry point lines,
The dry point is so termed, because used without
2. ground,, consequently not bitten; the burr, or
5
barb, rising from the copper, by the use of it, is very
strong, and must be scraped off carefully. The whole
point, and 1ts. handle, is stronger than an etching

point, to sustain greater pressure when in use.
It appears from this mode of reasoning, that to at-
tain considerable excellence in this style of engraving,
i5 o easy matter; and indeed, of the many who are
brought up to it, few arrive at superior hohpours; of,
if they obtain skill in one branch (etching for in
stance), they fail in others: yet, as much of the
Progress, even of the best of plates, is little more
than mechanisim, and patience, abilities of all degrees
are useful in the course of a long work:
It is proper to caution-those inclined to attempt
any of the branches of engraving, against a cramp
posture, or, leaning the stomach against the table, or,
poring with their eyes too close to the plate, &c.
while at work. In very delicately. finished works,
the artist always has recourse to a magnifying glass;
but as our readers certainly will not undertake such
Works, we proceed to another species of Engraving.

INNGRAVING



187.


OF ENGRRVING IN CHALkS.
857
 his manner of engraving has lately highly ex-
cited the public attention, and, indeed, has deserved
it, by the beauty of many specimens which it has
produced.
The process for preparing the plate, s. e. laying the
ground, tracing, &c. is the same as before. The
principles adopted in the etching, differ only, in that,
instead of fines, the drawing, shadows, eec. are in-
serted in dots, as freely as may be, yet carefully.
The biting is the same; with this difference, that
whereas, in biting lines, no two should be suffered
to unite; unless previously intended, and prepared
for that purpose; in biting chalks (provided they do
not by their union form a hard spot, or too consi-
derable a black) this accident is not of equal conse-
quence; if the subject be large. In small subjects,
the more delicate and important parts should not be
colored in the etching, but wholly inserted with the
graver; being less hazardous, and much more ac-
Clirate.
The plate bitten, and the ground removed, the
effect of the subject represented, remains to be
worked up with the graver. For small subjects, or
such as are to be neatly finished, this is the only tool
to be depended on. The best manner of preparing
the graver for firm work, is, by changing its situa-
tion in the handle, so that the belly part of it, which
was lowermost, becomes uppermost; then, by turn=
ing the handle in the hand, the point acts on the
Copper
A. 2 2





C. 188 7
copper from a greater elevation, which for strong
dots is preferable; as only dots, not strokes, are re-
quired, the tool is, in this position, manageable with
much greater facility, and speed.

The remaining part of the progress of a plate con-
sists only in covering the copper with dots, in a man=
her lighter, or heavier, proportionate to the color,
and to the drawing, required. When one covering
of dots is scraped off, another must be inserted, and
so on; by this repetition, a proper grain of dots, and
the general masses of shade are procured.. This pro-
cess is tedious; but in return, it requires no great
skill in the operator; a. little practice, and proper.
attention, attains the whole mystery.
In larger subjects, or those which are to be slighted,
some persons use tools of various sorts, such as
wheels, with single, or double, rows of teeth, or
cradles resembling a mezzotinto grounding tool (but.
made with teeth), or, others constructed to their
minds; but, these, tools, though more expeditious
than the graver only, are seldom so accurate, of so
pleasing in the effect they produce.
r
These Kind of tools, and a variety of others
(amounting in the whole, when a set is perfect, to
nnear forty), have been very much used in France,
where the manner of engraving in chalks was first
practised; they very frequently produce an effect
more closely resembling an original drawing in
chalks, than English performances finished selely
with the graver; but, on the other hand, the neat-
ness and accuracy, as well as a certain mellowness of
style which distinguish English productions, are not.
only


C 189 )
ohly vastly superior to those of the French artists,
5
but are universally esteemed so, throughout Europe.
The chief merit of plates; engraved in chalks, is.
inserted by the artist who finishes the subject. Care
and attention is requisite, and a good habit of design.,
indispensable; every requisite in the manual practice
is easily acquired.
The French have very well imitated drawings on
3

blue paper, by using two plates; one of which printed
the black-chalk effect,, the other the white-chalk:
on, the same idea, chalk plates printed in black, on
blue paper, may afterwards be touched with white-
chalk, to a very pleasing effect.
OF RE-BITING.
When the parts of a subject which were intended
to be dark, have failed of their proposed effect, they
may be re-bitten, by the following process (which
applies to all kinds of erching, and is among the se-
crets of the superior engravers): at a convenient
part of the plate, being properly heated for the pur-
Pose, melt a quantity of ground; then with a dabber,
carefully, by degrees, transplace as much of the
ground thus melted, as is necessary, to the part pro-
posed, by beating it gently, so that the surface, only,
6
of the copper may be covered, and the hollows, or
excavated lines of the work may remain free and
clean. When this ground is cold, it may be re-
bitten with aqua-fortis as before. It is frequently
better not to smoke it, lest the heat of the taper
should


C 190 J
should melt the ground into the work; in which
case, wherever the ground covered the plate the
aqua=fortis could not act.
N. B. Re-biting is sometimes used both to strokes
and dotes, to strengthen a part which has not acquired
all the color it should have; even after it has been
laid in with the graver.
To clean strokes, erc. engraved, use a little spirits of
turpentine, and rub the plate with crumbs of bread;
if the dirt is of long standing, soap lees poured on
the plate, while warming, is very effectual: but as
this is a corrosive liquor, it must be immediately
washed off the plate by plenty of cold water; and it
15 too stong for mezzotinto plates (especially) unless
it be very carefully used.
OF MEZTOTINTO.
Me2zotinto is said to have been first invented by
Prince RUPERT, about the year 1649, who took the
hint from seeing a soldier file his rusty musket; and
Mr. EvELyN, in his Ilistory of Chalcography, gives
us a head, performed by that Prince, in this way;
but Mr. LE BLOND is said to have introduced it
most successfully into practice.
The Prince laid his grounds on the plate with a
channelled ruler; but one SHER WIN, about the same
fune, laid his grounds with a half -round file, which
was pressed down with a heavy piece of lead. Both
these grounding tools have been laid aside, for many
years; and a hand-tool, called a cradle, resembling
a shoe-








191 


a. Thoemakers ecutting-board Knife, with a fine cre=


2
helling on the edge, was introduced by one EDiar,

a smith by trade, who afterwards became a mezzo-
Iinto printer.


As it is much. easier to scrape off, or to burnish
"
away, the parts of a dark ground corresponding with
the outlines of any design sketched upon it, than to
form shades upon a light ground, by an infinite num-

ber of hatches, strokes,, and points, which must all
terminate with exactness on the outline, as well as
differ in their force, and mapnner, the method of
5
soraping, as it is called, in mezzotinto, becomes, con-
sequently, much more easy and expeditious, than
any other manner of ENGRAVINs. The instruments
used in this Kind of engraving are CRADLES, SCRAF-
ERS, and BURNISHERS. The scrapers for delicate
York are much like a surgeon's lancet in shape and
in fineness, but others are much stronger, for greater
speed, and riddance.
To lay a ground, the cradle is to be passed for=
wards uniformly in the same direction; being kept
25 steady as possible, and pressed upon with a mode-
tate force; till- the instrument has passed over the
whole surface of the plate. This first course of
grounding must be crossed, at right angles, on the
same principle. New lines must then be drawn dia-
gonally,, and the cradle passed along them as before;
when the first diagonal operation is performed, these
lines must then be crossed at right angles. The plate
having undergone the action of the cradle, accord-
ing to this disposition, a second course of cradling

must be commenced: and the same must be re-
peated,


192
peated, regularly, changing the direction of the lines
made by the tool. When the whole of this opera
tion is finished, it is cailed one turn; but, in order
to produce a very dark, and uniform, ground, the
plate must undergo the repetition of all these opera-
tions many times.
ing
2
When the plate is prepared with a ground, the


skeich must be traced on it, by means of the paper

rubbed on the back-side with chalk, as mentioned
before. It is also proper to over-trace the lines, and
drawing, afterwards with black lead, or rather, which
i5 much better, with Indian ink, to secure the out-
   


lines. The scraping is performed; by partuse
172
cutting away, the grain of the ground; in various
degreess so that none preserves its original state; ex
cept the touches of strong shadow. The general
manner of proceeding is like drawing with white up-
on black paper. The masses of light are first begun;
and those parts, which lighten upwards but are in
shade below. the reflections are then touched; after
which the plate is blackened with a printers black-
ing-ball, made of felt, in order to view; the effect:
the whole is then gradually brought to effect by
scraping over the parts till they are sufficiently
lightened.
Observe always to begin with the strongest lights.
It is easy to scrape more off any part if it be too
dark; but, if a part be too much scraped away, it is
troublesome; for it must undergo the action of a
small cradling tool, proportioned to the size of the
part, and the additional ground thus procured is not
always a correct march to the original ground, which
has


193 )
has an unpleasant effect, unless very skilfully ind-
raged. Me2zOtunto plates are therefore proved, long
before they approach toward finishing, if the subject
be in any degree intricate, or considerable.

OF AAUA TINTA.
This manner of producing on copper the effect of
a drawing washed in Bistre, or Indian ink, is altoge-
ther a modern invention; it was attempted in 1755
or 1760, by Mr. P. SaNDEy and Mr. DALTON, but
it then failed of that success it has since met with.
17
The first person whose productions were not only
imitations of drawings, but were capable of printing
any considerable number of copies, was Mons. LE
PRINCE of Paris; whose early performances appeared
in his & Modes 8r Usages de Russic. Mons. LE
PRINCE, by degrees, improved his discovery, till
at length it was thought, by the Honourable Mr.
Greville, (brother to the Earl of Warwick) a secret
worth purchasing at the expence of thirty guineas.
This gentleman communicated the process to Mr. P.
SANDBY, whose attention and genius carried it to
great excellence. Since its importation into Eng¬
land, it has been the subject of repeated and conti-
nued investigation; and as it was impossible to pre-
vent the inquisitive essays of many ingenious engrds
vers, who thought this article worth their acquisi-
45
tion, so it has happened, that more ways than one of
producing this effect have been discovered. Each
person thinks his own method the best; and all
884
B D
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


 194 V
stadiously conceal their principles; we may there.
fore claim the ment of being the first, in England
at least; who communicated the secret to the public.
We shall report several modes of procedure.
1.P
THE FIRST wAY we shall mention of producing

on copper the effect of tinted drawings, is, by grind-
ing a quantity of sulphur in oil, and with this mix-
ture painting the plate; then, by placing the plate
over a gentle fire, the vitriolic acid contained in the
sulphur is set at liberty, and acts as a Corrosive on
the copper, forming a color lighter or deeper, in
roportion to the heat of the fire, the time of its

exposure to it, and to the strength of the acid em-
ployed in the mixture.
A SECOND way of producing the same effect, 1s
conceived on the well-known different affections of
the same menstruum to different metals; and pro-
ceeds thus; saturate a quantity of aqua=fortis of a
due strength, with shreds of silver; this liquor poured
on copper, will quit the silver it contains, in order
to act on the copper, by which it is more attracted;
the silver will precipitate in the form of a subtle
Powder, and thereby occasion irregularities on the
surface of the plate, which will hold the ink when
printed.
Of these manners of procedure, the first is very
offensive in its process, the fumes of the composition
being highly disagreeable. The second, is chieffy
applicable to very slender parts, and to add a color
to places which are not of importance sufficient to
require a, fresh ground, or much trouble; such as
leaves of trees, light fiying clouds, erc. as it does not
3
DOSSESS



295
possess much force, without great good fortune, or
very close attention.
 A THIRD wAY proceeds on the principles, that
minute interstices, alternately black and white, will,
when viewed at a little distance, produce the effect
of all black, according to the tone to which they are
adapted : therefore, whatever will so fix irself to the
plate, as to prevent the action of aqua-fortis where it
1s in contact, and yet will pertit the aqua-fortis to
corrode all around it, will produce alternarely blacks
and whites. This was first attempted with rosin
finely pulverized; but that was apt (if too fine, or
t00 much warmed) to form a coat, or superficies, over
considerable parts of the copper, thereby resisting
the menstruum on all sides. Sal ammoniac, pulve-
rized with the rosin, and antimately mixed with it,
was found to preserve interstices; but this applies
only occasionally.
There are several guins which possess nearly simi-
lar properties; but the following appears superior to
all others, and is (excepting the change of gum junt-
per, for guin copal) the method followed by Mions.
HE PRINCE.
Grind a sufficient quantity of gum copal; divide
it by sifting, into three or four parcels at pleasure,
according to the fineness of each parcel: the first or
finest powder serving for the lighter parts of the sub-
jeet to be treated, such as distances, sky, erc.. The
second or grained powder for middle tints; the coarser
grains of powder for fore-grounds, and other very
dark places; where strong biting is required by the
subject. To accomplish this separation, the sieyes
Milst
B.b 2


1





196
must vary in fineness. Sift on the plate a suffic
crent quantity of the finer powder; the plate will
now appear of an uniform tender white, unless closely
examined, when the interstices between the particles
of gum will be very discernible; heat the plate very
gently, only till the sum changes from its white
color, and is so far melted as to fix on the plate, from
which it is scarcely to be distinguished by iis color,
When cold, the plate is ready for receiving the aqua-
fortis. Stop out the lights, &cc. as in common
biting.
When the biting is over (which does not last long,
2 minute, perhaps, to the fine powder), wash the
plate with water, as before directed for biting, and
examine the effect produced, and the state of the
ground; if some parts only are done, stop them out,
and proceed to bite the other parts; if the whole be
done of which this ground is capable, clean the plate
by heating it, and apply a little oil, to remove the
gum easily, if necessary. Those parts which are of
the just color required, must then be secured, by
stopping them out; the second powder must next be
treaied as the first has been, and the coarser powders,
or rathergrains of gum, must be treated in the same
manner, to procure the bolder strengths: but these

may endure proportionately stronger biting.
It is necessary to have more powders than one, be-
cause the hold the powder, or grains, has of the cop-
per will permit only a certain degree of action in the
aqua-fortis. The grosser the grains, the stronger
hold they take of the copper; they will bear more
heat to fix them, and will suffer more copper to be
COf-





1
197)
corroded away from around them: but then, they
would make very staring whites, were not a ground
previously laid by the others; or, if they were mis-
placed on a subject, they would greaily disfigure it.
Sometimes a finer tint may be laid over a Coarser
to good advantage.
Sometimes a larger grain of whites may be pro-
cured, by melting the finer powders more than usual,
which, by spreading each particle of gum, makes
each grain cover a greater surface, which it protects
from the action of the aqua-fortis.
It requires some patience, and facility with the
pencil, to prepare the plate by stopping out; which
operation is not only to be attended to at first, to
preserve the whites, but may be repeated at any time,
provided the grains of powder attached to the plate
appear able to sustain the biting necessary to produce

the color proposed.
Every manner of engraving by aqua tinta has
much of uncertainty connected with it; and requires,
ot only good judgment, but great attention, and
some, perhaps a good deal, of good luck, to succeed
happily. If, therefore, any mode of practising it
could be reduced to a certainty of producing the
effect required, and could be so conducted as to be
under command, it would be a fortunate discovery.
The first difficulty in aqua tinta is, to get the
ground perfectly even, and uniform; to accomplish
this, we have two objects in view; the first is to
compose a ground which shall be properly divided
into (1) a material which may produce grains
to resist the aqua-fortis, (2) a material which
will





7


198
will produce interstices to admit the aqua-fortis. The
best way, at present Known, is, to bruise, grind,
break, and sift together, repeatedly, till the com
pound powder appear of one uniform color, the gum
copal, with a proportionate quantity. of asphaltum;
which will make a powder of pretty nearly equal fine-
ness. Now, the gum copal will be fixed on the plate,
by being melted, by means of so gentle a degree of
heat as will not affect-the asphaltum: this powder,
then, being loose, admits the aqua-fortis to surround
the grains of gum.. N. B. Other powders may be
discovered to answer the same purpose: and, indeed,
whatever is near the specific gravity of the guin,
nay succeed in practice.
The second object we have in view 1s, to lay the
grounds perfectly uniform, and evenly distributed,
over the surface of the copper. It is true, that a
steady hand may sift a powder through a fine sieve,
very evenly, if the eye follow it closely, and this
tnethod is not to be despised; but, almost every
body must have observed, that, powders of all Kinds
are precipitated when at rest in water, very evenly,
and uniformly; if then, a quantity of water, having
2 proper proportion of powder diffused in it, be
poured on a plate, the water may be drained from it,
by 2 proper inclination of it, while the powder re-
mains behind : when the water has entirely quitted
the plate, the ground, thus obtained, may be set by
being warmed as before.
A menstruum, in which the grains of gum are
dissolved and intimately mixed, may be yet better.
Tum or rosin dissolved in spirits of wine, the liquer
being


( 199 J
being poured on the plate, the spirits will evaporate;
and the rosin becoming dry, will form itself into
grains, which being fixed on the plate, allow inter-
stices for the action of the aqua-fortis.
As the time necessary for putting a border of wax
round a plate, is more than is engaged in the biting
of a light ground, some artists make use of a trough,
properly painted, and secured from the action of the
aqua-fortis, into which, when filled with aqua-fortis,
and after having stopped out all that is to be left
white on the plate, not forgetting the margin), they
plange the plate and suffer it to remain there, only
so long as they judge necessary to produce the color
wanted; if upon examination the plate be not bitten
enough; they plunge it again, till they are satisfied.
Do
This they do to every ground, till the plate 1s
finished.
Each of these modes of practising aqua tinta; sup=
poses a good deal of trouble in stopping out the parts
which are to be left white: there have been, there-
fore, other methods suggested, which for some sub-
jects answer better.
First, lay a ground of gum copal grain, all over
the surface of the copper when this is cool, and
ready for use, paint, with the shadowing composition
mentioned below, in the same manner, and with the
same freedom, as with Indian ink, the shadows of
the subject (if it be a landscape, the foliage of the
trees, Ecc.) let it be thoroughly dry; then, with a
large, soft, camel's hair pencil, cover over the whole,
with the asphaltum varnish : and when that is thos
roughly dry, plunge the plate into water: in a short
Space


1


200 )
space of tithe, the water penetrating through this
vainish, will dissolve the sugar, or the treacle, which
forms its composition; and that, rising, will part
from the copper, and bring with it all that covers
it, leaving the copal ground unaffected by the wa-
rer, and still adhering firmly to the plate. This bite
25 before.
The ASPHALTUM VARNISH is made; by dissolving
four ounces of asphaltum in about eight ounces of
spirits of turpentine; using a very gentle heat: pour
off the liquid, and add more of either ingredient, as
the varnish may be thought too thick, or too thin.
The SHADOWING COMPOSITTON is made, by tak.
ing any quantity of treacle, and grinding it into a
Paste with whitening; or, by taking, of coarse sugar
about two ounces, of whitening about one ounce,
and grinding them with a sufficient quantity of wa-
ter, to form a paste proper for use by the pencil.
If any hard edges occur in aqua tinta, they may
be softened by the burnisher, or the burnisher may
insert lights or slight touches of drawing, Exc. occa:
sionally, to advantage.
The aqua-fortis used in this method of engraving
should not be too strong; because, as its operation
15 always rapid, if too strong, it will break up the
ground, and do other mischief, before it can be pre-
vented. It is not a bad way to try the strength of it,
before it be used, on a separate piece of copper.
A very great disadvantage attending re-tinting of
any part is, the nicety required to match a color; in
fact, it is hardly possibly to lay two grounds so pre-
crsely alike as is requisite for that purpose: nav, it

Fre-


"


201 
frequently happens that a second ground obliterates,
or at least damages, the first over which it is laid.
Aqua tinta is a method of engraving (if it may de-
serve that title) so very rapid, that it will produce on
a large plate, in one week, the effect of a months
labour at some other Kinds of engraving: it is in ge
neral, however, but shallow on the copper, yet,
when well managed, is sufficiently lasting. Its merit
consists much in a very even colour, smooth, and

free from blemishes. It applies well to architecture,
to landscape, and to back-grounds.
Though I do not think much use can ever be
made of the invention, yet I think proper to insert
here the mode of etching upon glass. or, rather,
the discovery of a solvent which acts upon glass, as
aqua-fortis does upon copper.
The acid for this purpose is procured from sparry
fluor, or Derbyshire blue John, powdered, and by
means of concentrated vitriolic acid. submitted to
distillation by a gentle heat; what comes over, and
unites with a proper quantity of water in the receiver
(which is of lead as well as the retort) is the acid;
It must also be kept in a leaden vessel. This will
corrode lines, ec. drawn upon glass through a varnish.
Explanation of the Method of printing in CoLOUns.
The plate being warmed in the usual manner, the
colours are applied by means of stump camel-hair
pencils, to the different parts, as the subject sug-
gests; it is then wiped with a coarse gauze canvas,
2137
C C
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


(202
any other being improper; after this, it is wiped
clean with the hand, as in common practice; and
being again warmed, is passed through the press.
The colors are mixed with burnt linseed oil, and
those generally used by painters are proper.
The little finger generally supplies the place of
pencils. This art succeeds best in chalk engravings.
The prints, if touched up with colours, after they
are printed, will approach very beautifully toward
the effect of pictures.
OF CUTTiNG IN WOOD.
This business is, properly, neither scuipture, nor
engraving, but, being applied to many of the pur-
poses of engraving, it claims affinity to that art. The
smoothest grained woods are the best; such as pear-
tree, or beech, but above all box. The surface
being prepared by smoothening, a thin coat of white
lead, tempered with water, is passed over it, the
outlines of the design are traced with a black lead
pencil, or ink, and the design is laid on the block;
then wetted, and carefully rubbed on the back, till
the lines traced are transferred to the white lead,
which shews them plainly; the blank parts are then
cut away with sharp Knives, small chissels, or gravers,
as required. This kind of work differs from engrav-
ing on copper; in that, the parts of the copper
which are out out hold the ink, and form the impres-
sion; in this, the parts which remain, being promi-
nents


203)
ent, perform the same business. The blocks are
printed as letter-press.
This Kind of work has been made to produce an
effect resembling washed drawings, by using several
blocks, correspondent to the several colors of the de-
sign: the ink, being accurately mixed to the color
wanted, is applied all over the surface of the
block, and the darker colors printed after the lighter.
Aqua tinta has superseded the use of this method;
but one similar to it is practised at Paris, only using
copper plates instead of wooden blocks, and printing
the separate parts of the design in their proper colors,
by which they are very prettily tinted.
In delicate works, or parts expressive of distances,
to slope away the surface of the wood gently in those
parts produces a good effect; because, in the print-
ing, they less hold the ink, and less ink is pulled off
them by the paper; consequently, they appear
fainter.
E C 2


OF


2


(204 )


OF MODELLING.
This is one branch of the art of the sculptor, and
in many cases, a very important one; being, to all
works of considerable size, an indispensable requi-
site previous to cutting the marble; being also, the
usual mode in which young sculptors study the prin-
ciples of their profession, academy figures, ecc.
The tools for this purpose are usually slender sticks
of wood, made by the artist himself, and therefore
of a shape at his pleasure; but, whatever other im-
plements may occasionally be employed, the thumb
and fingers generally perform the major part. The
clay to be used should be fine, soft, free from stones,
dirt, &cc. and be carefully examined before it is used.
In London, this Kind of clay is procured from
about Vauxhall.
To model a Bas Relief: on a strong board, of suf-
ficient size, sketch the dimensions of the subject in-
tended, then place the clay, which is morst and ad
hesive, laying a greater quantity on the parts which
are to be raised, to give them thickness, and follow-
ing the course of the drawing proper to the subject.

To model a figure, it is sometimes requisite to in
sert little sticks into the limbs, and other parts which
will not support themselves without props; but this
requires care. It is a liberty very allowable in mo-
delling, to support the figure with beds of clay in
convenient places, where they do not injure the com-
position, since these Kind of models are to be consi-
dered as little more than sketches, or preparatory
studies.

3
Whe





5


(205
When the model is quitted, if not finished it must
be kept cool, and morst, by being covered with a
wet cloth.
If a model is intended to be preserved, it must be
set by, to dry very thoroughly; then, taken. to 2
pottery, where it must be gradually hardened, and
baked. There are many risks attending this process;
if the clay be not dry within, however it may appear
without, sudden heat will spoil it; or, if there re-
main any stone concealed in it, when the heat of the
fire reaches that stone, it will explode, and crack the
piccc.
If the colour of the clay used is not approved of,
it may be painted in Distemper, after being burnt;
oil colors, having a glossiness, are seldom employed.
To prepare for a large piece of sculpture.—The
model is finished as above, the size of the figure
intended, and then molded in separate parts, in
which, when re-united, is cast a plaster-figure.
which is repaired, (l. e. cut, scraped, erc.) with great
accuracy. This figure is now the standard, from
which a copy in marble is to be taken, the original
part of the business being over.
To MODEL IN WAx.—The process is much the
same as with clay. To temper the wax, some add to
a pound of wax half a pound of colophony; some
add turpentine, melting the whole with olive oil;
some insert a little vermilion, or other color, to give
it a tint. Wax will readily take every color added
to it; and is accordingly sometimes used to imitate
life; in which procedure cleanness of tint must be

carefully attended 1o.
OF



3
206
1
253

o h Fin
3
5


OF SCULPTURE.


Mr. BacoN having communicated to the public,
in the Cyclopedia, some remarks on that profession
in which he excels, to offer it to our readers, re-
quires, we presume, no apology. They are as
follows:
66 7
it is probable that sculpture is more ancient than
painting; and, if we examine the style of ancient
painting, there is reason to conclude, that sculpture
stood first in the public esteem: as the ancient paint
ers have evidently imutated the statuarles, even to
their disadvantage: since their works have not that
freedom of style, more especially with respect to
their composition and drapery, which the pencil
might easily acquire to a greater degree than that of
the chissel; but, as this is universally the case, it
cannot be attributed to any thing else besides the
higher estunation of the works on which they formed
themselyes. Which is the most difficult art has been
a question often agitated. Painting has the greatest
number of requisites, but, at the same time, her ex-
pedients are the most numerous; and, therefore, we
may venture to affirm, that, whenever a sculpture
pleases equally with a painting, the sculptor is cer-
tainly the greatest artist. Sculpture has indeed the
honour of giving law to all the schools of design,
both ancient and modern, with respect to purity of
form. The reason, perhaps, 1s, that being divested
of those meretricious ornaments by which painting is
enabled to seduce its admirers, it is happily forced to
SeCk


1


113


2


12
3
3
e4

iz












































5






1





Artide SCULPTURE Dictionary

-





  









8
ynt
Sy




2.8
LsiTis


 t 
aits titat
y eganit
S


geet tt

 The e es tht

1 61141









 
  

M













3





































































4




















8





8


























(207
seek for its effect in the higher excellencies of the
art: hence elevation in the idea, as well as purity
and grandeur in the forms, are found in greater per-
fection in sculpture than in painting. Besides, what=
ever may be the original principles which direct our
feelings in the approbation of intrinsic beauty, they
are, without doubt, very much under the infiuence
of association. Custom and habit will necessarily
give a false bias to our judgment; it is therefore na-
tural, and in some measure, reasonable, that those
arts which are temporaneous, should adapt them-
selves to the changes of fashion, &cc. But sculpture,
by its durability, and consequent application to works
of perpetuity, is obliged to acquire and maintain the
essential principles of beauty and grandeur, that its
effect on the mind may be preserved through the
various changes of mental taste. It is conceived,
that it will scarcely admit of a question, whether the
ancients or moderns have most excelled in this art;
the palm having been universally adjudged to the
former. To determine in what proportion they are
superior is too difficult an attempt. Wherever there
15 a real superiority in any art or science, it will in
time be discovered; but the world, ever fond of ex-
cess, never stops at the point of true judgment, but
dresses out its favourite object with the ornaments
of fancy, so that every blemish becomes a beauty.
This it has done by ancient sculpture to such a de=
gree as not to form its julgment of that by any rules,
but to form an opinion of rules by the example. As
long as this is the case, modern art can never have a
fair comparison with the ancient. This partiality to
the


(208
the ancients is so strong as to prevent almost all dis=
crimination; and is the sole reason, why many an-
Liques, that now stand as patterns of beauty in the
judgment of most connorsseurs, are not discovered
to be copies. This is not more important than it is
easy to be perceived by a judicious eye; for where-
ever there is a grandeur or elegance to an eminent
degree in the idea and general composition of a sta-
tue, and when the execution of the parts (called by
aftists the treating of the parts) betrays a want. of
faste and feeling, there is the greatest reason to con-
clude, that the statue is a copy, though we were ever
so certain of its antiquity. And surely, if evidence
of a pictures being a copy proportionably diminishes
1ts value, the same rule of judgment may may be no
less properly applied to a statue. Modern and ancient
art can never, therefore, be fairly compared, till both
are made to submit to the determination of reason
and nature. It may be observed, that the anciepts
have chiefly confined themselves to the sublime and
beaunful; and, whenever a pathetic subject has
come before them, they have sacrificed expression
to beauty. The famous groupe of Niobe is one
instance of this Kind; and, therefore, however
great our partiality to the ancients may be, none
can hesitate to affirm, that, whenever the moderns
shall unite great expression with great beauty, they
99
will wrest the palm out of their hands.
In Sculpture the first thing done, is, out of a great
block of marble to saw another of the size required;
which is performed with a smooth steel saw, without
teeth; casting water and sand thereon, from time to
ties


(209
Lime; then, by taking off what is superfiuous with
a steel point and a heavy hammer of soft iron, it is
brought near the measure required; and still nearer
with a finer point; they then use a flat cutting instru-
ment, having notches in its edge, of teeth; and then
a chissel to take off the scratches the other has left;
till, at length, taking rasps of different degrees of
fineness, they gradually bring the work into a con-
dition for polishing.
To polish, or make the parts smooth and sleek,
they rub them with pumice-stone and smalt; then
with tripoli; and when a still greater lustre is re-
quired, they use burnt straw.
To proceed the more regularly, on the head of the
model, some place an immoveable circle, divided
into degrees; with a moveable ruler, or index, fast-
ened in the centre of the circle, and divided likewise
into equal parts. From the end of the ruler hangs a
thread with a plummet, which serves to take all the
points to be transferred thenteito the block of marble,
from whose top hangs another plummet like that of
the model. But other excellent sculptors disapprove
of this method; urging, that the smallest motion of
the model changes their measures; for which reason,
they rather choose to take all their measures with the
compasses, though reckoned more tedious.
In large figures, the first part of the business
being labour, and not skill, it is committed to under-
orkmen: and indeed the whole of this part of the
profession being to copy the model, the mdster seldom
troubles himself to work at it, at least, till the close
of the process.
In
Dd
TOL. II. Edit. 7.


1


 2107
In imitating bas reliets, if it be a subject which
admits of being laid flat, they endeavour to bring
the copy to cast the same shadows as the original.
Sculpture has been in England rather a monumen=
tal art, than, as it is in many other countries, a de=
corative profession. Of late, we have had many
elegant chimney-pieces of sculpture, but very few
large figures, except fortombs. Our best specimens
in public are, the statues of Phrenzy and Melancholy,
On the piers before Bethlehem Hospital, which de-
serve to be ranked among the first performances in
this art; they were executed in the reign of Charles
II. by GARRTEL CIEEER, father of the poet-laureat.
There is also a most elegant statue of King Edward
VI in bronze, which stands in one of the courts of
St. Thomas's Hospital, in Southwark, by ScHEEMA-
KER; and one of Sir Isaac Newton, at Cambridge.
3
by ROUEILLYAC.
Westminster—Abbey is the most famous repository
of sculpture in England, and it contains many fine
specimens; but the fighres lose much of their effect
by being crowded together without order; whereby
one groupe injures another.
St. Pauls Cathedral has lately received further em-
bellishments by sculpture; and more is intended. It
affords many noble opportunities and situations for
capital groupes, &&c. in all parts, but especially in the
circumference beneath the dome.
e



211.)
The following colors being nerwly discovered and made
public, have been ounted in their proper places: ws.
give them here for the satisfaction of our readers.

BRUNSWICK GREEN.—This is a very valuable
and newly discovered color, and is prepared by two
brothers, of the name of Gravenhorst, at Brunswick.
Hithereto it has been kept a secret; but it is conjec=
tured to be a precipitate of copper which has been
dissolved in tartar and water by coetion, and which,
3
by evaporation of the lixivium, is deposited in the
form of a cupreous tartar.  similar color is sold by
MMessrs. Brandran and Co. in Sise-lane, London,
which possesses many, if not all, the rare qualities of
that prepared at Brunswick.

EARTH, WHITE.—Many ingenious men have
employed their talents in discovering a more whole-
some, and cheaper, pigment, than white lead;
and, perhaps, the finer and whiter sorts of EARTH
might be usefully substituted. The Terra Goltber.
gensis is of a white color, which is dug up in se-
veral parts of Germany,, more particularly at Golts
berg, whence its name, and Strigaw, and at Lignitz
in Silesia. At this time, it is procured in the neigh-
bourhood of Ifasselt, in the bishoprick of Liege, in
the circle of Westphalia, where it is usually sealed
with the impression of an eagts, and the words
66
Terra Goltbergensis. — Oftobacco-pipe clays there
are also several sorts that appear convertible into pig=
ments, especially one of this class which is found near.
Lymington in Hampshire, which is not at present
But the earth termed Melimim
turned to much use,
7108
PA 2


. 212.
vide MELINUM), has ever been famous in the annals
of painting, being the principal white of the painters
of antiquity. It is still found in the same place from
whence the painters of old had it, viz. the island of
Wilo, called Melos by the Greeks, whence its hname,
and is common in all the adjacent islands. It is not
quite so bright a white as white lead; but as it never
turns yellow, as white lead does, it is far preferable
to that article in the course of time. Besides, as
most of the discoloring substances of earths may
be attributed to iron, if it were treated with marine
acid, the brightest might be improved.
ORANGE LAKE.—This may be prepared by boil.
ing four ounces of the best Spanish annotto, and one
pound of pearl ashes, for the space of half an hour;
in one gallon of water. Strain the tincture, and mis
it gradually with a solution of a pound and a half of
alum in six quarts of water, desisting when no ebul-
lition ensiues. Treat the sediment as is usual in com-
thon lake, and dry it in square bits, or rolls; &cc.

PATENT VELLow.—This color, for which the
ingenious Mr. Turner has a patent, is prepared by
triturating red lead and common salt together in a
mortar, and then exposing them in a crucible (made
of tobacco-pipe clay) to a certain heat. The sait is
decomposed, the marine acid uniting with the cals
of lead, forms the patent yellow; and the basis of
the salt, which must be carefully washed out, is the
mineral alkali, of so much consequence in the soap,
glass, and other manufactories.
SUGAR OF LEAD.—Lead and its calces may be
dissolved by the acctous acid, and will afford a cryss
tallizable
4


215
97
Vallizable salt, called sugar of lead, from its extreime
sweetness. This, like all the preparations of fead, 1s
a deadly porson. It has the property of rendering
oils thicker, and causing them to dry more rapidly.
TO MAKE WHITE PRECIPITATE OF EEAD.
If a small quantity of strong nitrous acid be poured
on litharge (which see), the acid unites itself to the
metal with considerable effervescence and heat. Some
water being now poured on, and the glass vessel con-
taining the mixture shaken, a turbid solution of the
litharge is made. If a small quantity of acid of viz
triol be now added, it throws down a beautiful white
precipitate; and the acid of nitre being left at liberty
to act upon the remainder of the litharge, begins
anew to dissolve it with effervescence.. When it 1s
again saturated, which will be known by the discon-
finuance of the bubbles, more acid of vitriol is to be
dropped in, and a white precipitate is again throwis
down. If any of the litharge remains undissolved,
the nurous acid being set at liberty a second tiime,
attacks it as at first; and by continuing to add acid
of vitriol, the whole of the litharge may be converted
into a most beautiful and durable white. Unfortu=
pately, this color cannot be used in ofl, though in
ater it seeims superior to any.
N.B. If the process be well managed, an ounce
of nitrousacid may be made to convertseveral poands
of litharge into a white of this Kind.
k173
It has been strongly recompmended to paper:t:
12E



1


214

ers; and others, who use water-colors in large quang
tities, to prepare their lakes, and the colors now pre-
pared of chalk, on the basis of the above precipitate
of lead.—For instance: if the color required be a
very fine one, suppose from cochingal, the coloring
Thatter is to be extracted by spirit of wine, without
heat. When the spirit is sufficiently impregnated,
It is to be poured by little and little upon the cals:
the spirit soon evaporates, and leaves the calx, co-
lored with the cochineal. More of the tincture 1s
then to be poured on, rubbing the mixture con-
stantly; and thus, by proper management, many
beautiful colors, not inferior to the best carmine,
may be prepared. When only a small quantity of
color, for the more exquisite touches of, the miniag
ture painter, is required, we would recommend the
process to be conducted on the basis of white precipi-
tate, or cale of tin, pursuing the same method of
rubbing in the coloring tincture as when whice pre-
cipitate of tead is used. If, instead of cochincal,
Brazil-wood, turmeric, legwood, exc. be substiruted,
different kinds of red, yellow, and purple, may be
produced.





215
By way of conclusion to this part of our Work, we
shall add some MISCELLANEOUS REMARKS, ex-
tracted from a small work by the late ingenious Mr.
RORERTSON; which being only distributed among
his private friends, and never published, is in few
hands: and being the result of the experience of
many artists, communicated to him, as well in Italy,
as in England, and written down by him, will, we
hope, be acceptable to our friends; as certainly many
of the ideas and hints are very good.
GROUND AND PEIMINH.
5
Mir. Forrester communicated to me the followins

ubservations, which he had from Mir. Patoon and
Others.
The Venetian masters often worked upon jess
i
grounds thus prepared. Take a fine, and even can.

was; of board, and give it one coat of jess made

with size; when asy paint upon it. The first coler-
ing will sink in as the jess drinks up the oil, but by
that means leares the greater brilliancy in the colors;
the second painting will not sink so much, and also
2905
it
C
appear very clear, after which you may very safely

re-touck, and glaze or scumble with the mastic war

sish at pleasure, and your picture will retain by far
more force and vigour, than if painted on any other
sround. Fou may likewise paint with safety on this
th
3

ground (or even on a white silk without any prepara-
 
sion) in water colors, prepased in the common way,

93
19
9
F F
any head, agurs, landscape, &c. After being bar-
monized









( 216.
Monized and finished in water-colors, the mastic
Warnish must be carefully laid on before you proceed
to re-touch, glaze or scumble in the usual way with
oil and varnish until the effect proves satisfactory;
this will bear out and retain more force, delicacy,
and clearness, than any oil-painting whatever, and
will even last as long, and is also a method made use
of by some of the finest colorists in their best works.
It is of great importance in our first and second
painting, whether of flesh, drapery, landscape, &c.
to paint only with earths, reserving the most clear
and brilliant colors for the last painting and glazings,
by which means a greater truth and force will always
be preserved in our works, and they will also last the
longer for it. It may reasonably be supposed, that a
proper foundation of strong holding colors is neces.
saty (such as most earths are) under the more delicate,
which will make them last and bear out the befter.
whilst, on the contrary, if earths are used upon the
clear and brilliant colors, the effect must be both
stull and heavy. Besides, if in dead or second co-
foring the finest and brightest tints are used, what
colors can be found to brighten or finish with I
The method used by Pietro Bianchi, who was a
very ingenious and general painter, and whose pic-
4
fures still maintain a great clearness and freshness,
though done forty, fifty, or sixty years—is this: he
took one half of drying oil, and the other half of
clear nut oil; these he mixed well together, and his
picture being dry, he rubbed (with a sponge of
brush) these ixed oils upon the pieture, leaving it
only damp therewith, after which he re-painted of
fe-touched


C 217)
re:touched at pleasure.) This method was given by
an old scholar of John Baptista Bougieuty who was
well acquainted with the said Prerso Branchi. The
same person also informed me, :that his own master,
Baptista Bougicur, made use of the thick white var-
nish sold in the color-shops for re-touching and re:
painting; but the consequence was, that, after some
years, all his pictures becarhe covered with a stuff
like a mildew, which after being cleaned off would



shortly-return.

Signior. Gaspar Scarmouchi, who is. also an
ingenious; man, and a scholar of Lucatelli; recoms
mends the use of poppy oil for according; re-touchs
ing, or re-painting a picture, which, he says; will

never change, and dries much sooner than nut;ous
The method of applying it is by letting the picture
be well dried, then rub, with a small sponge dipped
in the oil, the part of the painting; which you intend
to re-touch, after that spread the oil with the palm
of the hand, which will make the colors spread and


Work; very agreeably.
Mr. Andrews says, that, if you would unite, any
part of a picture in water colors; whether sky, face,
drapery, or any other part, you must wer the picture
on the back, with a clean sponge moderately, so as to
damp the colors, after which you may re-touch,
scumble, or re-paint, as often as you please, pro=
vided the size with which you mix your colors is
neither too weak nor too strong, and that the preture
be painted on an unprimed fine cloth of silk.— This
15 Mr. Patoons secret, and may be repeated with
Safety
EE
VOL. II. Edit. 7.


218
safety as often as you please to re-touch it, and withs

ai lises
Out anny Tsk:
In order to prevent your colors from ever chang-
ing, and to maintain their original beauty; force, and
vigor, the cloth should be primed with peach-stone
black and whice; that us to say, the second going
over the cloth, or the last hand, as it is termed,
should be done with this black and white, and the
picture will maintain itself without the least danger.
According to Mr. West, when you intend to re-
paint, re-touch, or glaze your picture; let it first be
tolerably dry, then give the whole, or the part which
you intend to paint, a coat of varnish a day or two
before, after which you may mix some of the same
Farnish with the colors you put on, which will make
them bear out with great force and clearness, inso
much that there will not be the least occasion for
varnishing those parts when the whole is finished,
only covering the other parts that appear dull or


Sunk in.
According to Mr. Jenkins, when the varnish is
very dry on the pietare, the best method is to rub
on the part to be painted, or re-touched, &c. a little
purified nut oil, which must be wiped clean off, so
as to leave only a little dampness on the place, which
assists the fresh colors in uniting with the old without
t
any sinking in.
Mastic, with ut oil, is very good for re-touching
to be used instead of the white varnish sold at the
color-shops.
For re-touching or bringing out pictures when
sunk in, take purified nut oil, and mix it with oil of
lavender
1


219.


lavender in equal quanuties: rub it on the part, or,

it the part is too fresh, mx the oils, with the color
on the pallet, or dip the pencil in it.
This oil of
2
lavender renders the colors pleasing, and most agree-



2
able, making them appear of a good
e2s7. to
oody, &


work; and quick to dry, so that the same part of a
picture may be painted on, day after day, until it is.
finished, without the least inconveniency or bad
effect.

MILDEW.

  pr p f
Coli 

D




5
some say, that, by shuttingi
up a fresh picture on
which you have put a mastic varnish, it will become

a


mildewed, wherever that varnish has touched: how-
ever,, the method of taking off that mildew is easy;


it
3 3t f 

aid may be done thus:

I 
3

To prevent ildew from Varnish.


t is F are es
i


Wash the picture with a clean sponge, dipped in

s
an equal quantity of vinegar and water, milk warm,
33
a Mot 8 t   ts t  t t 2 t ct t t t t
which will take away the mildew effectually; affer-

  


when the picture is dry
wards it will be necessary,
57
to rub it over with. a clean soft, sponge or cotton,
 

moistened with purified oil,; which you must wipe




off as clean as you can with cotton, or any other ing-
terial thanwill take the moisture of the eil away, and



 Poea
 
the picture will become clear, and look as fresh, as



is
5.62
CHeTef .


heen 5t  i
Mr. Jenkins's method of taking off mildew from
mastic varnish, 1s, by taking an equal quantity, of
5
spirits of wine, and rose water mixed, and so rub

it
E C 2


Bi5 8)
"4 
17



3
it on with a sponge, tin it takes off the ord varnish,


igi a Sn
 9
after which wasa the picture with ciean water, and

1
when it is dry you may put opn a tresh varnish again;
 
: Firnliglegil

but s the varnisr has been mixed in the coor at the
&   i
 ist
EC
his Tigfotiti liz
time of painting, or fe-touchils, as is practised by
2

8 S 1

708
5
 g sagav sisd Iisai

Mmany, painters, you must not attempt to taxe it on
mieis
1 
thit clilse ll nvend in orit 5 
by ahy means.

sess.o suris wil Eeielts Wilorlile
3

COLORS.
Umber burned or unburhed is a good color, espe-
gially for dead colorings it is used and recommended
1e2 3
&  8  
7.
67
Wir. Menss, and has a good pody...

wh j Eij isi ob ittesst
epne se si atos ite issi
19rid de Disnpa ourned,
and mixed with dark
o 5
erdillt. thess riridanet Essias ass
3d
AP
VehOw; and ara, rosa, make a hge: tiat...

35
  
sxices id ceistinas ons
Crystal pounded to an impalpable powder 1s. an
57


excelent dryer of the colors, mixed either with on
or Varnishoners & wr
caS. Misr
In order to dry a picture suddenly, place the back
3
F

EC

towards the san, arlich will enect it without the reast
L2
1 27
     sdfe
detfimehit to the Coiors.






he besn sort of the erra de Sienna burnea, naked

d
with white, and a little ultrailiarine, makes an exgurs

 r
Si osist 252l 5: O5l 
Site uesh or tine cofor for skies, at.


321
 4i
SFF
isr

22
72

1tiid fosalersua, with blaca and white, manis an

8
&


2
Libl Is iasoc tias ils tts Mirdis E.
Ecchent heshy tint.
13
1527
41

Indian red, with wory bldcx, mases a tne color.

1
fir
5
4

ane blacs earth of England is a very une corot.
Persico of peach stone black is a fine bluish black;

7

and the best and saiest in fiesh, skies, wattr, &C.


A most excellent black may be made thust take a
quantity of white paper, the whiter and cleaner the
better,


227.)
better, and burn it, preserving the ashes, which will,

when mixed with oil, make a fine black.
  


note  

GLAEENG.


 2  itt s


52
A:very: fine glazing liquid for the more delicaty
parts of a pilture may; be thus made: first grind
the mummy or burned lake, or any. other glazing
colors, very fine on the stone with ofl; when you
are aking the varnish, put in these, colors, and

let them boil in them till the varnish is made


(mastic) in which time the colors will sufficiently
incorpetate with the warnish. When you are going
to make use of it, in order that the colors may be
3
This makes
mixed the better, sur the bortle well.
the most delicate glaze that can possibly. be, and
which may he put on, any part of the picture;. it will

mellow it in the finest manner, without leaving the
least smuddled effect, or even the appearance of
being glazed at all.
The finest brown used by Mr. West in glazing is
the flesk of mummy; the most fleshy are the best
Partss the threads of the garments, or any dirt which
may prevent its grinding, must be murely cleared
8
2way; afterwhich: it must be ground up with nut oil
very fine; and may be mixed for glazing with ultra=
marifie, lake, blue, or any other glazing colors; when
1tis used, a little drying oil must be mixed with the
Farnish, without which it will be longer in drying,
which is the only defect it has, as it may be used in
any part of a picture without fear of its changing.
The
84


222
The finest brown next to that of mummy is the
Prussian blue burned, which is to be used in the
same manner for glazing as the former; with this
difference, from its being a better drier, there is no
occasion to use drying oil with the varnish. In some
respects, this has the advantage of the mummy,
being very little, if at all, inferior in point of color;
it dries better, is obtained with less difficulty, and


ground with greater ease.
A good glazing brown is made of gumbouge
burned; it is very similar in color to asppalrum, but
much inferior to the mummy, or blue.
To obtain a very lively and beautiful green, paint
the object, whether tree, drapery; &c. quite:blue,
afterwards glaze it over with brown pink, which will
" 111
produce the wished-for effect.

The finest green may be produced by painting the
ground white, and glazing over it with verdigrease
 F
mixed up with varnish.

3


O1LS.
5
 3
LINSEED OIL is expressed from the seed of line or
Rax. It is the principal oil used in all Kinds: of
paintings, or, indeed; the only Kind,; except for
some very nice purposes, where: its brownhess ren-
ders it unfit The principal defects of linseed:oil
are these, a brown color,, and a slowness in drying
both of which are in a much greater degree. in some
Parcels than in otlrers, arising sometimes from an
accidental mixture of seeds growing with it, which
make it partake of the nature of olive oil, which can
nOt


(223
not be brought to dry by any art or means whatever.
The excellence therefore of linseed oil consists in its
hear approach to a colorless state; and its soon drying.
With respect to the first quality, it may be distin-
guished by inspection only; but the second can only
be Known by trial, for there is no particularappearance,
of other immediately perceptible mark attending this
last quality. Linseed oil is in general used without
any other preparation than the mere mixture of it
with the proper dryer, but to keep it a considerable
time before it is used will always be found to im=
prove it. It is nevertheless used sometimes after it is
wrought into the state of drying oil (not to mix and
make other unprepared parcels dry) but alone, as the
sole vehicle of the colors. The convenience of this
is the speedy drying of the paint so composed; but
1t cannot be practised when the beauty of the color
15 of the least consequence; for, in this case; the
oil imparts a strong brown to the mixture.
NoT OIL is the oil of walnuts pressed out of the
Kernels by means of a screw-press; it is used for the
purpose of mixing with flake white, or other pis-
ments, where the clearness of the color is of great
consequence, and would be injured by the brownness
of linseed oil. It is used without any other prepara-
tion than keeping, which is ever found to improve it
with regard to iis color and quality of drying. The
adventitious faults of nut oil are turbidity, slowness
in drying, and not being perfectly colorless; inspec-
tion points out the first, but the remaining two must
be examined by trial: if, however, there is no adul-
teration in the case, time will generally cure it of all
defects.


(224 )
defects: Whoever would have nut oil perfectly
good should paal the skin of the Kernels before they
press them, for the skin contains an acidoil of a very

different hature from that, of the Kernel, and is ex-
tremely. subject to turn brown, or even black, and
consequently tinges the other when expressed with it.
PoPPy-erl is expressed from ripe seeds of poppies;
in the same manner as put oil from walnuts: its
qualities and uses, defects and remedies, are also
much the same; only when it is perfectly- good it is
much clearer, and will also dry better than the best
put oil.
Oils of SPIKE OF LAVENDER are essential, or dis=
killed oils, obtained by distilling spike, or any other
Eavender, with water. It is used in painting, only as
the vehicle for laying on the composition formed of
the flux, and colors in enamel painting, which its
fuidity renders capable of being worked with a
pencil, its volatile nature afterwards rendering it
wholly dry, without leaving any marter that might
affect the substances of the enamel, which an essen-
fial oil is only capable of. Oil of spike and lavender
is subject to be adulterated by the oil of rosemary.
END OF THE COMPENDIUM OF COLOkS.


