A L I.
DRAUGHTSMEN’S. ASSISTANT
OR,
DRAWING. MADE EASY;
WHEREIN
THE PRINCIPLES OF THAT ART ARE RENDERED FAMILIAR;
IN. TEN INSTRUCTIVE. LESSONS,
Comprised. under the following HEAds :
1. FEATURES AND LIMBS.
6. LANDSCAPES,
2. PROFILES AND OVALS.
7. PERSPECTIVE.
3. WHOLE FIGURES,,
8. ENLARGING AND CONTRACTING.
4. DRAPERY.
9. IMITATION OF LIFE.
5. LIGHT AND SHADE.
10. HISTORY.
Explain’d by a great Variety of ExAMPLEs from the most approved Designs, on
Copper-plates, neatly Engraved :
WITH
A suitable Introduction on the UTIiLIty of this Noblé Art ;
A N D
OBSERVATIONS on DEsiGN, as well in regard to Theory as Practice.

Bx THE AUTHOR OF THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.




LONDON;
Printed for R. SAYER and J. Bennett, Map and Print-sellers, (No. 53) Fleet-street.


THE
DRAUGHTSMAN’S ASSISTANT;
OR,
DRAWING MADE EASY.
INTRODUCTION.
DRAWING is the Representation of any Object either real or imaginary ;
being the Imitation of Nature or Art, in which by Qut-lines and Shadows,
L well executed in their Symmetry and Proportion, the Copy appears as if it
were the real Object.
This useful and entertaining Art improves the Mind, refreshes and supports the
Memory ; it enables the Artist to form the clearest Conception, without which the
most laboured Descriptions would be found deficient; and it rescues from Oblivion the
Actions and Persons of our Fore-fathers, and preserves their Features and Deeds to
future Generations ; and retains every uncommon appearance of Nature.
Nature seems to inculcate a Fondness for Drawing even in Youth, by the Delight
they take in Pictures, Prints, &c. which is a kind of universal Language, that speaks
to the Eye, and conveys Ideas understood by every Nation and People on the Globe.
The Artist may at Pleasure take Sketches of any Appearances in the Works of
Nature or Art, either in his own, or any foreign Country, and bring them homc for
his future Use or Inspection.-With this Accomplishment the Nobility and Gentry
can judge of Designs before executed, and spare themselves the Mortificatton of Delay,
and the additional Expence of future Alterations. In a word, it may be said to be the
silent, but the most expressive Language of Nature.
There is no Art or Profession to which Drawing is not useful, but more particularly,
the Painter, Carver, Statuary, Engraver, Chaser, Mathematician, Architect, Navi-
gator, Gardener, Weaver, Embroiderer, Whitesmith, and indeed every Workman
whose Advantage in Trade may depend on Variety and Beauty ; as by the Assistance
of it he can lay down his Designs, and improve them to the Fancy and Satisfaction of
his Employers.



It is Pity so useful a Branch of Education should ever be neglected, as several by
excelling in this Art have attained Perfection in their respective Professions and Employ-
ments, and have distinguished themselves by Works of Ingenuity, which have met
with the Protection and Encouragement of the judicious Part of Mankind. We need
not point out the Injury done to Youth by the Neglect of this necessary Study, and
how greatly many in Years of Maturity lament the Deficiency of it as à Loss to them-
selves and Families. No wonder it should be deemed one of the chief Accomplish-
ments in human Life, and thought worthy even of Royal Patronage, as well as the
honourable Regard paid to it by the different Societies, in all of which a spirited
Emulation is excited among the Proficients, by Premiums given to such as produce
the most correct and perfect Designs or Imitations.
It has ever been the Misfortune of those who have professed to lay down Rules for
the Attainment of any Art or Science, to leave them enveloped with Difficulties,
which, if not utterly insuperable, at least discourage the Learner from proceeding in a
Study which he can have little Hopes will ever reward his Purfuit.
From hence we may reasonably infer, that the sald Professors were totally unac-
quainted, if not with the Theory, at least with the Practical Part of what they un-
dertook to teach others: and that the Instructions they have given were founded
rather upon a bare Suppesition of their Efficacy, than upon the surer Basis of long and
repeated Experience, which alone could have ensured their Success, and from which,
with all due Deference to the Judicious (whose Sanction we shall at all Times be
ambitious to deserve l, we may venture to answer for the Practicability of our own.
To obviate every Objection, and to remove all those Difficulties which had so long
blocked up the Path of Science, and retarded, if not wholly impeded the Pupil, in his
Progress to the Temple of Fame, was the chief View in compiling the subsequent
little Treatise.
Over and above the Improvements made in illustrating the several Arts hitherto so
imperfectly and unintelligibly explained, we have introduced Directions for Scraping
in Metzotinto, which, in this Edition, are still farther enlarged, and which, as they
have never been before attempted in any Books of this kind, we flatter ourselves will
be the more acceptable ; especially when it shall appear, from the Rules laid down for
the Performance of this Art, that it is so easy to be attained, that a tolerable Profici-
ency in Drawing will enable any one to undertake it with all imaginable Prospect of
Succe ss.
The Reader will also find, in this Impression, the Addition of a very useful Problem,
in the Article of Perspective, illustrated by a new Plate.
As this Book is chiefly intended for the Use of young Practitioners, we have pur-
posely avoided all abstruse Expressions and obsolete Terms, contenting ourselves with
fuch a familiar Stile as we judged most likely to inform those Minds we would wish to
improve : Yet, as the Ideas of an Artist are not wholly to be conveyed without some
necessary Terms peculiar to each Branch, we have taken Care to explain such as
could not be omitted without a manifest Injury to the Work, by familiar Words of a
synonimous Tendency, wherever they occur ; so that we apprehend we have not left
the least Stumbling-Block. for the Reader to encounter.


GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
EVERY young Beginner should endeavour to improve his Memory with the-

Beauties of the most excellent Paintings and Prints, taking Notice of the Harmony
of their different Parts, as well as of the Reasons for the Disposition of the Lights
and Shades : which will by Degrees improve the Ideas to a Degree of Excellencys-
and make the Practice easy and familiar ; as the Hand will be more ready to execute
those Objects the Mind has so clearly conceived. The use of this Accomplishment is.
visible in many, who, though not able to execute, yet by accustoming themselves to
this Study become excellent Judges, and are with great Propriety termed Connoisseurs-
in the polite Arts of Painting, Engraving, &c. &c. It will also be of essential Ser-
vice to the Pupil to attend to the Reasons assigned for the Merits or Defects of the Per-
formance, as such an Enquiry will greatly forward him in his Study.
Pupils should take particular Notice of the Original intended to be drawn from,-
observing whether the Figures or Objects are upright, or incline to the right or left,
taking Care also that everv Part in the Copy has the same Direction, which may easily
be discovered by frequentlv revising the Sketch, and comparing it attentively with the
Original. Paying a due Observance to this by young Beginners will mend their Judg-
ment, and in Time enable them to proceed with a growing Pleasure.
MATERIALS for DRAWING.
Camel’s Hair-Pencils.
Charcoal cut in long Slips.
Fitches.
Black Lead Pencils.
Crow-quill Pens.
Crayons of black, white, and red Chalk.
A Ruler and a Pair of Compasses;
A Porte-Crayon.
An Indian Rubber.
Indian Ink.
INSTRUCTIONS, WITH EXAMPLES.
VERY Learner is particularly desired to perfect himself in the Practice of the-
E first Lesson, in its several Branches, before he attempts the Second, and so of the
Second before he proceeds with the Third, not endeavouring to become Master of the,
whole at once, which will only perplex his Ideas, and weary him in the Pursuit of
what he will never by this Means be likely to attain ; whereas by proceeding gra-
dually, the Rules will be found much more easy and practicable, and consequently
the Study infinitely more pleasing and encouraging,



Drawing the Introductory Lines, with the Features and Limbs
separately.
ENDEAVOUR to imitate perpendicular or upright Strokes, and then horizontal
or parallel Lines, but without using the Ruler; and if Care be taken, few Examples
of this Sort will give you Perfection. When yon have attained this, proceed to the
curved and twining Lines, observing carefully their different Inclinations. And when
you can with Ease perform these, proceed to draw the Qut-lines of a Human Face,
as the Eyes, Nose, Mouth and Ears; and from them proceed to the Parts of the
Body, as the Arms, Hands, Legs, &c. See Plate I.
N. B. The above must be but faintly fketched, so as to be easily taken down with
a Rubber, in order to make the necessary Alterations before finishing.
Profiles and Ovals.
WHEN you are become Master of the former, you may then attempt the Profile
or Side Face, being careful to observe the Proportion of the several Parts to each
other; after this the Full or Oval Face, observing still the Bearings of every Feature
with respect to the rest, and keeping the Proportions as exact as possible. After pro-
ceeding with great Care in the above, you may begin the Qut-line of the Body, as in
Plate II.
Whole Figures, with the Proportions and Dimensims of the
Human Body.
IF on thorough Examination you find you can easily imitate the different Fea-
tures, and Parts of the Body, you may begin the whole Figure by sketching the
whole very lightly with your Pencil or Charcoal, examining the Proportion of the different
Parts, taking it down with a Rubber, and altering where it shall appear necessary.
When you have brought it as near as possible toyour Original, proceed to finisn with the
Crow-quill Pen and Indian Ink, beginning with the Head, then proceeding to the
Shoulders, Body, Arms, Hands, Hips, Legs and Feet, taking Care to correct any
Errors in the Pencil Sketch, the Remains of which will be easily erazed with a Rubber.
N. B. Refrain from the Use of Compasses till after a very minute Inspection with
the Eye, and then, if the Fault cannot be discovered, a proper Application of them
will greatly assist the Pupil to remedy the Defect. Having by close Attention and
Practice improved his ldeas so far as to be able to compleat a Figure in Qut-lines, we
shiall proceed to instruct him in the Drapery or Cloathing; but before we quit this
Subject it will be necessary in this Place to give him
THE best Method of ascertaining the proportions and dimensions of the several Parts of
the Human Body, by raising a Perpendicular on the Place you intend for the Middle of
the Figure, and divideit into Heads, and from such form a Scale, to regulate the
proper Distances: but as it has been common to divide the Figure into ten Parts, we
have (tho’ we do not so well approve of this Method) given an Example of both of
these Methods, together with Rules for the Illustration of each respectively.



The Proportion of a Figure divided into Eight Heads.
See Plate III.
THE Length of the Head, is from the Crown of the Head to the bottom of the
Chin.
A Line ruled through the Second Division will directly cross the Paps of the Breasts.
The Third Division will fall near the Navel.
The Fourth acrofs the Privities, which is exactly the Middle of the Figure.
The Fifth crosses the Middle of the Thigh.
The Sixth is just below the Bend of the Knee.
The Seventh falls a little below the Calf of the Leg.
The Eighth extends to the bottom of the Heel.
Observe that when the Arms are extended at full Length in a direct Line, the full
Extent from the Middle Fingers of each Hand is exactly the Length of the Figure ;
from the Middle of the Collar Bone to the End of the Middle Finger measures four
Heads, viz. The First to the Bend of the Shoulder, The Second to the Elbow, the
Third to the Wrist, and the Fourth to the Fingers Ends.
From Shoulder to Shoulder in a Man of common Size, measures exactly two Heads ;
but there is no precise Standard for the Breadth of the Limbs, which vary according to
the Bulk of the Person, and the Movement of the Muscles.
The Proportion of a Figure divided into Ten Parts. See Plate III.
THE First of these Divisions extends from the Crown of the Head to the under lip.
The Second a little below the Collar Bone, and a Line drawn through this Part
of the Figure, will pafs over the Middle of the Shoulders.
The Third Division will make a Line just below the Paps of the Breast.
The Fourth will reach just below the Navel.
The Fifth, which is the Middle of the Figure, directly across the Privities.
The Sixth will pass over the Middle of the Thighs.
The Seventh’crosses the Bend of the Knee.
The Eighth directly through the Calves of the Legs.
The Ninth reaches half Way from the Calf, to the Bottom of the Heel, which
determines the Tenth and last Division of the Figure.
The young Beginner will find the foregoing Rules of infinite Advantage, to which
we would advise him to give due Application till they become strongly impressed
on his Mind ; but Care must be taken that too strict an Observance of the preceding
Dimensions may not destroy that Variety of Compositions so absolutely necessary ;
nor will the Préservation of the same Proportion be always allowed in the Subject,
which Mr. Hogarth in his Chapter of Proportion very judicioussy remarks in his Ob-
servations upon the celebrated Statue of the Apollo Belvidere, where he says, l cannot
throw a stronger Light on what has been said hitherto of Proportion, than by animad-
verting on a remarkable Beauty in the Apollo Belvidere, which hath given it the Prefer-
ence even to the Antinous ; I mean a Super-addition of Gieatness to at least as much
Beauty and Grace as is found in the latter.



In the same Apartment at Rome are to be seen these two Master-pieces of Art,
where in viewing the Antinous the Spectator is silled with Admiration ; when the
Apollo strikes him with Surprise ; and, as Travellers express themselves, with an
Appearance of something more than human, which they are always at à Loss to de-
scribe ; but the Effect of this is, they say, the more extraordinary, as the Dispropor¬
tion upon Examination is evident to every common Eye.
Anatomy the Foundation of Design.
ANATOMY is a perfect knowledge of all the Parts of the Human Body; but no
more is necessary to Painters than that which relates to the Bones, and the principle
Muscles that cover them.
There is an absolute Necessity to be thoroughly acquainted with the Forms and
Joints of the Bones, Bécause the Dimensions are often altered by Morion; and like-
wise to understand the Office and Situation of the Muscles, since the most striking
Truth in Design depends upon them.
As it is indispensably necessary that the Pupil should have some Knowledge in
Anatomy, it being the fundamental Part of Design, and enables Artists to discover
the Beauties of the Antique; it is therefore earnestly recommended the Student to pay
some Attention to it, as all that is necessary for Draughtsmen is very eafily retained.
O DRAPERY.
WHEN you have drawn the Qut-lines of the Figure you want to cloath, faintly
with Charcoal, sketch the Qut-lines of your Drapery lightly, with the several Folds,
remembering that they must not cross each other. Due Regard must likewise be had to
the Quality of the Drapery ; as Stuffs and Woollen Cloth are more harsh than Silky
which is always flowing and easy. Remember that the Drapery must not stick too
close to the Bodv, but let it seem to flow easy about it, and yet appear so that the
Motion of the Figure be free and natural. Be careful that the Drapery supposed to be
blown by a Breeze of Wind all slow one Way, and draw the Parts next the Body
before those which sty off. The Garments must always bend with the Figure, and if
you make the Drapery almost close to the Boly the smaller must be the Folds, and if
quite close there must be no Folds, but only a faint Shadow, to represent the Bend of
that Part of the Body which it covers. It is necessary the Student should take every
Opportunity of Improvement in this useful Branch, by remarking the Folds in the
Drapery of Gentlemen and Ladies, according to their several Positions : By this uner-
ring Rule of Nature, the Learner will greatly heighten his own Idea-, and give a
superior Excellence to his Work.
Thus far may serve to give the young Draughtsman a general Idea of Drapery, but
that he may not be at à Loss in perfecting himself in this necessary Branch of the Art,
we have here subjoined the following more particular Instructions, viz.
I. Be careful to avoid overcharging your Figure with a Superfluity of Drapery.
2. Let as much of the Form of the Body as possible be shewn underneath it.
3. When the Draperies are large throw them into as few Folds as you can, and let
these be large and graceful.



4. On the contrarv, let those which are close to the Body and short, be loosened by
sinall Folds judicioussy placed, which will be the means of avoiding that Stiffnefs,
which for want of this Caution appears, when the Drapery is made to sit too strait, and
makes the Figure seem as if wrapped round with a Bandage, instead of being grace-
fully cloathed.
5. When much Drapery is required, let the greater Part (if possible) be thrown
into Shadow.
6. Observe that the Folds which fall in the Light must have such foft and tender
Shadows, as may make them sit hollow from the Body, and not seem to girt too
closely to it.
7. Let the Folds be properly contrasted, and avoid strait Lines as much as possible.
8. A judicious Repetition of Folds in a circular Form greatly contribute to
characterise a fore-shortened Limb.
9. In fixed Attitudes let the Drapery appear likewise motionless (unless exposed to
the Air). But the Drapery of Figures moving with great Agility, should seem to play
as if agitated by the Wind, but in Proportion only to the Velocity of the Figures in
Motion.
We cannot conclude this Subject without giving this very useful Caution, viz.
Let the Pupil be careful how he studies Statues, and remember that the best of them
are only Memorials of those great Artists, whose Lives were spent in endeavouring
to express their own Idea of Perfection, which varied according to the different Taste
of each, and the Nature of the Materials upon which they wrought: and let it be
likewise remembered, that there is a Stiffness (which should be studiously avoided)
in a Copy (even though a correct one) made after the finest Statue, which will never
convey any Idea but that of a Statue; whereas there is such a Freedom observable in
the Imitations of Nature, as evidently distinguishes them from those taken either from
Marble or Plaister.
Of Light and Shade.
THE proper Distribution of Light and Shade in a Picture is absolutely necessary
to be known ; as it not only determines the proper Distance of one Object from ano-
ther, without which the Whole would be an undistinguished Mass of Confusion, but
it gives likewise to each respective Object its Substance, Roundness, and Effect.
Therefore, having out-lined the Folds, and the other Parts of Drapery, vou may
next attempt the Shadowing of your Figure, observing the following Method :
Shadow the Drawing with the Pencil or Pen; in which great Care is required,
First, observe from which Side the Light comes in, which if natural ought to be
from the Right or Left; for when the Light comes in the Middle, it is called an
artificial Light, as proceeding from some artificial Luminary, as a Candle, Lamp,
&c. &c. Lay your Shades rather faint at first, so that you may heighten them at
Pleasure where necessary ; for you may at any Time darken your Shadows, when you
cannot lighten them.
Remember that your Shades must be all on the same Side of the Figure, that is to
say, if the Right Side of the Face be in Shade, so must the same Side of the Body,
Arm, Leg, &c. Your Shades must all be faint as they approach the Light, the
Strength gradually decreasing towards the Extremities, to prevent a harshi Appearance,
as that is a never-failing Sign of a bad Workman.



When one Part of the Body projects over or before another, the Part projecting
must receive a stronger Light: Those Parts that bend inward must be made so much
the darker, and shadowed deepest next the Light.
Two equal Lights must never be made in the same Picture: The strongest Light
should fall upon the Middle of the Piece (where the principal Figures ought to stand),
diminishing gradually towards the Extremities.
A Stump inade of Paper or Glove-leather rolled hard, and cut almost to a Point
like a Pencil, is useful (if you shade with the Pencil, Red Chalk, or Crayons) to
blend the Shades, and soften them into each other; as also, where they appear too
strong, to weaken them with the afcresaid Roll. By examining Nature you will im-
prove your ldeas in Light and Shade, as well as in Outlines, and be enabled to form
a right Judgment of the Truth of your Drawing.
N. B. The Indian Ink may be prepared for a few different Shades by rubbing it
more or leis in Water on a Marble Stone cut in Hollows, for that Purpose, reserving
one of the Hollows for the Water.
Of Drawing Landscapes, &c.
THIS will give the Student an inexhaustible Fund of Amusement, from the Variety
of Subjects which Nature constantly supplies for his Observance and Imitation. And
in order to improve in this Study, the best Method is to adhere to the Rules before
laid down with regard to the Human Body, by beginning with the most simple Ob-
jects, as the Outlines of Cottages, Trees, &c. for which Reason we shall give a few
Examples in each, with their proper Shades ; but would advise the Pupil not to be
too hasty in the Shadowing before he is perfect in the Outline; and, as it is impos¬
sible he should excel in Landscape without some Knowledge of Perspective, we shall
give some Directions, suitably illustrated with Problems, as a necessary Assistant to
the Practitioner, which will prevent his being imposed on by faulty and incorrect
Originals, where the lgnorance of Perspective makes the whole Landscape appear
unnatural and distorted.
Of Perspective.
THE first Thing necessary to learn, before we proceed to the Problems, is an Ex-
planation of the several technical Terms used in the Practice of this Art; and these
are as follow :
The Base or Fundamental Line is the Bottom of the Drawing, or that Part of the
Ground on which the Person is supposed to stand, looking towards the Point
of Sight.
A Perpendicular is an upright Line with respect to any Part of the Base.
Parallel Lines are equidistant from each other, as the Horizon to the Base.
The Horizon is the most distant Part where the Clouds seem to touch the Earths
and limits the Sight.
The Point of Sight is that Part of the Horizon where all the Visual Rays center.
Visual Rays are Beams of Light conveying the Likeness of any Thing to the Sight,
and the Knowledge thereof to the Mind.



Points of Distance are set off on the Horizontal Line, at equal Distances on each
Side of the Point of Sight.
Diagonal Lines are those drawn from the Points of Distance to the End of the
Base Line.
The Abridgment of the Square is theLine where the Diagonals crofs tneVisual Rays,
and must always be parallel to the Base ; this is only of Uie when the Sight is limited
by a Perpendicular, as the End of a Church or Room.
The foregoing Terms are illustrated in Plate IV. Fig. I.
The Point of Direct View is when the Obiect is seen in Front, as a House, &c.
or a Geometrical Elevation raised from a Ground-plot, comprehending an equal
Space on both Sides the Point of Sight.
The Point of Oblique View is when the Object is seen sideways ; for Instance, a
View of a Canal with some remarkable Buildings, when the Person drawing the said
View is placed on the Base Line opposite to the Buildings, so that the Ray of Light
may be more oblique, and the Buildings less fore-shortened, and appear to greater
Advant age.
Accidental Points are those where Objects end in the Horizontal Line, not in the
Points of Sight or Distance, serving for Streets, Houses, Chairs, &c. taking diffc-
rent Directions.
schnography is a Plan or Ground-plot to be raised in Perspective.
Scenography is bringing any Thing raised in Perspective from an lchnographie Plaa
to its proper Proportion, that all Objects may be diminished in a Picture the same as
in Nature.
As the Art of Perspective is constructed on Geometrical Principles, it may be ne-
cessary, previous to the Rules themselves, to demonstrate the following introductory
Operations :
I. From a Point in a given Line 12 to raise a Perpendicular. See Fig. II.
Plate IV.
Draw the given Line 1—2, then set one Foot of the Compasses in 2, and extend-
ing them to rather more than half the Length of the Line 1—2, stiike the Arch
3, 4. and with the same Extent of the Compasses set one Point in 3, and describe the
ArchS, 6. and then, without altering the Compasses, set one Foot in 7, and sweep
the Arch 8, 6. Next rule through the Points 3, 7. to intersect the Arch 8, 9. at 103
and draw the Line from 10 to 2, which is the Perpendicular required,
2. To raise a Perpendicular upon A, it being the Center of the given Line A. B.
See Fig. III. Plate IV.
Divide the Base Line BCinto two equal Parts, then extend the Compasses to any
Distance greater than A B or A C, and with one Foot in B sweep the Arch d e,
then with the same Extent of Compasses set one Foot in C, and sweep the Arch ƒg,
and from the Intersection of the two Arches at h draw a Line to the Center of the
Base Line at A, and you have the Perpendicular required.


3. To draw a Line parallel to, or equidistant from, another given Line E. F
Extend the Compasses to the Distance of the Parallel required, then with one Foot
in any Point of the Line given, as in G, sweep the Circle H. I. Again, without
altering the Compasses, set one Foot in another Point, as in K. and describe the Circle
L. M. then rule the Line T. C. touching the outward Parts of the two Circles,
and you will then have the Parallel to the Line given.
4. To bisect or divide a given Line, C. D. into two equal Parts. See Fig. V. Plate IV.
Having taken with your Compasses any Distance greater than half the given Line,
proceed with one Foot of them in C. to describe the Arch E. E. and without altering
the Distance, seiting one Foot in D, sweep the Arch F. F. and these Arches will
intersect each other in the Points I. K. which joined by a Perpendicular will cross.
C. D. in the middle Point L.
5. Having three given Points not in a right Line, how to turn a Circle through
them. See Fig. VI. Plate IV.
Three Points being fixed as at D. E. and F. proceed to join them by the right
Lines D. E. and E. F. then by Fig. V. bisect the Line D. E. with the Line G. H.
which being doné, divide the Line E. F. with the Line I. K. and from the Middle
K. where these Lines center, extend your Compasses to D. and sweep the Arch
D. E. F. P.
6. A sure Way of drawing an Oval. See Fig. VII. Plate IV.
Divide the given Line G. H. into four equal Parts ; one Foot of the Compasses
being set in I. describe a Circle E. E. Without altering the Extent of the Compasses,
from K sweep the Circle F. F. then extend the Compaffes, one Foot in K, and sweep-
the Arch L. L. With the same Extent set one Foot in I. and turn the Arch M. M.
the Intersections must be united by a Perpendicular from N. to O. then proceed, with-
one Foot of the Compasses in N. to describe the Arch P. P. and with the same Extent.
of Compasses set one Foot in O. and turn the Arch T. T.
7. Anotker certain Method. See Fig. VIII. Plate IV.
Rule a given Line A. L. then place one Foot of the Compasses in C. and describe
the Circle F. F. then with the same Extent of Compasses on the Line A. L. in the-
supposed Point O. describe the Cirele P. P. and through the Points Q. Q where the
two Circles intersect, rule the Perpendicular K. T. then, having one Foot of the
Compasses set in K. extend the other so as to sweep the Arch B. B. to the lower Ex-
tremities of the Circles ; then, without altering the Compasses, set one Foot in Ty
and turn the Arch. U. U. to join the upper Extremities.
By the preceding Examples it is evident that an Oval of any Form or Size may be
constructed at Pleasure, only observing always to set the Compasses at an equal Dis-
tance from the given Line A. L. on the Perpendicular K. T.



Practical Examples in Perspective.
To draw a Square Pavement in Perspective. See Fig. IX. Plate IV.
SUPPOSING you have a Piece of Pavement consisting of 64 Pieces of Marble,
each a Foot Square, your first Business is to draw an lchnographical Plan, which is
thus performed :
An exact Square being made to the Size of your intended Plan, proceed to divide
both Horizon and Base into eight equal Parts, and from each Division in the Base to
its opposite Point in the Horizon rule perpendicular Lines, and divide the Sides into
the same Number, ruling acrofs from Point to Point parallel Lines ; so that of Course
vour Pavement will be divided into 64 Square Feet ; as the eight Feet in Length,
being multiplied by the eight in Breadth, produce the Number of Pieces contained
in the Whole : then rule from Corner to Corner Diagonal Linies, and you will have
your Ground-plot as in the same Figure.
Now, to throw this into Perspective, draw another Square as before directed, and
divide the Base Line only into eight equal Parts ; fix your Point of Sight at F. in the
Center of the Horizon G. H. ; then to every Division in the Base D. E. rule Lines
from the same Point; and proceed to rule Diagonals from D. to H, and from G. to
E, to answer thofe in the Ground-plot, and you will then have your Square reduced
to the Triangle D. E. F. and from the Point 1. where the Line D. F. is intersected
by the Diagonal G. E. to the opposite Intersection K. where the Line E. F. is inter-
sected by the Diagonal D. H. ; then rule a parallel Line, which is the Abridgment
of the Square.
From the rest of the Lines which go from the Base to the Point of Sight, through
the Points which are intersected by the Diagonals, rule parallel Lines, and you will
then have your Square Pavement laid in true Perspective, as in Fig X. Plate IV.
To find the Height and Proportion of Objects appearing above the Horizon on a
supposed Plane. See Fig. XI. Plate IV.
Having your horizontal Line ruled A B. proceed with sixing your Point of Sight
as at N, and marking the Place of your nearest Pillar by a Dot at the Summit or Top
as at C, and another at the Base as at D. Then rule à Line from C. to N. and
another from D. to N. and these two Lines give the Height of any Number of Pil-
lars : for Instance, would you have your Pillar at E, fix your Dot for the Base, then
meet the Diagonal D. N. at F, by ruling a parallel Line, and to the Diagonal CN
rule the Perpendicular F G, which Perpendicular shews the Height of the Pillar
required at E. Or, would you have a Pillar placed at H, observe the soregoing Di-
rections ; ruling the Parallels HI and KL, and the Perpendicnlars IM and LO
will shew the required Heights and Distances.
In finding the Diameter at any particular Distances, you are to be guided by that
nearest the Base ; as, for Example, suppose your nearest Pillar DR to be ten Feet in
Height and one in Diameter, intersect from Bottom to Top in two equal Parts, and
upon the Base of the Pillar set off one of them from the Point of Sight N to the
Diameter R, then rule a Line to the Point of Sight from R, and you will have on
the respective Bases the Thickness of each Pillar.



The preceding Rule exemplified in Objects beneath the Horizon. See Fig. XIE.
Plate IV.
Having ruled the Horizontal Line A B, fix the Point of Sight as at C; then,
according to your Judgment, make a Dot for the Feet of your Figure as at D, and
another for the Head as at E; then rule à Line from Cto D, and from C to E, and
these two Diagonals will shew the true Height of any Number of Figures that can
be wanted. Make Dots for the Place of the Feet of any Figure where you would
have them stand, as at F, G, H, I, and K: now to know the Height of each respec-
tively, draw parallel Lines from the Dots F, G, H, I, and K, to the Diagonal CD;
then raise Perpendiculars from the Points where the Parallels intersect this Diagonal
at LO MR, NS, OT, and PU, and the Perpendicular L Q shews the Height
of the Figure at F, as does MRof that at G, NS of that at H, O Tof that at l7
and PU of that at K.
Note, You will be obliged always to fix the Height of one Figure as at D E, in
order to find the Size of the rest; and the Point ef Sight may be placed at any Dis-
tance you please from the first supposed Figure on the Horizontal Line:
Rule your Base Line of any Length you please, as at A E; then raise Perpendi-
culars (as in Fig. II. ) from A to C, and from Bto D; next take with your Com-
pasies the Length from A to B, and, setting one Foot in A, turn the Arch EF; then
with the same Extent of Compasses set one l’oot in B, and describe the Arch G H ;
lastly, rule a Line from l to K, touching the outward Parts of the two Arches where-
they intersect the Perpendiculars, and you have the Square required.
From a given Line to form a Parallelogram. See Fig. XIV. Plate IV.
Rule a given Line of the Length required, as at A B; then raise a Perpendicular
at A, and another at B, (as in Fig. II. ) and on them set off the proper Heights, as.
A C and BD; join CD with a Line, and your Parallelogram is complete.
FIG. XV. Plate IV.
In this Figure we have attempted to shew how to draw, with- Certainty, that Curved
Line, wnich Mr. Hogarth, in his ingenious Analysis, has stiled the Line of Beauty-
There has, however, been an Objection raised by some, that he has omitted the Rule
whereby this truly useful Line may be found : For which Reason, and in order to
en force the Study of it, we have given thisFigure, not as an Insult upon that celebrated
Author (whose Meaning is very clear), but as a.Line well deserving of Attention;
being of itself single and easily drawn; and as we are desirous of following the
Method of that great Artist, in the Explanation of our Ideas by the most familiar
Objects, we here inform the Student, that it may be plainly seen in that well-known
Amusement of the School-Boy, a six-pointed Star; in which the contrasted Halves
of any two opposite Points give the Line which is with great Propriety stiled the
Line of Beauty.



To execute a Direct View. See Fig. I. Plate V.
If you would draw a Direct View of a House and Wall, or, in other Words, a
Geometrical Elevation to be raised from a Plan or Ground-plot, by a Scale, madæ
according to the Dimensions of the Building, first rule the Base Line A A above the-
Plan B B at any Height vou please. Then erect Perpendiculars at C and D for the-
Extremities of the House, also fiom the Windows marked in the Plan ef,gh, i ér
l' m, no, which will give the Breadth of all the Windows. Rule these Perpendiculars
faintly with Black Lead. Having done this, suppose the Bottom of the Parlour or
Ground-Floor Windows. to be 3 Feet above the Base Line A A, take off with your
Compasses 3 Feet from the Scale, and transfer that Measure from 9 to q at each End
of the House. Then supposing the Parlour Windows to be 54 Feet high, set off that
Measure from the Scale, and transfer it to the Extremities from 3 tor. Then, if
the Distance from the Top of the Parlour Windows to the Bottom of those on the
First Floor be 5 Feet, take it as before from the Scale, and set it off at each End
from r tos. Then suppose the Chamber Windows to be 5à Feet high, transfer that
Distance from the Scale from s to t, at each End. Next, supposing from the Top
of the First Floor or Chamber Windows to the Bottom of the Cornice to be 3 Feetx
take 3 Feet from the Scale as before, and set off that. Distance at each End from
t to u. Then if the Cornice be 13 Foot high, meafure it off from the Scale, and
transfer it to each End from u to w. Lastly, suppose the Roof to be 3 Feet from the
Top of the Cornice, set off 3 Feet at each End. from w to x, then rule faintly with-
your Pencil the Parallels q9, rr, ss, tt, u u, a w, x x, and you have the Height
and Breadth of all the Windows, &c. which having outfined, rub out the Parallels-
and Perpendiculars with Bread ; and setting off 6 Feet, the supposed Height of the-
Wall, rule the Line from 4 to Y at each End, and the Work is ready for shading.
To draw an Oblique View. See. Fig. II. Plate V.
First rule the Horizontal Line DE, and if. the most remarkable Object be on the
Left-Hand, as at C, having taken your Station on the Base Line as at G, from that
Place raise a Perpendicular G I, which at the Point of Sight K will intersect the-
Horizon; and to find the Roof and Base of the principal Buildiag C, rule the Dia-
gonals LK and MK.
N. E. Observe whether the Prospect before you make a Curve, which if it should,:
be careful to make the same in your Copy, whether it be direct or oblique.
To draw a View wherein are Accidental Points. See Fig. III: Plate V..
Suppose a large Building in which are seen two Fronts taking different Directionss¬
as in this View : six your Station at A about the Center of the Base Line, after which-

rule the Horizontal Line B E, then fix. upon that your Boints of Sight D and E ;.
and rule first the Diagonals EH and E l, and you may draw Diagonals from the
Point of Sight D to F, G, and K, &c. that they may take their proper Directious-
towards their respective Points of Sight.
Accidental Points seldom intervene where there is but a small Distance, as in Canalss.
Groves, Noblemens Seats, &c. which are to he drawn by the strictest Rules of Per-



spective. But when the Prospect is extensive, it must include every Thing analagous
thereto; but as this requires such an infinite Number of Accidental Points, you had
better not attempt them till your Ideas are farther improved, and your Judgment
more strengthened.
Of Enlarging and Contracting. Fig. I. and V. Plate V.
WITH your Compasses divide your Original into any Number of Squares, and
with your Pencil rule from Side to Side, and from Top to Bottom ; then divide your
Paper into the same Number of Squares bigger or lefs than the Original you intend
to enlarge or contract: and you may, to prevent Mistakes, number the Squares both
in the Original and Copy, as they are done in the Plate. This done, place vour
Original before vou, and draw Square by Square, that is to say, make the same Parts
as are contained in one Square of your Original fall into the same Square of your
intended Copy; and by doing this with Care, you will make the one exactly corre-
spond with the other in due Symmetry and Proportion. Then outline your Subject
with Indian Ink, and rub out the Marks of the Pencil with Bread, and so proceed
to shading.
Of Copying of Draughts.
WHEN you would copy a Print or Drawing exactly of the same Size, rub the
Back of it with the Dust of Red Chalk or Black Lead ; lay this upon vour Paper,
and pin it down at the four Corners ; then with a blunt Point trace the Qutlines and
Breadths of the Shadows ; which done, having carefully examined it to see that
nothing be omitted, take it off, and finish it with the Pencil or Pen.
Another Way to make an exact Copy, and at the same Time to preserve the Ori-
ginal, is, to lay a Piece of transparent Paper upon it, and draw the Outlines thereon
with a’Black-lead Pencil ; then between that and the Paper you intend to draw upon,
place a Piece of thin Post-Paper, reddened or blackened at the Back ; after which,
proceed to trace and finish it according to the foregoing Rule.
If vou would reverse your Original, you need only turn the transparent Paper, with
the Drawing you have made upon it, downwards upon the Post-Paper, and trace it
as above directed.
Of the Imitation of Life.
CHUSE the Person you are to draw from, to be of an handsome Shape and good
Proportion, as this will confirm your Ideas, and illustrate the Rules before-mentioned.
Place the Person in the most natural and easy Position, always avoiding, in vour
early Practice, the copying of ungraceful or distorted Attitudes, which serve only to



geve the young Practitioner a wrong Bias, and render him incapable of forming a
just and proper Conception of the natural Beauties and Graces of the Human Form.
Begin as before directed with a slight Sketch with vour Charcoal of the main
leading Strokes or Outlines, which having done correctly, proceed to finish with
your Pencil.
Take particular Notice of the Muscles as they oecur ; as this will give a Resem-
blance of the Person in the Outline, if correctly observed, before vou shadow it.
In drawing a Likeness, great Care is necessary to exprefs the Paffions in the liveliest
Manner, and this is done by minding the Disposition of every Feature, with pecu-
liar Nicety. This being by far the most difficult Part the Pupil has to learn, we
would advise him not to be too hasty to attain it before he has made a thorough
Proficiency in the easier and more practicable Branches of Drawing ; nor would wey
on the other Hand, discourage the Efforts of Genius, which in the Pursuit of any
Art or Science, are most certainly truly laudable, and have been frequently attended
with the deserved Success : all that we mean to inculate by this Caution, is not to
aspire all at once, or by too hasty Strides, to Perfection, but rather to ascend pro-
gressively the necessary Steps which lead towards it.
Of HISTORY.
THE Student has in this Branch the whole Art of Drawing, as it were, blended
together ; and when he has so far gained his Point, as to draw compleatly the-
Human Body, this will be the most delightful Employment that can be imagined.
For the Choice of Subjects he need never be at à Loss, as his own or his Neighbour’s:
Families will furnisn him with Abundance. Books will likewise greatly afsist him,
particularly the Sacred History, which is replete with an inexhaustible Fund of
Events, above all others worthy to be recorded, and therefore most deserving his-
ferious Attention. To this we may add the History of our own Country, wherein
the illustrious Actions of ancient Heroes, as well as those of our Contemporaries,.
and particularly our gallant Officers Military and Naval in the last War, afford ample:
Matter for the Exercise of the ingenious Artist. As to Beasts, Birds, Flowers,.
Fruits, Plants, &c. we think it wholly unnecessary togive any Directions concerning
them, as the Subjects we have already discussed are by far the most usefül, and he-
who can draw a human Figure correctly, is sufficiently qualified for every other
Branch of this noble Art ; but as the experienced Draughtsman nay sometimes chuse-
to vary the Object of his Study, which, when perfect in Anatomical Subjects, he-
may do with Safety, we have given a few Examples of Beasts, Birds, Shipping, &c.
for his farther Entertainment and Amusement.


Observations on DEsiGN, as well in Regard to Theory as Practice.
THE Theory of Design is only to be acquired by studying the best Authors who
have laid down the scientifical Rules for the Attainment of this Art. By a sound
Knowledge in the Theory of Design, those who are unable to draw the most simple
Objects may be enabled to give their Opinion upon the Performances of the best
Masters; in this Case, Theory being detached from Practice, is equally considered,
and distinguished by the Epithet of Taste. There is another Method of acquiring
Taste ; which is by frequently examining good Pictures, in the Prefence of those
who are esteemed Connoisseurs in the Art, who generally pafs their Judgment with-
out Reserve.
Theory, in this Sense of the Word, has been hitherto the greatest Support of
Painting; for had Taste been confined to Practice only, we should not be able to
find so many invaluable Pieces in the Cabinets of Princes and other Encouragers of
Art, and who could not perhaps have been permitted by their Avocations to have
acquired any Taste for this polite Art, so that Painting of Course would have found
no Patronage.
The practical Part of Design is produced only by a frequent Application of the
Hand, accompanied with the Understanding, in the Imitation of various Forms.
Those Objects, whether Persons or Places, which we have but a transient View of,
are in the Menory like Sketches of Charcoal upon Paper, which the Whisking of a
Feather will entirely deface. How then shall the unaccustomed Hand perform its
Function when the Object is not inculcated in the Mind, and can in a fhort Time retain
anly a confused Idea of its Resemblance- This is therefore an infallible Proof that the
only Way to attain Perfection is to blend Practice with Theory.
From what has been already said, it is plain that the Conveyance of the Similitude
of Objects is only to be obtained by an unwearied Application. The Hand by Prac-
tice acquires à Facility which gives Freedom, and we must correct that Freedom by
Judgment. Please to observe, that we do not here mean by Judgment that Exertion of
the Understanding that is necessary to compose an historical Picture, but relates only
to Proportion, it being nothing uncommon for one who is a good practical Draughts-
man to be entirely incapable of composing, which we think should be with the utmost
Propriety ascribed to the Genius.


