The

Oeconomy of ARTS;
OR, A
COMPANION




For the INGENIoUS of Either SEX.
Adorn’d with Curicus SCULPTURES;
In THREE PARTS:
CONTAINING,
I. The First Principles of Drawing, the Nature and Bezuty
of Lights and Shadows, with Directions to learn without 2
Master.
II. The Art of Penmanship exemplified in all the various
Hands of Great Britain; viz. Alphabets of all the Hands :
Twenty-four Alphabetical Copies: Forms of Bills; Notes ;
Receipts, &c. With an Introduction for the Ualearned,
III. The whole Art of Painting in Gil and Water-Calours :
With the Beautv of Preparing and Mlixing the Colours ;
and their Descriptions, natural and artificial Natuzes and
Qualities, as to their Productions, various Preparations,
Compositions, and Uses.
IV. General Rules, and newest Experiments, in that curions
Art of Jepanning to imitate the Indiaa way with Colourd,
Engrav’d Prints, cut out and stuck on Wood, &c.
V. Painting on Mezzetintoes, with the whole Method of
Preparing the Brint, and Laying on the Colour.
Vi. Receipts for making the several Sorts of Varnisnes :
Likewise Inks of all Kinds; the Method of making them
both natural and sympathetical.
The Whole to be had Together, or Single in their different
Farts: And in a large Quarto.


By GEORGE BICKHAM, Junior, Engraver.


LONDON;
Printed for G. BICKHAM, in May’s-Buildinigss.
Covent-Garden. N DCCXLVXX,


An Introductive ESSAY

ON

DRAWING.




WITH
The NATURE and BEAUTY of
LIGHTS and SHADOWS.
A N D
CUTS suitable for the Younc Practitioner;
IN THE
Manner of tie Greatest Matters.


By GEORGE BICKHAM, Junior, Engraver.





































LONDO N;
Printed for G. BiCkHAM, in May’ s-Buildings,
Covent-Garden. M BCC XLVII.


AN
ESSAY
ON
DRAWING, &c.







 
OF all the Productions of human In-







genuity ; of all the Operations which








the Fancy assisted by the Hand is ca-










pable, there are none more excellent





or useful, none more universally ad-




mir’d than the Art of DRAWING.
Among the ancient Greeks it was held in the highest
Esteem : They thought it no ways inferior to the li-
beral Arts, and shew’d their Value for it accordingly :

Fheir Slaves were forbid the Study of it; none but
Persons of Distinction were honour’d w’th so great a

Privilege; and Princes themselves not only patro-
niz’d it, but thought thz Practice of it an Addition
to their Glory.
The Romans in Imitation of them, had the like
Veneration for it, and their Emperors Consuls, and
others of superior Rank, employ’d great Part of their
ime in that delightful Study, and strove with a lau-
dable




 




dable Emulation to excell, and this Art retain’d its
Excellency as long as the Empire flourishied ; but
when that decay'd, and fell a Prey to the Qutrages of
several tyrannic Princes, the Art languish-d, and could

no longer boast her Imperial Patrons and Professors,
But tho too long obscur’d; the Cloud once more
remov’d, the Art reard up her drooping Head, and
thro’ the Industry and Application of some curious
Men, and the Encouragement they met with from
those in Power, regain’d new Vigour, and shone again
in her sirst Lustre.
Nor was it without just Ground that this Artwas
held in such high Repute. Her Beauties are, and
ever will be entertaining to the Curious; and no-
thing more illustrates the Glory of a Nation than her
Productions.
By the Labours of her Professors, the Egyptiens,
Grecks and Romans express’d the Actions of their He
roes, and transmitted their Fame to latest Posterity.
Nor has this Art been less advantageous to Reli-

gion than the State Tne Heathens of old were cu-
ious in tne Practice of it, and made it a Branch of

their; divinie Worship, and the Christians, particuiarly
those of the Romish Persuasion, still keep up an equal
Veneration for it. The Mysteries of their most holy
Religion, and the Triumphs of their Saints and Mar-

tyrs are represented in all their Chaiacters by the
aplest Artists, and whose Works are to this Day the
Object of publick Adoration.
Subjects of this Nature, when they are thus art-
fully exprèss’d, and shine in a Picture, make more
decp and lasting. Impressions en the Mind, than all

the Charms of Eloquence itself.
. '
But as the foliowing Essay is principally design'd
for the Instruction and Improvement of Youth
shall not enlarge on tne History and Progress of this



Art. What little I have offer’d, l’ hope will be suf-

ficient to induce them to the Study and Practice of

it ; to set a Value on it suitable ta its Nature and


Excellence ; and regard it as an Accomplishment as









useful at least, and ornamental, as any other genteel

Acquisition.
And as there can be no Art without its Precepts,
any more than a House without a Door for an En-
irance into it: And as Youth should be led gently
by the Hand, and their Learning be made a Pleasure,
not a Pain, I shall lay down (in as clear, familiar, and
instructive a Manner as l can) some general Rules for
their future Observance, as well with respect to draw-
ing their Colours, or Out-lines which are their first
Operations ; as Lights and Shadows, which beautisy
those first Designs, and make them strike the Eye
with Wonder and Delight. By a proper Application
to which, with the Assistance of an industrious
Hand, I hope the young Practitioner in ashort Time,
may be enabled to judge with Knowledge, and pur
sue his Labours with Pleasure and Success.
INSTRUCTIONS in General.

THE first Thing requisite is a happy Genius,

 which is the Influence of the Stars, and the pe-
culiar Gift of Heaven: How to improve it, many
Books can teach us ) how to obtain it none; and
without it all agree nothing material can be done; and
to which you must be oblig d for the greatest Beau-
ties of your Art. It is an unhappy Loss of Time
for a Youth to endeavour to gain that which he has
deny d him. As the Fraits of the Earth have not
their proper Relish; nor Flowers their innate Beauty,
and fragrant Smell, when transplanted into a foreign
Soil, and rear’d by an artificial Heat, before their
due Season , So it is in vain that the young Studient
toils and sweats in the Fursuit of this Art, if the na-
tural Bent of lus Inclination is directed another
Way.
He therefore that would be a Proficient in this
Art, and is blest with a Genius for it, fhould study

the Theory first, before he meddles with the, actice.






To act otherwise would be preposterous and irratio
nal ; it would be like his ventring out upon the wide
Ocean without Helm or Compass to direct him
When once the Theory of his Art is become familiar:
to him ; when once he knows what Course to steer,
there is no Danger in the Pursuit of his Voyage, andi
his safe Arrival at the wish’d for Port.

The PRECEPTS.

YOU must get a Habit of Imitation by frequene.
Tryals ; which if it be done with a Pen, taken
Care to avoid scratching, and making thin and lean
Strokes, but rather broad ones, drawn from above
downwards; but some of the Hagches must be sharp,
fome broad, some unequal, some equal, according to
the Shades.
Hold the Pen or Pencil somewhat long (and not so
upright, as is usual in Writing) as if you laid it strait
forward, and when you draw with Chalks, use your
self- to turn them in your Hand, which will hinder
their growing blunt so soon as otherwise they will.
Begin with Eyes, Nose, Mouth and Ears. In thé
Drawinig of a Face; form the Circles, or Oval of
the Face, then make a Stroke down where the Middle
or Tip of the Nose and Mouth should be placed ;
which Stroke must be made strait down in a full Face,
but arched or oval in an Oblique, or Side-Face.
For Demonstration, take an Egg or lvory Box in
that Shape, mark the Lines with Ink, and it will ex
plain this Rule in all its Fore-shortnings, tho’ this is
the general Rule of Proportion, yet Hature often
varies, which renders the Object to be imitated more
remarkable and casy.
As to the various Passions express’d in Faces, I
need not treat of them, it being already so well per
form’d by the Chevelier Le Brun. When you are 77
persect in: Drawing- your Ovals, and can divide ther

to all. Positions, you must proceed to Hands and





Feet, Arms and Legs, seperatély, before you attempt
a whole Figure.
For a more easy Method, I should advise you to
hang a small Thread and Plummet before the Figure
you draw by, then make a perpendicular Line on
your Paper, by this means you will more easily set
your Figure upright, or discover the Bending, or the
Sway and Action of it, how every Part answers each
other in a perpendicular Line. Next hold a Ruler
or Pencil, parallel to the several Parts of your Figure,
thereby you will find how the Shoulders, Hip,
Knees and Muscles answer each other in a Parallel.
In order to draw the Form of any Beast, begin at
the Forehead with your Coal, first lightly drawing
dovnward to the Nose, Mouth, upper and nether
Chop,
ending the Line at the Throat ; then view-
ing it again, where you began ; from the Forehead
over the Head, Ears and Neck, continuing till you
have given the full Compass of the Buttock, then
mark cut the Legs and Feet : viewing it again, touch
out the Breast with the Eminency thereof: Lastly,
finisn the Tail, Paws, Tongue, Beard and Teeth.
In Birds begin also the Draught at the Head (and
beware of making it too big) then the Breast Line,
from under the Throat, down to the Legs, there
stay, and begin at the Pinion to make the Wing,
which being joined to the Back-Line, will be pre-
sently finisned. The Eyes, Legs and Tail must be
drawn last, always letting (in Birds as in Beasts) the
farthest Leg be shortest.
Infects, as Flies, Bees, Wasps, Grasffioppers,
Worms and such like are easily drawn; but Nature
is the best Pattern.
To draw a Flower ; begin from-the Rose Tuft, ox
Wart in the middle, as in a Rose or Marygold, which
being made, draw Lines equally divided from thence
to the greatest Compass, or Extent of the Flower.
They may be drawn either fully open, or in the
Burd-; but must be sketch’d gently cut, the: Eéaves





rudely, giving them afterwards their Veins or Jag
gedness.

Nature alone, and not the Manner of any other
Master must be the Pupil’s faithful Guide ; her Image
he must for ever retain in his Mind; and draw from
ghence all the Beauties that are to enter into his fu-
ture Works. For ’tis impossible to express that with
the Hand which never enter’d into the Imagination.
Nature augments the Force and Vigour of the
Genius, and she it is alone from whom Art derives
her ultimate Perfection, by the Means of sure Ex-
perience.
Whilst he contemplates on these Truths, and
makes necessary Reflections on them, let the Labour
of his Hand attend and accompany the Study of his
Brain ; let the one second and support the other-
yet let not a too eager Pursuit and Application, and
over-assiduous Care blunt his Genius, and abate hij
Vigour.
However, let him not indulge himself so far as to

pass over one Day without some , ractice, by sketch-
ing and drawing something, no matter what.
Let him, as he walks along the Streets, observê
the Airs of Heads, or the different Postures of Ani-
mals, and their Expressions, which the less they seem
to be regarded are always the most free.
And least any Occurrence should slip his Memory,
let him enter into a Memorandum-Book (which he
should have always ready in his Pocket) every thing
he judges worthy of his Netice, whether Ohjects on
the Earth, in the Air, or upon the Waters, whilst the



Idea is fresh in his Imagination.
Thus initiated, let him be very curious in tlie
Choice of his Master. He who begins well, has al-

 
ready perform dhalf his Work, is an excellent Italian

Proverb There is nothing more pernicious to Youth,
who is yet in the Elements of Drawing, than to en-
gage himself under the Discipline of an igncrant
Master, or to foilow bad Origmals, and copy from




Books that are already published, which are the



O DRAWING.
Works of Pupils (in order to learn them) which are
daily sold at most Print Shops, and are very pernicious.
They will deprave his Taste by an infinite Number
of Mistakes, of which their mean Performances are
full, and thereby make him imbibe the Poison, which
infects him all his future Days.
Never begin to draw till you have well consider’d
af your Design, and settled your Qut-lines; nor
till you have present in your Mind a perfect Idea of
your Work.
Be ever consulting the best Artists. He who is in-
dolent in his Studies, and incurious in his fnquiries,
who forms no Scruples about what he undertakes; b it
contents himself with his own mean Performances,
and blind and self-conceited imagines all Things
mighty easy, demonstrates he is only a Pretender, not
a Workman; and that the Art is beyond his weak
Capacizy to attain.
But when once a Youth is duly conscious of the
many Difficulties that attend him in the Execution
of his Work, every Reflection that arises, inspires
him with new Vigour to overcome, them, and. Ey
Industry and Applicatien, he makes every Day some
Progress and Improvement.
Whenever, therefore, young Gentlemen, your
own Observation, cr the Advice of a superior Artist
points out any Error in your Operations, be open to
Conviction, act impartially to yourselves, and correct
it without Delay ; lest by exposing your Work to
publick View, you betray ycur Weakness and Want
of Judgment.
Flatter not yourselves, that you can regain the
Credit which you once have lost, by 3 future Amend-
ment. Drawing like Writing is of a long Duration,
3
Tis not like the Sound of an Instrument, which if
,4
unharmonious dies in its Biin, is heard no more,
and soon forgot ;
but whatever Mistakes of this
Kind are once publisn’d to the World, they are past
Recall, and are the everlasting Oljects of Contempt
and Ridicule.
Nog
3




Nor is it a sufficient Excuse, that Necessity con-
pell’d yoû to hasten your Productions, or that you
had not Time to be correct, Nature is sufficed with
a litttle, and a bare Subsistance with Credit, is much
more valuable than Treasures with Ignominy and
Disdain. Let your Thoughts be bent upon acquire-
ing a glorious Name, which can never die, but with
the Werld, and make that the noble Recompence of
all your Labours.

Be very careful how you form a Judgment: of-
your own Performances ; ner depend too far on- the-
Approbation of your Friends. Friends are our se-
cond selves, and apt to be too partial : Foes are the:
most sincere.
Do not arrogantly difdain to learn the Opinion of
every individual Person that observes your Works-
For even those who have little or no Judgment in:
the Art of Drawing, may distinguisn the Defects of:
Nature, and by a Parity of Reason, may form a just
Idea of the Blemishes of the Art.
Be very careful not to be overseen in proportioning.
the Circumstances of your Brawings; for tho the:
Practice is too common, it is shamefully ridiculous. :.
Sometimes you shall see a’Hogse so very smail, and
the Doors- so very low, that they scarce reach the-

Knees of their Inhabitants, tho they are supposede:
néarer the Eye of the Spectator, than the Personga-
who are ’to ènter into them. Cities and Towns some-
times yoù will find so little and low, that cne of the
Figures behind might stride over them with Ease.

But such and the like Absurdities ought carefully to



be avoided.
Let nat one Side of your Drawing be void, whilst
the ogher is sitted to. the Border; but dispose Matters


so, that both Sides may appear equal, but not uni
form, as a Reverse whether there are-many Figurès


in it, or but sew.
Avoid drawing such Views as are unnatural ; as aslo

forc’d. Actions, and-Motions; shew no Parts which



are eitier immodest or disagreeable to the Sight.

 





Avoid likewise Objects which are full, of Hol
iows, broken in Pieces, or in Parcels; then all those
Things which are inhuman and shocking to the Eyes
As also all Representations which are obscene, lascivi-
ous, unseemly, fantastic, poor and wretched : In
fhort, all Things which corrupt their natural Forms,

by a Confusion of their Farts which are entangled in
each other : For the Eye looks-down with Horrour

on those Tnings which ttie Hands will not condescend
to touch.
Have no manner of Relish for Gothic Ornaments ;
since they are in effect so many Monsters, which bar-
barous Nations have produc'd.
Consider the Place where you lay the Scene of
your Picture; the Manner of all the Person’s Actions
an it, their Laws, Customs; and Dress, and every
thing in short that properly belongs to them.
In all your Operations, follow the Order of Na-
ture, Carefully avoid drawing Clouds towards the
Bottom of your Piece, and Waters in the uppermost
Parts of it. Never place a Stone Column on a Foun-
dation of Wood, but observe a Decorûm.
It was a Saying of Xenophon, that nothing pleases a
Man so much as Decency and Order, and it is a Rule
laid dovn in Horace; which is equally just in Draw¬
ing as in Poetry.
Set all things in their own peculiar Place.
And know that order is the greatest Grace.

This good Oeconomy, or Distinction of Figures
in their proper Places, produce the same Effect in re-
lation to the Eyes, as a Concert of Musick to the
Ears.
Observe therefore, in, the- Disposition of your
Work, that the Spectator at the first Glance of the
Eye, may conceive the principal Paffio -it intends to
inspire. If the Subject you have chosen be that of
Joy, it is nècessary, that every thing which enters
into your Picture should contribute to that Passion,






If that of Sorrow, let every thing in it haven a’ Sereke
of Distress.
Take Care to avoid introducing Figures that are
foreign to your Subject, for such may be call’d pléa-
fantly enough, Figures to be Let.
Horace, it is true, has given Poets and Painéers
Permission to dare every thing; but yet he licenees
neither of them to transgress the known Laws eof

Nature. For he adds immediately after,
But let the Bounds of Lieentes be fix d,
Not things of disagreeing Nature s mix'd;
Not sweet with sowr nor Birds with Serpents joyn'd


Nor the fierce Lyon with the fearful Hind.

Use therefore your Licences with a becoming
Boldness, but let them be ingenious, and not im¬

moderate and extravagant.
Lastly, never trust too far to the Strength of your
Memory, anid the Conceptions of Nature imprinted

on ycur Mind. The Memory is too weak, too niar-
row to retain all the various Objects of our Sight.
The best and furest Method is to have Nature herself,


as often as possible you can for your Model.



Of Lights and ShADOWS

HAVING thus lead the young Practitioner
thrcugh the first Rudiments of Drawing his
Out-lines, I shall now proceed to what I principarly
aim’d at in this Efsay, to instruct him in the Dispo¬
sition of the Lights and Shadows of his Figures;ac-
cording to their respective Situations, which is eloath-
ing the Designs or Drawings, Dressing them up

and making them appear more lively than what they


are.
Do Nothing rashly weigh well and consider what

you are about, some Faais require à fainter, others a
stronger Light; and some Shadows must be deeper



than others: Be curious in you Observation of their






Quantity and Mixtures. As to the Contours or
Out-lines, take Notice where they are te direct the
Shadows, how much Light centers in the Lines; where

they are broad and strong; and where faint and lan

guid ; never let your Lights and Shadows terminate
apruptly,-but fall, gradually one within another, till
at last. like a Cloud of Smoke, they lose themselves

insensibly. If you habituate yourselves to be thus
curious and exact, Practice will soon render ycu ex-
peditious.
When you-draw after Nature, or the Life, con-
sider how large or small the Object is, which you
propose to. imitate ; remove yourself from it three

times its Magnitude ; have your Eye in a Level with
it ; and be very curious, as you draw every indivi-
dual Stroke, to remark what shadow’d Parts of your

Statue, Nudity or any other Object you are imitating,
meet under perpendicular, or principal Lines.
As to the Position of your Model, a high Light,

 equally diffus’d, and not too strong and glaring, is the
best; Objects so dispos’d shew all their Beauties, and
the minutest Parts appear to Advantage.

The Light, thus falling from above, does not strike

upon, or inlighten all the Parts, but some are
shelter’d by the Relievo of others. The Eyebrows
defend the- Hollow of the Eye ; the Nose some Part
of the Mouth; and the Chin obscures the Throat.
You must likewise observe, that the Shadows of

Objects are not always single. Fesides the strong and
eprincipal Shade, there are many others which are
Almost imperceptibly thrown overs like a thin Cloud
upon-it; but Experience will convince you of the

Truth and Ferspective of the Reason of it. For all
spherical Bodies receive as many varicus Lights and

Snadows, as there are various Bodies that furround
them.
The Picture of a fine Lady, hung up at the En-
trance of a dark Room, will. strike the Eye with a


surprising Delight, by the a awer of Lights and

Shadows, if it is artfully disposed; that is; if the





shadow’d Side of the Face appears obscur’d by the

Gloominess of the Place, towards which it is situated ;
the illumin’d Side is still heightened by the Bright
ness of the Air, which expands itself over the Wholg,
whereby the Shadows on that Side become aé least
very faint, if not wholly imperceptible. This artful
Increase of Lights and Shadows gives any Figure a
fine Relievo, and makes it shine with more than cor-
mon Lustre.


In drawing à Face, therefore, never let the Muscles

be too bold, or-close too abruptly, all on a sudden
but let your Lights be sweet, die away as it were,
and inseniably loose themselves, in soft delightful:
Shadows. On your due Care in this Particular, all

the Charms and Graces of a Face principally depends
Always choose, if Convenience will permit of it,
a North Light for your constant Situation, as ’tis-
much steadier than any other. If your Chamber
fhould be open to the South, it wiil be very proper
and convenient to fik an oil’d Paper Sash before it ;
for, by that Medium, the Rays of the Sun, which
will strike upon it all Day, will be more moderate,
equally diffuse itself, and be constant without any 
visable Variation.
When you are drawing from the Life, let youi
Light come from such an Altitude, as that: the v
Shadows of Bodies projected on the Plane may be
equal, and in proportion to their Height.


In the Representations of Bodies, give them al

ways such Lights, as are most proper ard convenient
to their supposed Situation, If in the Fields, and
open Air, the Sun is obscur’d by the Clouds, and
not visible, they should be surrounded with an al
most universal Light; but if the Sun be conspicuous.
or fhines out in its full Lustre, then the Shadows
musk be very strong and dark, in relation to those. 


Farts which receive the Light; and the Extremities
of all those Shadows, as well those which are bor-

rowed, as tlaose that are, criginal, must be very
bold.






If the Object you have chosen for your Repre

sentation, be supposed in a Room a little, though not
very much, illumin’d, and you survey it from with
out; and stand on a Level with the Light that strikes
upon it ; the Shadows of that Figure must necessarily
be very soft, and look beauteous to the Eye; for,
notwithstanding the Softnefs of the Shadous, the,
Figure will feem as if emboss’d, and come boldly
out.
Particular Lights you’il find more advantageous to 
Figure than universal ones, and make them appear
with the greatest Relievo. The Reason of this is ;
Particular Lights produce Reflexes, which loosen, as
it. were, the Figures from the Ground; these Re
flexes are created by the Lights of Figures, or some
thing light behind them, and reverberate, or dart
back upon the Shadows of those which are di
rectly over-against them, and giye them a glimmer
ing Light; but a Figure, if supposed in a dack and
obscure Place, though exposed to a particular Light,
receives no Reffex ; no Parts of it are seen but what
are illuminated. This, indeed, is seldom or never
used, but in Night-Pieces, where the Light must.
be very particular, and exceeding faint.
The Qut-lines or Contours of Figures, however,
discover more Art and Contrivance than the Lights
and:. Shadows, which is but the third Part of Draw
ing, and in Colouring it is cail'd Cromatique; for In
vention is the first Part, and the Out-lines are the
next, which is the Composition and Disposition of
the Work to put all Things in a beautiful Order and.
Harmony ; without which you are but a Copier
For Invention requires the greatest Strength of Ima
gination, and Shadowing the Extent ; for the Mem
bers are all limited to certain and peculiar Motions 
whereas the Projections of Shadows, the Qualities
and Degradations of Light, are boundless and un
circumscribed.
When you draw after any Figure, and’sind your
self at a Loss to limit the exact Eounds of your Sha
dows,




dows, always leave them unfinish’d. By this artful
Negligence you discover your own Mdesty, and at
the same time your strict Regard to the Imitation of
Nature.
All allow, that the Air is clearer, more subtle, and
transparent, the farther it is remov’d from the Earth ;
upon which account, the upper Parts of Objects that
appear above us, and are seen at some considerable
Distance, are more visible and conspicuous than those
that are under: For the visual Rays, whereby we
discern the latter, journey through a long Track of
grofs and dense Air; but the Rays, by which we
view the former, though they begin in a thick and
foggy Air onthe Side of the Eye; yet, on the Side
of the Object, they terminate in a much clearer, and
more subtle Air. The further they remove from the
Eye ; they become finer and finer.
In drawing Landskips, therefore, you must always
make your Mountains less clear at the Bottom than
the Top; and the same Rule must be observ’d as to
Churches, and other high Buildings. The greater
Distance they are suppos’d to be at, the clearer always
miust their Tops appear ; and the loftier they
are, their Forms must in proportion be more con-
spicuqus and distinct.
Objects that are nearest the Eye, and placed in the
Front of the Picture, must be more finisn d, and
more bold, than those supposed to be at some Die
stance from us.
As to Reflexes of Light on clear and transparent
Bedies, whose Surfaces are moderately dense and po-
siffi’d, a Ray of Light that thus strikes upon these
Bodies, reverberates, or rebounds, liks a Tennis-bail,
and reflects upon the first Body that stands in its
Way.
The Surfaces of dense Bodies are surrounded with
Light and Shadows, whose Qualities are widely
distant.
There, arè twe Sorts or Kinds of Lights, namely,

Primative,and and Derivitive. Primitive Light is that





which is innate in any Body, and not borrowed of
aany other. Derivitive Light is Light reflected, that
which is not inherent in a Body, and is borrowed of
another. The Light of the Sun is an original Light :

He shines with his proper Rays. The Moon is an
opaque Body of herself, and all her Light is bor-
rowed; her silver Beams, all sne can boast of, she
receives from that superior Luminary.
But to proceed : There can be no Reflex of Light
en that Side of a Body whereon it is shadowed, that
is to say, from that Side turn’d towards any opaque
Place or Body, as Groves, Trees, Herbs or Plants ;
for though every Bough and every Leaf, admit of
Light, yet the vast Number of Boughs and Leaves
constitute a dark Body, through which the Rays of
Light can never enter.
The Reflexes of Light are brighter, or less appa¬
rent, according as the Ground on which they are
discern’d is more or less obscure: When the Ground
is more dark than the Reflex, the former serves as
a. Foil to the latter, and the Reflex will appear
strong and apparent: On the other hand, when the
Ground is brighter than the Reflex, it must naturally
appear more gloomy, by the Lustre that surrounds
it, and by which means it can scarcely be discern ’d ;
but that which is visible on the darkest Ground must
appear the boldest, and most plain; on the other
hand, that on the brightest Ground must be least di
stinct, and most obscure.
This arises from the Contrast between Things of a
different Degree of Darkness; the least obscure setting
aff the others with a superior Lustre, and the brighter
rendering the others still more obscure, and less ob
vious to the Sight. As any two things of unequal
Whiteness, when play d, by way of Contrast; one
against the other, the superior Whitenéss reflects a
Foil on the other, beyond its native Darkness.
For Light, being of a communicative Nature,
diffuses itself on every Thing, not hid from it; par-
ticuiarly on every Thing that is plain and smooth ;






but where there happens the least Elevation, a Sha-
dow is produced, which exhibits the Figure of the
illuminated Part on the Plan. Light, though quite
contrary to Shadow, is yet what gives it its Being, as
the Body or Object is what gives its Form or Figure. :
In effect it must be held for a certain Maxim, that
Shadows always retain the same Point of Sight as the
Objects
A small Light illumining a Body, occasions the
Shadows on the unenlightened Side to be large, and
their Extremities to be very bold : On the other
hand, a large Light makes the Shadow on the same
Side of the Body less distinct, and mere minute in
their Limitations: When a little, but strong Light
is inclosed in another more extensive, yet still more
weak, as the Sun in the Air; the most feeble, in that
Case, will have the Effect of a Shadow on the Bodics
which are enlightened by it.
In any Drawing, therefore, where a Multitude of
Frigures are introduced, either Men or Beasts; you
must observe to make those appear the most obscure,
that are lowest, and farthest involved in the Croud.
Figures that are expos’d to an universal Light, ap-
pear more beautiful, and strike the Eye more agrce-
ably, than those that are illumin’d only with a par-
ticular Light: And the Reason is, Because a large
and strong Light surrounds the Relievoes of Bodies ;
so that the Figures enlightened thereby appear with
Force and Freedom, and preserve themselves at a
great Distance ; whereas those that are more confined,
and only enlightened by a small contracted Light,
receive very large as well as very deep. Shadows. You
must never admit two equal Lights in the same
Picture; and let the Light strike forcibly on the
Middle, or Front, of your Drawings.
And lastly, when you draw your Figures, avoid
strong Shadows on the Middle of the Limbs. But
Place those Shadows round abcut them, thereby to
heighten the Parts; and take such advantageous







Lights as are large, that after great Shadows may suc-
ceed.
As for Sattins and Silks, and all other shining Stuffs,
they have certain bright Reflexions, with sudden
Lights, and exceeding bright Glances ; especially

where the Light falls broad. Then the Reflexions
are, less bright, as the Garment falls more inward
from the Light.
The like is seen in Armour, and Brafs Pots, or any
glittering Metals. You may fee à sudden Brightnefs
in the Middle or Centre of the Light, which causes
the shining Nature of all such Things.
As thefe Directions, if carefully followed, will be
sufficient, I presume, to answer the End proposed in
prefixing this snert Essay, I shall freely submit the
following Exemplifications of them to. the Censure
or Approbation of the Publick,



