The Artist's Assistant


In the study and Practise of Mechanical Sciences.


Calculated for the Improvement of Genius. Illustrated with Copper-Plates


Printed for the author, and sold by G. Robinson. London and


M. Swinney Birmingham












PREFAGE
IT is needless to apologize for sending forth
this production, as it is calculated to
improve the rising gemius, and to render the
study and practice of the polite arts easy and
agreeable to those who wish to tread the pleasing
paths of science.
We need no greater stimulation to the study
of the arts than a due contemplation of their
significancy. to mankind, and a reflection on
the estimation in which they have been held by
the wisest men, and in the greatest nations upon
carth. Tn trace their beginning among men,
we should find them coeval with man hiinfelf.
The remembrance of the most extraordinary
events, as well as the learning of the first men,
was preserved by means of the fine arts. Re¬
calling to memory the great actions of their an¬
cestors, they were the noblest spur to their pos-
terity to imitate their virtues, so beneficial to
society, and all great minds have ever been
most sensible to impreffions of this kind. It
is not easy to imagine a higher merit, than
that of inspiring those who were the most ca-
pable iu exerting themselves in the service of
human nature, with a love of glory and imn-
mortality. It is no wonder then, if the arts
were held in distinguished honour by the
reatest kings, and the most powerful coin-













ronwealths, and that mankind considered and-
honoured artists as the common benesactors to:
human society: and, in truth, a higher anti-
quity, or a more noble origin. than that of
the polite arts, cannot possibly be conccived.
We shall begin with Drawing, and range
the treatises on Designing, Perspective, Co-
lours, Painting, Enamelling, Japanning. Lac-
quering, Staining. Engraving, Casting, Bronz-
ing. Gilding, Silvering. &c. &c. in regular suc-
cession, under the respective heads, illustrating
and explaining the most material subjects
with elegant engraved designs.
Those mentioned above are the principal
topies by which-this work is intended to pro-
mote the improvement of the more curious
kinds of manufactures: but, besides those ar-
ticles, there is a number of others, of con-
siderable moment, touched upon in tlis vo-
lume ; some in a more copious, and others
only in a brief manner, according to the im¬
portance of the matter, or the room given for
an advantageous enlargement.
The judgment or skill of the author, in the
design. or execution of this performance, he
candidly desires to submit to the public, and
hopes that the system of inslruction here laid
down, will furnissi such ideas, as, with the
assistance of practice, will readily enable those
who wifh to attain a thorough knowledge of
the arts, to reach the summit of their de-
sires, which is his sole aim in publishing this
compendium.



THE
ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.
PRELIMINARY tO DRAWING.

THE first and indispensible requisite towards
forming a painter is Genius, for the absence
of which divine gift no human acquirements
can compensate ; as, without that spark of ætherial
flame, study would be misapplied, and labour thrown
away. Painting bears a very near resemblance to
her sister Poetry, and the Painter, like the Bard,
must be born one. A picture, as well as a poem,
would afford little pleasure, though formed accord-
ing to the strictest rules, and worked up with the most
indefatigable attention, were genius wanting to com¬
plete the design : a design, which may be faid to be¬
like the celebrated statue, fafhiioned by Prometheus,
lovely but lifeless, unless genius (like the fire which
he is fabled to have stolen from Heaven) darts its in-
vigorating ray, and gives a soul to the finished piece.
But, though genius is absolutely necessary, since-
nothing can be well done without it, it will not,
alone, do all things, but must be assisted by rules,
reflection, and assiduity. The memory may be, not
iinproperly, called the repository whcre genius
treafures up the idcas which pafs before it in con¬
tinual succession : from this repository tlie artist
Jselects such materials as the occasion demands, di-

rected by his judgment.











Above all, nature is the grand object of his me¬
ditation, and ought never to be out of his sight; na-
ture is the only source of beauty, sor nothing can
be pleasing that is not natural. The designer who
oversteps the modesty of nature may court applause
from the ignorant and vulgar, but must not expect
ghe approbation of the discerning and polite.
Design comprehends invention and dispositions
invention furnishies the subject, and disposition
places that subject in the most proper situation fon
exhibition ; nature supplies the objects ; art con-
trasts, diversifics, and groups them. But, as every
painter may not have time or opportunity to view
nature in all her various lights, he will do well to
contemplate the works of those great masters who
knew how to make a judicious choice of subjects,
and to execute them with taste and effect. On these
he may rely, almost as confidently as on nature her-
self, and will find them of the utmost use to affist
his invention. Genius need not disdain to call to
its aid the productions of kindred genius; and (as
a wit hath remarked) the young painter who should
neglect the study of the most eminent profefsors of
that science, on pretence of setting up for an ori¬
ginal, would be esteemed really an original.
An author, whose title to genius is indisputable,
will not write the worse for having learned his
grammar, and for being acquainted with what other
writers have said upon the subject which he pur
poses to illustrate. An intimâte knowledge of the
beauties of the antients will be of no small advan-
tage ; for they made nature their peculiar study, and
transmitted to us examples in sculpture, which haved
triumphed equally over the rage of time and Bar-
barians ; examples which have ever been consider-s
ed as forming a perfect Rule of Beauty-




A close and servile imitation, however, is not
what we would wisn to recommend; a man may
find his account in attending to the manner, and
storing up the observations of a well-bred and in-
telligent acquaintance, without ridiculously affect-
ing his gait, or copying his phrascology.
There are not wanting some who attribute the
decline of painting to à dearth of genius, whereas
it seems to spring from a very different cause; the
truth is, sew parents arc judges of the real bent of
their children’s inclination, (another word for ge-
nius) and fewer still give themselves the trouble of
seeking for it, considering what line of life accords
most with their own wilhes, or convenience. But
of those few who really discover in what science
nature intended their littlc ones to excel, how rarely
do we mect with one who takes the right method
to insure success, by directing their studies in the
proper channel !
For though one should be apt to smile at the ab-
furdity of those parents, or guardians, who, find-
ing a boy possessed of a genius for painting, should,
by way of initiatinghim in that delightful art, grave-
ly recommend to him the study of the classics;
since it seems full as reasonable to expect him to
become a poet, from contemplating the works of
Guido, Titian, and Raphael, as to become a painter
from turning over the leaves of Homer, Horace,
and Ovid. Yet can any thing be more common than
to see a lad condeinned to undergo a course of Latin
and Greek, let the profession for which he is de-
figned be whatever it may p But life, methinks, is
too fhort to admit of six or seven years (and those
the most important ones) being trifled away in
learning what, perhaps, will prove of very little
fervice to him in the situation which he is to be
hercaster



hereafter placed : however, if words instead of
things must be the object of his study, it is, cer-
tainly, of as much importance that he should be
able to clothe his thoughts in the habit of his own
country as in that of any other; a living language
is, at least, of as much use as a dead one; and
it has been but too often remaked, that many an
artist, who could exprefs his ideas with uncom-
mon delicacy and perspicuity on canvass, has so
ill succeeded, when attempting to describe them on
paper, as to incur no small share of ridicule, from
the coarseness and obscurity of his diction.
The subjects first proposed to the pupil’s attention
will be foand to influence his future practice more
than may be easily imagined. First inprefsions sink
deep and last long; and ill habits, acquired in the
early part of life will sometimes adhere too closely
to be entirely removed by the strongest exertions of
maturer judgment ; it will be, therefore, necessary
to be careful that the works of none but eminent
masters be put into his hands. Every figure, nay
every stroke, given him as a pattern, should be maf-
terly, that he may be familiarized to beauty, taste,
and symmetry.
Experience has evinced, that more real improve¬
ment will acerue to the learner from being used to
copy things in relief than from copying drawings ;
he will, by this methiod, become acquainted with
the principles of light and fhade, and the nature of
the clear obscure; by the magic force of which,
the paintings of Patrhasius were termed realities ;
and the fingers of Apelles’ famed Alexander (in
the character of Jupiter the Thunderer) seemed to
fhoot sorward, while the lightning appeared to slassz
from them.
But,



But, above all, the young student must apply his
taisk with pleafure, as well as with perfeverance ;
or improvement cannot reasonably be expected, if
the mind (instead of being sired with emulation)
loomily contemplates the cmployment as a penance ;
or must the patient artist be too easily satisfied
with his own performance ; he must review it and
ertouch its again and again ; he must search for
its blemishes with the most rigid scrutiny, till, by
repeated efforts, he brings it as near to perscction
is possible. In a word, diligenee, in the beginning
fo any study, will render the progress of it easy,
and the end delightful.
Drawing has been, by some people, esteemed as
an ornamental superfluity in education; but it 1s,
on reality, a most usesul accomplishinent; at the
same time so elegant and agreeable an amusement
for leisure hours, that every neglector of it has felt
and confessed its loss. This is become so univer-
sally known, that nothing is thought more necessary
so complete the education of youth than instructions
for drawing, especially if their inclination or ge-
nius leads that way. For, exclusive of its great
use to painters, engravers, architects, engineers,
gardeners, cabinet-makers, carvers, embroiderers,
statuaries, modellers, chafers, tapestry-weavers, and
a number of artists and mechanics concerned in
design ing, how very agreeable and entertainingmust
it be ; or what can be more useful than for any one
lo be able to fketch or draw a fine view from a
building, or any uncommon romantic production of
nature ? Nothing is more properly calculated for
the man of common business or the gentleman.
In painting it is the sole basis on which excellence
is erected; and it is, in reality, the foundation of
the polite arts.
The



The materials necessary for drawing are, black
ead pencils, camel hair pencils, a rule and com¬
passes, crow quill pens, red, wvhite, and black chalk,
crayons and Indiæn ink.
The black lead pencil should not be held so near
the point as à pers in writing; the use of it being
for the sketch or first outlinc of the piece, which
should be drawn with freedoin, as any wrong stroké
or line may with case be erased, by rubbing the
work gently with a crumb of stale bread. In or-
der to acquire a knowledge of the face, begin with
drawing the features’ separate, placing the copy at
such a distance as the eye may meafure both it and
the drawing without moving the head. Sketch in
the first outline very light; and in rubbing out,
leave faint traces of the sirst fketch; by proceeding
in this manner, without ithe afsistance of rule or
compasses, the outline should be brought to an ap-
proved exactness; and in placing the fcatures, à
perfect oval should be formed, through which a
perpendicular line is drawn in the middle; and
acrofs the centre of this, a diameter line from one
side of the oval to the other. On these all the seâ-
tures of the face are to be drawn, according to the
following rules for drawing a head.
The perpendicular must be divided into four
equal parts; ’one from the crown of the head te
the top of the forehead ; two from the top of the
forehead to the eye-brows ; three from the eyè
brows to the bottom of the nôse ; four from thenco
to the bottom of tlte chin.
The diamêter line divide into five parts ; ths
breadth of thè face being supposed the length 5
five eyes ; this is to be understood in a fulf Tron
face only; and thiese proportions are raiher inéon
stant in diss-rent men, as to length and Ihage; bi




in a well proportioned face are nearly right, and
should be strictly observed.
When the face turns to either side, then the dis-
tances are to be lessened on that side froin you, more
or less, in proportion to its turning. Most artists
begin the drawing with the nose, that being the
centre ; and then proceed to the other fcatures ;
observing that the top of the ear is to rife parallel
to the eye-brows ; the eye to be placed so as to
leave exactly the length of onc cye betwixt them ;
the nostrils should not project further than the
corner of the cye ; and the middle of the mouth
should be on the perpendicular line. In order to
understand better tlie different turnings of the face,
it may be vory advantageous to procure a piece of
wood, made in the shape and sixc of an egg ; draw
a line down the middle as before directed ; divide
this in two cqual parts, and draw another across the
centre : let the features be made as accurate as pos-
sible from the foregoing directions. By turning this
oval, a great varicty of faces will appear, according
as it is inclined or gurned ; but care must be taken
to observe in what manner the nosé projects be-
yond the round of the oval. A perfect knowledge
of this may cnable the student to form an idea of
the face better than merely copying prints or pic-
tures without it: but aster this acquisition, let the
best drawingsor pictures be studied that can be pro-
cured ; previus to which, those paffions, in man¬
ner of Le Brun, may merit imitation. Thie po¬
sitions and actions of the hands are fo various, no per¬
fect rule or method can be given sor drawing them
Time and painshould be employed in bestowing
care on those members, for it is very necessary
not



not only to avoid, all lameness and imperfection,
but also to make them appear with life and spirit ;
the atfainment of which must be acquired by appli¬
cation and practice ; carefully imitating such pos¬
tures, both in hands and feet, as can be procured in
good prints or drawings. Lines and meafures, and
such mechanical rules, are not only perplexing,
but rejected in the practice of the best masters. The
properest method is to lightly fketch the whole
shape of the hand or foot with its position or action ;
and examine carefully that it is correct, rubbing out
and altering till it is so ; when the bending of the
knuckles, the- veins, joints, and tendons may be
drawn with much ease, after the shape and propor-
tion is made perfect in size and attitude.
After a proper study of the legs, arms, hands;
feet, &c. and the student has reason to deem him-
self sufficiently practised in drawing features, the
human figure entire should be his next attempt; to
meafure which, according to a lesson from Tressnoy,
 The Aritients have commonly allowed eight heads,
e though some of them have but: seven ; but we
 ordinarily divide the figures into ten faces; that
 is to fay, from the- crown of the head to the sole
 of the foot, in the following manner:
 From the crown of the head to the forelicad is
 the third part of a face.
 The face begins at the root of the lowest hairs
 whick are upon the forehead, and ends at the
 bottom of the chin.
 The face is divided into three proportional
 parts : the first contains the forehead, the second
 the nose, and the third the mouth and chin.




 From the chin to the pit, betwixt the collar
 bones, are two lengths of a nofe.
 From the pit betwixt the collar bones to the
 bottom of the breast, one face.
 From the bottom of the breast to the navel, one
 face.
 From the navel to the genitors, one face.
 From thé genitors to the upper part of the
 knees, two faces.
 The knee contains half a face.
 From the lower part of the knee to the ancle,
 two faces.
 From the ancle to the sole of the foot, half a
 face.
 A man, when his arms are stretched out, is,
 from the longest finger of his right hand to the
 longest of his left, as broad as he is long-
 From one side of the breast to the other, two
 faces.
 The bone of the arm, called humerus, is the
 length of two faces, from the shoulder to the elbow.
 From the end of the elbow to the root of the lit¬
 tle finger, the bone called cubitus, with part of
 the hand, contains two faces.
 From the box of the shoulder-blade to the pit
 betwixt the collar-bones, one face.
 lf you would be satisfied in the meafures of
 breadth, from the extremity of one finger to the
 other, so that this breadth should be equal to the
 length of the body, you must obferve that thé
 boxes of the elbows with the humerus, and of
 the humerus with the shoulder-blade, bear the pro-
 portion of half a face when the arms are stretch-
 ed out.






 The sole of the foot is the sixth part O a figure.
 The hand is the length of the face.
 The thumb contains a nose.
The inside of the arm, from the place wlere
the muscle disappears, which makes the brcast,
 called the pectoral muscle, to the middle of thé
 arm, four nofes.
From the middle of the arm to the beginning
 of the hand, five noscs.
 The longest toe is a nose long:
 To the utmost parts of the teats and the pit be¬
 twixt the collar-bones of a woman are an equi-
 lateral triangle.
 For the breadth of the limbs no precise meafure
 can be given ; because the meafures themselves are
 changeable, according to the quality of the persons,

 and according to the movement of the muscles.
In drawing a figure there should be a slight sketch
made of the whole, not beginning with the head,
and finishing it, then proceeding to the other parts,
a method customary to many; in consequence of
which, the head is often disproportioned, or some
part void of drawing. Sketch in the whole outline

of the figure lightly, and measure with the eye, or
draw the pencil or finger over any way to determine
exactness without the rule or compaffes. In begin-
ning the sketch the héad is the first object, then the
shoulders in exact breadth, the, trunk of the body
next, observing, with accuracy the breadth of the
waist; next the legs, and lastly the arms and hands.
The principal difficulty is overcome when a per-
fect outline is procured; after which the shado ws
claim the attention of the student. As every ap-
pearance of bodies reprefented, animate or inani¬
mate,




mate, in distance, shape, substance, and distinc-
tion, are perfected by this, let them be first made
broad and massy, without attending to the many
little distracted parts which fall under a second con-
sideration. Thus far is necessary to observe in co-
pying prints or drawings : but in drawing from a
plaister figure, the eye will discover ét that side light-
 est that the light falls upon. Most well set
figures have a broad mafs of light, which should be
well attended to before the smaller parts are di-
vided. The outline should be exceedingly faint in
such parts as receive the light. The rising of a
muscle may, by its appearance, prove deceiving, and
scem darker than it really is ; but by castin, the
eye to the other darker shadows, a true degree of
its teint may be afcertained, and sometimes tlie light
may catch on the projection of a bone near the
mass of a fhadow, which must be scumbled very
tenderly, or it will have a harsh unpleasing effect.
This may also be regulated by comparing it with
the stronger lights. Observing this rule with care
and exactneis, is the only true means of preserving
the consistency of the whole together.
There is no branch of drawing or painting re-
quires taste in the execution more than the drapery ;
to manage the folds in such a manner as shall give
grace and dignity to the figure ; to dress it without
fafhion, prejudice or caprice, so as the imitation
may be taken for reality, and bear the test of ages,
requires the fullest exertion of true genius. Many
artists first draw the naked figure and cloath it after-
wards ; forming the drapery to the shape and pro-
portion of the limbs, easy and flowing, not sitting
toò close, but seeming to have a free motion; mak-
ing



ing first the great folds, and tlien properly dividing
them by strokes that do not cross, nor are yct 1oo
parallel. But somc uscful remarks from a work
lately published, include every other necessary ob-
servation concerning the human body :
 Some artists reject the use of drawings or prints
 for the students imitation, it is, say they, a ser-
 vile method of proceeding, because it cramps the
 ideas ; and hence genius suffers too grcât à con¬
 finement. Notwith standing this, the usual prac-
 tice is to copy after prints and drawings at first,
 and l imagine experience has determined the ad-
 vantages accruing from this method. To set the
 drawings ’(in particular) of the most eminent art-
 ists before a young beginner, at his first commence-
 ment, must be highly beneficial, as it most undoubt¬
 edly will prevent rudeness and inaccuracy, against
 which the most exact cannot be too much guard-
 ed. How much more then ought the young stu-
 dent to observe this caution p Somc geniuses re-
 quire restriction, and when this happens to be the
 case, the placing of accurate works besore them
 must hold them in subjection, sroin which alone
 correctneis is to be expected. Exact copies are
 absolutely to be required at first. This will im¬
 perceptibly produce a habit of correctness, till by
 degrees the student will make himsels master of
 those grand essentials to perscction, truth, bold-
 riess, and freedom. Truth will be acquired by
 this accustomed correctnefs, boldness and free-
 dom will follow after as the certain consequence,
 and on those the excellence of the performance
 must depend : copying the drawings of good
 masters has also another considerable advantage,
teach ing



 teaching a good method of execution, by which
 many laborious and sruitless efforts will be pre-
 vented. 

Of DESIGNING.
DESIGN is used in painting; sor the first idea


of a large work, drawn roughly, and in little,
with an intention to be executed and finished in-
large.
It is the simple contour, or out-lincs of the figures
intended to be reprefented, or the lines that termi-
nate and circumscribe them : such design is some-
times drawn in crayons, or ink, without any sha-
dows at all; sometimes it is hatched; that is, the
shadows are expressed by sensible out-lines, usually
drawn acrofs each other with the pen, crayon, or
graver. Sometimes, again, the shadows are done
with the crayon rubbed so that there does not ap-
pear any lincs ; at other times the grains or strokes
of the crayon appear, as not being rubbed; some-
times the design is washed; that is, the shadows are
done with a pencil in Indian ink, or some other li-
quor; and sometimes the design is coloured; that is,
colours are laid on much like those intended for the
ground work.
The cssential requisites of a design are correctnefs,
good taste, clegance, character, diversity, expression,
and perspective. Correctness depends on the just-
ness of the proportion, and knowledge of anatô-
my. Taste is a certain manner of correctness pecu-
iar to onc’s self, derived either from nature, maf¬
ters,




ters, or studies, or all of them united. Elegance
gives a delicacy that not only strikes persons of
judgment, but communicates an agreeablenefs that
pleases universally. The character is what is pecu-
liar to each thing, wherein there must be diversity,
insomuch that every thing has its peculiar character
to distinguishit. The expreffion is the reprefentation
of an object, according to the circumstances it is
supposed to be in. Perspective is the reprefentation
of the parts of a painting, or afigure, according to
the situation they are in with regard to the point of
sight.
The design or draught, is a part of the greatest
amport and extent in painting. It is acquired chief-
ly by genius and application, rules being of less
avail here than in any other branches of the art, as
colouring, &c. The principal rules that regard de-
sign are, that novices accustom themselves to copy
good originals at first sight; not to use squares in
5
drawing, lest they stint and consine their judgment;
to design well from life, before they practise per-
spective ; to learn to adjust the size of their figures
to the visual angle, and the distance of the eye from
the model or object ; to mark out all the parts of
their design before they begin to snade ; to make
their contours in great pieces, without taking no¬
tice of the little muscles, and other breaks; to make
themselves masters of the rules of perspective ; to
observe the perpendicular, parallel, and distance of
every stroke ; to compare and oppose the parts that
meet and traverse the perpendicular, so as to form a
kind of square in the mind, which is the great and
almost the only rule of designing justly ; to have 2
regard not only to the model, but to the parts al-
ready



ready designed, there being no such thing as design¬
ing with strict justness, but by comparing and pro-
portioning every part to the first. All the other
rules relate to perspective.

Of the EXPRESSION of the PASSIONS.
THAT language, which, above all others, a painter

should carefully endeavour to learn, and from
nature herseff, is the language of the paffions. With-
-out it the finest work must appear lifelefs and inani¬
mate. It is not enough for a painter-to be able to
delineate the most exquisite forms, give them the most
graceful attitudes, and compose them well together :
it is not enough to dress them out with propriety and
in the most beautiful colours. It is not enough, in
sine, by the powerful magie of light and shade to
make the canvass vanisn. No, he must likewise
know how to cloath his figures with grief, with joy,
with fear, with anger; he must, in some fort, write
on their faces, what they think, and what they feel;
he must give them fife and speech. It, is indeed, in
this branch that painting truly soars, and, in a man¬
ner, rises superior to herself ; it-is-inthis branch fhe
makes the spectator apprehend much more than
what she expresses.
The means, employed in her imitations by paint-
ing, are the circumspection of terms, the chiaroscura,
and colours; all which appear solely calcilated to
strike the visual faculty. Notwithstanding which, she
contrives to represent hard and fost, rough and smooth
surfages, which are objects of touch; and thie
by



by means of certain tints, and a certain chiaroscura,
wliich has a different look in marble, in the bark
vf trees, in downy and delicate substances. Nay,
she contrives to exprefs sound and motion by means
of light and shade, and certain particular configu-
rations. In some landscape’s of Diderich’s, we al-
most hear the water murmur, and see it tremble
along the sides of the river, and of the boats upon
it. In the battles of Burgognone we are really apt
to fancy, that the trumpet sounds ; and we see the
horse, who has thrown his rider, scamper along the
plain. But, what is still more wondersul, painting, in
virtue of her various colours, and certain particular
tgestures, expresses even the sentiments and most hid-
den affections of the soul, and renders her visible,
so as to make the eye not only touch and hear, but
even kindle into’ passion and reason.
Many have written, and, amongst the rest, the
famous le Brûn, on ’the various changes, that, ac-
cording to various paffions, happen in the muscles
of the face, whichis, as it wcre, the dumb tongue
of the soul. They observe, for example, that in
fits-of anger; the facc reddens, the muscles of the lips
puff out, the eyes sparkle ; and that, on the contrary,
in fits of melancholy, the eyes grow motionlefs and
dead, the face pale, and the lips sink in. It may be of
service to a painter-to read these and such other re-
marks; but it will be ofinfinitely more service to study
thein in nature itself, from which they have been
borrowed, and which exhibits them in that lively
manner, which neither tongue nor pen can express.
But, if a painter is to have immediate recourse to
nature in any thing, it is particularly in treating
thofc very minute and almost imperceptible differ-
ences,



ences, by which, however, things very different
from each other are often expressed. This is par-
ticularly the case with regard to the passions of
laughing and crying, as in these, however contra-
ry, the muscles of the sace operate nearly in the saine
manner. 2
According to Lionardo de Vinci, the best masters
that a painter can have recourse to in this branch,
are those dumb men who have found out the me-
thod of expressing their sentiments by the motion
of their hands, eyes; eye-brows, and, in short,
every other part of the body. This advice, no
no doubt, is very good, but then such gestures must
be imitated with great sobriety and moderation, least
they should appear too strong and exaggerated, and
the piece should shew nothing but pantomimes,
when speaking figures, alone, are to be exhibited ;
and so become theatrical and second-hand; or, at
least, look like the copy of a theatrical and second-
hand nature.
« As the famous Pietro de Cortona was one day finishing the
face of a crying child, in a represcntation of the lron age, with
which he was adorning the floor, called the Hot-bathi, in the royal
palace of Pitti, Ferdinand I1. who happened to be looking over
him for liis amuseinent, could not forbear cxpressing his approba¬
tion, by crying out, Oh, how well that child cries l To whom the
able artist said, Has your Majesty a mind to sce how easy it is to make
children laughp Behold, I will prove it in an instant; and taking
up his pencil, by giving the contour of the mouth a concave turn
downwards, instcad of the convex upwards, which it before had,
and with little or no alteration in any other part of the face, he
made the child, who, a little before, seemed ready to burst its
heart with crying, appcar in equal daiiger of bursting its sides with
immoderate laughter; and then, by restoring the altered fcatures to
their former position, he soon set the child a crying again. Lectures
of Philip Baldinucci, in the academy of la Crusca il Lustrato, &c.
We



We are told strange things of the antient painters
of Greece in regard to expreffion ; especialy of Ari-
stides, who, in a picture of his representing a woman
wounded to death at a siege, with a child crawling
to her breast, makes her appear afraid, least the child,
when she was dead, should, for want of milk, suck
her blood. A Medca murdering her children, by
Timomachus, was likewise much cried up, as the in-
genious artist contrived to exprefs, at once, in her
countenance, both the fury that hurried her on to
the commission of so great a crime, and the tender-
ness of a mother that seenied to withhold her from it.
Rubens attemtped to exprefs such a double effect in
the face of Mary of Medicis, still in pain from her past
labour, and, at the same time, sull of joy at the birth
of a Dauphin. And in the countenance of Sancta
Polonia, painted by Tiepolo, for St. Anthony’s
church at Padua, one may, l think, clearly read a mix-
ture of pain from the wound given her by the execu-
tioner, and of pleasure srom the prospect of paradise
opened to her by it.
Few, to say the trutli, are the examples of strong
expression afforded by the Venetian, Flemifn, or
Lombard schools. Deprived of that great happinefs,
the happiness of being able to contemplate at leisure,
the works of the antients, the purest fources of per-
fection in point of design, expression and character;
and having nothing but nature constantly before their
eyes, they made strength of colouring, blooming com¬
plexions, and the grand effects of the chiaroscura
their principal study; they aimed more at charming
the senses than at captivating. the understanding.
The Venetians, in- particular, seem-to have placed
thein wkole glony in setting offt rheir pievez-wich alt
that



that rich variety of personages and dress, which their
capital is continually receiving by means of its ex-
tensive commerce, and which attracts so much the
eyes of all those who visit it. Idoubt much, if, in all
the pictures of Paolo Veronese, there is to be found
a bold and judicious expression, or one of those at-
titudes, which, as Petrarch expresses it, speak with-
out words; unless, perhaps, it be that remarkable
one in his Marriage-feast-at-Cana-of-Galilee, and
which l do not remember to have seen taken notice
of before. At one end of the table, and directly-
opposite to the bridegroom, whose eyes are fixed.
upon her, there appears a woman in red, holding up
to him the skirt of her garment, as much as to say,
I suppose, that the wine miraculously produced was
exactly of the colour with the stuff on her back-
And, in fact, it is red wine we see in the cup and
pitchers. But all this while the faces and attitudes
of most of the company betray not the least sign
of wonder at so extraordinary a miracle. They all,
in a manner, appear intent upon nothing but eat-
ing, drinking, and making merry. Such, in gene¬
ral is the stile of the Venetian school. The Floren-
tine, over which Michael Angelo presided, above
all things curious of design, was most minutely and
scrupuloussy exact in point of anatomy. On this
she set her heart, and took singular pleasure in dis-
playing it. Not only elegance of form, and noble-
ness of invention, but likewise strength of expres-
sion, triumph in the Roman school, nursed, as it
werc, amongst the works of the Greeks, and in
the bosom of a city, which had once been the se-
minary of learning and politeneis. Here it was, that
Domenichino and Poussin, both great masters of ex-
preffion,



prefsion, refined themselves, as appears more particu-
larly by the St. Jerome of the one, and the death
of Germanicus, or the slaughter of the Innocents;
by the other. Here it was that arose Raphael, the
sovereign master of thiem all. One would imagine,
that, pictures which are generally considered as the
books of the ignorant, and of the ignorant only, he
had undertaken to make the instructors even of the
earned. One would imagine, that he intended, in
some measure, to justify Quintilian, who affirms,
that painting has more power over us than all the
arts of rhetorick. There is not, indeed, a single pic-
ture of Raphael’s, from the study of which, those
who are curious in point of exprefsion, may not
reap great benefit ; particularly his martyrdom of
Saint Felicitas; his Magdalen in the house of the
Pharisee ; his Transfiguration ; his Joseph explain-
ing to Pharaoh his dream, a piece so highly rated
by Poussin. His school of Athens, in Vatican, is,
to all intents and purposes, a school of exprefsion.
Among the many miracles of art, witli which this
piece abounds, I shall single out that of the four
boys attending on a Mathematician, who stooping
to the ground, his compasses in his hand, is giving
them the demonstration of a theorem. One of the
boys, recollected within himself, keeps back, with
all the appearance of profound attention to the rea-
soning of the mafter; another by the brifknefs of
his attitude discovers a greater quicknefs of appre-
hension; while the third, who has already seized
the conclusion, is endeavouring to beat it into the
fourth, who, standing motionless, with open arms,
a staring countenance, and an unspéakable air of stu-
piclity in his looks, will never, perhaps, be able to
make



make any thing of the matter. And it is probably,
from this very groupe, that Albani, who studied
Raphael so closely, drew the following precept of
his; ec That it behoves a painter to exprefs more cir-
cumstances than one by every attitude; and so to
employ his figures, that, by barely seeing what
they are actually about, one may be able to guefs,
both what they have been already doing, and are
next going to do. This I know to be a difficult
precept; but l know too, that it is only by a due
observance of it, the eye and the mind can be made
to hang 'in suspence on a painted piece of canvas.
It is expreffion, that a painter, ambitious to soar in
his profefsion, must, above all things, labour to per-
fect himself in. It is the last goal of his art, as So-
crates proves to Parrhafius. It is in expreffion that
dumb poetry consists, and what the prince of our
poets calls a visible language.
erté hadéo h ie hedeyrtén
PERSPECTIVE.
DERSPECTIVE is the art of delineating visible
objects on a plain surface, such as they appear at 2
given distance or height, upon a transparent plane,
placed perpendicular to the horizon, between the eye
and the object.
There are three forts of perspective, viz. linear,
aerial, and specular perspective.
Linear perspective (to which most properly belongs
our definition, and which is a branch of the mathema¬
tics) regards the position, magnitude, form, &c. of





the several lines or contours of objects, and exprefs
their dim inution.
Aerial perspective (which makes part of the art of
painting) regards the colour, lustre, strength, bold-
ness, &c. of distantobjects, considered as seen through
a column of air, and expresses the diminutions therof.
Specular perspective reprefents the objects in coni¬
cal, spherical, or other mirrours, erect and clear;
whereas on lawn, and other plancs, they appear con-
fused and irregular.
These three sorts of perspective have cach its par-
ticular doctrine ; but before we proceed on the ex-
planation of the doctrine, we must teach our pupils
what are planes in perspective ; of which there are
five forts, viz. perspective, geometrical, horizontal,
vertical, and objective plane.
Perspective plane is a plain pellucid furface, ordi¬
narily perpendicular to the horizon, and placed be-
tween the spectator’s eye and the object he views ;
through which the optick rays, emitted from the se-
veral points of the objects, are supposed to pafs to the
eye, and in their passage to leave marks that represent
them on the said plane.
A geometrical plane, is a plane parallel to the ho¬
rizon, whereon the object to be del incated is supposed
to be placed : This planc is usually at right angles
with the perspective plane-A horizontal planc is a
plane passing through the spectator’s eye, parallel to
the horizon, cutting the perspective plane, when that
is perpendicular to the geometrical onc, at right
angles.-A vertical plane, is a plane passing through
the spectator’s eye, perpendicular to the geometrical
one; and usually parallel to the perspective plane.
An objective plane, is any plane situate in the hori¬
zontal



zontal plane, whiose reprefentation is required in
perspective.
There are likewise several different lines in per-
spective, viz. terrestrial line, geometrical line, line
of the front, vertical line, visual line, line of station,
objective line, and line of distance--Geometrical
line, in perspective, is a right line drawn in any man¬
ner on the geometrical plane--A terrestrial line, or
fundamental line, is a right line, wherein the geome-
trical plane, and that of the picture, or draught inter-
sect one another. Such is the line formed by the in¬
tersection of the geometrical plane, and the perspec-
tive plane-A line of the front, is any right line,
parallel to the terrestrial line--A vertical line, is
the common section ofthe vertical, and of the draught.
A visual line, is the line, or ray, imagined to pass
from the object to the eye.-An objective line, is any
line dravn on the geometrical plane, whose represent-
-ation is sought for in draughts or pictures.A line of
. station, according to some writers, is the common sec-
tion of the geometrical and vertical planes. Others
. mean by it the perpendicular height ofthe cye above
the geometrical plane, whose representation is sought
for in draughts or pictures.-A line of distance, is a
right line drawn from the eye to the principal point :
this, as it is perpendicular to the perpendiculars of
the plane, or table, can only be the distance of the
eye from the table-The point of the distance, in
perspective, is a point in the horizontal line, at such
distance from the principal point, as is that of the
eye from the same.
There are other points besides this point of dis-
tance in perspective, viz. the point of sight, the third
point, the objective point, the accidental point, and
the



the vifual point; wliich term point, is used for va-
rious parts, or places, with regard to the perspective
plane--The point of sight, or of the eye, is a point
on the plane, marked out by a right line drawn srom
the eye, perpendicular to the plane. This is also
called the principal point. This point is in the in¬
tersection of the horizontal and vertical planes.
Some authors call it the principal point; and give
the aame point of sight, or vifion, to the point wherein
the eye is actually placed, and where all the rays
terminateThe third point, is apoint taken at dif-
cretion in the line of distance, wherein all the diago¬
nals dratyn from the divisions of the geometrical planc,
whose reprefentation is required on the perspective
plane--An accidental point, is a point in the horizon¬
tal lines, where lines parallel to one another, though
not perpendicular to the picture, or repesentation
meet.-— A visual point, is a point in the horizontal
line, wherein all the ocular rays unite. Thus a per-
son standing in a strait long gallery, and looking for-
wards, the side, the floor, and ceiling seem to meet,
and touch one another in a point, or common centre.
These things previously considered, I’Il pafs to the
Explanation of the different sorts of perspective.
1. From a point in a gipen line Ae, to raise a perpendicular.
Sce fig. II.
Draw with the ruler the given line A B; then set
one foot of your compasses in B, and extending
them to rather more than half the length of the
line A B, sweep the arch cd; and with the same
extent of compasses’set one point in c, and sweep
the arch e f; then, without altering the compasses,
set





set one foot in g, and describe the arch h i; next
rule through the points cg, to intersect the arch hi
in k, and draw the line from k to B, which is the
perpendicular required.
2. Another way. Sce fig. III.
From the point A take the equal distances A B
and A C on each side of it, then stretch the com¬
passes-to any distance greater than A B or A C, and
with one foot of them in B sweep the arch d e;
then, with the same extent of compasses, set one
point in C, sweep the archfg; and these two arches
will intersect each other in the point h, from which
a line drawn to the point A is the perpendicular
required.
3. To draw one line parallel (or equi-distant) to another
&
given line AB. See sig. IV.
Extend your compasses to the distance of the pa¬
rallel you require ; then with one foot in any point
of the given line, as in c, describe the arch d e.
Again, without altering the compasses, fix one foot
in any other point, as in f, and sweep the arch gh;
then rule the line l K, touching the outward parts
of the two arches, and that will be the parallel to
the given line.
&. To bifect or dividc à given line A E, into two equal
parts. Sce fig. V
Take with your compasses any distance greater than
half the given line ; then with one foot of them in
B, sweep



B, sweep the arch cc; and with the same distance,
setting one foot in A, sweep the arch dd; and thefe
arches will intersect each other in the points gh;
which joined by a perpendicular, will intersect A B
in the middle point 1.
S. Upon the end A of a given line, AB, to raise à per¬
pendicular. Sce fig. VI.
Place one soot of the compasses in A, and ex--
tend them to any point c without thie given line ;
then set one soot of them in cand turn the circle
d e and A, and through d c draw the diameter dCe,
meeting the circle in e; Join A e, and that right
line is the perpendicular required.
6. To turn the cirele through any three given points not in a
right line. See fig. VII.
Fix three points at any distance you think proper,
as at A B and C, and join them by the right lines
A B and EC; then by fig. V. bisect the line A B
with the line d e; which done bisect the line BC
with the line fe; and from the center e, where
thcse lines mect, extend your compasses to A, and
describe the carcle A B C G.
7. To draee an oval. See fig. VIII,
Draw a given line A B, which divide into four
equal parts ; set one foot of the compasses at C, and
from that center describe a circle ee ; with the same
extent of compafses piace one soot in the center D,
and turn the circle fs; then with one soot still in
D, extend




; extend your compasses, and turn the arch gg;
and with the same extent, placing one foot in C,
describe the arch hh; join the intersections with a
perpendicular from i to k; next, place one foot of
the compasses in i, sweep the arch LL, and with-
out altering them, set one foot in k, and describe the
arch MM.
8. Another method for an oval. See fig. IX.
Draw a given line A D, and with the compasses
extended, placing one foot in B, with the other
turn the circle e e; then, without altering your
compasses, on the line A D in the supposed point C
weep the circle ff, and through the points gg,
where the two circles intersect, draw the perpen¬
dicular h i; then six your compasses with one foot
nh, and extend them so as to describe the arch.
 k to the lower extremities of the circles; then,
with the same extent, with one foot in i, sweep the
rch Il, to join the upper extremities.
By these examples it will appear, that an oval of
any form or size may be constructed at pleafure, on-
ly taking care always to fix the compasses equi-
distant from the given line A D in the perpendicu-
ar hi-
PRACTICAL EXAMPLES in PERSPECTIVE,
1. To draw a square pavement in perspective. See fig. X.
and XI.
Suppose your piece of pavement to consist of six-
ty-four pieces of marble, each a foot square. Your





first business is, to draw an ichnographical plan or
ground plot of it, which is thus performed. Hav¬
ing made an exact square of the size you intend your
plan, divide the base and horizon into eight equal
parts, and from every division in the base to its
opposite point in the horizon, rule perpendicular
lines; then divide the sides into the same number,
ruling parallel lines across from point to point; so
will your pavement be divided into sixty-four square
feet ; because the eight fcet in length, multiplied by
the same in breadth give the number of square feet
or pieces of marble contained in the wholc: then
rule diagonals from corner to corner; and thus will
your ground plot appear as in fig. X.
Now, to lay this in perspective, draw another
square to your intended size, and divide the base
line A B into eight equai parts, as before; then fix
your point of sight C in the middle of the hori¬
zon D E, and from the fame point rulc lincs to every
division in the base A B; after which, rule diago¬
nal lincs from D to B, and froin E to A, answer-
able to those in the ground plot, and your square
will be reduced to the triangle A B C; then from
the point F: where tlie diagonal DE intersects the
line A C, to the opposite intersection G; where the
diagonal E A crosses the line C B, rulc a parallel
line, which is the abridgment of the square.
Then through the points where tlie diagonals
cross the rest of theTines wlich go from the base to
the point of sight, rule parallel lines, and your
square pavement will be laid in perspective, as in








2. To find the height and proportion of any objeëts, as they.
appear above the horizon, on a fupposed planc. Sce
fig. XII.


First, rule your horizontal line N O, and fix
your point of sight, as at M; then mark the place
of your nearest pillar, by making a dot for the
base or bottom, as at A; and another for the sum-
mit or top, as’at B: rule à line from A to the point
of sight M, and another from B to M, and these
two- lines will give the height of any number of
pillars. As for example ; suppose you would have
à pillar at C, fix your dot for the base, and rule
from thence a parallel line to meet tlie diagonal A M
at D; then rule the perpendicular DE to the di-
agonal B M; which perpendicular is the height of
your figure required at C. Or, if you would place
pillars at F and I, observe the same method, ruling
the parallels FG and I K, and the perpendiculars
GH and KL will give their heights at the distances
requi red.
To find the diameter or thickness of pillars at any
particular distances, you are also to be guided by
that nearest the bafe. For instance ; suppose your
nearest pillar A B to be ten feet high and one foot
in diameter: divide it from top to bottom into ten
equal parts, and set off one of them upon the base
of the pillar ; then rulé a line from the point of
sight M to the diameter P, and you will have the
thickness of- all your pillars on their respective pa¬
rallels or bascs.





3. The same rule exemplified in objects below the borizoxe
Sce fig. XIII.
If you would know the heights of a number of
figures below the horizon, rule your horizontal
line QR, and fix your point of sight, as at P; then
place your nearest figure, or mark the dots sor the
head and feet, by the points A and B, which an¬
swers the same purpose ; and rule from these dots
to the point of sight the lines A Pand Bp; and iE
you would find the height of a figure to be drawn
at c, rule from thence the parallel c d to the di-
agonal BP, and the perpendicular de will give the
height required. The same directions will shew
the height of a figure at any other distance you
have a mind to place it, as at f, i, and m, by ruling
the parallelsf g, i k, and m n; and from each of
these their respective perpendiculars gh, k l, and
no; which perpendiculars will shew the heights of
the figures at f, i, and m
4. To drav a direct view. See fig. XIV,
To illustrate this example, suppose you were to
draw the inside of a church, as reprefented in this
figure: first take your station at the point A, in the
center of the base line B C, from which you have
à front view of the whole body of the church,
with all the pillars, &c. on each side; then fix your
horizon at any height you think proper as at DE;
bisect it by the perpendicular EA; and where these
two lines intersect, is the point of sight F. (This
perpendicular will pafs through the center of all
the



he arches in the dome or cupola: which centers
may be sound by any three given points, as in fig.
VII.) Next divide your base line into any given
number of feet; and the visual lines ruled from
these divisions to the point of sight, will reduce all
your objects to their just proportion, by setting off
heir height upon a perpendicular raised at their re-
spective distances. The base, in the example here
given, is divided into twelve equal parts of five
feet each ; from which (supposing your front co-
umn to be thirty-five feet high) take seven divi¬
ions from the base line of your drawing, and set
them off upon the perpendicular G H; then (sup-
posing this column to be five feet thick at the base)
set off one of those divisions upon the parallel IK,
which is the breadth required. So that, by pro-
portioning this scale to any distance by the fore-
going directions, you may not only find the dimen-
ions of all your- columns, but also of every distinct
part of them, as well as of all the doors, windows,
and other objects that occur. For instance ; having
found the height and breadth of your nearest co-
lumn G, draw from the top and bottom of the said
column to the point of sight the lines HFand KF;
after which, rule the line l F from the base of the
column to the point of sight, and you have the
height. and breadth of all the rest of the columns,
as has been already shewn in fig. XII.
By ruling lines from the points a, b, c, d, &c. to
the point of sight, you will see that all the summits
and bases of your columns, doors, windows, &c.
must tend immediately to that point; and by lines
drawn from the points 1, 2, 3; 4, &c. on each side,
of the correspoudent points on the opposite side, may




be seen all the parts of your building lying upon
the fame parallel.
5. To draw an oblique viexv. Sce fig. XV.
First, draw your horizontal linc A B; then, if
your favourite object be on the right hand, as at Cy
place yourself on the left hand upon the base line,
as at D; then from that station erect a pependicular
D E, which will pafs through the horizon at the
point of sightF; to which rule the diagonals GF
and H F, which will shew the roof and base of vour
principal building C, and will also, as before direct-
ed, serve as a standard for all the rest.
Observe also, either in direct or oblique vicws,
whether the prospect before you makes a curve ; for
jf it does, you must be careful to make the same
curve in your drawing.
6. To draw a perspective viev, wvherein are accidental
points. See fig. XVI.
Rule your horizontal line a h, and on one part of
it fix your point of sight, as at c; from which rule
the diagonals cd and ce on the one side, and ef and
and ce’on the other ; which will shew the roofs and
bases of all the houses in the street directly facing
you (supposing yourself placed at A in the center of
the base line). Then fix your accidental points g
and h upon the horizontal line, and rule from them
to the angles i k and l m (where the streets on each
side take a different direction, towards the acci¬
dental points g and h) and the lines gi and gk give
the roofs and bases of all the buildings on one side,
asl h and mhdo on the other.





Accidental points seldom intervene where the dis-
tance is small, as in noblemen’s feats, groves, canals,
&c. which may be drawn by the strict rules of per-
spective ; but where the prospect is extensive and
aried, including mountains, bridges, castles, rivers,
recipices, woods, cities, &c. it will require such an
infinite number of accidental points, that it will be
better to do them as nature shall dictate, and your
ipened judgment approve.
To find the center for the roof of a house, in an obtique
view. Sce plate IV
Suppose from the point of sight A, the visual lines
B A and A C be drawn, BC being one perpendicu-
lar given, and DE the other, rule the diagonals
rom Dto C, and from Eto B, and the perpendicu-
ar FG, raised through the point of their intersec-
ion, will shew the true center of the roof, as will
appear by ruling the lines GE and G C.
For want of being acquainted with this necessary
rule, many, who have been well versed in othier parts
of perspective have spoiled the look of their picture,
y drawing the roofs of their houses out of their
rue perpendicular.
Perspective is either employed in reprefenting tlie
ichonographies and ground-plots of objects as projec-
five plancs; or in scenographies, and reprefentations
of the bodies themselves.
lchnography, in perspective, is the vicw of any
thing cut off by a plain parallel to the horizon, just
it the base. or bottom of it ; so that ichnography is
the same with what is otherwise called the plan,
geometrical plan, or ground-plot of any thing.
Scenography,



Scenography, in perspective, is a representation of
a body on a perspective planc ; or à description there-
of in all its dimensions, such as it appears to thc cye.
The ichnography of a building, &c. represents the
plan, or ground-work of the building. The ortho-
graphy the front, or one of the sides; and the sceno¬
graphy the whole building, front, sides, height and
all, raised on the gcometrical plan.
Projcction, in perspective, denotes the appearance
or representation of anobject on the perspective plane.
The projection, e, gr, of a point, is a point through
which the optick ray passes from the objective point
through the plane to the cye ; orit is the point where-
in the plane cuts the optick ray. And hence is
easily conceived what is meant by the projection of
a line, a plane, or a folid.
The projection of the sphere in planc, is a repre-
sentation of several points or places of the surface of
the sphere, and of the cirles described thereon, or of
any assigned parts thcreof, such as they appear to the
eyc fituate at any given distance, upon a transparent
plane placed between the eye and the spliere. The
principal use of the projection of the sphere is in the
constructionof planisphicres, and particularly maps and
charts, which are said to be of this orthat projection,
according to the several situations of the eye, and the
perspective plane with regard to the meridians, paral-
lels, and other points and places to be represented.
The projcction of the spliere is usually divided into
orthographic and stereographic.
Ortiographie projection, is that wherein the super-
fites of the sphere is drawn on aplane, cutting it
in the middde; the cyc being placed at an infinite
distance vertically to one of the hemispheres. The
laws



laws of this fort of projection are these : 1. The rays
y which the cye at an infinite distance perceives
any object, are parallel. 2. A right line perpendicu-
ar to the plane of the projection, is projected into a
point, where that right line cuts the plane of the
projection. 3. A right line not perpendicular, but
either parallel or oblique to the plane of the projec-
ion, is projected into a right line, and is always
comprehended between tlie extreme perpendiculars.
. The projection of the right line is the greatest,
when that line is parallel to the plane of the pro-
jection. 5. Hence it is evident, that a line parallel
o the plane of the projection, is projected into a
light line equal to itself; but if it be oblique to the
plane of the projection, it is projected into one
which is less. 6. A plane furface, at right angles to
the plane of the projection, is projected into that
light line, in which it cuts the plane of the projec-
ion. Hence it is evident, that à circle standing at
light angles to the plane of the projection which
basses through its center, is projected into that
diameter, in which it cuts the plane of the projec-
ion. 7. A circle parallel to the plane of the pro-
ection, is projected into a circle equal to itself; and
circle oblique to the plane of the projection, is
projected into an ellipsis.
Stereographic projection, is that wherein the sur-
ace and circles of the sphere are drawn upon the
plane of a great circle, the eye being in the pole of
that circle As to the properties of this fort of pro-
ection-: 1. In this projection a riglit circle is pro-
ected into a linc of half tangents. 2. The repre-
entation of a right circle perpendicularly opposed
the eye, will be a circle in the plane of the pro-





jection. 3. The reprefentation of a circle placed
obliquely to the eye, will be a circle in the plané
of projection. 4. 1f a great ciréle is to be projected
on the plane of another great circle, its center will
lie in the line of measure distant from the center

of the primitive by the  of its elevation

above the plane of the primitive . If a lesser cir-
cle, whose poles lie in the plane of the projection,
were to be projected; the center of its representa-
tion would lie in the line of meafures, distant from
the center of the primitive, by the Rcant of the
lesser circles distance from its pole, and its semi-

diameter or radius be equal to the tang of that
distance. 6. If a lesser circle were to bepygojected,
whose poles lie not in the plane of the projection, its
diameter in the, projection, if it falls on each side
of the pole of the primitive, will be equal’ to
the sum of the half tangents of its greatest and
ncarest distance from the pole of the primitive, set
each way from the center of the primitive in the
line of meafures. 7. If the lesser. circle to be pro-
jected, falls entirely on one side of the pole of pro-
jection, and does not encompass it, then will all its
diameter be equal to the difference of the half tan¬
gents of its greatest and nearest distance from the
pole of the primitivc, set off from the center of the
primitive one, and the same way in the line of
measures. 8. In the stereographic. projection, the
angles made by the circles of the surface of rthe
sphere, are equal to the angles made by their re-

presentation in the planc of their projection.





O COLOURS.
1.
The metbhd of preparing the various kinds used in painting
IT will now be proper to explain in an easy man-
ner, the method of preparing the various bodies
employed by painters, for producing the difference of
light and shade; which may be termed either pig-
ments or fluids, as they are solid or aqueous; and
are distinguished in. their several kinds according to
the manner of working them ; as oil-colours, water-
colours, enamel-colours, &c. but their variety are
too numerous to be in general use : most painters
therefore select a set out of them, and become very
unjustly prejudiced against those they reject. It is
no little impediment to their improvement in the
profession, that they are not more extensively ac-
quainted with all the ingredients fit for their pur-
poses.
Those colours which become transparent in oil,
such as-lake, Prussian blue, and brown pink, are
frequently used without the admixture of white,
or any other opake pigment; by which means the
teint of the ground on which they are laid retains,
in some degree, its force ; and the real colour, pro-
duced in painting, is the combined effect of both.
This is called glazing; and the pigments endued
with the property of becoming transparent in oil,
are called glazing colours.
As colours are obtained from various substances,
the means of preparing tlieni are conscquciitly vari-





ous ; some being of a simple nature, and requirinig
only to be purified and reduced to a proper con¬
sistence or texture ;; and others being compounds of
different bodies, to be formed only by complex pro-
cesses. It is therefore very difficult to give such ge¬
neral directions, for the making every fort of co-
lour as may be intelligible to all ; the utensils to be
employed, as well as the methods to be pursued, be¬
ing such as belong to different arts and trades.
Where, neverthelets, simple means, and the use
of such utensiis as are generally knoin, may be suffi-
cient to performswhat is wanting, it is best to avoid
all techriical terms, and more complex methods of
operation, adopting such a mode of instruction as
may be universally intelligible :--We now proceed
to the nature and preparation of the different co-
lours, as they follow in their clafses.
CLASS IB OF RED COLOURS.
VerMiLLion, is one of the most useful colours
in every kind of painting; except enamel or on glafs ;
as it is of a moderate price, spends to greât advan-
tage in any kind of work, and stands or holds its
colour

CLASS I. RED.
Scarlet, or tending to the orange. Crimson, or tending to the purple.
Vermillion.
Carmine.
Native cinnabar.
Lake.
Red lead.
Rose pink.
Scarle: oker.
Red oker.
Common Indian red.
Venetian rec.
Spanisn brown.
Terra di sienna burnt,


THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 45
colour extremely well. It may be prepared in great
perfection by the following process.
 Take of quick silver cighteen pounds, of flowers
 of sulphur six pounds: melt the sulphur in an
 earthen pot; and pour in the quick silver gradual¬
 ly, being also gently warmed; and stir them well
 together, with the small end of a tobacco-pipe.
 But, if from the esservescence, on adding the latter
 quantities of the quicksilver, they take fire, extin-
 guissi it by throwing a wet cloth (which should be
 had ready) over the vessel. When the mafs is cold,
 powder it, so that the several parts may be well
 mixed together. But it is not necessary to réduce
 it, by nicer levigation, to an impalpable state.
 Having then prepared an oblong glass body, or
 sublimer, by coating it well with fire-lute over
 the whole sursace of the glafs, and working
 a proper rim of the same round it, by which it
 may be hung in the furnace in such a manner that
 one half of it may be exposed to the fire, fix it in
 a proper furnace, and let the powdered mafs be
 put into it, so as to nearly sill the part that is
 within the furnace ; a piece of broken tile being
 laid over the mouth of the glafs. Sublime then
 the contents, with as strong a heat as may be used
 without blowing the fumes of the vermillion out
 of the mouth of the sublimer. When the sublima¬
 tion is over, which may be perceived by the
 abatement of the heat towards the top of the body,
 discontinue the fire ; and, after tlie body is cold,
 take it out of the furnace, and break it. collect
 then together all the parts of the sublimed cakc,
 separating carefully from them any dross that may
 have been left at the bottom of the body, as also
any



 any lighter substance that may havé formed in the
 neck, and appears tobe dissimilar to the rest. Le-
 vigate the more perfect part; and, when reduced
 to fine powder, it will be vermillion proper for
 use : but on the perfectness of the levigation, de-
 pends, in a great degree, the brightnefs and good¬
 ness of the vermillion. In order thercfore to per-
 form this, it is necessary that two or three mills
 of different closcnefs should be employed, and
 the last should be of steel, and set as finely as
 possible.
It is common, perhaps general, sor dealers to fo-
phisticate vermillion with red lcad. But to detect
with certainty the fraud, both with respect to the ge-
neral fact, and the proportion, use the sollowing
means :
 Takc a small, but known quantity of vermil-
 lion suspected to be adulterated, and put it into a
 crucible ; having first mixed with it about the faine
 quantity, in bulk, of charcoal dust : put the cruci-
 ble into a common fire, liaving first covered it with
 a lesser crucible inverted into it ; and give à heat
 sufficient to suse lead; when the crucible being
 taken out of the fire, should be well shaken, by
 striking it against the ground. If the suspected
 adulteration has been practised, the lead will be
 sound reduced to its metalline state, in the bottoin
 of the crucible; and, being weighed, and com¬
 pared with the quantity of cinnabar that was put
 into the crucible, the proportion of the adultera-
 tion may be thence certainly known. But, if no
 lead be found in the crucible, it may be safcly in¬
 serred, that no red lead had been commixt with
 the vermillion.
NATIVE



NATIVE CINNABAR.
It 1s found naturally formed in the earth, though
seldom fo pure as to be sit for the uses of painting,
at least without being purisied by sublimation. The
mistaken notion that it would stand better than ver-
million, because it was a natural production, has
made it to be coveted by painters who are curious
on colours. It is, however, not worth their while
so be folicitous about it, as it never excelled the best
vermillion in brightness; and what is generally fold
or it is a pigment compounded of quicksilver and’
sulphur.
RED LEAD, Or MINUM.
The goodnefs of red lead may be seen by its bright-
nefs, and a mixture of any kind will make it of a
dull appearance. It is-pn this account not fo liable
to be fophisticated as white lead or vermillion. It is
lead calcined, till it acquires a proper degree of co-
lour, by exposing it with a large furface to the fire.
SCARLET OKER,
Is an ochrous, earthy, or rather irony fubstance,
and is the basis of green vitriol, feparated from the
at.
acid of-the. vitriol by calcination. It is a kind of
orange fcarlet colour, and rivals any of the native
okers, from its certainty of standing, and extreme
strength and warmth, either as a ground, or in the
shade of carnations. It is ufeful as a colour in any
kind of painting; the manner of its preparation is
is follows.




 Take of green vitriol or copperas, any quantity ;
 and being put into a crucible, of whicl it will sill
 two thirds, set it on a common fire to boil (takirig
 care that it do not boil over) till the matter be near-
 ly dry ; when it will be greatly diminished in
 quantity. Fill then the crucible to the same
 height again, and repcat the boiling and replenisn-
 ing, till the crucible be silled with dry matter.
 Take it then from this fire, and put-it into a wind-
 furnace; or, if the quantity be small, it may be. con¬
 tinued in the same fire, the coals being heaped up
 round it. Let the contents be calcined there till
 they become of a red colour when cold; which
 must be examined by taking a little of the matter
 out of the middle, and suffcring it to cool; for so
 long as it remains hot, the red colour will not ap-
 pear, though it be sufficiently calcined. When
 duly calcined, take the oker out of the crucible
 while hot, and put it into water, in which the parts
 of the broken crucible may be be snaked likewise
 to obtain more easily what shall adhere to them ;
 and stir the oker well about in the water, that all
 the remaining vitriol may be melted out of it. Let
 it then settle, and when the water appears clear,
 pour it off, and add a fresh quantity; taking out all
 the broken pieces of the crucible ; and proceed as
 before ; repeating several times this treatinent wath
 fressi quantities of water. Then purify the. oker
 from any remaining soulness by washing over;
 and havitig brought it to a proper state of dryness,
 by draining off the fluid by a silter, in which the
 paper must be covezed with a linen cloth, lay it to
 dry on boards.
COMMON



COMMON INDIAN RED,
Is substituted in place of the real kind brought
from the East-Indies: serving equally well sor com¬
mon purposes, giving a teint verging to scarlet,
(varying from the true Indian red, which is great-
ly ineliried to the purple) and on account of its
warm, though not bright colour, it is much used,
as well in finer as coarser paintings in oil. It is af-
forded cheap and may be thus managed.
 Take of the caput mortuum, or oker, lest in
 the iron pots after the distillation of aquafortis
 from nitre and vitriol, two parts, and of the ca-
 put mortuum or colcothar, left in the long necks
 after the distillation of oil of vitriol, one part ;
 break the lumps found among them, and put them
 into tubs with a good quantity of water; and hav¬
 ing let them stand for a day or two, frequent-
 ly stirring them well about, lade off as much wa-
 ter as can be got clear from them ; and add a fresti
 quantity, repeating the same treatment till all the
 falts be washed out, and the water come off nearly
 insipid. The red powder which remains must
 then be washed over, and, being freed from the
 water, laid out to dry.
 When this is designed for nicer purposes, it
 should be washed over again in basons, the grofs
 manner of lading it out of one tub into another
 not fitting it always completely to such ends.
VENETIAN RED.
Useful to house-painters in imitating mahogany-¬
and is à native red oker inclining to scarlet, and
casily



easily prepared by mixing it with the colcothar or
caput mortuum, taken out of the aquafortis pots
and washed over. It requires no other preparation
for use than to be well ground with oil, unless when
it is used in miniature painting--when it should be
washed over with tlie utmost care.
SPANISH BROWN,
Resembles the Venetian red very much in colour,
but is souler: it is à native pigment and used much
in the fame state nature produces it ; being dug up
in several parts of England. No other preparation
is necdful than freeing it well from stones and filthi,
and grinding it with oil to render it fit for colour-
men, in the preparation of cloths for pictures, and
other coarse work-
Caleineel or burne TERRA di SIENNX,
Is originally yellow ; but when modcrately cal-
cined becomes an orange red, though not very
bright. It is a native oker, brought hither srom
Italy in the state in which it is naturally found. It
is calcined by putting lumps of it either in a cruci-
ble, or naked in a common sire, and continuing it
there till the colour be changed from yellow to red.
It is exceedingly ufeful in oil-painting, and admits
of no adulteration: it may be distinguished fromn
other ochrous earths by its semi-transparency.
CARMINE,
Is a bright crimson colour, of great advantage in
painting as well in water as varnish ; the prepara-





tion of it is kept a fecret by thosc who prepare it in
persection; and the superiority of the French car-
mine: shews that the proper method is wanting
in England--though some wrongly attribute the
excellence to qualities in the air and water of
France. There are several recipes for this colour,
but rather than insert impersect instructions for
an article of great confequence, we choose to be
silent.
LAK E.
The best of what is commonly sold is made from
the colour extracted from scarlet rags, and deposited
on the cuttle-bone, which may be done in the fol¬
lowing manner :
 Take a-pound of the best pearl-ashes, and, hav¬
 ing dissolved them in two quarts of water, purisy
 them by filtering through paper. Add then to
 this solution two more quarts of water, and having
 put in a pound of scarlet shreds, procured of the
 taylors (which must be entirely clean) boil them
 in a pewter boiler, till the shreds appear to have
 wholly lost their scarlet colour. Take them out
 of the solution and press them well; dipping
 them aster in water and pressing them again,
 that all the fluid they had imbibed may be got
 from them, in order to be put back to the rest.
 Take then another pound of the scarlct shreds,
 and repeat the like treatment of them in the same
 solution; as also a third and fourth pound. While
 this is doing dissolve a pound and half of cuttle-
 fish-bone in a pound of strong aquafortis in a
 glass receiver; adding more of the bone, if it ap-
 pear









 pear to produce any ebullition in the aquafortis :
 and, having strained off this solution through
 flannel, pour it into the other by degrees ; observ-
 ing whether it produce any esservescence on put-
 ting in the last quantity : which if it do in any
 great degree, more of the cuttle-fish-bone must be
 dissolved in aquafortis; and the solution very gra-
 dually added till no ebullition appear to be raised
 by it in the mixture. If this be properly ma¬
 naged, the fluid will soon become clear and co-
 lourless, and the tinging particles extracted from
 the shreds, together with the cuttle-fish-bone,
 will subside, to the bottom and form a crimson
 sediment; which is the lake. The water must
 then be poured off ; and two gallons of hard
 spring water must be put to the lake, and well
 stirred about to mix tliem. This being likewise
 poured off, after the lake has again settled to the
 bottom, must be replaced by another two gal-
 lons; and the same method must be repeated four
 or five times. But if hard water cannot be, pro-
 cured, or the lake appear too purple, half an
 ounce of alum should be added to each quantity
 of water before. it be used. When the lake is thus
 fufficiently freed from the salts, it must have the
 water drained from it in a filter covered with a
 linen cloth, which has been so worn as to have no
 nap or down remaining on its furface. After the
 lake has been drained to a proper drynefs, it must
 be dropped on clean boards, by means of a proper
 funnel: through which, the drops being suffered
 to pafs, and rest on the board at proper distances,
 they will become small cones or pyramids; in
 which form the lake must be suffered to dry, and
 the preparation is then completed. 1
ROSE







ROSE PINK.
The basis of this pigment is principally chalk ;
and the tinging substance extracted from brasil, of
Campeachy wood. It will not stand with oil or wa¬
ter, and is seldom employed but for the coarse work
of house painters, or for paper hanging, unless se-
cured from flying with varnish, when, if good, it
may be substituted for lake. It is prepared as
follows :
 Take brasil wood six pounds, or three pounds of
 brasil and three of peachy wood. Boil them an
 hour with three gallons of water, in which a
 quarter of a pound of alum is dissolved. Purify
 then the fluid by straining through flannel ; and
 put back the wood into the boiler with the same
 quantity of alum, and proceed as before ; repeat-
 ing this a third time. Mix then the three quan¬
 tities of tincture together; and evaporate them
 till only two quarts of fluid remain : which eva¬
 poration must be performed first in the pewter
 boiler, and afterwards in a Ralneo Mariae. Pre-
 pare in the mean time eight pounds of chalk by
 washing over ; a pound of alum being put into
 the water used for that purpose, which, after the
 chalk is washed, must be poured off and supplied
 by a fresn quantity, till the chalk be freed from
 the salt formed by the alum ; after which it must
 be dried to the consistence of stiff clay. The
 chalk and tincture as above prepared, must be
 then well mixed together by grinding; and af-
 terwards laid out to dry where neither the sun or
 cold air can reach it: though, if it can be con¬

 veniently done, a gentle heat may be used. 
RED



RED OKER,
Is a native earth, brought chiefly from Oxsord-
shire, and burnt afterwards (by those who pre-
pare it) in large ovens, till by calcination it becomes
red. It is very useful as well in the more delicate
as coarser paintings in oil, for it stands infalliby.
For nicer purposes it should be washed over; but for
others it may be used in the state in which it is sound
in the fhops.
CLASS ILT O BLUE COLOURS.
ULtraMarine is a bright blue colour, of the high-
est value in every kind of painting; being equally
serviceable in all, even in enamel. It has à trans-
parent effect in oil, and in some degree in watera
and will stand without the lcast hazard of slying. By
reason of its high price, Prussian blue has been
much introduced, to the prejudice of painting in ge¬
neral ; as tlie fkies of landfkapes and many other
parts of modern pictures, shew the loss of ultra-
marine, by their changing from a warm or elcar
blue, to a faint green or olive teint. The methods
liave been continually varied by those who have at-
tempted
CLASS II. BLUE.
Ultramarine.
Indigo.
Uitramnarine afhes.
Smnalt.
Prussian blue.
Bice.
Verditer.
Litinus, or lat muso
Cendic blue, or Saaders bluc.




tempted to prepare this pigment. The sollowing is
tlie best of the more modern.
 Take the lapis lazuli, and break it into very
 small pieces, or rather ’a grofs powder ; put it into
 a erucible, and cover it securely, to prevent the
 coals srom salling amongst it. Caleine it then
 with a strong fire, sor an hour, is thiere be any
 large quantity, or less time in proportion ; and
 quench it, when taken out of the fire, in vinegar;
: stirring them well together; and suffer it to re-
 main in that state for, à day or two. Pour off
then the vinegar, except what may be necessary
 sor moistening the calcined lapis lazuli in grind-
 ing ; which operation it must then undergo, in
 a mortar of flint or glafs, till reduced to the greaf-
 est degree of finenefs those means may effect:
 But, if it appear yet too hard to be easily ground,
 give it another short calcination, and quench it a
t second time in vinegar. The vinegar must then be
 washed off from’the powder, by the putting to it
 several succcssive quantities of clean water; each
 of which must be poured off when the lapis lazuli
 has been well stirred about in them, and is again
 settled to the bottom. It must then be ground on
 a porphyry stone, with a mullar, till it be perfect-
 ly impalpable, and then dried : in which statc it is
 duly prepared to mix with the sollowing cement.
 Take of Burgundy pitch nine ounces--of white
 resin, and Venice turpentine, six ounces-of vir-
 gin wax one ounce and hal sand of linseed oil
 one ounce and a quarter; mix tliem together by
 melting in a pipkin over the fire ; and suffer them
 to boil till they acquire so stiff a consistence, that
 being dropt into water whilc of this boiling heat,
 they



 they will not spread on the surface of its but form
 a roundisni mass or lump. The cement being thus
 formed, may be poured out of the pipkin in the
 water, and made into cakes or rolls sor use. Of
 this cement, take an equal weight with that of the
 calcined lapis lazuli and melt it in a glazed carthen
 pipkin ; but not so as to render it too fluid. Then
 add to it the calcined matter by very slow degrees ;
 stirring them together with an ivory spatula, till
 the whole appear persectly mixed. Being thus
 mixed, heat the composition to a something greater
 degree, and cast it into a large bason full of cold
 water. When it has cooled to a consistence to
 bear such treatment, knead it well like the dough
 of bread, with the hands rubbed over with linsced
 oil, till all the parts be thoroughly incorporated
 with each other. Then make the mafs into a cake,
 which may be cither kept till some other conveni-
 ent time in cold water, or immediately proceeded
 with in the following manner: put the cake into
 an earthen disn or bason, tlie bottom of which
 should be rubbed with linseed oil, and pour on it
 water of the warmth of blood. Let it stand a
 quarter of an hour; and, as the water softens the
 cake, it will let loose the finest part of the cal-
 cined matter, which, on genely stirring the water,
 but without breaking the cake, or separating it into
 lesser parts, will be suspended in the water, and
 must be poured off with it into another vessel.
 The quantity of water must be then renewed,
 and the same operation repeated a fecond or third
 time : and, as the mafs appears slack, in affording
 the colour, it must be moved and stirred, in the
 manner of kneading, with the ivory spatula, but
et not




 not broken into fragments or small parts ; and
 when so much of the colour is extracted, as to
 render it necessary for the obtaining more, the
 heat of the water must be increased to the greatest
 degree. The quantities of the calcined matter
 (which is now the altramarine) that were first
 washed off, and appear of the same degree of deep¬
 nefs and brightneis, may be put together ; and the
 same of those of the second degree ; thie last wash-
 ings making a third. The water being then pour-
 ed off from each of these parcels, but on a lixivium
 formed of two ounces of salt of tartar, or pearl-
 afhies, dissolved in a pint of water, and filtered
 through paper after the solution is cold. This
 lixivium must be put on boiling hot, and the ul¬
 tramarine stirred well about in it; and then the
 mixture set to cool. The powder being subsided,
 the clear lixivium must be poured off, and clean
 water put in its place ; which must be repeated
 till the whole of the salts of the lixivium are
 washed away. The ultramarine must afterwards
 be dried; and will be then duly prepared for

 use.
Uitramarine is subject to be adulterated, on ac-
count of its great price--this is frequently done by
a precipitation of copper, made by alkaline salt,
and is very injurious ; because the magistery of cop-
per (if the ultramarine sophisticated with it be
used in painting, either with oil or water) will
change its hue and turn black. And, in enamel
painting, as soon as fluxed it will become a green,
and consequently make the effect of the ultrama¬
rine vary from what is intended. This fraud may
be easily detected by pouring some diluted spirit




 THE ARTIST ASSISTANT.
of nitre on a small quantity; which, if there be
any copper, will soon dissolve, and forin a greenissi
blue solution.
ULTRAMARINE ASHES.
After the ultramarine lias been extracted from the
lapis lazuli, the residuum or remains from this
pigment. And when the operation of extracting
the colour has not succeeded well, a considcrable

share of the ultramarine is left behind with the re-
crement, and greatly enhances the worth of the
afhes ; for of course the valuc of the latter is inse-
rior to the former, but it is still subject to adultera-
tion, which may be discovered by putting some of
it into a small quantity of spirit of nitre, and if there
be any copper in it, it will be tinged green. It is
prepared as sollows :
 Take the cement of the ultramarine, which re-
 mains after the colour is extracted, and mix it
 with four times its weight of linseed oil. Let the
 mixture be set in a glazed pipkin over the fire,
 and when it is thus boiled a fhort time, putit into
 a glass vessel sufficiently large to contain it, of a
 cylindrical figure: of which vessel the diameter
 must be small in proportion to the length. But
 care must be taken, that the matter when put into
 this glafs be cool enough not to endanger the
 breaking it. This glafs must then be put into a
 balneum mariæ, which must be made as hot as
 possible without boiling, and kept there till the
 colour appears to be all subsided to the bottoin,
 The oil must then be poured off, till the colgur
 appears to rise with it; and the xemainder, with
 the




 the colour in it, must be put into another glass of
 the same kind with as much fresh oil as will rise
 five or six inches above the colour. This glafs
 must be treated in the same manner as the first :
 observing when the colour has subsided, the oil
 must be poured off, and a fresli quantity put in its
 place. This having been likewise poured off, the
 colour must then be well washed, to free it from
 the remaining oil, first in boiling water, and af-
 terwards in some of the lixivium abovementioned,
 made boiling hot also. As much of the lixivium
 being poured off, when the colour has subsided, as
 can be separated from it that way, the colour must
 be thoroughly freed from the remainder by fre-
 quent ablutions with clean water: aster which
 the water must be taken off by the means above
 directed for the ultramarine, till the matter be of
 a proper degree of moisture for grinding. It must
 then be thoroughly well ground on a porphyry,
 and waslied over; that all the harder and insuf-
 ficiently calcincd parts may be reduced to an im¬
 palpable powder; in order to which, the remain-
 ing grosser parts, aster the finer have been separated
 by tlie washing over, must be again ground till
 the whole be perfectly fine- The fame means must
 be afterwards used to bring the afhes to a dry pow-
 der that were besore directed for the ultramarinc.
PRUSSIAN BLUE,
ls the earth of alum, combined with the fixed
sulphur of animal or vegetable coal; and may be
made from almost any animal substance; but it is
generally made of the coal of blood only. It is
useful
Il 2



useful in all kinds of painting, save enamel; and
prepared to different degrees of. brightness and
strength. The common kind found in the shops,
and sold at very low prices, can be little depend-
ed upon in paintings of confequence ; therefore it
should be prepared perfect, and in the true man-
ner : and then, considering the high price of ul¬
tramarine and the foulnefs of the indigo, it may be
deemed an acquisition to the art of painting.
 Take of blood any quantity; and evaporate it
 to perfect drynefs. Of this dry blood, powdered,
 take six pounds, and of the best pearl-ashies two
 potinds : mix them well together in a glafs or
 stone mortar; and then put the mixt matter into
 large crucibles or earthen pots; and calcine it in
 a furnace ; the top of the crucible or pot being
 covered with a tile, or other such convenient
 thing, but not luted. The calcination should be
 continued, so long as any flame appears to issue
 from the matter; or rather till the flame become
 slender and blue ; for if the sire be very strong, a
 sinall flame would arise for a very long time, and
 a great part of the tinging matter would be dissi-
 pated and lost. When the matter has been suf-
 ficiently calcined, take the vessels which contain
 it out of the fire; and, as quickly as possible,
 throw it into two or three gallons of water; and,
 as it soaks there, break it with a wooden spatula,
 that no lumps may remain. Put it then in a pro-
 per tin vessel, and boil it for the space of th ree
 quarters of an hour or more. Filter it while hot
 through paper in tin cullenders, and pafs some
 water through the filter whenit is run dry, to
 wash out the remainder of the lixivium of the
 blood and pearl-ashes; athe earth remaining in the




 silter may be then thrown away. In tlie mean
 time, dissolve of clean alum four pounds, and of
 green vitriol or copperas two pounds, in three gal-
 lons of water. Add this solution gradually to the
 filtered lixivium, so long as any cffervescence
 appear to arise on the mixture ; but, when no
 ebullition or ferment follows the admixture, ceafe
 to put in more. Let the mixture then stand at
 rest, and a green powder will be precipitated :
 from which, when it has thoroughly subsided, the
 clear part of the fluid must be poured off, and
 fresn water put in its place, and stirred well about
 with the green powder; and, after a proper time
 of settling, this water must be poured off like the
 first. Take then of spirit of salt double the
 weight of the green vitriol which was contained
 in the quantity of solution of vitriol and alum,
 added to the lixivium, which will soon turn the
 green matter to a blue colour; and, after some
 time, add a proper quantity of water, and wasn
 the colour in the same manner, as has been di-
 rected for lakc, &c. and, when properly washed,
 proceed in the same manner to dry it in lumps oc

 convenient size.
The brightnefs, deepness, and coolness of Prussian
blue, are prooss of its goodness--for wifh these qua-
lities it may be depended upon in standing well.
Sophistication, or any thing amiss in the process,
may be seen by its being more foul and purple.
VERDITER,
Is formed by adding a due proportion of chalk t9
a solution of copper, madc by refiners in precipi¬
tating the silver from the aquafortis, in the opcra-
ration



ration called parting. Verditer is to be had at a
chcap rate from thie refiners, who arc at no expence
in inaking it, but that of the chalk and labour. The
manner in which it may be best done by them is as
follows :
 Take any quantity of chalk, and having ren-
 dered it fufficiently fine by washing over carefully,
 add it gradually to the folution of copper. fo long
 as any change appears to be produced by it from the
 ebullition excited ; or the due proportion may be
 perceived by the fluid losing its green tinge and
 becoming colourless. Let it then stand at rest
 till the sediment be subsided, and pour off the
 clear part of the fluid from the poder; adding
 in its place clean water, which must be feveral
 times renewed till the salts be entirely washed
 out. The sediment, which is the verditer, must
 be afterwards freed from the sluid by filtering
 through paper covered with a cloth, and laid out
 in lumps of a middling size to dry.'
Those who defire to make verditer themfelves,
may prepare the solution of copper, by adding cop-
per filings gradually to aquafortis of any kind, or
putting plates of copper in it; and then proceeding
as is above directed for the refiners solution.
BLEU de CENDRES; or SANDERS BLUE.
If enquiry is made at the colour shops for this
article, nothing is to be found under the name but
common verditer, or a fpecies of it wliere the pre-
cipitation of the copper appears to be made in part
upon starch as well as chalk. It may be prepared as
follows,





Take of thie refincrs solution of copper made in
 the precipitation of silver from the spirit of nitre ;
 or dissolve copper in spirit of nitre or aquafortis,
 by throwing in filings or putting in slips of copper
 gradually, till all effervefcence ccase. Add to it of
 starch fincly powdered, the proportion of one
 sifth or sixth of the weight of the copper dissolved.
 Make then a folution of pearl afhies, and filter-it ;
 and put gradually, to the solution of copper, as
 much as will precipitate the whole of the copper ;
 which may be known by the fluid’s becoming
 clear and colourless, though before highly tinged
 with green. Wasn the powder, which will be
 precipitated, in the manner directed for lake, &c.
 and, when it is so well drained of water by means
 of a filter, as to be of a proper consistence, grind
 the whole well together, and lay it out to dry.
INDIGO.
This was formerly almost the only bluc colour used
in painting. It is made in tlie Spanish West-Indics,
by means of putrefaction from certain, plants, and a
coagulation by the air. It cannot (as far as is hither-
to known) be prepared in, these colder climates, on
account of the tender nature of the plants whiich pro¬
duce it. The indigo brought from the French, or
our-own plantations, is foul, and greatly inferior in
brightnefs to that formerly imported hither from
the Spaniards, it being equal to the prussian blue
for fome purpofes ; and there is no other prepar-
ation necessary to using it in painting, except a per-
fect levigation..





SMALT.
Smalt is made from glafs ground to a povyder, and
coloured with zaffer; or prepared from fluxing to
the proportion of glafs, one seventh part of zaffer, or
more or lefs according to the degrec of deepnefs re-
quired. It will not work with either brush or pen-
cil, but by strewing it upon any ground of oil paint
while wet, it makes a bright blue shining surface,
proper for large sun-dials, and other such appli¬
cations. In enamel-painting, and in painting on
glafs, it is of great ufe.
BICE.
At prefent several compositions of indigo and ver-
diter with chalk, and other cheap substances, are
sold in this name; but the true kind is fmalt, redu-
ced to a fine powder by levigation. From its unsuit-
able texture, it is now greatly disused, or it makes a
light warm blue colour, and was formerly used in
oil, but more frequently in water-colours.
LITMUS Or LATMUS.
Water painting is the only kind in which this can
be used, and as it is brought from Holland at a very
chcap rate, it were almost needless to give the pre-
paration. But if any are desirous, sor curiosity, to
know thie process, it is formed from archal, a species
of mofs, brought from the Canary and Cape de Verd
Islands, and prepared as sollows. " Add quick lime
te and putrisied urine, or spirit of urine distilled from




 lime, to the archal, previously bruised by grinding.
 This mixture must be sussered to stand till it ac-
 quire à very bluc colour. After which the sluid
 must be suffered to evaporate, and the remain-
 ing mafs, when it is of the consistence of a paste,
 must be laid on boards to dry in square lumps. '
lf it is used in miniature paintings, care must be
taken of the approach of acid, for that changes it in-
stantly from blue to red ; though it will stand if no
such accident intervene.
CLASS IILE O YELLOW COLOURS.
Kinc’s yellow, when prepared well (which must
be done by mixing sulphur and arsenic by sublima¬
tion) is an extremely bright colour, and a true yel-
low ; but when mixed with white lead, and several
other pigments, its colour flies or changes: this de-
sect, joined to its nauseous smell, and the notion of
its being à strong poison, renders it unpleafing, and
causes it to be rejected by many. Nevertheless, it
may be used on many occasions, with great advan-
tage, not only as a yellow, but by mixing it with
blue pigments, and forming agreen. King’s yellow
is prepared as follows :

 CLASS III. YELLOW.
Common orpiment.
King’s yellow.
Gall stones.
Naples yellow.
Terra di Sienaa unburnt.
Vellow oker.
Turpeth mineral.
Dutch pink.
Yellow berry wafh.
English pink.
Turmeric wash.
Light pink.
Zedoary wasti.
Gamboge.
Tincture of saffron.
Masticot.




Take of arsenic powdered, and flowers of sul-
 phur, in the proportion of twenty of the first to
 one of the second: and having put them into a
 sublimer, sublime them in a sand heat. The ope-
 ration being over, the king’s yellow will be sound
 in the upper part of the glass; which must be
 carefully separated from any caput mortuum, or
 foul parts that may be found in the glafs with it.
 It must be afterwards reduced to an equal powder
by levigation.
NAPLES YELLOW
The neighbourhood of Naples is said to produce
this pigment naturally, of the truth of this we ave
dubious, but certain that it is brought from abroad.
It is a yellow rather inclining to the orange ; seldom
used but in oil painting, where it is generally found
to stand well. It is brighter than other yellows at
present in use, except the king’s yellow; but if it
touch iron along with the least watry moisture,
it will be changed by it, for which reason care should
be taken to employ an ivory spatula, instead of a
pallet knife, during the grinding of it with oil,
which is the only preparation practised on it, as it
does not well bear levigation with water.
YELLOW OKER.
The fubstance of this is a mineral earth, found
in different places, of various degrees of purity-
There is no other preparation necessary but levi-
gation, and freeing it properly from dirt and other
matter. It is a valuable colour ; being a true yel-
loe-



low that will not sly in the least, and its texture
uits it for all kinds of painting. Notwithstanding
its utility it ought to be of low price.
DUTCH PINK.
As this colour will not bear well to be worked in
oil, nor can be depended upon with regard to its
standing, it is used principally for coarser purposes
in water; and is sometimes prepared in the same
manner with starch and white lead : but the follow-
ing preparation is very cheap and easy, and makes
it to perfection :
 Take of French berries one pound, and of tur-
s meric root powdered four ounces ; boil them in a
gallon of water two hours, and then strain off the
 tincture through slannel, and boil it again with an
 ounce of alum till it be evaporated to one quart.
 Prepare in the mean time four pounds of chalk,
 by washing it over, and afterwards drying it,
 and mix the chalk with the tincture, by grinding
 them togetlier; and then lay out the Dutch pink

 thus made to dry on boards.
As it should be a full gold coloured yellow, and
very bright, any adulteration may be discovered by
the cye.
ENGLISH PINK.
Prepare this in the same manner, and with the
same ingredients as the Dutchi, only increasing
the quantity of chalk, to render it of an infe-
rior quality ; it being the same, only lighter and
coarser.





LIGHT PINK.
The only kind fit for use in oil painting is prepared
 Take of French berries one pound, boil them
 with a gallon of water for an hour: and having
 strained off the fluid, add to it two pounds of
 pearl afhes, dissolved and purisied by filtering
 through paper. Precipitate with alum dissolved
 in water, by adding the solution gradu ally, so
 long as any ebullition shall appear to be raised in
 the mixture. When the sediment has thoroughly
 subsided, pour off the water from it, and wassi it
 with several renewed quantities of water, pro-
 ceeding as has been before directed in the case of
 the lake, &c. drain off the remaining sluid in a
 filter with a paper covered with a linen cloth;
 and, lastly, dry it on boards in small square
 pieces.
GAMBOGE.
No yellow is of greater service in water colours ;
easily dissolving to a milky consistence, from the
state in which it arrives. It is a gum produced in
the East Indies, and nothing but the addition of
water is wanting to prepare it for use.
MASTICOT.
As this is not a very bright colour it is little
used ; orit will stand perfectly in oil or in water; it
works with the pencil better than most other pig-
ments,




ments, and certainly might be’made very useful by
putting flake white, or white lead, on an earthen
or stone dissi besore à strong fire ; and continuing it
where till the colour be sufficiently yellow. The
calcination being finished, the parts which are of
the desired teint must be picked out from the rest and
put together. For with the greatest care, it is diffi-
cult to calcine the whole equally. Grinding with
oil is all the further preparation necessary to the
using of it.
COMMON ORPIMENT.
It is generally disagreeable to meddle with this,
on account of its nauseous smell and poisonous qua-
lity ; being a fosile body composed of arsenic and
sulphur, with a mixture frequently of lead, and
sometimes other metals. In its unrefined state it 15
only useful to colour the matted bottoms of chairs,
or other coarse work; and if purified by sublimation
it becomes king’s yelloW
GALL. STONES.
The real kind are found in the gall bladder or
like ducts of beasts; and require nothing more than
rubbing with water (as gamboge) to dissolve them to
a dark warm yellow.- But as these are not al ways
to be procured, a fictitious kind, of equal servicc,
may be made as follows :
 Take a quart of the bile of oxen, as fresh as
 possible. Put it into a proper pewter vessel, and
 set it to boil in a balneo mariæ ; having added to
 it a quarter of an ounce of clear gum arabic.
 Evaporate



 Evaporate the whole to about an eighth; and
 then remove it into a china cup or bason of pro-
 per size, and evaporate it to dryness; collecting
 it into a mass as it becomes of a stiff consistence.
TERRA d SIENNA unburut.
Mention has been made of this pigment being a
native ochrous earth, brought from Italy ; that cal-
cination changes it from ycllow to red--thereforc
those that choose to use it as a yellow, should take
care to have it cxtremely well levigated, and it will
serve as à deeper shade by many degrecs than any
of the other okers, and of a superior brightnefs.
TURPETH MINERAL.
This for use is much such another colour in yel-
low as vermillion in red, and will stand equally
well with that. It is a preparation of mercury,
by calcining it together with oil of vitriol, and is
much brighter than any other yellow used in oil.
except king’s yellow. The preparation :
 Take of pure quicksilver, and oil of vitriol,
 each six pounds. Put them into a retort ; to
 which, being placed in a sand bath, fit on a re-
 ceiver ; and distil them with a strong fire, while
 any fumes appear to rise into the receiver ; urging
 it at last with as great a heat as the furnace will
 bear. When the retort is again cold, remove it
 out of the sand bath; and having broken it, take
 the white mafs, which will be sound at the bot-
 tom of it, and break it to a grofs powder; and
 having put it in a glafs mortar, pour water on it ;
 which will imnicdiately convert it to a yellow
 colour.




 colour. Let it then be thoroughly ground in tiis
 mortar, with water, and afterwards washed with
 several successive quantities. It must then be
 thoroughly well levigated on a stone, and dried. 5
The YELLOW WASEl, from the French berries-
 Take a pound of the French berries, and put 10
 them a gallon of water, with half an ounce of
 alum: boil them an hour in a pewter vessel, and
 then filter off the fluid, through paper if it be
 designed for nicer purposes, or flannel for more
 ordinary. Put them again into the boiler, and
 evaporate the sluid till the colour appear of
 the strength desired; or part may be taken out
 while less strong, and the rest evaporated to a pro¬

 per body.
It may be used in water as a wafhing colour, and
is applicable to many material purposes, as it may
be made of almost any degree of deepnefs.
TURMERIC WASH.
The gum made from the turmeric-root dissolved in
water, serves for the same purposes of the wellow-
berry-wasni-but to procure a bright tincture, it must
be dissolved in spirit of wine instead of water, by the
sollowing method.
 Take two ounces of proof spirit, and add to it
 onc ounce of water. Being put into a proper
 phial, add two drams of turmeric root in powder.
 Shake them well together, and then let them stand
 three or four days, repeating the shaking as often
 as convenient; and à strong tincture will be thus
e: obtained. 
TINCTURE



TINCTURE O SAFFRON,
It makes a good shade for gamboge or other light
bright yellows : by pouring hot water on the best
Englisn saffron in a proper phial or other vessel ;
which should be placed for some time in a heat
next to that which would make water boil; and the
tincture should then be filtered froin the dregs
through a piece of linen cloth.
ZEDOARY WASH.
Take an ounce of zedoary-root, and boil it in a
quart of water till the water appear sufficiently
tinged to a yellow : strain it through linen and it
will be à stronger colour than can be made of turs
meric without spirits of winc, and is valuable for
many purposes in painting with water colours, as
slowers, yellow draperics, &c.
CLASS IV* O GREEN COLOURS.
VERDIGRISE.
Let the pulp of grapes or any such acid remain
upon copper; and the rust sormed by its corrosive
action is verdigrise. It is brought from France and
Italy hither, and makes a blue-green colour in paint ;
but will not stand in oil. It should have a small ad-
mixture of yellow to renderit a true green.
CHRYSTALS

* CLASS IV. GREEN.
Verdigrife.
Pruilian green.
Terra vertc.
Distilled verdigrise, or chrystals
of verdigrise.
Sap green.


THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 73
CHRYSTALS Of VERDIGRISE; called
DISTILLED VERDIGRISE,
 Take of the best verdigrise sour ounccs, and of
 distill’d vinegar two quarts. The verdigrise being
 well pounded, lef them be put into a circulating
 vessel, that may be formed of a mattrafs (which is a
 round bodied glafswith a long straight neck) and a
 Florence slafk; which must have its neck inverted
 into the mattrafs, the thick end being broken off.
 This circulating vessel must be placed in a gentle
 sand-hcat, or other warm situation, where it must
 continue, being frequently shaken, till the vinegar
 has dissolved as much as it can of the verdigrisc.
 Remove tlie verdigrise and vinegar then into a pro¬
 per glafs for decanting the fluid, when it shall be¬
 come clear from the sediment: and when it has
 stood a due time to settle, let it be carefully poured
 off and cvaporated to about half a pint; which is
 best done with a fand heat, in a glafs body or cu-
 curbit, having its neck cut off to form a wide mouth.
 It may be set to shoot in the same vessel, or in a
glafs recciver with a wide neck ; and when the
 chrystals are formed, they must be taken out and
 carefully dried in the shadc.
 A frefh proportion of vinegar may be added to
 the remains of the verdigrise; and at the same
 time the first quantity left undissolved ; and the
 mothers, or fluid remaining after the chrystals
 were formed, may be put into it; by which means,
 the other parts of the procefs being repeated, a
t second quantity of the chrystals may be obtained. i
The chrystals made thus are of a bright green co¬
lour, and if used with varnish so as to stand, have





a fine effect: but they will not hold their colour
very well in oil, being apt to turn black.
SAP GREEN,
Is made of the juice of buckthorn berries, and is
very useful in water painting as a washing colour,
making a strong and pretty deep stain. It is pre-
pared as sollows :
 Take any quantity of buckthorn berries before
 they be ripe, and press out the juice in such a
 press as is used for making cyder or verjuice; or
 by any other method. Strain this juice throughi
 slannel ; and then let it stand to settle ; and when
 it has stood a proper time, decant off the clcarer
 part of the fluid from the sediment. Put this juice
 into à stone or earthen vessel; and evaporate it
 till it begins to grow of a thick consistence; then
 remove it into a pewter vessel, and finish the
 evaporation in a balneo mariæ, collecting the mat¬
t ter into onc mafs as it acquires a proper con¬
 sistence.
PRUSSIAN GREEN,
This colour is much neglected, and seems al most
wholly laid aside, or it has nearly all the uses in its
colour, that the Prussian blue has, only not so
bright; nor will stand so well ; yet it might be of
advantage in many kinds of painting. To make it,
 Proceed in all points, as in the procefs given
for the Prussian blue, till the solution of alum
 and vitriol be mixed with that of the pearl afhes
 and sulphur of the coal, and the green precipitation
 made. Then, instead of adding the spirit of salt,
 omit any further mixture, and go on to wash the
 sediment,




 sedimnent, which is the Prussian green; and after-
 wardds to dry it, in the same manner as is directed
ee for the blue.
TERRA VERTE.
This is supposed to be a native earth, brought
from abroad, of a coarse texture, requires to be
well levigated and washed over ; but no other pre-
paraticon is necessary previous to its use.
CLASS V Of PURPLE COLOURS.
The true INDIAN RED.
Perhaps it may be no easy matter to procure
this ccolour true ; for it is a native ochrous earth,
very tuseful in oil, in its compounded state, as well
for force in its effect as certainty of standing. But
the fictitious kind, now fallaciously called by its
name: has no good property as a purple : in short,
it is varied into a broken orange, and rejected by
most colourmen and painters. The true kind needs
no otther preparation than grinding or washing over.
ARCHAL, Or ORCHAL.
This may be made in a very easy manner by those
who cannot procure it of the manufacturers ; and
is any extreme bright purple sluid, but apt to dry to
a reddish broiyn, and therefore much disused at
present.
 Take an ounce of the archal weed or moss, as
 it is sold at the dry-salters ; and having bruised it
well, put it into a glafs phial with half a pint of




 CLASS V. PURPLE.
True Indian red.
Archal, or orchal.


 weak spirit of sal ammoniacus distilled with lime.
 Stop the phial close, and leave the archal to in¬
fuse till a strong bluish purple tincture be formed. 1
CLASS VI Of BROWN COLOURS.
BROWN PINK.
Among the variéty of methods for preparing this
pigment, the following is one of the best :
 Take of French berries one pound; of fustic
 wood in chips half a pound, and of pearl afhies
 one pound. Boil them in a tin boiler, with a gal¬
 lon and a half of water, for an hour; and then
 strain off the tincture through flannel while the
 fluid is boiling hot. Having prepared, in the
 mean time, a solution of a pound and a half of
 alum, put it gradually to the tincture, so long as
an ebullition shall appear. Proceed then to wash
 the sediment as in the manner directed for the
 lakes; and being brought, by siltering through
 paper with a linen cloth, to a proper consistence,

 dry it on boards in square pieces.
Its goodnefs may be judged of by its transparency,
in every quality but that of standing; which can
only be known on trial.
BISTRE.
This colour is extremely ferviceable in water, if
procured good, which may be done by the following
recipe :
ce Take



S CLASS VI. BROWN.
Terra japonica, or japan earth.
Brown pink.
Bistre.
Umbre.
Brown oker.
Asphaltum.
Spanish juice, or extract ofliquorice.
Cologn, or Collin’s earth.





 Take any quantity of soot of dry wood, but let
 it be of beech wherever that can be procured.
Put it into water in the proportion of two pounds
 to a gallon ; and boil them half an hour. Then,
 after the fluid has stood some little time to settle,
 but while yet hot, pour off the clearer part from
 the earthy sediment at the bottom; and if, on
 standing longer, it form another earthy sediment,
 repeat the same method: but this should be done
 only while the fluid remains hot. Evaporate then
 the fluid to drynefs, and what remains will be good
 bistre, if the soot was of a proper kind. 17
BROWN OKER.
After procuring this substance of fosile earth from
the colourmen, which may be done at a very loiv
price, care should be taken to have it well, levigated
and washed over; when it may be used for a foul
orange colour, and may be depended on for stand-
ing well.

COLOGN, or COLLIN's EARTH.
Where the fore ground of a water painting re-
quires to be pretty strong, the Cologn earth inay be



used to advantage. It requires no preparation,, save.


grinding perfectly sine with water; it being of a
profile substance, and a dark blackish brown colour.
TERRA JAPONICA, or JAPAN EARTH.
A full brown colour is produced from this gummy

-

substance, by dissolving it with water; but it will


not mix well with oil. It is extracted from some

tind of vegetable, and its goodness-may be distin-
guished by the cléarness of its colour.





It has the quality of the other ochrous carthy sub-
stances, joined to that of drying better, whiéh oëca-
sions it to be much used in making drying oils, japan¬
ner’s gold size, and the black oil lacker. In paint-
ing some sew use it with water; but before it is fit
sor that purpose it fhould be burnt, levigated and
washed over.
ASPHALTU M.
There is an additional advantage in this colour,
when used in lieu of brown pink: It is secure from
flying, and retains in drying a transparent browni.
If it can be procured pure as it is found in the earth
in Asia, it is certainly very useful ; but it is a hi-
tuminous matter, of a consistence like tar, and lia-
ble to be adulterated with turpentine and other cheap
balsamic substances; which fraud is not easy to be
detected, unless by the mixture taking off the na-
tive transparent, and dcep brown colour, wlich
the cye may discover.
SPANISH JUICE, OT EXTRACTO LIQUORICE.
The liquorice root is extracted by a decoction in
water, and then evaporated to a well known consist-
ence. In miniature painting it is at this time much
used. It supplies the place of bistre in a great ica-
sure, though it is inferior; but there is no trouble
in procuring, nor process in preparing the liquorice
that is ever wanted in England
CLAS-


THIE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 79
CLASS VIL* O WHITE COLOURS.
WhITE FLakE is brought here srom Italy ; il is
used for oil or varnish painting, where a very clean
white is requiréd ; and is a kind of ceruss or lead
corroded by acid.
There is a great deal sold at the colour fhops ready
prepared ; that is, the true kind levigated, mixed
with starch or some such substance. But it is best to
procure the white flake in a lump, and then levigate
it, and if it is thought proper, add any quantity of
starch in the grinding, that may render it suitable 10
work with.
WHITE LEAD,
ls a corrosion by acid from plates of lead, pre-
pared by those who are concerned in it at a low
price. It is much employed in common purposes of
painting, and may be used in nicer; but will require
washing over, and then it is inserior to flake white.
Notwithstanding its cheapness, it is frequently adail¬
terated by the makers or wholesale dealers, by add-
ing chalk or powdered tale, which may be seen by
comparing a pure piece with a suspected one ; as
the fraud will appear by the difference of the weight.
But to prove it more exactly use the following
means -
 Take an ounce of the white lead suspected ;
 and mix it well with about half an ounce of
 pearl afnes, or of any fixed alkaline salt, and
 about
6
x CLASS VII. W HITE.
Pearl white.
White flake.
Troy white.
White lcad.
Egg-fhell white.
Calcined hartshorn.


 THE ARTIST ASSISTANT.
 about a quarter of an ounce of charcoal dust :
 and having put them into a crucible, give them a
 strong heat. The lead will by this means be re-
 duced to its metallic state : and being weighed,
 will shew by what it may fall fhort of the
 weight of an ounce, the proportion of the adul-
 teration ; about a tenth part being allowed for
 the corroding acid which formed part of the
 white lead. 17
CALCINED, o BURNT HARTSHORN.
 Take horn, or bones, and burn them in any
 common fire till they become a coal, or are cal-
 cined to some degree of whiteness. Then, having
 freed them carefully from any coal or filth, reduce
 them to a grofs powder; and put them upon a
 vessel made in form of a common earthen dish, of
 ground crucibles and Stourbridge clay, and well
 dried; and procure this to be placed in a tobacco-
 pipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, during the time
 they keep their pipes or pots in the fire. The
 earth of the horn or bones being thus thorough-
t ly calcined, it must be very well levigated with
 water; and it will be yct further improved by

 being carefully wafhed over. 
This is a pure white, nor will change by cither
air or time : for the nicest purposes it is much used
in water painting, and will not turn black in the
manner flake white and white lead sometimes will.
It is therefore preferred by the more experienced
painters.
PEARL WHITE,
Is prepared by drying or calcining oyster shells at
a fire, and taking that part of the powder that is
of



of a perfect whiteness, levigating it well on a ftone,
and washing it over. It is serviceable in miniature
painting.
TROY WHITE, or SPANISH WHITE,
May be used in water eolours, srom the follow-
ing preparation :
 Take a pound of ehalk, and soak it well in wa-
 ter. Then wash over all the finc part; and having
 poured off the first water, add another quantity, in
 whieh two ounces of allum is dissolved. Let them
 stand sor a day or two, stirring the chalk once in
 six or eight hours. Wafn then the ehalk again
 over, till it be rendcied perfectly fine; and pour
 off as much of the water as can be separated from
 the chalk by that means, taking off the remainder
 of the dissolved allum, by several rene wed quan-
 tities of sresh water. Aster the last water is pour-
 ed off, put the chalk into one of the cullender
 silters, with a linen cloth over the paper; and
 when the moisture has been suffieiently drained
 off from it, lay it out in lumps to dry on a proper
 board. 
EGG-SHELL WHITE,
Is made of the elcar shell when the inner skin is
peeled off, levigated to powder of a proper finenefs,
and washed over. Itois used by some in water co-
lours, and preferred to slake white.
CLASS VIII. OF BLACK COLOURS.
LAMP BLACK.
There is no other preparation than procuring it
good, from burning oil in a consincd place, and col-




lecting the soot. It mixes well either with oil or
water, and is esteemed as the principal black in all
nicer kinds of painting.
IVORY BLACK.
 Take plates, chips, or shavings of ivory; and
 soak them in hot linseed oil ; or, if filings are to
 be more casily procured, they may be used moisten-
 ed with the hot oil. Put thein into a vessel which
 will bear the fire ; covering them with a fort of
 lid made of clay and sand ; which should be dried,
 and the cracks repaired besore the vessel be put into
 the fire. Procure this vessel to be placed in a to-
 bacco-pipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, or any
 other such fire ; and let it remain there during one
  their lieats. When it shall be taken out, the
 ivory will be burnt propetly; and must be after-
 wards thoroughly well levigated on the stonc with
 water; or it fhould, indeed, to have it perfectly
 good, be also wafhed over. ’
It is not so much used as lamnp black, owing, per-
haps, to its drying slowly in oil, or to the frequent
adulterations with charcoal dust, which renders it
of a blue cast; otherwise it is, if genuinely pre-
pared from the ivory, a full clear black, and ex-
tremely serviceable.
INDIAN INK.
The true Indian ink is imported from China, and
is of a consistence, when dissolved with water, cx-
tremely well adapted to the pencil. It is much
used in miniature painting, and drawings of small
kinds. There is a fort frequently sold for it made as
follows :




 Takke of isinglass six ounces; reduce it to a
size, bby dissolving it over the fire in double its
weighht of water. Take then of Spanish liquorice
one oounce : and dissolve it also in double its
weigh ht of water; and grind up with it an ounce
of ivoory black, prepared as above directed in
p. 82. Add this mixture to the size while hot ;
and stir the whole together till all the ingredients
be thoroughly incorporated. Then evaporate away
the water in a balnco mariae, and cast the remain-
 ing ccomposition into leaded moulds greafed ; or
 make :it up in any other form.
The preceding are the chief of the substances
here will be occasion to mention in drawing and
painting ; but crayon and enamel colours will be
created tof in their places.

Of PAINTING.
PAINTING is the art of representing on a flat
supierficies, by the duct of draught, and the de-
grees of colours, all forts of visible objects.
This definition contains three things, viz. the
draught, the colours, and the composition; and
thougl this last part does not appear expressed in a
very clear manner in this definition, it can, not-
withstanding, be understood by these last words,
visible objects, containing the matter of the subjects,
which the painter proposes to represent.
The composition contains two things, viz. the
invent ion and the disposition. By the invention, a
painter inust siud and intoduce into his subject, the





objects which he judges most proper to express anc
adorn it. And by the disposition, he must place
them in a manner, the most advantageous to draw
a grand effect from them, and to please the eve in
shewing beautiful parts.
For the draught.- A painter must do it correctly,
with a good taste, well diversified, sometimes heroic.
and sometimes rural, according to the character of
the figures he wants to introduce.
The attitudes are to be natural, expreslive, va-
ried in their actions, and contrasted in their mem¬
bers : They ought to be simple or noble, animated
or moderated according to the fubject of the picture,
and the discretion of the painter.
Attitude, in painting, is the posture or gesture
of a figure, or the disposition of its parts, by which
we discover the action it is engaged in, and the very
sentiment supposed to be in the mind of the person
repre sented.
The expressions must be just to the subject; the
principal figures having noble and sublime oncs,
and keeping a medium between the exaggerated and
insipid.
Expression in painting, denotes a natural and
lively representation of the subject, or of the seve-
ral objects intended to be shewn. The term expref-
sion is ordinarily confounded with that of paffion ;
but they differ in this, that exprefsion is a general
term, implying a representation of an object, agree-
able to its nature and character, and the use or
office it is to have in the work ; whereas paffion
in painting denotes a motion in the body, accom¬
panied with certain dispositions, or airs in the face,
which mark an agitation in the soul ; so that every
passion



passion is an exprefsion, but not every cxpreffion
a passion.
The extremities, l mean the head, feet, and hands,
must be worked with more precision and exactness
than all the rest, and must concur together, to ren-
der the actton of the figures more expressive.
The draperies must be well ordered, the folds or
plaits thereof large, in small number as much as
possible, and well contrasted ; the stuffs thick or
light, &c. according to the quality and convenieney
of figures.
Drapery in painting,-is the reprefentation of the
garments, or cloathing of human figures.
Animals must be principally characterized by an
ingenious and special touch.
A landskape ought not to be cut by too many ob-
jects ; they should be few, but well chosen; and in
case a great quantity of objects be introduced in it,
they must be ingeniously grouped with lights and
shadows; the sight well bound and free ; the trees
different in form, colour and touch, as much as
prudence and the variety of nature require it. That
touch should be always light; the fore parts of the
landskape rich, cither by the objects, or by a greater
exactness of work, which render the things true
and palpable: the sky is to be light, and no object
on the ground ought to dispute with its æthereal
character, except smooth waters, and polished bo-
dies, which arc susceptible of all colours opposed
to them ; of celestial, as well as terrestrial ones :
the clouds must be well chosen, well touched, and
well placed.
Group in painting, is an asfemblage or knot of two
or more figures of men, beasts, fruits, or the like,
which



which have some apparent relation to cach other
In a good painting, it is necessary that all the figures
be divided into two or three groops, or separate col-
lections. Such and such a thing make a group, with
such and fuch other of different nature and kind.
The antique Laomedon is a fine group, ofthree beau¬
tiful figures.
The perspective must be regular, and not of simple
practice, very little exact.
In the coloris, which includes two things, the local
colour, and the clair-obscure.
The local colour is nothing else but that, which is
natural to each object, in what place soever it be
found.
The clair-obscure, is the art of distributing advan¬
tageously the lights and shadows, as well on the par-
ticular objects, as in the whole of the picture : on the
particular objecis, to give them a convenient relievo
and roundness : and in the whole of the picture, that
the objects may be seen in it with pleafure ; by giving
occasion to the sight to rest itself from space to space,
by an ingenious distribution of grand clairs, and
large shadows, which afford one another mutual suc-
cours, by their oppositions ; so that the great clairs
are rests for the great shadows ; as the great shadows
will be rests for the great clairs.
In the description of colours there must be an ac-
cord, which may producc the same effect sor the eyes,
as music does sor the ears.
If there be several groups of clair-obscure, in a
picture, one of them must be more sensible than the
rest, so that there may be unity of object, as in the
composition there is unity of subject.
As to the pencil, it must be bold, and light, if pos¬
sible; but whether it appears smooth, like that of Cor-
regio,



egio, or uneven and rough, like that of Rembrant,
t should be al ways fost.
As to licences, if onc is forced to take any, they
nust be imperceptible, judicious, advantageous, and
uthorifed ; the three first are for the art of the
ainter, and the last regards history.
The invention, which is an essential parf of the
rt, consists only in finding the objects which must
nter the, picture, according to tlie imagination of
he painter, false or true, fabulous or historical.
As to the composition- Some have consounded
he first part of painting with the genius, others
vith a fertility of thoughts; and others with the
lisposition of objects; but all those things are dif-
erent from one another. I thought that to give a
lear idca of the first part of painting, I should
all it composition, and divide it into two, viz.
nvention and disposition. The invention finds only
he objects of the painting; and the disposition
laces them.
The invention is formed by reading in the fubjects
xtracted from history or the fable. It is a pure
ffect of the imagination in metaphorical sulyjects ;
t contributes to the fidelity of the history, as to the
learness of the allegories ; and in what manner
oever it is ufed, it must never keep the mind of
he spectator in fuspence by any obscurity.
As to the design, which I consider as the second
art of painting.
The qualities or conditions required in a design
are correctness, good taste, elegance, character, di-
versity, expression, and perspective.
Correctness depends principally on the justness
of the proportions, and à knowledge of anatomy-
Taste,



Taste, is an idea or manner of designing, which
arises either srom the complexion and natural dis-
position, or from education, one’s master, studies,
&c. Elegance gives the figure a kind of delicacy,
which strikes people of judgment, and a certain
agrecableness which pleases every body. The cha-
racter is what is peculiar to cach thing, in which
there must be a diversity ; in as much as every
thing has its particular character to distinguish it.
The expression is, as already observed, the repre-
sentation of an object according to its character,
and the several circumstances it is supposed to be in.
The perspective is the representation of the parts of
a painting or figure, according to the situation they
are in, with respect to the point of sight.
The principal rulcs that regard the design are;
that novices accustom themselves to copy good origi-
nals at first sight; not to use squares in drawing, for
fear of stinting and confining their judgment ; to
they begin the practice of perspective rules ; in de-
signing aster the life, to learn to adjust the bignefs
of their sigures to the visual angle, and the distance
of the eye from the model or object; to mark it at
all the parts of their design, before they begin to
shiadow ; to make their contours in great pieces,
without taking notice of the little inuscles and other
breaks ; to make themselves masters of the rules of
perspective; to observe every stroke as to its perpen-
dicular, parallel, and distance ; and particularly so to
compare. and oppose the parts that meet upon, and
traverse the perpendicular, as to form a kind of
square in the mind ; which is the great, and al-
most the only rule of designing justly; to have a
regard


THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 89
regard not only to the model, but also to the part
already designed; there being no such a thing as de-
signing with strict justness, but by comparing and
proportioning every part to the first, &c.
As to attitudes. In them the ponderation and
contrast are founded in nature. It performs no ac-
tion without shewing those two parts; and was it
to fail in it; it would be cither deprived of motion,
or constrained in its action.
As to expreffions--They are the touch-stone of
the judgment of the painter: he shews by the just-
ness wherewith he distributes them, his penetra-
tion and discernment.
As to the extremities, viz. the head, feet and
hands, must be more finished than any other things.
As to draperies--It is said in painting, to throw
a drapery, or give a drapery, instead of cloathing
a figure. Draperies are not to be set in form, as our
cloaths are ; but the plaits must be found as by
chance round the members, that they may make
them appear such as they are; and by an indus-
trious artifice, contrast them in shewing them, and
caress them, by their tender sinuosities and softness.
As to the landskape.—This kind of painting con¬
tains an abridgment of all the others; the painter
who practises it, must have an universal knowledge
of the parts of his art, if not in so great à detail as
those who commonly paint history, at least specu-
latively, and in general. And if he does not finish
all the objects in particular, which compose his
piece, or accompany his landfkape, he is obliged
at least, to exprefs in a lively manner, the taste and
character thereof ; and to give the much more spirit
to his works, that it is less finished.





Let a landfkape be ever so well finished, if the
comparison of the objects does not render them va-
luable, and preserve their characters, if the sites
be not well chosen, or are not supplied by a fine
intelligence of the clair-obscure, if the touches be
not judicious, if the places be not animated by
figures, animals, or other objects, which are most
commonly in motion, and if the truth and variety
of nature be not joined to the good taste of the
colour, and to the extraordinary sensations, the paint-
ing will never gain a reputation among connoisseurs.
As to perspective.- Some authors have imagined
that perspective and painting were the same thing,
because there was no painting without perspective.
Though the proposition is false, absolutely speaking,
since the body, which cannot be without shadow,
is not, notwithstanding, the same thing with the
shadow ; but however it is true, in that sense,
that a painter cannot do without perspective, and
that he does not draw alike, nor give à stroke of his
pencil, without perspective having some part in it,
at least habitually.
The colouring in its general sense, takes in what-
ever relates to the nature and union of colours ;
their agreement, or antipathy ; how to use them to
advantage in light and shadow, so as to shew a
relievo in the figures, and a sinking of the ground ;
what relates to the æriel perspective, i. e. the dimi¬
nution of colours by. means of the interposition of
air ; the various accidents and circumstances of the
luminary and the medium; the different lights, both
of the bodies illuminating, and illuminated; their
reflections, shadows, different views, with regard
either to the position of the eye, or the object ;
what



what produces strength, boldnefs, sweetness, &c. in
paintings well coloured : the various manners of
colouring both in figures, landfkapes, &c.
As to the pencil-Here the word pencil signifies
only the manner of using it in the application of
colours ; and when those fame colours have not
been too much agitated, and as it is faid too much
tormented by the motion of a heavy hand; but, on
the contrary, the motion appears free, quick, and
light, it is said that the work is of a good peneil.
But that free pencil is of but little signification, un-
lefs it be guided by the head, and shew that the
the painter is master of his art. In a word, a fine
pencil is to painting what music is to a fine voice ;
since both are esteemed in proportion of the grand
effect, and harmony which-accompany them.
The next thing our pupil painter is to provide
himself with, is colours; for which he has in-
structions fufficient to guide his choice in a proper
selection-His next care is pencils, brushes, &c. to
apply them.
There are pencils of various kinds, and more of
various matters ; the most useful are made of badgers
and squirrels hair, thofe of swans down, and those
of boars bristles; which last are bound on to a stick,
bigger or less, according to the uses they are destined
for; and when large are called brushes. The others
are inclosed in the barrel of a quill.
Besides pencils, we must have a pallat, which is
a little oval table, or picce of wood or ivory, very
thin and smoothi ; on and round which the painters
place the feveral colours they have occasion for,
ready for the pencil. The middle serves to mix the
colours on, and to make the teints required in the




work. It has no handle, but in lieu thereof, a hole
at one end, to put the thumb through to hold it.
With regard to the materials in painting, the
matter whereon they are applied, and the manner
of applying them, is of various kinds, lience came
painting in fresco ; painting in oil ; painting in
water colours, or limning ; painting in miniature ;
painting in enamel ; and painting on glass.
Fresco is a kind of painting performed on a freshi
plaister, or on a wall laid with mortar, not yet dry,
and with water colours.
The colours used, are white made of lime slaked
long ago, and white marble dust; oker, both red
and yellow, violet red, verditer, lapis lazuli, smalt,
black earth, &c. all which are only ground and
worked up with water; and most of them grow
brighter and brighter, as the fresco dries.
This fort of painting is chiefly performed on
walls and vaults, newly plaistered with lime and
sand: but the plaister is only to be laid in propor¬
tion as the painting goes on ; no more being to be
done at once than the painter can dispatch in a day,
while it is dry.
Before he begins to paint, a cartoon or design
is usually made on paper, to be chalked and trans¬
ferred to the wall, about half an hour after the
plaister is applied.
Painting in oil is performed on walls, on wood,
canvas, stones, and all sorts of metals.
To paint on a wall.When well dry, you must
give it two or three washes with boiling oil, till the
plaister remains quite greasy and will imbibe no
more. Over this are applied desiccative or drying
colours, viz. white chalk, red oker, or other chalks
beaten




beaten pretty stiff. This layer being well dried,
you will sketch and design your subject; and at last
paint it over: mixing a little varnish with your
colours, to save the varnishing afterwards.
Others, to fortify their wall better against mois-
ture, cover it with a plaister of lime, marblé dust,
or a cement made of beaten tiles soaked with lin¬
seed oil ; and at last prepare a composition of Greek
pitch, mastich, and thick varnish, boiled together,
which they apply hot over the former plaister;
when dry, the colours are applied as before.
To paint on wood-They usually give their
ground a layer of white, tempered with size; or
they apply the oil abovementioned. The rest as in
painting on walls.
To paint on cloth or canvas-The canvas being
stretched on a frame, you must give it a layer of
size, or paste water. When dry you shall go over
with a pumice storie, to smooth off the knots.
When the cloth is dry, a lay of oker must be laid
on, sometimes mixing with it a little white lead to
make it dry the sooner. When dry you will go again
over it with the pumice stone, to make it fmooth.
After this, a second layer, composed of white
lead, and a little charcoal black is sometimes added,
to render the ground of an afh colour; observing
in each manner to lay on as little colour as possible.
As little oil is to be used as possible, if it be de-
sired to have the colours keep frefh ; for this reafon
some mix them with oil of aspic, which evaporates
immediately, yet serves to make them manageable
with the pencil.
As to oils, the best are those of walnuts, linseed,
aspic, and turpentine. The desiccative or drying




oils, are à nut oil boiled with litharge and sandarach ;
others with spirit of wine; mastich, and gumlacca.
The next operation is to draw the design on the
canvas ; and afterwards to prime the work, whicha
is done by laying a lay of white all over it, except
on the lincs of the draught, which must be kept
visible. Then if the picture be a history piecc, or
a portrait, the painter begins by the face or faces ;
which, together with all the other naked parts to be
pronounced in the picture, are called carnations.
The carnations are made with white and carmine ;
and brown, blue and yellow for the shadows ; ac-
cording to the complexion the painter designs to
give to the figure or figures he is to represent.
The application of colours in painting, is con¬
sidered either with regard to the kinds of painting,
in works of various colours, or in those of one
single colour.
First, in the larger picces, the colours are rather
laid on full, so as they may be impressed or incor-
porated together, which make them hold the more
firmly.
Or else the more agrecable ones, which dry too
hard and too hastily, are mixed with a little colour,
and the clearest of the oil. But in both cases, the
colours are to be laid on strong at first ; it being eafy
to weaken those which are to be thrust back, and to
heighten the others; the touches to be bold, by the
conduct of a free and steady pencil ; that the work
may appear the most finished at a proper distance,
and the figures animated with life and spirit.
For glazed colours, care must be taken, that the
under colour be painted strong, and that it be a
body colour, and laid smooth.





In finished works, which are to be viewed near
at hand, the process is either by applying each co-
lour in its place ; preserving their purity, without
fretting or tormenting them, but sweetly sostening
off the extremities; or by filling up all the great
parts with one single colour; and laying the other
colours which are to form the litile things upon it,
which is the more expeditious way, but more apt
to decay.
For the second ; the kinds of pictures in one co-
lour are two, viz. camieux, where the degradations
of colours of objects afar off, are usually managed
by lights, or with crayons, and bafs relievo, which
is an imitation of sculpture, of whatsoever matter and
colour; in both these the colours are wrought dry.
For the oconomy, and dispensing of colours in
paintings, regard is either to be had, first, to tle
qualities of the colours, to appropriate them ac-
cording to their value and agreement ; or, secondly,
to their effect, in the union and oconomy of the
work,
For the qualities, ’it must be observed, that white
represents light, and gives the brifkness and height-
ening ; black, on the contrary, like darkneis, ob-
the light parts, and by that they serve each other
to loosen the objects. A proper choice to be- made
of colours ; and the too much charged manner to
be avoided; both in carnations, where red colours
are not to be affected, or rather resembling thè
flesn when flead from the fkin, how delicate foever,
being always of a bloom colour. In the drapery,
where the painter has his whole stock of colours to
choose out of to procure a good cffect; and in the
landskape,



landfkape, to dispose those colours near one another,
which mutually asfist and raise each others force
and brifkness; as red and green, yellow and blue.
To manage them so, as that they may be accom-
modated to the effects of the great parts of light
and colours ; that the strong colours lead to the soft
ones, and make them more looked at, bringing them
forwards, or keeping them back, according to the
situation and the degree of force required.
For the effects of colours, they either regard the
union, or the oconomy ; with respect to the first,
care must be taken that they be laid so as to be
sweetly united under the briskness of some prin-
cipal one ; that they. participate of the prevailing
light of this piece, and that they partake of each
other by the communication of light, and the help
of reslection.
For the oconomy in managing their degrees, re-
gard is to be had to the contrast, or the opposition
intervening in the union of thie colours, that, by a
sweet interruption, the brifkness, which otherwise
fades and palls, may be raised ; to the harmony,
which makes the variety of colours agree, supply-
ing and sustaining, the weakness of some by the
strength of others, neglecting some places on pur-
pose to ferve as a basis or repose to the sight, and to
inhance those which are to prevail through the
piece : to the degredation, where the better to pro-
portion the colours that fall behind, some of the
same kind are to be preserved in their purity, as a
standard, for those carried afar off to be compared
by, in order to justify the diminution : regard being
always had to the quality of the air, which, when
loaded with vapours, weakens the colours more
than




than when clear : to the situation of the colours,
where care must be taken, that tlie purest and the
strongest be placed before, or in the front of the
piece ; and that by their force, the compound ones,
which are to appear at a distance, be kept back,
particularly the glazed colours to be used in the
first rank. Lastly, to tlie expreffion of the subject,
and the nature of the matters, or stuffs, whether
shining or dull, opake or ’transparent, polished or
rough.
The different colours, which you are to employ
in your picture are to be mixed as follows : For a
violet colour, take indigo, white lead and lake ;
mix them all well together; and the more or less of
each quantity will make it deeper or lighter. A
lead colour is made of white and indigo, well mixed
together. A scarlet of lake, red lead, and a little
vermillion’; though, in fine paintings, l would pre-
fer carmine, with a very small quantity of ultra-
marine, and a still sialler one of fine ceruss. A
light green of pink and smalt. A middle and light
green, of verdigrise and pink ; a deep and sad green,
indigo and pink. A purple colour of Spanish brown,
indigo and white well mixed. A murrey colour of-
white and lake. A flame colour of red lead and
masticot, heightened with whitc. But these gene-
ral rules are not to captivate the imagination of a
painter, no more than the following ones ; for a
good painter who has a good natural genius for his
art, and takes pleasure in the practice thereos, makes
often new discoveries to render his draperies moré
beautiful ; as for carnations they are always made
of tho same mixture of colours ; the whole secret
consisting in the judicious application thereof.





After a painter has transferred his draught on his
canvas, and has primed it, he begins his piece,
first, by drawing the eyes or nose (having while he
works, his right hand supported with a moll-stick
or stay, made of heavy wood, not subject to bend,-
about a yard long, havingat the end, which leans
against the picture, a ball of ravelled cotton, with,
a leather over it, the other end held with the left-
hand) making the white thereof with white lcad,
with a little charcoal black. This sinished, he leaves:
from the eye (in a face full front) the distance of an
eye, then draws the proportion of the nose; after-
wards makes the mouth, cars, &c. This done, he
lays his carnation or flesh colour over the face,
casting in, here and there fome shadows, which he
works in by degrees with the flesh colour; which
slesh colour is commonly compounded of white lead,
lake and vermillion or carmine, this last being best.
There is no fixed rule sor heightening or deepening
this colour; for it is left to the discretion and judg-
ment of the painter; who must consult in this his
own imagination, with regard to the age, country,
&c. of the person, whose face he endeavours to re-
present. Then he shadows the face over as he sees.
cause, and finifhes the nose, compassing the tip of
it, with some dark, or light reddish shadows; which
shadows, for the face, are commonly compounded.
ofivory black, :white lead,, vermillion, lake, fca-
coal black, &c. The cheeks and lips are fhadowed
with. vermillion or carmine, and lake mixed toge-
ther; and the mouth stroke is made with lake only.
As to the circles of the eyes; for grey eyes they
are made of charcoal black and white lead, height-
ened and deepened at pleasure : the black circle of
the




the eye is made of umber, scacoal black and a little
white mixed together: the round ball in the eye
of lamp black and verdigrise, since the lamp black
will hardly dry without it. The same colours used
in painting and shadowing the face, are used in
painting the hands, and shadowing them between
the fingers. When a painter wants to make a flesh
colour of a swarthy complexion, he mixes white
le ad, lake, and yellow oker together, and shadows
it with a mixture of umber and seacoal black.
For black hairs he uses lamp black only, and
when he will have them brighter, mixes it with a
little umber, white and red lead; putting in more
umber if he wants them browner, and more white
lead, if whiter; but if quite dark, he adds à little
seacoal black. Yellow hairs are made of a mixture
of masticot, umber, yellow oker, and a little red
lead; increasing the quantity of umber and red lead,
if they be wanted redder. For white hairs he takes
an equal quantity of ivory black, and of umber,
viz. half of each, and tempers them well upon his
pallat with white lead, taking more or less of those
three colours, according as the hairs are to be height-
ened or deepened.
The teeth are made of white lead, and shadowed
with charcoal black.
As to the different stuffs the figures are to be
cloathed with, it must be left entirely to the ima¬
gination and judgment of the painter.
The several colours used in painting, are also
called teints, and semi-teints ; considering the co¬
lours as more or less high, or bright, or deep, or
thin, or weakened and diminished, &c. to give
the proper relievo, or softriefs, for distance, &c.





to the several objects; and the lessening and render-
ing dim and confused-.the appcarance of different
objects in a landskape, fo as they shall appear there
as they would do to an eye placed at that distance
from them, is called, in painting, degradation.
As to painting in water colours, called limning,
in contra-distinction of painting properly so called,
which is done in oil colours, the usual colours are
proper enough excepting the white, made of lime,
which is only used in fresco. But the azure, or ul¬
tramarine, must always be mixed up with size, or
with guin; in regard to yolks of eggs, they give bluc
colours a greenish tincture ; but there are always ap-
plied two lays of hot size, before the colours mixed
even with size, are laid on :. the composition made
with eggs and the juice of the fig tree, being only
used for touching up, and finishing, and to prevent
the necessity of having the fire always at hand to
keep the size hot ; yet it is certain, that the size
colours hold the best, and are accordingly always
used in cartoons, &c.This size is made of shreds
of thin leather, or of parchment.
To limn on linen, the best is that which is old,
half worn and close.This is stamped with white
lead, or a fine plaister beaten up with size, which,
once dry, we must go over it with a layer of the
same size.
The colours are all ground in water, each by it-
self; and in proportion as they are required in
working, are diluted with their size water-lf the
yolks of eggs are desired, they must be diluted with
water made of equal quantity of common water
and vinegar, with the yolk, white, and shell of an
egg, and the end of the little branches of a fig



THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 
trec cut small, all well beaten together in an earthen
pan.
Painting in miniature is a delicate kind of paint-
ing, consisting of litile points or dots instcad of
lines, usually donc on vellum, with very thin sim¬
ple water colours.
Tlie colours for miniature may be mixed up with
water of guin-arabic, or gum-tragacanth.
The operation is usu ally made on vellum, on which
the design is drawn, with carmine, or somc other
colour, which may render the lines discernable.
The draught is filled afterwards, with a very thin
and smooth lay of white, yet some choose to paint
on the naked vellum without any lay; and in my
opinion it contributes much towards incorporating
well the colours, that the dots may not appear so
visible, and so coarse, as they do-without it. When
the lay is dry, the painter searches with his pencil
all the lines of the draught, lest some of tlaem should
be either much weakened, or entirely obliterated
by the lay of white ; then he begins, as in all other
paintings, by the face, dipping first the point of
his pencil in water, and rubbing it afterwards on
the colour he designs to employ ; when thus rubbed,
he makes the point thereof with the tip of his lips,
and then applies it on the vellum, repeating the
famc process every time he wants colours, and hav¬
ing different pencils for the different colours. He
has also before him a shell with gum water, in case
he wants to dip his pencil in it, as it often happens.
Painting in mosaic is an asfemblage of little pieces
of glass, marble, shells, precious stones, woods, or
the like of various colours cut square, and cement-
ed on a ground of slucco, imitating the natural eo-
lours and degradations of painting
DIRECTIONS



DIRECTIONS fer colouring of FLOWERS
and painting upon SILK.
PLOWER-PAINTING with water colours is an
art in which nature affords an infinite variety
of unrivalled examples, yet may be easily imitated ;

being possessed of the colours herein described, a
and well attending to the rules laid down. First
of colours : they are of two forts, transparent and
body colours; of all which the preferable hue will
determine your choice in purchasing.
All the teints necessary for flower-painting are
contained in, or may be combined from the above
list; for instance, sap green will receive various hues
by adding Prussian blue or gumboage, and so of the
rest; and those not of themselves gummy, which
sap green, Indian ink, gumboage, and logwood pur-
ple

Ditto, bedy colour.
 Names.
Transparent.
Flake white, or well-wash-
White. Poland stareh.
ed whiting.
Ivory black, which must be
Biack. Indian ink.
mixed sirst with brandy.
Lake, vermillion and red
Carmine.
Red.
lcad.
Verditer and blue bice.
Uitramarine, indigo, and
Eluc.
Prussian blue.
Verditer and Dutch pilik.
Green. Saagreen, or gumboage and
Prussian blue.
Yellow.
Naples yellow, Dutch or
Gumboage.
English pink.
Orange.
Vermillion and Dutch pink.
Carmine and gumboage.
Brown.
Umbre,
Bistre or gallstone.
Lake and verditer, or rose
Parple.
Carmine and Prussian blue,
pink and bice.
or tincture of legwood.



le are, imust be mixed with a solution of clear gum¬
arabic in water, the true strength of which vou will
now by the colour when dry ;, if it rubs off with
the finger, it is too weak ; and if it cracks or scales
off vit is too strong. The colours when first mixed
with gum water will not work so free, as if dried and
round afresh with common water. Be caresul to
spread each colour smooth, in order to which, let
your pencil be as large as tlie subject will admit :
in transparent colours lay on the pale first, to which
five depth by four or sive sat most) gradations ;
oftening the harsh distinctions of teints by taking
off the edge with a clean pencil dipt in water.
With body colours your work will look more pic-
turesque by laying on first the middle teint ; but witli
these, and the transparent too, let each colour dry
before you apply another. lf your colour or pa-
er seem greasy, add a drop or two of gall, and
at will readily adhere. Clean your pencils always,
s they will spoil by being left in the colour or
water

INSTRUCTIONS for COLOURING.
COLUMBINE.
HIS flower admits of a great variety and display
in the drawing; some are blue, others purple,
thers again are striped, crimson on white or straw
coloured grounds. The green is the common green,
begun with sap green, and finished with a mixture
of gumboage and indigo ; making some parts with
guimboage, a little carmine and green, as fading,
which



which makes a pleasing appearance in picture- though
not in nature
BALSAM.
The balsam is varied with white and red stripes,
sometimes all red, to be painted as the other flowers
so variegated. The leaves are a pleafant green,
and the stalk of a fine red, and very smooth and
transparent.
SWEET SCENTED PEA.
This beautisul blossom is thus variegated; the
two outer petals are a purplish crimson, the two
inner are a dcep bluc, a little inelining to the pur-
ple, the most inner part is white, just tinged with
purple. The purplish crimson to be begun with
deep carmine, and finished with purple, adding in¬
digo for the deepest shade. The blue which in-
clines to purple, begin with Prussian blue, and as
the shades grow stronger, adding carmine and in-
green.
JASMIN E.
Our common jasmines are a fnowy white, which,
whén properly composed, by throwing the flower
artfully on the green leaves, have a very light and
pleasing appcaraiice. But the jasminc we have here
chosen from nature, is the large Catalonian jasmine,
being the most conspicuous in shape and varied in
colour the outside being a pleafant crimson, in¬
clining to a purple, and the inside a pure white.
The. leaves of both are deepisn green. There is
also a yellow jasmine, with leaves broader and a
of a shiining green.
HYACINTH



HYACINTH.
Hyacinths arc blue, or white; others are white,
with a faint tinge of crimson. The blue oncs are
begun with bice, shadowing with Prussian bluc, and
finissiing with indigo. The light parts may be
worked at discretion, either leaving the paper, by
ncatly shading with bice, or by laying it all over
and heightening with white. The white hyacinths
may be coloured in the same manner as the white
lilv. For those with a blusn of crimson, a faint
tinge of carmine must be tenderly wafhed over, and
sinishing as directed for the white ones. If ultra-
marine is used instead of bice, it will make the
work appear more delicate. The stalk and lcaves
are a blueissi green, done with the same mixture as
the lily.
AURICUL A.
This beautiful flower is by the gardeners art so
varied, that a particular description of its varieties
would be endless. A much esteemed fort is to be
coloured thus: begin with a pale lay of gumboage,
shadowing it with bistre, leaving a broad space
round the centre white ; which part is to be sha-
dowed with Indian ink, mixed with sap green :
then that part which is begun with gumboage is to
be variegated with a purplisn red, made by a mix-
ture of carmine and Prussian blue. The hollow in
the centre must be à strong yellow, shadowed with
gumboage and carmine, mixed together. This done,
it is to be neatly dotted with white, mostly on the
centre; mixing Indian ink proportionably with the
white, as the flower becomes dark. The stalk and
leaves are a greyisn green, to be painted with a mix¬
ture



ture of sap green, white and indigo, adding more
indigo for the shades.
A NEMON E.
Of these flowers, especially the double ones, there
is such a variety, and the colours on them so diver-
sisied, that we can only mention the richest forts,
and leave the practitioner to the study of nature,
that inexhaustible fund of improvement. The large
petals are white, striped or clouded with carmirie.
The small petals are done with pale straw colour,
shaded with neat lines of carmine, or green, made
with indigo and gumboage according to fancy. The
stalk is brown, by a mixture of carmine and sap
green, shaded with indigo and carmine. The leaves
sap green, and finished with gumboage and indigo.
DOUBLE JONQUIL.
This flower is a fine yellow ; to be done with
gumboage and shadowed with carmine and gumboage
mixed together, and the darkest parts with bistre
and a little carmine. The stalks and leaves are a
blueish green, made with Prussian blue and sap green;
adding indigo in the darkest parts. The upper part
of the stalk is browii.
TULIP.
This flower is not at all inferior to the carnation,
as to variety, though somewhat different in dispo-
sition of colour, the tulip being generally orna-
mented with stripes of various colours, crimsons
and purples, upon either a white, yellow, or straw
colour ground, are the most common. For the mix-
tures and shading which colours, any student, by
recollecting



recollecting the preceding directions, will be en-
abled properly to colour this flower. The lcaves
and stalk inay be done in the same manner of those
of the carnation.
ROSE.
The rose is, and very justly, the favourite of the
painters ; seldom left out in any composition, where
it can be admitted. Esteemed for its natural ten¬
derness of colour, and boldness of shape, it furnishes
matter for the most masterly pencil. Our common
method of colouring this flower, is to begin with
a lay of thin carmine; and to shadow it, by using
the carmine in degrees thicker, and consequently
darker. This manner, by its gay appearance at
first, courts the eye, but is evidently erroneous ;
for, notwithstanding the finest colours we can use
are but dirt, when compared with the natural gaity
of the teints on flowers, yet the colouring the rose
with carmine only, gives it à disagrecable and un-
natural glare : to prevent which it is here recom¬
mended, after the sirst or lightest carmine is laid on,
soften it with a faint wasn of Prussian blues then
proceed with pure carmine; and to give power to
the darkest parts of the slower and roundness to
its appcarance, add a little indigo. If one is re-
presented so much blown as to shew the buttons in
the middle, they are first to be laid with gumboage,
and shadowed with gumboage and carmine mixed
together. The stalks are brownish, done with sap
green, and a little carmine; adding indigo for the
shades, on the dark side. The upper sides of the
leaves are done with sap green, shadowed with
gumboage and indigo mixed together, to make a





dark green. Tlie backs, or under sides, are à dullisn
green made of white, indigo and a little sap green.
It is not pleasing in naturc, but to make some of
the leaves a ycllowish brown, as if witbering, gives
a natural and pleasant air in painting; which is to
be done with a mixture of gumboage; sap green,
and carmine.
The STRIPED Or MUNDI-ROSE.
This species of the rose is thus varicgated; the
ground colour is so pale a crimson as to be almost
white, which is to be begun with a lay of carmine,
so thin as only just to tinge the paper. The striping
with carmine, deep according to fancy, even as
strong as in some tulips; finishing the striped part
with the shades usual for crimsons. The pale part must
be finished according to the rules for white flowers ;
only adding a little carmine, so as to make it a faint
blush. For the leaves and stalk, the directions given
sor the foregoing rose are sufficient.
RANUN CUL A.
Ranunclas are varioussy coloured ; some are white.
edged or coloured with crimson; others straw co-
lour, or yellow, striped with scarlet, which may
be executed according to the directions given for
other slowers of the same colour, a repetition of the
mixture of the colours being needlefs. The leaves
are done with sap green, shadowing with indigo and
gumboage ; taking the liberty of making some leaves
yellowish or brown, whieh makes a pleasing variety
in the work. The stalk is to be made brown, by a
mixture of carmine and sap green.





There is such an infinite variety of carnations,
that a particular description of them would be end-
less, being composed of the following colours ; white,
crimson, scarlet and purple ; and those colours so
diversified that the student may take the liberty of
his fancy, without danger of deviating from what
may happen in natiire. The cup, leaves and stalk,
arc a pale blueish green, to be done with a mixture
of Prussian bluc, sap green, and white, adding in-
digo sor the darkest parts.
MARTAGON.
Martagons are some yellow, others a most rich
fcarlet. The yellow ones are done with a pale gum¬
boage, shading with bistre, carmine and yellow
mixed together, so as to make a pleafant brown. At
the base of each petal are neat spots of strong indigo.
The stalks and leaves are a pleafant green; to be
done with- sap green, and a very little Prussian blue.
The bottom of each leaf swells into a roundisti
knob, which is considerably paler than the other
parts. The scarlet’ones are to be smootlily laid with
red lead, shading with carmine; adding indigo for
the deepest shades. The style, filaments and buttons,
are orange colour; laid first with gumboage, and
shadowed with carmine.
POPPY.
The instructions given for the carnation, are ald
that are required for this flower; only observing
that it is diversified by different colours on the edges
of the petals, not striped or clouded as that flower




SUN-FLOWER.
The petals of this noble, though common flower,
are a fine yellow, painted in the fame manner as the
yellow part of the jonquil. The centre is à strong
reedifh brown, iade with ycllow, carmine and in-
digo; using more carmine and indigo for the deep¬
est. sndes. The leaves and stalk are a pleasant
green, done with sap green, shadowed with the same
colour, and deepened with indigo and guinboage.
L IL Y.
Lilies are either white or orange colour. The
white ones are done by leaving the paper for the
lightest parts ; and shadowing with a mixture of
Indian ink, indigo, and a very little sap green ;
keeping, (as has been before recommended for other
flowers) a proper gradation of the shades. The but-
tons arc orange colour, and the style a pale green.
The leaves and stalk are a blueish green, with a
mixture of sap green and Prussian blue, finishing
with Indigo. The orange coloured ones are done
in the same manner as the direction given with the
jonquil, spotting the inside of each petal with in¬
digo towards its bafe. The buds, while young, are
green, turning to the orange as they ripen, which
makes a pleasing varicty in the colouring
DOUBLE STOCK.
Double stocks are a purplish crimson, or va-
riegated with white and crimson. The cluster of
smali petals in the middle is green, which diffuses
itself faintly on the larger ones, and affords a plcafing
ctiversitv. The stalk and leaves are à whitisn green.
AFRICAN.




Africans are either yellow or orange colour.
The yellow ones are to be done according to the di-
rections for the yellow part of the jonquil, either
pale or deeper at discretion; and the orange colour
ones, as the cup of the jonquil. The stalk and
leaves are a pleafant green.
HOLYHOCK.
Holyhocks vary, from the palest rose colours to
the deepest crimson. Some are white, which, in 2
composition, afford an agreeable contrast to the other
flowers, by their beautiful shape; but if reprefented
singly, it is easily imagined, any of the other co-
lours are the most interesting; for which the me-
thod laid down for painting the rose, will answer-
using the same colours deeper, according to fancy,
preserving a proportionable shade of colour, that
the deep shades may not appear too suddenly dark
to drovn the effect of the pale colours. The stalæ
and leaves are a pale green, to be done with sap
green mixed with white, for the pale colours ; the
same colour, only less white, for the next shade,
and adding a little indigo sor the darkest snades.
PASSION FLOWER.
This flower is, in nature, so beautifully singular
in its structure, that without the advantage of colour
(in which it is also delightful) it would engage the
attention of every curiotis observer of nature. The
petals are a greenish white, to be painted with a
mixture of Indian ink and sap green, leaving the
paper in the light parts. The th reads are so exactly
set



set and coloured, as to form three circles of differ-
ent colours, viz. the outer one blue; shadowed with
Prussian blue. The next is white; to be done by
continuing the stroke with slake white, making the
space between each thread dark, with the Indian
ink and indigo. The inner circle-is a reddish pur-
ple ; done with a mixture of carmine and a little
Prussian blue. The centre of the flower is a pale
yellov. The five buttons are yellow in the inside ;
which is the part mostly seen, by their curling back
as soon as the flower blows. The other parts, which
project from the centre, are a pale green, excepting
the three projections for the top, which are purple.
The bud is a pale green, with a tinge of red at its
end. The leaves are a dark green ; to be done with
indigo, gumboage, and a little Indian ink mixed
together. The stalk and tendrils are made brown,
with sap green and carmine. The religious have
named this flower, from a supposition of its parts
describing the passion of our Lord.
HONEY-SUCKLE.
The outside of this flower is begun with a lay of
carmine mixed with a little lake, adding indigo for
the dark shades. Some flowers, in the same cluster,
are more purple than others, wliich may be done at
discretion, to make a variety of colour, by adding
Prussian blue to the carmine. The insides of tlie
petals, which are shewn by their splitting and curl-
ing back at the ends, are some white ; others straw
colour. The white to be fhadowed with Indian
ink, mixed with a very little sap green ; the straw
colour with a very pale lay of gumboage, shadowed
with bistre. The style and buttons, seen at the
ends



ends of the flower, are a faint green. The stalks
are a purplish brown, with carmine and a litile sap
green; the leaves sap green, shadowed with gum¬
boage and indigo.
HEART's EASE.
The two upper petals of this flower are a rich
purple ; the other three yellow, or straw colour,
edged and otherwise stained with purple, or olive
colour, with very fine lines of a deep purple ; be-
ginning at the base, and spreading delicately over
each petal. The stalk and leaves are a pleasant
green.
CONVOLVULUS.
Bluc is the principal colour of the convolvulus ;
but the base is stained with yellow, which gradually
becomes white, and spreads itself in rays like a star
in the centre. The leaves and stalk are a whitish
green.
PIN K.
The single pink does not admit of so great a va-
riety as the carnation, but it is nevertheless so va-
riegated as to make it an agreeable flower for sattins,
silks, &c. The most common are either white or
crimson, others are striped white and red, others
are white spotted with red, others edged with red 3
all which may be worked according to the rules for
the other flowers so diversified with the same co¬
lours. The leaves and stalk are a blueish green,
only at the joints there is, for the most part, a yel-
lowish tinge, which is also at the bottom of the cup
and scales.




PAINTING on SILKS, SATTINS, &c.
HAVING with the utmost circumspection laid

down the rulcs for painting on paper, we now
proceed for the amusement and instruction of those
ingenious ladies who delight in the abovementioned
branch, with the same care to give the following ne-
cessary instructions.
When the outline is made according to the astist’s
sancy, a wash of isinglafs should with care be laid
on to take away the glare and sleekness of the sattin,
otherwise the colours will not work freely ; the
isinglass to be melted in very clear water, over the
fire, so as not to be very glutinous, otherwise it
will discolour the sattin, and consequently spoil the
COlours.
In the foregoing rules we have recommended,
for the most part, the leaving the paper for the light
parts of a flower, and working with colours mostly
transparent; but here the lights are to be made by
a small tincture of the colour of the intended flower,
mixt with flake white, so much as just to make
a degree from the colour of the sattin, if white,
or if any other colour, to be mixed proportionably
1o the colour of the slower; for instance, if a blue
slower, the bice or verditer, a very small quantity
of it with the white, using less of it proportionally.
as the snades grow darker, and, in the most dark, in-
digo alone may be used, it being by that time opake
enough ; but great care must be used not to lay the
colours on too. thick, otherwise they will crack :
a little white sugar-caudy will be found very ne-
cessary, when mixt with the gum water, as a pre-
ventive



ventive to that inconveniency. If a flower hap-
pens to be of so deep a colour as not to admit of
any pure white in the lightest of the parts, a fort
of priming of white should be laid on, after which,
when dry, begin with the ground colour of the
flower, proceeding gradually with the shades as in
the above directions, which, with lively flowers
peculiarly chosen from nature for the purpose, we
hope will be sufficient to initiate our ingenious and
fair students in this most delightful amufcment.

PAINTING with CRAYONS.
WHETHER the painter works with oil colours,
water colours, or crayons, the grand object of
his pursuit is still the same : a just imitation of nature.
But each species has its peculiar rules and methods.
Painting with crayons requires, in many respects, a
treatment different from painting in oil colours ;
because all colours used dry are, in their nature, of
a much warmer complexion than wlien wet with
oils, or any other binding fluid. Let this be prov¬
ed by matter of fact :--Mr. Cotes painted a portrait
of Sir William Chambers, which is in Lord Bes-
borough’s collection. An ingenious foreigner had
discovered a method of fixing crayon pictures, so that
they would not rub or receive an injury if any ac-
cident happened to the glafs. Thé society for the
encouragement of arts had before offered a pre-
mium to any one who should discover so valuable a
secret, for which premium he made application.





Mr. Cotes being eminent in his profession, was de-
sired to lend a picture sor the trial, and give his
judgment, which was made on this portrait of Sir
William Chambers. The crayons he indeed so per-
fectly fixed as to resist any rub or brush without the
least injury, which before would have entirely de-
faced or spoiled it: but the picture, which before
had a particularly warm, brilliant, and agrceable
effect, in comparison became cold and purple ; and
though in one sense the attempt succecded to the de¬
signed intention of fixing the colours, yet the bind-
ing quality of whatever fluid was made use of in
the process, changed the complexion of the colours,
rendering the cold teints too predominant. For this
reason, in order to produce a rich picture, a much
greater portion of what painters term cooling teints
must be applied in crayon painting, than would be
judicious to use in oils. Without any danger of a
mistake, it is to be supposed, the not being acquaint-
ed with this observation is one great cause why so
many oil painters have no better success when they
attempt crayon painting. On the contrary, crayon
painters, being so much used to those teints which
arè of a cold nature when used wet, are apt to in¬
troduce them too much when they paint with oils,
which is seldom productive of a good effect.
Another observation l would make, which requi res
particular notice from the student who has been
conversant with oil painting, prior to his attempts
with crayons ; oil painters begin their pictures much
lighter and fainter than they intend to finish them,
which prefents the future colouring clear and bril-
liant, the light underneath greatly assisting the trans-
parent glazing and scumbling colours, which, if they
we re



were laid over any part already too dark, would but
increase its heavy effect. On the contrary, crayons
being made of dry colours, are difficult to procure
sufficiently dark, the crayon painter therefore will
find an absolute necessity to begin his picture as dark
and rich as possible, except in the strongest lights;
for if once the grey and light teints becomc pre-
dominant, it will be next to impossible for him (in
the deep shadows especially) to restore depth and
brilliancy, having no opportunity of glazing or scum¬
bling to give the effect, as the grey teints being
mixtures with whiting underneath, will contin ually
work up and render the attempt abortive.
I shall now endeavour to give the student, some
directions towards the attainment of excellence in
this art.
The student must provide himself with some strong
blue paper, the thicker the better, if the grain is
not too coarse and knotty, though it is almost im-
possible to get any intirely free from knots. The
knots should be levelled with a penknife or razor,
otherwise they will prove excecdingly troublesome.
Aster this is done, the paper must be pasted very
smooth on a linen cloth,t previoussy strained on 2
deal frame, the size according to the artist’s plea-
sure:, on this the picture is to be execnted ; but it
is most eligible not to paste the paper on till the
whole subject is first dead-coloured. The method of
doing this is very easy, by laying the paper with the
dead¬

* That side of the paper should be pasted which has the strokes
from the wires most evident, that the painting may be on the
smoothest side, otherwise the lines, which these wires have leit
in the paper will prove troublesome and look unpleasant.



dead-colour on its face, upon a fmooth board or ta-
ble, when, by means of a brush, the backside of
the paper must be covered with paste ; the frame,
with the strained cloth, must then be laid on the
pasted sidc of the paper; after which turn the
painted side uppermost, and lay a piece of clean
paper upon it, to prevent smearing ; this being done,
it. may be stroked gently over with the hand, by
which means all the air between the cloth and the
paper will be foreed out.
When the paste is perfectly dry, the student may
proceed with the painting. The advantages arifing
from pasting the paper æ in the frame, according to
this methed, after the picture is begun, are very
great, as the crayons will adhere much better than
any other way, which will enable the student to
finisn the picture with a firmer body of colour, and
greater lustre. The late Mr. Cotes discovered this
method by accident, and estecmed it a valuable ac-
quisition; and, 1 remember, on a particular occa-
sion, he removed a fine crayon picture of Rozalba’s,
and placed it on another strained cloth, without the
least injury, by soaking the canvas with a wet sponge,
till
2 Some crayon pictures are painted on vel lum; but the animal
salts in the skin very often cause thein to mildew. It must be con¬
fessed the vellum gives tuc picture a foft effect; but its use cannot
be recommended in our unfavourable climate. Others make ule
of smalt grouids; Le Tour, lately a painter of note in Paris, often
used them with great success. The method to prepare them is to
brusti over the paper with gum water, waich directly strew with
smalt moderately fine, the superfluous part of which should be
swept off, with a painter’s brush, when the gum water is perfectly
dry. On this the picture is to be painted ; but we have paper
now in England to be procured of so excellent à texture, as to
render this preparation perhaps unniccessary.



till the paste between the cloth and paper was suf-
ficiently wet to admit of separation.
When painters want to make a very correct copy
of a picture they generally make use of a tiffany,
or black gauze, strained tight on a frame, which
they lay flat on the subject to be imitated, and with
a piece of sketching chalk, trace all the outlines on
the tiffany. They then lay the canvas to be painted
on, flat upon the floor, placing the tiffany witla
the chalked lines upon it, and with an handkerchief
brush the whole over: this presents the exact out-
lincs of the picture on the canvas. The crayon
painter may also make use of this method, when
the subject of his imitation is in oils, but in copy-
ing a crayon picture, he must have recourse zo the
following method, on account of the glass:
The picture being placed upon the esel, let the out-
lines be drawn on the glafs with a small camel’s hair
pencil dipped in lake, ground thin with oils, which
must be done with great exactness; after this is ac-
complifhed, take a sneet of paper of the same size,
and place it on the glafs, stroking over all the lines
with the hand, by which means the colours will
adhere to the paper, which must be picreed with
pin holes pretty close to each other. The paper in-
tended to be used for the painting must next be laid
upon a table and thie pierced paper placed upon it ;
then with some fine pounded charcoal, tied up in a
piece of lawn, rub over the perforated strokes, which
will give an exact outline. Great care must be
taken not to brush this off till the whole is drawn
over with sketching chalk, which is a composition
made of whiting and tobacco-pipe clay, rolled like
crayons, and pointed at each end.




When the student paints immediately from the
life, it will be most prudent to make a correct draw-
ing of the outlines on another paper, the size of the
picture he is going to paint, which he may trace by
the preceding method, because erroneous strokes of
the sketching chalk (which are not to be avoided
without great expertness) will prevent the crayons
from adhering to the paper, owing to a certain
greasy quality in the composition.
The student will find the sitting posture, with the
box of crayons on his lap, the most convenient me-
thod for him to paint. Thie part of the picture he
is immediately painting should be rather below his
sace, for, if it is placed too high, the arm will be
fatigucd. Let the windows of the room where he
paints be darkened at least to the height of six feet
from the ground, and the subject to be painted should
be situated in such a manner, that the light may fall
with every advantage on the face ; avoiding too
much shadow, which seldom has a good effect in
portrait painting, especially if the face he paints
has any degree of delicacy. Before he begins to
paint, let him be attentive to his subject, and ap-
propriate the action or attitude proper to the age of
the subject: if a child, let it be childifh ; if a young
lady, express more vivacity than in the majestic
beauty of a middle aged woman, who also should
not be expressed with the same gravity as a person
sar advanced in years. Let the embellishments of
the picture, and introduction of birds, animals, &c.
be regulated by the rules of propricty and con-
sistency.
The features of the face being carefully drawn
with chalk, let the student take a crayon of pure
carmine,



armine, and carefully draw the nostril and edge of
he nose, next the fhadow ; then, with the faintest
armine teint, lay in the strongest light upon the
nose and forehead, which must be executed broad.
de is then to proceed gradually with the second
teint and the succeeding ones, till he arrives at the
shadows, which must be covcred brilliant, enriched
with much lake, carminc, a little broken, with
brilliant green. This method will, at first, offen-
lively strike the eye, from its crude appearance ; but,
n finishing, it will be a good soundation to pro-
duce a pleasing effect, colours being much more
easily sullied when too bright, than when the sirst
colouring is dull, to raise the picture into a bril-
iant state. The several pearly tcints, discernable in
ine complexions, must be imitated with bluc ver-
diter and white, which answers to the ultramarine
teints used in oils. But if the parts of thie face
where these teints appear are in shadow, the crayons
composed of black and white must be substituted in
hteir place.
Though all the face, when first coloured, should
be laid in as brilliant as possible, yet each part
hsould be kept in its proper tone, by which means
the rotundity of the face will be preserved.
Let the student be careful when he begins the
eyes to draw them with a crayon inclined to the
carmine teint, of whatever colour the iris are of ;
he must lay them in brilliant, and, af-first, not load-
ed with colour, but executed lightly: no notice is
to be taken of the pupil yet. The student must let
the light of the eyc incline very much to the blue
cast, cautiously avoiding a staring, white appear-
ance, (which, when once introduced, is seldom over-





come) preserving a broad shadozy thrown on its up¬
per part, by the eye-lash. A black and heavy te int
is also to be avoided in the eye-brows ; it is there-
fore, best to exccute them like a broad, glowing
shadow at first, on which, in the finishing, thc hairs
of the brow are to be painted, by which method
of proceeding, the former teints will shiew them¬
selves through, and produce the most pleasing effect.
The student should begin the lips with pure car-
mine and lake, and in the shadow use some car-
mine and black ; the strong vermillion teints should
be laid on afterwards. He must beware of executing
them with stiff, harsh lines, gently intermixing each
with the neighbouring colours, making the sha¬
dow beneath broad, and enriched with brilliant
crayons. He must form the corner of the mouth
with carmine, brown oker, and greens, variously
intermixed If the hair is dark, he should pre-
serve much of the lake and deep carmine teints
therein; this may be easily overpowered by the
warmer hair teints, which, as obferved in paint-
ing the eye-brows, will produce a richer effect when
thie picture is finishied; on the contrary, if this
method is unknown or neglected, a poverty of co-
louring will be disce rnable.
After the student has covered over, or as artists
term it, has dead-coloured the head, he is to sweeten
the whole together by rubbing it over with his
finger, beginning at the strongest light upon the
forehead, passing his finger very lightly, and unit-
ing it with the next teint, which he must continue
till the whole is sweetened together, often wiping
his finger on a towel to prevent the colours being
sullied. He must be cautious not to smooth or




sweeteien his picture too often, because it will give rise
to a thin and scanty effect, and have more the appear-
ance obf a. drawing than a solid painting, as nothing
but a body of rich colours can constitute a rich ef-
fect. To avoid this, (as the student finds it ne-
cessary to sweeten with the finger) he must conti¬
nually replenish the picture with more crayon.
When the head is brought to fome degree of for-
wardniess, let the back ground be laid in, which
must be treated in a different manner, covering it as
thin asis possible, and rubbing it into the paper with-
a leather stump. Near the face the paper should be
almost t free from colour, for this will do great service
to thee head, and by its thinnefs, give both a soft
and solid appearance. In the back ground also,
crayons which have whiting in their composition
should be used, but seldom or never without cau-
tion; , but chiefly such as are the most brilliant and
the lezast adulterated. The ground being painted
thin naext the hair, will give the student an oppor¬
tunity r of painting the edges of the hair over in a
light aand free manner, when he gives the finishing
touche es.
The student having proceeded thus far, the face,
hair, : and back ground being entirely covered, he
must carefully vicw the whole at some distance, re-
markining in what respect it is out of keeping, that
is, whhat parts are too light, and what too dark, be-
ing particularly attentive to the white or chalky
appearrances, which must be subdued with lake and
carmine. The above method being properly put
into exccution will produce the appearance of a
paintinng principally composed of three colours, viz.
carminne, black, and white, which is the best pre-
parâation




paration a painter can make for producing a finc
crayon picture.
The next step is to compleat the back ground
and the hair, as the dust, in painting these, will
fall on the face, and would much injure it, if that
was compleated first. From thence proceed to the
forchead, finishing downward till the whole pic-
ture is compleated.
Back grounds may be of various colours; but it
requires great taste and judgment to suit them pro¬
perly to different complexions : in general, a strong
coloured head should have a weak and tender teint-
ed ground, and, on the contrary, a delicate com¬
plexion should be opposed with strong and power-
ful teints ; by which proper contrast between the
figure and the back ground, the picture will reccive
great force, and strike the spectator much more
than it could possibly do was this circumstance of
contrast not attended to.
Young painters often treat the back grounds of
pictures as a matter of very little or no consequencco
when it is most certain great part of the beauty and
brilliancy of the picture, especially the face, de-
pends upon the teints being well suited, the darks
kept in their proper places, and the whole being
perfectly in subordination to the face. Thus a sim¬
ple back ground requires attention, but the difficulty
is still greater when a variety of objects are intro-
duced, such as hills, trees, buildings, &c. in thesc
cases one rule must be strictly attended to, that each
grand object be disposed so as to contrast each other ;
this is not meant merely respecting thcir forms, but
their colour, their light, shade, &c. For instance,
we will suppose the sigure recciving, the strongest




light; behind the figure, and very near at hand,
are the stems of some large trees ; these must have
shade thrown over them, cither from a diiving
cloud or some other interposing circumstance ; be¬
hind these stems of trees, and at a distance, are seen
rees on a rising ground; these should receive the
light as a contrast to the former, &c. If an ar-
chitectural back ground be chosen, the same rule
must be applied ; suppose a building at a moderate
distance is placed behind the figure receiving the
light, a column, or some other object in shadow
should intervene, to preserve proper decorum in the
piece, or what will have the same effect, a fhadow
must be thrown over the lower part of the build-
ng, which will give equal fatisfaction or repose to
the eye. It must be remembered, the light must be
always placed against the dark, and the weak against
the strong, in order to produce force and effect, and
vice versa.
In painting over the forehead the last time, begin
the highest light with the most faint vermillion
teint, in the same place where the. faint carmine
was first laid, keeping it broad in the same manner.
in the next shade succeeding the lightest, the stu-
dent must work in some light blue teints, composed
of verditer and white, intermixing with them some
of the deeper vermillion teints, swectening theni to-
ether witli great caution, : insensibly melting them
into one another, increasing the proportion of cacli
colour as his judgment shall direct. Some brilliant
yellows may also be used, but sparingly ; and to-
wards
* This direction is sor the finest complexions, but tlie student
must vary his colouring according to his subject.



wards the roots of the hair, strong verditer teints,
intermixed with greens, will be of singular service.
Cooling crayons, composed of black and white,
should succeed these, and melt into the hair. Be¬
neath the eyes, the pleasing pearly teints are to be
preserved, composed of verditer and white, and un-
der the nose, and on the temples, the same may be
used ; beneath the lips teints of this kind also are
proper, mixing them with the light greens and some
vermillion.
The introducticn of greens and blues into the
face, in painting, has often given furprize to those
who are unacquainted with the art, but there is rea-
son sufficient sor their introduction (though it may
appear strange at first) in order to break and correct
the other colours.
The carmine predominating in the dead colour,
is, as has been observed, the best preparation for the
succeeding teints ; the crudeness of this prepara-
tion must be corrected by varioussy intermixing
greens, blues, and yellows ; which of these are to
be used is to be determined by the degree of carmine
in the dead colour, and the complexion intended.
The blue and yellow are of a nature diametrically
opposite, and serve to correct the reds, and oppose
one another ; the greens being compounded of both
these colours, is of peculiar use in many cases where
the transition is not to be so violent.
The student, attentively considering nature, will
discover a plcasing varicty of colours on the sur-
face, and discernible through a clear and transpa¬
rent fkin ; this variety will be still increased by the
effect of light and shade; he will perceive one part
inelining to the vermillion red, another to the car-
mine



mine or lake, one to the blue, this to the green, and
that to the yellow, &c. In order to produce these
different effects he will apply those colours to which
the teints are most inclined ; yet in crayon painting
it is often best to compound the mixed colours upon
the picture, such as blue and yellow instead of
green ; blue and carmine instead of purple ; red
and yellow instead of orange; in other circum-
stances the compounds already mixed should be
used : but in this case there can be no absolute rulc
given, it must be left to thie experience and discre-
tion of the painter, though the student may be greatly
assisted in the commencement of his studies, by an
able' master to direct and point out the best method
to treat circumstances of this nature, as they oc-
cur in practice, which may at first appear obscure
and mysterious, but will soon, to a good capacity,
become demonstrably clear upon certain and sure
principles ; tlie circumstances that require different
treatment are so various and so many, as to render it
impossible here to descend to every particular.
In finishing the checks, let the pure lake clear them
from any dust contracted from the other crayons ;
then, with the lake, may be intermixed the bright
vermillion ; and last of all (if the subject should
require it) a few touches of the orange coloured
crayon, but witli extreme caution ; after this sweeten
that part with the finger as little as possible, for fear
of producing a heavy, disagrecable effect on the
cheeks : as the beauty of a crayon picture consists
in onc colour shewing itself through, or rather be¬
tween another; this the student cannot too often re-
mark, it being the only method of imitating beau-
tiful complexions.



128 THE ARTISTS ASSISTANT;
The eye is the most difficult feature to cxecute in
crayons, as every part must be expressed with the
utmost nicety, to appear finished ; at the same time
that the painter must preserve its breadth and so-
lidity, while he is particularizing the parts. To
accomplish this, it will be a good general rule for
the student to use his crayon, in sweetening, as much,
and his finger as little, as possible. When he wants
a point to touch a small part with, he may break off
à litle of his crayon against the box, which will
produce a corner fit to work with in the minutest
parts. If the eye-lashes are dark, he must use some
of the carmine and brown oker, and the crayon of
carmine and black ; and with these he may also
touch the iris of the eye (if brown or hazel) mak-
ing a broad shadow, caused by the eye-lash. Red
te ints of vermillion, carmine, and lake, will exe-
cute the corners of the eye properly; but if the
eye-lids are too red, they will have a disagreeable
fore appearance. The pupil of the eye must be
made of pure lamp-black ; between this and the
lower part of the iris, the light will catch very
strong, but it must not be made too sudden, but be
gently diffused round the pupil till it is lost in shadc.
When the eye-balls are sufficiently prepared, the
shining speck must be made with a pure white
crayon, which should be first broken to a point,
and then laid on firm; but as it is possible they may
be defective in neatness, they should be corrected
with a pin, taking off the redundant parts, by which
means they may be formed as neat as can be re-
quired.
The difficulty, with respect to the nose, is to pre-
serve the lincs properly determined, and at the same
time



me so artfully blended into the cheek, as to ex-
ress its projection, and yet no real linc to be per¬
eptibie upon a close examination; in some circum¬
ances it should be quite blended with the check,
which appears behind it, and determined entirely
with a slight touch of red chalk. The shadow caused
y the nose is generally the darkest in the whale face,
artaking of no reflection from its ’surrounding parts.
carmine and brovn oker, carmine and black, and
such brilliant crâyons will compose it best.
The student having before prepared the lips with
the strongest lake and carmine; &c. must, with these
colours, make them compleatly correct, and; when
nishing introduce the strong vermillions, but with
great caution, as they are extremely predominant.
This, if properly touched, will’give the lips an ap-
pearance équal, if not superior, to those executed in
oils notwithstanding the seeming superiority the lat-
er has, by means of glazing, e of which the former
is entirely destitute.
When the student paints the neck, he should
avoid expressing the muscles too strong in the stem,
nor should the bones appear too evident on the chest,
is both have an unpleasing effect, denoting a violent
agitation of the body, a circumstance seldom ne-
cessary to exprefs in portrait painting. The most
necessary part to be expréssed, and which should
ever be observed (even in the most delicate subjects,
is a strong marking just above the place where the
collar bones unite, and if the head is much thrown


 The method with which painters in oils express transparency
in the lips is, by painting them first with light vermillion teints,
and, when dry, touching them over with pure lake.





over the shoulders, some notice should be taken of
the large muscle that rises from behind the ear, and
is inserted into the pit between the collar bones.
All inferior muscles should be, in general, quite
avoided. The student will find this caution ne-
cessary, as iost subjects, especially thin persons,
have the muscles of the neck much more evident
than would be judicious to imitate. As few necks
are too long, it may be necessary to give some addi¬
tion to the stem, a fault on the other side being
quite unpardonable, nothing being more ungraceful
than a fhort neck: In colouring the neck, let the
student preserve, the stem of a pearly hue, and the
light not so strong as on the chest. If any part of
the breast appears, it’s transparency must also be ex-
pressed by pearly teints, but the upper part of the
chest should be coloured with beautiful vermillions,
delicately blended with the other.




Of the MATERIALS.

THE perfection of the crayons consists, in a great
meafure, in their softnefs, for it is impossible to
execute a brilliant pictuze with them if they are
otherwise, on which account great care should be
observed in the preparing them, to prevent their
being hard-- In all compositions, flake white, and
white lead should be wholly rejected, because the
slightest touch with either of these will unavoidably
turn black.
The usual objection to crayon paintings is, that
they are subject to change, but whenever this happens
it



it is entirely owing to an injudicious use of the above¬
mentioned whites, which will stand only in oils. To
obviate the bad effects arising from the use of sucl
crayons, let the student make use of common whit¬
ing prepared in the sollowing manner :
Take a large vesfel of water, put the whiting into
it, and mix them well together; let this stand about
half a minute, then pour off the top into another
vessel, and throw the gritty sediment away ; let what
is prepared rest about a minute, and then pour it
off as before, which will purify the whiting and
render it free from all dirt and grittiness.--When
this is done, let the whiting settle, and then pour
the water from it; aster which, lay it on the chalk
to dry, and keep it for use, either for white crayons,
or the purpose of preparing teints with other colours,
for with this, all other teints may be fafely prepared.
The student must be provided with a large, flexible
pallet-knife, a large stone and muller to levigate the
colours, two or three large pieces of chalk to ab-
sorb the moisture from the colours after they are le¬
vigated, a piece of flat glafs to prevent the moisture
from being absorbed too much, till the colours are
rolled into form, and vessels for water, spirits, &c
as necessity and convenience shall direct.
R
E DS.
CARMINE aud LAKE.
It is rather difficult to procure either good car-
mine or good lake. Good carmine is inclined to the
vermillion teint, and should be an impalpable pow¬
der, and good lake to the carmine teint. The car-
minc crayons are prepared in the sollowing manner :





As their texture is inclinable to hardness, instead
of grinding and rolling them, take a sufficient quan¬
tity of carmine, lay it upon the grinding-stone, mix
it with a levigating knife with spirits of winc, till
it becomes smooth and even ; yet the less friction
produced by the knife the better. The chalk-stone
being ready, lay the colour upon it to absorb the
spirit, but be careful that it is laid on in a proper
shape for painting.
The simple colour being prepared, the next step
is to compose the different teints by a mixture with
whiting ; the proportion to be observed consisting of
twen ty gradations to one, which may be clearly un-
derstood by the sollowing directions. Take some of
the simple colour, and levigate it with spirits of
wine, adding about one part of washed whiting to
threc parts of carmine, of which, when properly in-
corporated, make two parcels. The next gradation
should be composed of equal quantities of carmine
and whiting, of which four crayons may be made.
The third composition should have one fourth car-
mine, and three fourths whiting, of this make six
crayoas, which will be a good praportion with the
rest. The last teint should be made of whiting, very
faintly tinged with carmine, of which make about
eight crayons, which will compleat the abovemen¬
tioned proportion.
N. B. Though these teints made with whiting
may be rolled, yet the pure carmine will not bear
it, but must be left on the chalk-stone till perfectly
dry.

LAKE
Is a colour very apt to be hard ; to prevent which
the student must observe the following particulars ;
Take



Take about half the quantity of lake intended for
the crayons, and grind it very fine with spirits of
wing; let it dry and then pulverize it, which is
easily, done if the lake is good; then take the other
half, and grind it with spirits, after which mix it
with the pulverized lake, and lay it out directly in
crayons on the -chalk. The colour will not bear
rolling. The simple colour being thus prepared,
proceed with the compound crayons, as directed be-
’
fore, aand in the same degrees of gradation as the
 carmine teints.
VERMILLION, or NATIVE CINNABAR.
The best is inclined to the carmine teint. To
prepare this colour mix it on the stone with soft
water, or spirits, after which it may be rolled into
crayons.
BLUES
PRUSSIAN BLUE
Is a colour very apt to bind, and is rendered soft
with more difficulty than carmine and lake. The
same method of preparation is to be followed with
this as directed with respect to lake, only it is ne-
cessary to grind a larger quantity of the pure colour,
as it is chiefly used for painting draperies.
BLUE VERDITER
Is a colour naturally gritty, and therefore it is
necessary to washi it well. Its particles are so coarse
as to require some binding matter to unite them,
otherwise the crayons will never adhere together.
To accomplish this, take a quantity sufficient to form




two or three crayons, to which add a paece of slack-
ed plaister of Paris about the size of a pea; mix
these, well together, and form the crayons upon the
chalk. This blue is extremely brilliant, and will
be of great use in heightening draperies, &c.
GREENS. 

BRILLIANT greens are produced with great dif-
ficulty, which may be procured of those who make
it their businefs to prepare them, yet the following
compositions will be found useful : Take yellow
oker, and after grinding it with spirits, mix it with
the powder of Prussian blue, then temper it with a
knife, and lay the crayons on the chalk, without
rolling them : Besides this use king’s yellow, mixed
with Prussian blue, brown oker and Prussian blue.
.
The crayons made of these last may be rolled.
YELLOWS.
KINGS YELLOW
Is the most useful and the most brilliant, levi
gated with spirits of wine, and compose the differ-
ent teints as before directed. Yellow oker and Na-
ples yellow ground with spirits will make useful
crayons.
ORANGE
Is produced with king’s-yellow and vermillion
ground together with spirits, and the tcints formed
as in other cases, but no grcat quantity of them is
required. 
BROWNS.

* Roman oker aud Prussian blue mixed in disserent proportions
will be useful.



BROWNS.
CULLENS-EARTH
Is a sine dark brown. After six or eight of the
simple crayons are prepared, several rich compound
teints may be produced from it, by a mixture with
carmine in various degrees ; black, carminc, and
this colour, mixed together, make useful teints for
painting hair ; several gradations may be produced
from each of these by a mixture with whiting-
UM BER
May be treated in just the same manner, only it is
necessary to levigate it with spirits of wine.
PURPLES.
PRUSsIAN blue ground with spirits, and mixed
with pulverized lake, will produce a good purple.
Carmine thus mixed with Prussian blue will produce
a purple something different from the former. , Va¬
rious teints may be made from either of these com¬
pounds by a mixture with whiting.
BLAC
K.
L AMP-BLACK,
Is the only full black that can be used with safety,
as all others are subject to mildew.
Cinnabar mixed with carmine-This is a compo¬
sition of great use, and teints made from this witli
whiting will be. found very serviceable.
Carmine and black is another good compound, of
which five or six gradations should be made, some
partaking more of the black, and others having the
carmine most predominant, besides several teints by
a mixture with whiting.




Cinnabar and black is also a very useful compound,
from which several different teints should be made.
Prussian blue and black is another good compound.
and will be found of singular service in painting
draperies.
It is impossible to lay down rules sor forming
every te int necessary in composing a set of crayons,’
there béing many accidental compofitions, entirely
dependent on fancy and opinion. The student shoald
make it à rule to save thé leavings of his colouYs,
for of these he may form various teints, which will
occasionally be useful.


Of ROLLING the CRAYONS and
DISPOSING them for PAINTING.

THE different compositions of colours must bè
cût into a proper magnitude after they are
prepared, in order to be rollec into pastils for the
convenience of using them. Each crayon should be
formed in the left'hand with the ball of the right,
first formed cylindrically, and then taperéd at each
end. If the composition is too dry; dip the finger
in water; if too wet the composition must be llaid
upon the chalk again to absorb iore lof the mbis-
ture. Thé crayons ’shoultf be rolléd as quick ’as pos-
sible; and when fnifhed, must Ue ’laid upen- the
chalk again, to absorb afl remaining moisture. After
the ’gradation of teints from one colour are formée,
the chalk and the grinding-stone Thould be well
scraped and cleansed with water before it is used
for another colour.




When the set of crayons is compleated according
to the rules prescribed, they should be arranged in
classes for the convenience of painting with them.
Some thin drawers, divided into a number of par-
titions, is the most convenient method of disposing
them properly. The crayons should be deposited
according to the several gradations of light. The
bottom of the partitions must be covered with bran,
as a bed for the colours, because it not only preferves
them clcan, but prevents their break ing.
The box made use of when the student painfs,
should be about a foot square, with nine partitions.
In the upper corner, on the left hand (supposing the
box to be in thelap when he paints) let him place
the black and grey crayons, those being the most sel-
dom used ; in the second partition, the blues ; in the
third, tlie greens and browns ; in the fist partition
on the left hand of the second row, the carmines,
lakes, vermillions, and all deep reds ; the yellows
and orange in the middle, and the pearly teints
next; and as these last are of a very delicate nature,
they must be kept very clean, that the gradations of
colour may be easily distinguished : In the lowest
roxv, let the first partition contain a piece of fine
linen rag to wipe the crayons with while they are
using; the second, all the pure lake and vermil¬
lion, teints ; and the other partition may contain
those teints, which, from their complex nature,
cannot be elassed with any of the former.





For ENAMEL GROUNDS.
THE matter of the enamel inust be first finely le-
vigated and searced : and the body to be enamel-
led should be made perfectly clean. The enamel
must be then laid on as even as possible by a brufh or
pencil, being first tempered with oil of spikc; and
the distance of time betwixt the laying on the
ground and burning the piece should not be too
great ; because the oil will exhale, and leave tlic
matter of the enamel a dry incohering powder;
which will be liable to be rubbed or shaken off by
the least violence. This is the common method ;
but there is a much better way of managing this
part of the work by means of a fearce; in which
the enamel is spread with very little trouble, and
the greatest part of the oil of spike saved. The
method of performing this is, to rub the surface to
be enamelled over with oil of spike; and then,
being laid on a fheet of paper, or piece of leather,
to save that part of the enamel which does not fall
on a pioper object, to searce the matter upon the
oiled surface till it lie of a proper thickneis. But
great care must be taken in this method of proceed-
ing, not to shake or move too forcibly the pieces of
work thus covered with the powdered enamel-
It is usual to add oil of turpentine to the oils of
spike or lavender, in order to make them go fur-
ther, and save the expence attending the free use of
them; and others add also a little olive or linseed
oil, or some, in the place of them, crude turpen¬
tine. The use of the spirit of turpentine is very
allowable ; for it is the same for this purpose as the




oils of spike or lavender, except that it wants the
glutinous quality which makes them serviceable in
spreading the enamel. But with respect to the use
of the oils of olive and linseed, or any other sub-
stantial oil, it is very detrimental : tending to re-
duce the metalline calxes; and leaving a small pro¬
portion of black coal or ashes, which must necessa-
rily injure the white colour of the ground.
When plates, as in the case of pictures, dial-
plates, &c. are to’be enamelled, they should always
be made convex on the outside, and concave within ;
and all pieces of enamel, formed of metal, where the
figure does not admit of their being thick and solid,
should be of the same kind or form. Otherwise
they will be very apt to warp in the heat, and can-
not be brought straight, after they are taken out of
the fire, without cracking the enamel. For this
reason, likewise, it is proper to enamel the work all
over, as well on the wrong as right sides, to pre-
vent the heat from calcining the metal ; which
would both contribute to its warping, and weaken
the texture of it.
The enamel being laid on the body to be enamel-
led, when tlie fixt muffle is used, the piece must be
gently- listed on to the false bottom; and put in
that state into the muffle fixt in a furnace, by thrust-
ing the false bottom into it as far as it will go. But
t is best to defer this till the fire be perfectly in or-
der, which may be known by putting a bit of tile
or china with some enamel on it of the same tone
with that used as a proof; and another proof of the
same kind may be also put along with the work into
tlie mussie ; which, being taken out, may shiew how
the operation proceeds.




Pit-coal may be used in the furnace, where enamel
is burnt with the sixt muffle, or in coffins ; which
is indeed one principal conveniency attending thre
use of them; as it faves a considerable expence of
charcoal. But where the open muffle is used, char-
coal alone should be employed ; as the fuines of mi¬
neral coal are very detrimental to some colours, and
destructive of the grounds, if whitened by arsenic,
as the common white glafs.
The colours being prepared, they must be reduced
to powder by due levigation, and washing over,
where they are required to be extremely fine, and
here is no unvitrified salt in the mixture. They
must then be tempered on a china or Dutch tile
with oil of spike or lavender, to which most artists
add likewise oil of turpentine; and some (but I
think erroneously, as I have before mentioned) a
litile linsced or olive oil, and in this state they are
to be used as paint of any other kind. But it should
be avoided to mix more of the colours with the es-
sential oils than will be immediately used ; because
they dry away extremely fast, and would not only
be wasted, but give a cohesion to the particles of the
colours, that would make them work less freely
when again diluted with oil.
The colours being thus laid on the pieces to be
painted, the proceeding must be in all respects the
same as with the grounds, in whatever manner they
are to be burnt, éither in the muffles or coffins.
But greater nicety must be observed with respect to
the fire, as the effects of any error in that point
are of much greater consequence in the burning
the colours than the grounds ; especially if the




white of the grounds be sormed from the calx of
tin or antimony, and not arsenic.
Pit-coal, as was above observed, may be employed
for burning as well the colours as the grounds, where
the muffle or coffins are used; or any other method
pursued that wholly hinders the smoke and fumes
from having any access to the enamel.

ENAMEL PAINTING.
of
ENAMEL painting differs from all other kinds,

in the vehicle employed for the colours (to hold
the parts together, and bind them to the ground they
are laid upon) ; this is glafs or some vitreous body,
which being mixed with the colours, and fused, or
melted, by means of heat, becomes fluid; and hav¬
ing incorporated with the colours in that state, forms
together with them, a hard mafs when grown cold.
It answers, therefore, the same end in this, as oil,
gum-water, size, or varnish, in the other kinds of
painting.
The glass or vitreous body, applied to this purpose
of mixing with the colours, in order to bind them to
the grounds, is called a flux ; and makes one of the
principal substances used in enamel painting. When
this flux is easily fusible, that is to say, melts with a
less degree of heat, it is, in the stile of those who work
in enamel said to be soft, and when it is reluctant to
melt, and requires a greater degree of heat, it is called
hard. Thefe terms are as well applied to the matter
of the enamel grounds, and all other vitreous sub¬
stances concerned, as to the fluxes. It is, in general, a
perfection



perfection of the flux to be soft, or run easily into
fusion. But the great point, with respect to this par¬
ticular, is, that when seve ral mixtures of colours and
fluxes are used at the fame time, they should all cor-
respond to each other in the degree of this quality.
Ocherwise some would be rendered too fluid, and
perhaps run the matter of the enamel ground into
fusion, and mix with it, while others remained solid
and insufficiently fused themselves. It is always
necessary, likewise, that the enamel of the ground
should be considerably harder than the mixtures for
the colours ; for if they both melt with the same de-
gree of heat, they will neceffarily run together.
It being requisite that the body painted in enamel
should undergo a heat sufficient to melt soft glafs, the
matter of such body can only be gold, silver, copper,
porcelean, or china-ware, hard glass, and earthen-
ware. And where the metals are used, if the paint-
ing be of the nature of a picture, or demand a vari-
ety of colours, it is necessary that a ground of white,
or some other colour, should be laid on the metal ; the
body of which ground must necessarily be of the same
vitreous nature as the flux, but harder. As nothing
else can endure so grcat a hoat that is capable of in¬
corporating with, and binding the matter of the
white, or other colour, to the surface of the metal.
The ground, therefore, makes another principal sub¬
stance used in en amel painting.
The third substance is the colour, which must
likewise be a body capable of suffering the heat of
melted glass; and such as will either itself be con-
verted into glafs, or kindly incorporate with it, in a
melted statc. This, of course, confines the matter of
such colour to metals, earthis, or other mineral bodies;




all vegetable and animal substances being calcined
and analized, with a less degree of heat than the low¬
est sufficient to work enamel.
The fourth kind of substance is what I shall call
the secondary vehicle ; which is, some fluid body for
laying on the ground, and working with the pencil,
the flux and colours when mixt together ; since, as
they form only a dry powder, they could not be used
as paint without some such medium. But as this is
to serve only for spreading and laying on the matter
of the enamel, and not, like other vehicles, to assist
in holding the colours together, and binding them
to the ground (that being in this kind of painting
the office of the flux) it is necessary, that it should be
some such substance as will evaporate and dry away
without leaving any part behind. As it would
otherwise be heterogeneous matter, with regard to
the enamel ; and consequently injurious to it. Essen-
tial oils have been, therefore used for this purpose,
as they have the quality of wholly drying away on
the first approach of heat, together with a slight unc¬
tuosity, which renders them capable of making the
matter of the enamel work properly with the pencil.
The preparation of these several substances have
been in a great measure monopolized by the Ventians,
except what were prepared at Dresden, since the
establishment of the china manufactories. The few
others who have had any knowledge of this matter,
have practised the preparing only some kinds; and
even at present, there are, perhaps, none in this
country, who make more than a small part of the va¬
riety necessary. For though many possess the know¬
ledge of some particular articles, yet they are ignorant
with regard to others, which are again; perhaps




known to those who are ignorant of thefe. As there
has been hitherto no means afforded to the practisers
of it, of learning the particulars of this art in a system,
and a deeper knowledge of the principles and prac-
tice of chemistry is requisite to the attaining it, with¬
out being taught, than could well fall to the share of
painters, or other artists, I shall, therefore, be mope
minute in my instructions for the making the several
kinds of the grounds, sluxes, and colours ; in order
that they who are concerned in, or may be desirons
to apply themselves to the art of painting in enamel,
which is now become the basis of a considerable
manufacture in this countiy, may furnisn themselves
with whatever is necessary in its greatest perfection.
Besides the knowledge of the preparation of the
above substances, and of that part of the art of using
them, which belongs to painters in general, there
is another requisitc. This is the burning, as it is
called, the grounds, in order to forming them on the
body to be painted, or enamelled ; as also the co-
lours with the fluxes after they' are laid on the
grounds. What is meant by burning, is the giving
such a heat to the matter, when laid on the body to
be painted, as will fuse or melt it; and consequently
give to the flux, or vitreous part of the composition,
the proper qualities of a vehicle for binding the
colours to the ground, and holding the parts together.
As this requires a particular apparatus, I shall en¬
deavour to shew the method of constructing it in the
most expeditious and easy manner; and give such
cautions for the conduct of the operation, both for
burning the grounds and painting, as may best teach
those, who are lefs experienced in it, to attain to per-
fection in this art. It cannot be expected, neverthe-




less, considering the niccty of the subject, such direc-
tions can be given, as will insure success in the first
trials, with regard to several of the processes, or
even the general operations ; but whoever will make
themselves masters of the principles on which they
depend, which arc all along intimated, will easily be
able to correct their own errors.
A judgment formed by some little experience, is
likewise requisite for the preparing well the colours
with certainty. For as disserent parcels of the same
substance vary frequently in their qualities, with
regard to the degree. or proportion, it is necessary to
make allowance accordingly in the proportion of
the quantities in the mixtures. This cannot be done
till some little previous trial be made; and the power
of judging of them be gained by an experimental
acquaintancc with them. But as the materials in ge¬
neral are very cheap, and the experiments may be
made in the same fire where actual business is donc ;
whoever would excel in the art of preparing and
using enamels, should take a considerable scope of
experimental enquiry into the effect of all the various
proportions and commixtures of the substances used
Of the Substances used for forming Fluxes.
Minum, or red lead, is used as à fluxing body, for
forming the enamel for grounds ; as also in coin¬
pounding fluxes for the colours. It requires no pre-
paration for these purposes ; only it is proper it
should be pure ; which may be known by the me-
thod before given, page 47. This flux renders the
enamel soft; but producing some proportion of yel-
low colour, is not fit for all uses.
Fixt alkaline salt of vegetables, is sometime used
also, in forming the mixture for enamel grounds ; as
likewise




likewise in some compositions of fluxes for the
colours. It makes a less soft enamel than the lead,
but is free from yellow, or any other colour; and
therefore proper for some purposcs.
Borax is a falt of very peculiar qualities ; amongst
which, is that of promoting vitrification, and the
fusion of any glafs when vitrified, in a greater degree
than any other substance known ; on which account
it is of the greatest consequence, in forming fluxes
for enamel. It requires, neverthelefs, either to be
previously calcined or brought to a vitreous state,
which it suffers srom the application of moderate
heat alone; and it must also be finely powdered
before it be mixed with other ingredients in sluxes.
Its use is not much known in common practice ;
though of the greatest consequence to the art of
enamelling. As not only a set of softer colours may
be produced by the aid of it, than can be other-
wise had ; but the degree of cach may be brought
to correspond, by the employing it in different pro-
portions, according to the respective hardnefs of the
other ingredients, which differ so mucl, as not to
be regulated justly by any other means.
Common salt may be also used as a slux in ena-
melling, particularly where there is occafion for
glazings : as it is not only extremely fluid, and free
of tenacity when used, but also less subject to crack
than any other vitreous body whatever. But for
fluxes for grounds and colours in enamel, it is not
frequently necessary to multiply ingredients, as the
above three substances may; when properly applied,
sufficiently answer most purposes. The same reason-
ing extends to nitre and arsenic ; which, though
they have the qualities of fluxes, possess yet along with
them



them such others, with respect to their effect on se-
veral of the substances that compose the calours, as
renders the methods. of using them difficult and
comples.
Of the substances used for forming the body of enamel,
cor fluxes.
White sand is used as a body for the fluxes and
grounds of-enamel : it should be reduced previously
to an impalpable powder, in order that it may be
mixed more intimately with the other ingredients ;
which not only accelerates the vitrification, but
renders the glafs much more perfect. The kind of
sand proper for this purpose, is that brought from
Lynn, in Norsolk, and called by the name of that
place.
Flints are used for the same purpose as the white
sand; and it is proper to. use them, when that can¬
not be procured of the right kind. They require to
be calcined before they are applied to any purpose
of vitrification. This is to be done, by putting them
into any fire, and, continuing them there till the
whole substance become white ; when they must
be taken out ; and, while in their full heat, im¬
mersed in cold water, and kept there for some time.
By such treatment, they will be rendered of a very
brittle and calcarious texture, and very easy to be
powdered ; which must be done to a perfect degree,
for the reason above given. Where small quantities
of the matter of any kind of enamel is to be pre-
pared, calcined flints are preferable to fand; as they
are much more eafily reduced to an impalpablé pow¬
der, and the troublé of the previous calcination is
very little.





There is a fort of store, which the French call
milon, that forms the upper crust, and lies round
the free-stone in most quarries. This stone will lofe-
its tenacity in a moderate fire, and, when calcined,
runs much sooner into vitrification than either flints
or sand. It is ’therefore, when it can bé obtained, à
better matter for the body of fluxes or soft enamel,
ihan either of tlie other. It will, with the ’same
proportion of the slux ing ingredients, make a much
softer flux; or, it otherwise admits of the diminn-
tion of the proportion of some of them; vhich,
for inany experimental reasons, is in certain’cales an
advantage.
Of the substances used for producing a wbite coloar in enamel,
for forming the grounds.
Putty, or caleined tin, is used as a body of colour
for the enamél grounds. As tin is very troublesome
in calcination, requiring a fong continuance of sire;
and to be spread into à very thin surface, it is mucl
the best way to procure it for the purposes of enamel-
ling ready calcined, of those :who make it their
Broper businefs to calcine it, for the use of lapida-
ries, and other artists who use it. For they have
large furnaces, fitly constructed for performing that
operation in large quantities, and can consequently
afford it much cheaper than it can be prepared in
small quantities; besides the sparing the trouble. Tt
must be demanded of them by the name of puttys;
and care must be taken that-it be not sophisticated,
which it seldom fails to be before it comes out of
their hands for common purposes. The sophistica-
tion, which is generally by chalk, lime, or some
such white carth, may be thus distinguished. Pat




the putty into a crucible with some tallow or other
rgease; and give it the heat of fusion, or what is
sufficient to melt it; supplying the greafe in freshi
quantities as it burns away, till the caleined tin ap-
pears to have regained its metallic state. Suffer then
the remainder of the grease to burn away, and the
chalk or earth; if any were mixed with it, will be
found swimming on the furface of the metal ; to
which however the afhes of the grease must he sup-
pofed to have added some little quantity- There 1s,
neverthelefs, another body, with which the putty or
calx of tin may be adulterated, that will not disco¬
ver itself by this method of reduction of the tin-
It is white lead, which, in this manner of treatment,
would run into fusion, and mix with the ’tin : and
could therefore not be distinguished from it. But it
may be easily rendered perceptible by another man¬
ner of proceeding ; which is, to take the putty suf-
pected to be adulterated with it, and having put it
into a crucible, without any admixture, and invert-
ed another crucible over it, as a cover, to give it a
moderate heat, carefully avoiding thât the smoke or
coal of the fire may have any access to it to change
its colour. If there be any white lead mixed with
the putty, it will shew itself, when removed from
ghe fire, and become cold:in a yellow or brown co-
lour. If no such colour supervene, but the putty
appear equally white as before it was heated, a con¬
clufion may be safely made, that it was not adulte-
rated by white lead; or that, if fophisticated at all,
it must be by some white earth, which may be made
percéptible by the reduction of tin in the manner
before mentioned.
UItramarine



Ultramarine (the preparation of which we have
before given) is used in enamel, where very bright
blues of a lighter teint are wanted ; and sometimes
indeed, in other cases, by those who do not under-
stand the right use of zaffer and smalt. But there
are sew instances where zaffer, when perfectly good,
Aluxed with borax and a little calcined flint, or Ve-
netian glafs, to take off the fusible quality of the
borax, will not equally well answer with the best
ultramarine. The ultramarine requires no prepara-
tion when ufed in enamel painting, previously to its
being mixtwith the proper flux, and what relates to
its general qualities, and the means of distinguishing
its goodness or genuinenefs, we have, along with its
preparation, before taught, p. 54, and the following :
UItramarine afhies are ufed, where light semi-trans-
parent blues are wanted. But they are so frequently
adulterated with precipitations of copper, which, of

course, turn green on fluxing, that it is very necessary
to be cautious, in the use of any parcél not previ¬
ously tried.
Zaffer is used for producing blue, green, purple,
and black- colours in enamel. It is an earth, obtain-
ed by calcining a kind of stone, called cobalt ; and
when it is mixed with any kind of vitreous bodies,
it vitrifies, at the same time assuming a strong blue
colour; but for the most part verging to the purple.
It is to be had in a state proper for use,: of those co-
lourmen who make it ’their particular businefs to
supply the glass-makers with colours. The goodness
of zaffer can fcarcely be known but by an actual
trial of it; and comparing the effect of it wiih that
of some other known to be good, and used in the
same proportion.




Magnesia is an earth, which, when sluxed with
any vitreous body, produces a broken crimson, or
oul rose colour. It is’’to be had, prepared fit for
ise, except a more perfect levigation, srom those
who sell colours to tlie glafs-makers. It is uscful not
only for some purposes as a red, but for the several
compositions for black, purple, and some browns-
The goodness of the magnesia must be determined
y the same means as that of zaffer.
Smalt is, as before mentioned, zaffer vitrified with
proper additions ; which are generally fixt aikaline
salts and sands, or calcined flints, whicl are some-
times used as a blue in enamel. But being hard, it
requires, for such purposes, to be used with a flux,
which increasing the body of glass in too great 2
proportion for the tinge, is apt to dilute the colour
too much, where great force is wanted ; therefore
the use of the zaffer itself is in most cafes prefcrable.
There have nevertheless been, as was above observed,
some parcels of smalt, or vitrified calx of cobalt,
brought from Saxony, which are of an extreme
strong body of colour, and will bear any proportion
of slux necessary to render them as foft as my be re-
quired, without weakening the colour too much, for
any purpose. Common smalt, however, ground very
ine, and mixt with a fourth part of its weight of
borax (which is much the most powerful and kind-
ly flux for zaffer) will run pretty well, and may be
used where either a full colour is not demanded,
or where the work will admit of the colours being
laid on thick. The goodness of smalt may be judged
of by its bright and deep colour: and the less it in
clines to the purple the better. In order to judge
of the strength of the colour, the smalt should be




reduced to a sine powder: for in a grosser state, every
degree of fineness renders it so disferent, that a judg-
ment cannot be easily formed of it. Smalt is to he
had of all colourmen, and is not subject to any adul¬
terations, which would not be obvious on inspection.
Gold is used in enamel to produce a crimson ar
ruby colour ; which, by the mistaken sense of the,
Latin word purpureus, has been called purple by all
the English and French writers. It must be previ¬
ousty reduced to the state of a precipitated powder,
by dissolving in aqua regia ; and making a precipi¬
tation by means of tin, fixt alkaline salt, or some
other metaflic, or alkaline body.
Silver is used for producing a yellow colour in
en amel. It must be previoufly reduced to the state
of a powder; which may be done either by pre-
cipitation from spirit of nitre, or by calcination
with sulphur. The precipitation of silver from spi-
rit of nitre, may be performed by dissolving an ounce
of silver, in two or three ounces of spirit of nitre ;
and precipitating and edulcarating it.
Copper is used in enamel painting, for the form-
ing, green, blue, and red colours; but it must be
previously either calcined, or reduced to the state of
a powder by precipitation.
Iron is used to produce on orange red, or foul
scarlet colour in enamel; as also a transparent yel-
low; and to asfist, likewise, in the formation of
greens, and other compound colours. It is prepared
many ways, both by corrosion and precipitation ;
some of which indeed make a real difference, but
most of them lead to the same end.
Antimony is used for producing a yellow colour
in enamel, as well as the white before mentioned ;




and indeed, it is the most useful, and most used of
any substance whatever for that purpose. It is pre-
ared only by levigation ; to which its texture, not-
withstanding its being a semi-metal, very well fuits.
Glass of antimony is also used sometimes, in enamel
painting ; being itself a fine transparent orange
colour. But as it wants body, it has no great effect
out in compositions.
Orpiment has been also used in enamel for pro-
ducing a yellow colour; but it is very tender with
egard to the fire, and requires so foft a flux, while,r
at the same time, antimony, properly managed, will
to well supply the place of it, that it is rarely used-
Powdered bricks have been also used for com-
ounding yellow colours in enamel ; but as they act
only in consequence of the oker they contain, they
are certainly inferior to the prepared okers we have
given.
The most active flux amongst salts is borax ; which,
indeed, possesses this power in the greatest degree hi¬
therto known of any simple whatever. The next is
dead ; which vitrifies with a very moderate degree
of heat, and asfimilates to glass with itself, not only
many kinds of earth, but all metals and semi-metals ;
except gold and silver in their entire state. Arsenic
os the next powerful flux, only it requires to be
fixed, by conjoining it with some other body al-
ready vitrified ; otherwise it sublimes and flies away
before it arrives at the vitrefactive heat. The seve-
ral kinds of salts liave the next degree of sluxing
power ; and among them sea salt possesses the great-
est. But they are not sufficiently strong themselves
to form an enamel flux soft enough to be used in
painting. Though, as they are colourless, which





is not the case of vitrified lead, they are very ne-
cessary to be compounded with lead; or used in its
place, assisted by borax, where absence of every de-
gree of colour is necessary in the flux.

PAINTING apon GLASS.
THE antient manner of painting upon glass was
very simple, and consequently very easy ; it con-
sisted in the mere arrangement of pieces of glass of
different colours in some fort of symmetry, and
constituted what is now called Mosaie work.
In process of time they came to attempt more re-
gular designs, and also to reprefent figures heightened
with all their shades : Yet they proceeded no farther
than the contours of the figures in black with water-
colours, and hatching the draperies after the same
manner, on glasses of the colour of the object they
designed to paint. For the carnation, they used glass
ef a bright red colour ; and upon this they drew the
principal lineaments of the sace, &c. with black,
But in time, the taste for this fort of painting im¬
proving considerably, and the art being found appli¬
cable to the adorning of churches, &c. they found
out means of incorporating the colours in the glafs it-
self, by heating them in the fire to a proper degree ;
having first laid on the colours.
The colours used in painting or staining of glafs,
are very different from those used in painting either
in water or oil colours.
Forblack, take scales of iron, one ounce ; scales of
copper, one ounce ; jet, half-an ounce ; réduce them



to powder, and mix them. For blue, take powder
of blue, one pound ; sal nitre, half a pound ; mix
them and grind them well together. For carnation,
take red chalk, eight ounces ; iron scales and litharge
of silver, of each two ounces ; gum arabic, half an
ounce ; dissolve in water; grind all together sor half
an hour as stiff as you can ; then putit in a glafs and
stir it well, and let it stand to settle fourteen days.
For green, take red lead, one pound ; scales of copper,
one pound ; and flint, five pounds; divide them
into three parts; and add to them as much sal nitre ;
put them into a crucible, and melt them with a strong
fire ; and when it is cold, powder it, and grind it on
a porphyry. For gold colour, take silver, an ounce ;
antimony half an ounce; melt them in a crucible ;
then pound the mafs to powder, and grind it on a
copperplate ; add to it yellow oker, or brick dust
calcined again, fifteen ounces ; and grind them well
together with water. For purple, take minum, one
pound ; brown stone, one pound ; white flint, five
pounds ; divide them into three parts, and add to
them as much sal nitre as one of these parts ; calcine,
melt, and grind it as you did the green. For red,
take jet, four ounces ; litharge of silver, two ounces ;
red chalk, one ounce ; powder them fine, and mix
them. For white take jet, two parts ; white flint,
ground on a glafs very fine, one part; mix them
For yellow take Spanish brown, ten, parts ; leaf silver,
one part ; antimony, half a part; put all into a cru-
cible, and calcine them well.
Those beautiful works which were made in the
glafs-houfes were of two kinds. In some, the colour
was diffused through the wholc substance of the
glass. In others, which were the more common, the






colour was only on one side, scarce penetrating with-
in the substance above one third of a line; though this
was more or less according to the nature of the co-
lour ; the yellow being always found to enter the
deepest. These last, though not so strong and beautiful
as the former were of more advantage to the work-
men, by reason that on the fame glass, though already
coloured, they could shew other kind of colours,
where there was occasion to embroider draperies,
enrich them with soliages, or reprefent other orna-
ments of gold, silver, &c.
In order to this, they made use of emery, grinding
ot wearing down the surface of the glafs, till such
time as they were got through the colour to the clear
glass. This done, they applied the proper colours
on the other side of the glafs. By this means, the
new colours were hindered from running and mix:
ing with the former, when they exposed the glasses
to the fire.
When indeed the ornaments were to appear white,
the glafs was only bared of its colour with emery,
without tinging the place with any colour at all;
and this was the manner by which they wrought
their lights and heightenings on all kinds of colour.
The first thing to be done, in order to paint, or
stain glass, in the modern way, is to design, and even
colour the whole subject on paper. Then they chuse
such pieces of glafs as are clear, even, and smooth,
and proper to receive the several parts, and procecd
to distribute the design itself, or papers it is drawn
on, into pieces suitable to those of the glafs : always
tak ing care that the glasfes may join in the contours
of the figures, and the folds of the draperies; that the
carnations, and other finer parts may not be impaired




by the lead with which the pieces arc to be joined
together. The distribution being made, they mark
wiII the glasses as well as papers, that they may be
known again, which donc, applying every part of
the design upon the glafs intended for it, they copy
our transser, the design upon this glafs with the black
colour diluted in gum water, by tracing and follow-
ing all the lines and strokes as they appear through
the glafs, with the point of a pencil.
When these strokes are well dried, which will
happen in about two days, the work being only in
black and white, they give a slight wasn over with
urine, gum arabic, and a little black : and repeat it
several times, according as the shades are desired to
be heightened, with this precaution, never to apply
a new wash till the former is sufficiently dried.
This done, the lights and risings are given by
ubbing off the colour in the respective places with
wooden point, or the handle of a pencil.
As to the other colours abovementioned, they are
used with gum water, much as in painting in mi¬
niature ; taking care to apply them lightly sor fear
of effacing the outlines of the design ; or even, for
the greater security, to apply them on the other
ide ; especially yellow, which is very pernicous to
the other colours, by blending therewith. And
here too, as in pieces of black and white, particu-
ar regard must always be had not to lay colour on
colour, or lay on a new lay, till such time as the
former are well dried.
It may be added, that the yellow is the only co-
our that penetrates through the glafs, and incorpo¬
rates therewith by the fire ; the rest, and particu-
larly the blue, which is very difficult to use, re-




maining on the surface, or at lcast entering very lit-
tie. When the painting of all the pieces is finished,
they are carried to the lurnâce, or oven, to anneal,
or bake the colours.
The furnace here used is small, built of brick,
from eighteen to thirty inches square ; at six inches
from the bottom is an’aperture to put in the fuel, and
maintain the fire. Over this aperture is a grate,
made of thrce-square bars of iron, which traverse
the furnace, and divide it into two parts. Two
inches above this partition, is another little aper¬
ture, through which they take out pieces to exa-
mine how the coction goes forward. On the grate
is placed à square carthen pan, six or seven inches
deep , and five or six inehes less every way than the
perimeter or the furnace. On the one side hereof is
a little aperture, through which to make trials,
placcd directly opposite to that of the furnaces des-
tined for the same end. In this pan are the pieces
of glafs to be placed in the sollowing manner: First,
the bottom of the pan is covered with three strata,
or layers, of quick lime pulverized ; those strata
being separated by two others of old broken glafs,
the design whereof is to secure the painted glass
from the too intense heat of the fire. This done,
the glasïes are laid horizontally on the last or upper¬
moft layer of lime.
The first row of glafs they cover over witli a
layer of the same powder, an inch deep; and over
this they lay another range of glasses, and thus al-
ternately till the pan is quite full; taking care that
the whole heap always end with a laver of the lime
Powder.



The pan being thus prepared, they cover up the
furnace with tiles, on a square table of earthenware,
closely luted all round ; only leaving five little aper¬
ures, one at cach corner, and another in tlie min¬
dle, to serve as chimnies. Things thus disposed,
there remains nothing but to give the fire to the
work. The fire for the first two hours must be very
moderate, and iust be increased in proportion as
the coction advances, for the space of ten or twelve
hours ; in which time it is usually compleated. At
last the fire, which at first was charcoal, is to be
of dry wood, so that the flame covers the whole pan,
and even issucs out at the chimneys.
During the last hours, they make essays, from
time to time, by taking out pieces laid for the pur¬
purpose, through the little aperture of the furnace
and pan, to see whether the yellow be perfect, and
the other colours in good order. When the an¬
nealing is thought sufficient, they proceed with great
haste to extinguish the fire, which otherwise would
soon burn the colours, and break the glaffes.

Of JAPANNING.
By japanning is to be here understood the art of

covering bodies by grounds of opake colours
in varnish; which may be either afterwards deco-
rated by paintings or gilding, or left in a plain
state. This-is not at present practised so frequently
on chairs, tables and other furniture of houses, ex-
cept tea waiters, as formerly. But the introduction of
it for ornamenting coaches, snuff-boxes and skreens,




in which there is à rivalship betwixt ourselves and
the French, renders the cultivation and propaga-
tion of this art of great importance to commerce. I
shall therefore be more explicit in shewing the me-
thods both now and formerly in use; with the ap-
plication of each to the several purposes to which
they are best adapted ; and point out, at the fame
tiine, several very material improvements, that are
at prefent enjoyed only by particular persons; or
not at all hitherto brought into practice.
The substances which admit of being japanned are
almost every kind that are dry and rigid, and not too
flexible ; as wood, metals, leather, and paper pre-
pared.
Wood and metals do not requirè any ofher prepa-
ration, but to have their surfaces perfcctly éven
and clean. But leather should bé fecurely strain-
ed either on frames, or on boards ; as its bend
ing, or forming folds, would’ otherwise crack and
force off the coats of varnish. Paper also shoulû
be treated in the same manner, and 'have a previous
strong coat of some kind of size; but it is rarely
made the subject of japanning till it is converted in¬
to papier mache, or wrought by other means, into
such form, that its original state, particularly with
respect to flexibility, is lost.
One principal variation in the manner of japan¬
ning is, the using or omitting any priming or under
coat on the work to be japanned. In the older prac-
tice, such priming was always used ; and is at pre-
sent retained in the French manner of japanning
coaches and snuff boxes of the papier mache. But
in tlie Birmingham manufacture, it has been always
rejected. The advantage of using such priming or




under coat is, that it makes à saving in the quantity
of varnisn used ; because the. matter of which the
priming is composed fills up the inequalities of the
body to be varnished, and makes it easy, by means of
rubbing and water-polishing, to gain an even surface
for the varnishi. This was therefore such a conveni¬
ence in the case of wood, as the giving a hardnefs
and firmness to the ground was also in the case of
leather, that it became an established method; and
is therefore retained, even in the instance of the
papier mache, by the French, who applied the
recejved method of japanning to that kind of work
on its introduction. There is, neverthelefs, this in¬
convenience always attending the use of an under
coat of size, that the japan coats of varnish and co-
lour will he constantly liable to be cracked and
peeled off, by any violence, and will not endure
near so long as the bodies japanned in the same
manner, but without any such priming. This may
be easily observed in comparing the wear of the
Paris and Birmingham snuff-boxes; which latter,
when good of their kind, never peel or crack, or
suffer any damage, unlefs by great violence, and
such a continued rubbing, as wastes away the sub-
stance of the varnisn; while the japan coats of
the Parisian boxes crack and fly off in flakes, when-
ever any knock or fall, particularly near the
edges, exposes them to be injured. But the Bir-
mingham manufacturers, who originally practised the
japanning only on metals, to which the reason
above given for the use of priming did not extend,
and who took up this art of themselves as an in-
vention, of course omitted at first the use of any
sach under coat; and not finding it more necessary





in the instance of papier mache, than on metals,
continue still to reject it. On which account the
boxes of their manufacture are, with regard to the
wear, much better than the French.
The laying on the colours with varnish instead of
gum water, is also another variation from the me-
thod of japanning formerly practised. But the much
greater strength of the work, where they are laid
on in varnisn or oil, has occasioned this way to be
exploded, with the greatest reason in all regular
manufactures. However, they who may practise ja-
panning on cabinets, or other such pieces, as are not
exposed to much wear or violence, for their amuse-
ment only, and consequently may not find’ it wortli
their while to encumber themselves with the prepa¬
rations necessary for the other methods, may paint
with water colours on an under coat laid on the wood,
or other substance, of which the piece to be japanned
is formed ; and then finisn with the proper coats of
varnish, according to the methods below taught. If
the colours are tempered with the strongest isinglass
size and honey, instead of gum water, and laid on
very flat and even, the work will not be much in-
fcrior in appearance to that done by the other me-
thod; and will last as long as the common old japan
work, except the best kinds of the true japan.
It is practised likewise, in imitation of what is
sometimes done in the Indian work, to paint witl
water colours on grounds of gold; in which case
the isinglafs size, with sugar-candy or honey, as
above directed, is the best vehicle.
Imitations are also made of japan work, by colour-
ing prints, gluing them to wood work, and then giv¬
ing them a ffifring appearance, by the use of some
white varnisn




Of japan grounds.-The proper japan grounds.
are either such as are formed by the varnish and co-
lour, where the whole is to remain of one simple
colour ; or by the varnish either coloured, or with-
out colour, on which some painting, or other deco-
ration, is afterwards to be laid. It is necessary,
howe ver, before I proceed to speak of the particular
grounds, to shew the manner-of laying on the priming
or under coat, where any such is used. 
This priming is of the same nature with that
called clear coating (or vulgarly clear coaling) prac¬
tised erroneously by the house-painters; and con-
sists only in laying on, and drying in the most even
manner, a composition of size and whiting. The com¬
mon size has been generally used for this purppse ;
but where the work is of a nicer kind, it is bêtter
fo employ the glovers or the parchment size; and if
a third of isinglass be added, it will be still better;
and if not laid on too thick, much less liable to peel
and crack. The work should be prepared for this
priming, by being well smoothed with the fish-skin, or
glass-shaver; and being made thoroughly clean,
should be brushed over once or twice with hot size,
diluted with two thirds of water, if it be of the
common strength. The priming should then be laid
on with a brush as even as possible, and should
be formed of a size, whose consistence is betwixt
the common kind and glue, mixt with as much
whiting as will give it à sufficient body of colour to
hide the surface of whatever it is laid upon, but not
more.
If the surface be very even, on wlich the priming
s used, two coats of it laid on in this manner, will
be sufficient : but if, on trial with a fine wet rag,





it will not receivé a proper water polish, on accouht
of ary inequalitiès, not sufficiently filled up and cô-
vered, two or more coats must be given it: and
whether a grèâter or less number be üsed, thé work
fhould be moothed, after the last coât but one is'
dry, by rubbing it with Dutch rushes. When the

last coat is dry, the water polifhi should be given, by
passing over every part of it with a sine rag gently
moistened, till the whole appear perfectly plain
and even. The prifhiing will then Be compleated,
and the work ready to receive the painting, or co-
loured vamilh: the rest of the proceedings are the
same in this case as where nô priming is (ised.
Of common grounds of varnish, which are to be
painted uponWhere wood ôr Téather is to be ja-
panned, and nofpriming is used, the best preparation

is to lay two or three coats of coarse varnish com-
Bosed in the fbllowing manner.
 Take of rectifiéd spirit of wine one pint, and of
 coarse seed-lac and resineach two ounces. Dissolve
 the seed-lac and resin in the spirit; and then strain
 off the varnish.
This varnish ’as well as all 'others formed’of spirit
of wine, must be laid on in a warm place ; and, ifit
can be conveniently managed, the piece of work to
be varnishied, should be made warm likewise, and for
the same reason, all dampness should be’avoided ; for
either cold or moisture chill this kind of varnish,
and prevent its taking proper hold of the substanée
on which it is laid.
When the work is so prepared, or by the priming
with the composition of size and whiting above de-
scribed, the proper japan ground miist be laid on ;
which is much the best formed of shell-lac varnish,
and




and the colour desired; if white be not in question,
which demands à péculiar treatment, as I fhaIl below
explain ; or great brightnefs be not required, when
also other means must bé pursued.
The colours used with the shell-lac varnish may-
be any pigments whatever, which give the teint of
the ground desired, and they may be mixt together
to form browns or any compound colours ; but, with
respect to such as require peculiar methods for the
producing them of the first degree of brightnefs, I
shall particularize them below.
The colours for grounds may otherwise be mixed
with the white varnisnes formed in oil of turpentinc ;
bût these varnishes haye no advantages over thé
shell-tac but in their whiteness, which preferves thé
brightness of the colours, and they are at the samé
time greatly inferior in hardnefs to it.
As metals never require to be under coated with
whiting, they may be treated in the same manner as
wood or leather, when the under coat is omitted, ex-
cept in the instances particularly spoken of below.
Of white japan grounds.-The forming a ground
perfectly white, and of the first degree of hardnefs,
remains hitherto a desideratum, or matter sought for
in the art of japanning. As there are no substances
which can be dissolved, so as to form a very hard
varnish, but what have too much colour not to de-
prave the whiteness when laid’on ofa due thicknefs
over the work, except some very late discoveries not
hitherto brought into practice.
The nearest approach, however, to a perfect white
varnish, by means already known to the public, is
made by the following composition ;




 Take slake white, or white lead, wafhed over
 and ground up with a sixth of its weight of starch,
 and tlien dried; and temperit properly for spread¬
 ing, with mastic varnissi, or compound them with
 gum animi' Lay these on the body to be japan¬
ned, prepared either with or without the under coat.
of whiting, in the manner as above ordered ; and
then varnish over it with five or six coats of the fol¬
lowing varnish;
 Provide any quantity of the best seed-lac, and
 pick out ofit all the, clearest and whitest grains ; re-
 serving the more coloured and fouler parts for the
 coarser varnisnes, such as that abovementioned for
 priming or preparing wood or leather. Take of
 this picked seed-lac, two ounces, and of gum animi,
 three ounces ; and dissolve them, being previously
 reduced to à grofs powder, in about a quart of spirit
 of wine ; and strain off the clear varnisn.
The seed-lac will yet give a slight tinge to this com¬
position, but cannot be omitted, where the varnish is
wanted to be hard ; though, where a softer will an-
swer the end, the proportion may be diminished :
and a little crude turpentine added to the gum animi,
to take off the brittleness.
A very good varnish, free entirely from all britile-
ness, may be formed, by dissolving as much gum
animi, as the oil will take, in old nut or poppy oil ;
which must be made to boil gently, when the gum
is put into it. The ground of white colour itself
may be laid on in this varnisn, and then a coat or
two of it may be put over the ground ; but it must
be well diluted with oil of turpentine when it is
used. This, though free from brittlenefs, is, never-
thelefs, liable to susser, by being indented or bruised
by


2



by any slight strokes; and it will not well bear any
polish, but may be brought to a very smooth surface
without, if it be judicioussy managed in the lay ing it
on. It is likewise somewhat tedious in drying, and
will require some timc where several coats are laid
on, as the last ought not to contain much oil of tur-
pentine. It must be observed likewise, that the gum
resin, such as the animi, copal, &c. can never be dif-
solved in substantial oils, by the medium of heat,
without a considerable change in the colour of the
oils, by the degree of heat necessary to produce the
solution. A method of dissolving gum copal in oil
of turpentine is, however, now discovered by a gen¬
tleman of great abilities in chemistry ; and he has
also obtained a method of dissolving amber in the
same menstruum, so that we may hope soon to sce the
art of japanning carried to a consummate degree of
perfection ; when the public are put in possession of
these most important inventions, or the fruits of
them.
Of blue japan grounds.-Blue japan grounds may
be formed of bright Prussian blue, or of verditer
glazed over by Prussian blue, or of smalt. The co-
lour may be best mixed with shell-lac varnish, and
brought to a polishing state by five or six coats of
varnisn of seed-lac. But the varnish, neverthelefs,
will somewhat injure the colour, by giving to a
true blue a cast of green; and fouling, in some de¬
gree, a warm blue, by the yellow it contains. Wherc,
therefore, a bright blue is required, and a less de-
gree of hardness can be dispensed with, the method
before directed, in the case of white grounds, must
be pursued.




Of red japan grounds. For a scarlet japan ground,
vermillion may be used. But the vermillion alone
has a glaring effect, that renders it much less beau-
ful than the crimson produced by glazing it over
with carmine or sine lake ; or even with rose pink,
which has a very good effect used for this purposc.
For a very bright crimson, nevertheless, instead of
glazing with carmine, the Indian lake, known in
shops by the name of safflower, should be used, dis-
solved in the spirit of which the varnisn is com¬
pounded (which it readily admits of when good).
But in this case, instead of glazing with the shell¬
lac varnish, the upper or polishing coats need only
be used ; as they will equally receive and convey
the tinge of the Indian lake, which may be actually
dissolved by spirit of wine; and this will be found a
much cheaper method than using carmine. If, not-
withstanding, the highest degree of brightness be
required, the white vamnishes must be used.
It is at prefent, however, very difficult to obtain
this kind of lake. For it does not appear that more
than one considerable quantity was ever brought
over, and put into the hands of colourmen; and
this being now expended, they have not the means
of a fressi supply. It, however, may be easily had
from the same place whence the former quantity was
procured, by any persons who go thither in the East
India company’s ships.
Of yellow japan grounds.-For bright yellow
grounds, king’s yellow, or turpeth mineral, should be
employed, either alone or mixed with fine Dutch
pink. The effect may be still more heighte ned, by
dissolving powdered turmeric root in the spirit of
wine, of which the upper or polishing coat is made ;




which spirit of wine must be strained from off the
regs, before the seed-lac be added to it, to form the
varnisn.
The seed-lac varnish is not equally injurious here,
and with greens, as in the case of other colours ; be¬
cause, being only tinged with a reddisn yellow, it is lit-
tle more than an addition to the force of the colours.
Yellow grounds may be likewise formed of the
Dutch pink only ; which, when good, will not be
wanting in brightnels, tholigh extremely cheap-
Of green japan grounds-Green grounds may be
produced by mixing king’s yellow and bright Prussian
blue ; or ractrer, turpeth mineral and Prussian blue.
A cheap, but souler kind, may be had from verdi-
rise, with a litile of the abovementioned yellows, or
Dutch pink. But where a very bright green is
wanted, the chrystals of verdigrise (called distilled
verdigrise) should be employed; and, to heighten
the effect, they should be laid on a ground of leaf
old, which renders the colour extremely brilliant
and pleasing.
They may any of them be used successfully with
good seed-lac varnish, for the reason before given ;
out will be still brighter with the white vamnisn.
Of orange-coloured japan grounds.-Orange-co¬
loured japan grounds may be formed, by mixing ver-
million, or red lcad, with. king’s yellow, or Dutch
pink ; or red orpiment, will make a brighter orange
ground than can be produced by any mixture.
Of purple japan grounds.—Purple japan grounds
may be produced by the mixture of lake, and Prussian
blue or a fouler kind, by vermillion and Prussian
blue They may be treated as the xest, with respect
the varnish.




Of black japan grounds, to be produced without
heat-— Black grounds may be formed by either ivory
black, or lamp black ; but the former is preferablé,
where it is perfectly good.
These may be always laid on with the shell-lac var-
nisn; and have their upper or polishing coats of
common seec-lac varnish; as the tinge or foulness of
the varnish can be here no injury.
Of common black japan grounds on iron or cop-
per, produced by means of heat--For forming the
common black japan grounds by means of heat, the
piece of work to be japanned must be painted over
with drying oil; and when it is of a moderate dry-
ness, must be put into à stove of such degree of
heat, as will change the oil black, without burning
it, so as to destroy or weaken its tenacity. The stove
should not be too hot when the work is put into it,
nor the heat increased too fast; either of which er¬
rors would make it blister: but the slower the heat
is augmented, and the longer it is continued, pro-
vided it be restrained within the due degrce, the
harder will be the coat of japan. This kind of var-
nisn requires no polisn, having received, when pro-
perly managed, a sufficient one from the heat.
Of the fine tortoise shell japan ground, produced
by means of heatThe best kind of tortoise shell
ground produced by heat is not less valuable for its
great hardnefs, and enduring to be made hotter than
boiling water without damage, than for its beautiful
appearance. It is to be made by means of a varnisn
prepared in the following manner :
: Take of good linseed oil one gallon, and of um¬
e bre half a pound. Boil them together till the
ee oil becomes very brown and thick : strain it then





 through a coarse cloth, and set it again to boil ;
 in which state it must be continued till it acquires.
 a pitchy consistence, when it will be fit for use-
Having prepared thus the varnisn, clean well the
iron or copper-plate, or rather piece which is to be
japanned ; and then lay vermillion tempered with
shell-lac varnish, or with drying oil, diluted with
oil of turpentine, very thinly, on the places intend-
ed to imitate ’the more transparent parts of the tor-
toise shell. When the vermillion is dry, brush over
the whole with the black varnish, tempered to a
due consistence with oil of turpentine ; and when
it is set and firm, put the work into a stove, where
it may undergo a very strong heat, and it must be
continued a considcrable time, if even three weeks
or à month, it will be the better.
This was given, among other recipes by Kunckel,
but appears to have been neglected till it was re-
vived with great success in the Birmingham manu¬
factures, whère it was not only the ground of snuff-
boxes, dressing-boxes, and other such like lesser
pieces, but of those beautiful tea-waiters, which
have been so justly esteemed and admired in several
parts of Europe where they have been sent. This
ground may be décorated with painting and gilding,
in the same manner as any other varnished surface,
which had best be done after the ground has been
duly hardened by the hiot stove ; but it is well to
give a second annealing with a more gentle heat af-
ter it is sinished.
Of painting japan work Japan work ought pro¬
perly to be painted with colours in varnish. But in
order for the greater dispatch, and in somc very nice
works in sinall, for the freer use of the pencil,





the colours are now most frequently temnpered in
oil ; which should previoussy have a sourth part.
of its weight of gum animi dissolved in it; or in
default of that, of tlie gums sanderac or mastie, as I
have likewise before intimated. When the oil is
thus used, it should be well diluted with spirit of
turpentine, that the colours may be laid more evan-
ly and thin : by which means, sewer of the polifhi-
ing or upper coats of varnish become necessary,
In some instances, water colours, as I before
inentioncd, are laid on grounds oft gold, in tlie
manner of other paintings; and are best, when, so
used, in their proper appcarance, without any vaf-
nisn over them. They are also sometimes so managed,
as to have the effect of embossed work. The colours
employed in this way, sor painting, are (as l before
intimated) best prepared by means of isinglafs size,
corrected with honey, or sugar-candy. The body
on which the embossed work is raised, need not,
however, be tinged with the exterior colour, but
may be best formed of very strong gum water, thick-
ened to a proper consistence by bole armoniac and
whiting in equal parts ; which being laid on in the
proper figure, and repaired when dry, may be then
painted with the proper colours tempered in the
isinglass size, or in the general manner with shell-
lac varnish.
Of varnishing japan workThe last, and finishi-
ing part of japanning, lies in the laying on and po-
lishing the outer coats of varnish ; which are ne-
cessary, as well in the pieces that have only one
simple ground of colour, as with those that are
painted. This is, in general, best done with common
sécd-lac varnisn; except in the instances, and on
those



those occasions, where I have already shevn other
methods to be more cxpedient. The fame reafcans.
which decide as tosthe sitnefs or impropriety of the
varnishes, with respect to the colours of the ground,
hold equallyswell with regard to those of the painting-
or where brightnafs. is the most material point, and
tinge of yellow will injure it, seed-lac must give¬
way to the-whiter gums. . But where hardnefs, and a-
greater tenacity, aaræ most essentiak it must be ad-
iered to; and where both are so necessary, that it
is propet one should give way t9 ghe othier, in a
certain degvee reciprocally, a mixt varnish must be
adopted.
This-mixed varnish, as I besore observed, should
be made of the picked sced-lac. The common seedt
as varnish, which is the most useful preparation of
the kind hitherto invented, may be fhus made :-
 Take of seed-lac thrce ounces: and put it into wa-
 ter to freeit from the sticks and silch that frequently
are inteimixed with it; and which must be done
 by stirring it- about, and then pouring off the water
 and adding fresh quantities, in order to repeat the
 operations till it be frce from all impurities, as it
 very effectually may be by this means. Dry it then
 and powder it groisly ; put it, with a pint of rec-
 tified spirit of wine, info a bostle, of which it will
 not fill above two thirds. Shake the mixture well
 together, and place the bottle in a gentle heat, till
 the seed appears to be dissol ved ; the shaking being
 in the mean time repeated as often as may be con¬
venient ; and then pour off all which can be ob¬
 tained clear by that method, and strain the remain-
 der through a coarse cloth. The varnish thus
 prepared must be kept for use in a bôttle well
stopt.





When the spirit of wine is very strong, it will
dissolve a greater proportion of the sced-lac ; but this
will saturate the common, which is seldom of a
strength sufsicient sor making varnishes in perfec-
tion. As the chilling, whichis the most incon-
venient accident attending those of this kind, is
prevented, or produced more frequently, according.
zo the strength of the spirit, I will take this oportu¬
nity of sliewing a method by which weaker rectified
spirits may, with great ease, at any time, be freed
from the phlegm, and vendered of the first degree of
strength.
 Take a pint of the common rectified spirit of
 wine ; and put it into a bottle, of which it will not
 fill above three parts. Add to it half an ounce of
 pearl-ashes, salt of tartar, or any other alkaline
 salt, heated red hot, and powdered, as well as it
 can be without much loss of its heat. Shake the
 mixture frequently for the space of half an hour ;
e: before which time, a great part of the phlegm will
 be separated from the spirit; and will appear, to-
 gether with the undissolved part of the salts, in the
 bottom of the bottle. Let the spirit then be pour-
 ed off, or freed from the phlegm and salts by
 means of a tritorium, or separating funnel’; and let
 half an ounce of thie pearl-ashies, heated and pow¬
 dered as before, besadded to it, and the same trcat-
 ment repeated. This may be done a third timc, if
 the quantity of phlegm separated by the addition of
 the pearl-afhies appear considerable: An ounce of
 alum reduced to powder and madc hot, but not
 burnt, must then be put into the spirit, and suffered
 to remain some hours ; the bottle being frequentlv
 shaken. After which, the spirit being poured off,
 it will be fit for use.
The-




The addition of the the alum is necessary, to neu¬
ralize the remains of the alkaline falts, or pearl-
ashes; which would otherwise greatly deprave the
spirit, with respect to varnishies and’lacquers, wherc
vegetable colours are concerned, and must conse-
quent ly render another distillation necessary,
Tlie manner of using the seed-lac, or white var-
nissies, is the same ; except with- zegard to the sub¬
stance used in polishing, which, where a pure whitc,
or great clearness of other colours, is-in question,
should be itself white; whereas the browner soris of
polishing dust, as being cheaper, and doing their
business with greater dispatch, may be used in other
cafes. The pieces, or work, to be varnished should
be placed near a fre, or in a room where there is a
stove, and made perfectly dry ; and then the varnisn
may be rubbed over them by the proper brusnes
made for that purpose, beginning in the middle, and
pasiing the bruih to one end; and theu, with another
stroke from the middle, passing it to the other. But
no part should be croffed or twice passed over, in
forming one coat, where it can possibly be avoided.
When one coat is dry, another must be laid over it;
and this inust be continucd at least sive or six timcs,
or more, if on trial, there be not à sufficient thickness
of varnish to bear the polish, without laying hare tie
painting, or the ground colour underneath.
When a sufficient number of coats is thus laid on,
the work is fit to be polished; which inust be done,
in common cases, by rubbing it with a rag dipped in
tripoli (commonly called rotten stone) finely powder-
ed. But towards the end of the rubbing, a little
oil of any kind should be used along with the pow¬
der; and when the work appears sufficiently bright
and glossy, it should be well rubbed with the oil
alone,



alone, to clean it from the powder, and give it a still
brighter lustre.
In the case of white grounds, instead of the tripoli,
fine putty or wliiting. must be used ; both- which
should be washed over, toi prevent the danger of
damaging- the work from any fand or other gritty
mattcr, that may happen- to be commixt with them.
It -is z.great iinprovement of all kinds of japan
work, to harden the varnish by means of heat; which,
in every degrce that can be applied. short of whæt
would burn-or: calcine the matter, tends to give it à
more firm and strong texture. Where metals form
lie hody, tlxercfore; a very hot stove may be used;
and the pieces of work may be continued- in it a con¬
siderable:time. ;. efpecially if the heat be gradually
increased. But where wood is in question, heat must
be sparingly used,: as it wouldt orherwise warp or
shrink the body, so as to injure the general figure.
Of gilding japan work--The wvarious methods of
gilding, which are applicable to, the ornamenting
japan work, being exceedingly prolix and uninte rest-
ing, it is needless to repeat them here. I fhall, there-
fore; only obferve, that in gilding with geld size
swhich-is almost the only method now practised im
Japan work) where it is desired to have the gold not
shine, or approaclt in the lcast towards the burnisfi-
ing state, the size should be used either with oil of
turpentine only, or with a very little fat oil. But
wheve a greater lustre, and appearance of polissi,
are wanting, without the trouble of burnishing, and:
the preparation necessary for it, fat oit alone, or
mixed with a little gold size, should be used ; and
the same proportionable effect will be produced.
from a mean proportion of them.




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































