















































eet




























































































Arts COMPANION,
Or a New
ASSISTANT
FOR THE
INGENIOUS.
In Three PARTS.
PARt I. Containing, The Art of Draw-
ing in Perspective made easy and fully explain’d; the
Manner of Drawing with Crayons, and the best Re-
ceipts for making them of all Colours : The Way of
painting on Glass; Instructions for Etching on Copper-
Plate, and to cast Amber in any Shape: With a new
and curious Method of making the various Kinds of Var-
nishies for Japanning upon Glass, Wood, or Metal; and
to make gilt Japan-ware as beautiful and light as that
bought from the East-Indies.
PART II. Containing the Art of Draw¬
ing and Painting in Water-Colours ; with sufficient Di-
rections for delineating a View or Prospect to the utmost
Exactness, and for colouring the same or any other Print
in the most beautiful Manner; Also Instructions for mak-
ing transparent Colours of every Sort, and the Manner
of taking off Medals instantly, by various Methods not
before made publick, interspersed witff many curious Re-
ceipts for the Use of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, &c.
PARt III. Containing the Art of Paint-
ing in Miniature ; whereby the various Methods of Draw-
ing are made easy to any tolerable Capacity : To which
are added Directions for Shadowing, Stipling, &c. with
many curious Receipts for preparing Colours peculiar to
this Kind of Painting ; likewise the Preparation of an ex-
cellent Polisn and Shell: The whole taken from some of
the beft Italians and other Masters.


LONDON; Printed, and DUBLIN Re-
printed by 1. Jackson at the Globe in Meatb-Screet,
Price bound, 1 71/2.
1749.






























The Preface
THE following Piece is designed for the lnstruction
and Entertainment ef Gentlemen and Ladies, wbo
chuse to divert tbemselves in the curious Arts of
Drawing. J apanning, Painting upon Glass, Varuisbing up¬
on Metal, Wood or Pastboard, and of taking Views and
Prospects justly, aecording to tbe Rules of Perspective.
Directions for the speedy attaining the Knowledge of these
useful and amusing Arts, without giving the Students the
Trouble of consulting large Volumes (wbich are generally
taken from one another right or wrong) or of learning seve¬
ral Branches of the Mathematicks, as is generally thought
necessary, in order to understand Perspective ; a Science,
without the Knowledge of wbich, it is impossible to make
any great Improvement in the Arts of Drawing or Painting,
er even to be a Judge of good Drawing, or to understand
whether one is Right or Wrong, in what one would invent
or design.
I must confess, lowe my Knowledge of several valuable
Receipts, to some Manuscrips of the great Mr. Boyle,
which bave never been printed; and. bave fallen into my
Hands by Means of the same noble Lord, bis Relation, whom
Ihave mentioned in my Art of Drawing, and Painting
in Water-colours,
Iam likewise obliged to a worthy Gentleman, who, af-
ter a deliberate Study of Perspective, set me to rights in a
few Hours, when lwas at any Loss. As far the rest, they
are Observations srom the Experiments wbich I have






made from time to time, at à large Expence, and witb
great Industry.
Ihave been upbraided by some Workmen in Cariosities,
for publishing Receipts of Value, to instract the Gentry in
the Manner of Drawing and Pamting, and in Arts of the
like kind; for say they, it is a Damage to the Workmen
who get their Livelihood by such Things. I have a short
Answer to this Argument; namely, that there are none of
the Receipts, wbich l publisp, but what are either my own
Iavention, or T have bought at a good Frice, or else hade
heen presented witb by People of Faspion, with their Defire
to have them made publick ; and these are such as would
never come to the Knowledge of the Workmen, if l was not
to communicate them in this Manner, by aubith thev bave
an Opportunity of improving themselves, as many of them
hae done, from Things shat l bave already published in
the same ways so that l can say, from my own certain
Knowledge, that many of them are obliged to me, and, in¬
stead of complaining, ought to thank me-








THE
ETTUD
OF
LEARNING tO DRAW
IN
PERSPECTIVE, &yc.

CHAP I.
which will prove of great Use to all De¬
signers.
WHEN I observe the Faults daily committed
in the Designing of Landscapes, or drawing
Views and Prospects, Imore and more find
and avoid such Errors ; for, understanding that Art will
render any one capable of drawing any Thing with ma¬
so many Mis
But l conceive that the Reason, why
stakes are commonly made in Drawings, proceeds from
the Apprehensions that some have of the Length of time
it will take up, to render themselves Masters of Perspec-
tive, and from being frightned at the Difficulties they
conceive are in that Study ; particularly imagining. that
one must be first well grounded in the Mathematicks :
This
PART I.




This I knew has discouraged many from engaging in the
Rules relating to this Art ; but for their Sakes l under¬
take, in this Tract, to instruct them in the following
Lessons how to lay any Plan in Perspective, and raise
Pillars or Buildings to due Heights according to their
Distances.
Lesson 1. Of the Plan.
FIG. I.
Suppose we have a square Piece of Pavement, as in
Figure l, consisting of 25 Pieces of Marble, each a Foot
square, it must be measured exactly, and laid regularly
dewn upon Paper: You may likewise, for your better
Observation, mark every other Stone or Marble black,
which will better inform you how every particular Square
will appear, when we have a true perspective View of
them ; or else you may number every one, and, when the
following Lesion is done, number those in the perspective
Plan, with the sameFigures as are marked on the fist Plan.
Lesson 11. Of laying Figure I. in Perspective,
It is to be understood in Perspective that there are two
Points so be co. sidered; theifirst we caal the Point of
Sight.






Sight, that is, what relates to every Thing in our View
from the Place where we stand ; and it matters little
where we stand to take our View, for the Perspective
will still be true, according to the Appearance of the
Plan to our Bye : lf we stand at a Corner, or in the Mid-
die, or at any Point, the Method l shall prescribe pre-
sently will lay our Plan justly before us as it will appeac.
The other Point is called the Point of Distance, be-
cause it governs the Distances, and the Proportions of
every Thing we can truly see of the Plan, in whatever
Position we happen to be.
































At A, you see the Plan of Figure I. This is divided
into Squares, as mentioned in that Figure ; the three at
the Bottom. marked B, C, D, in both, and the Squares
in the Plan A, marked 1, 2, 3, 4, are those which are
marked in perspective with the same Numbers.
Now, to lay your Plan in perspective, fix your Point
of Sight as you observe in the Figure, or more or less
to the right or left as you think proper ; then draw
the Line K, K. parallel to, and at what Distance you
will from, the Line L, L: then raise a Line on each
side from L toK, to form the Figure you see, as a
Frame to your Picture ; then draw a Line from the Cor-
ner K, which is the Point of Distance, to L, and this
Line will regulate your Work.
Then draw Lines, from the Squares of your Plan to
the Point of Sight, as exactly as possible; and wherever
your Line of-Distanoe cuts those Lines, which are drawn
from the Squares of your Plan to the Point of Sight,
that matks where your Squares in perspective ought to
be ; then draw Lines parallel to the Line L, L. where
the Line of Distance cuts, and that will give you the
true Figure of-every Square : So D, in the perspective
Plan, answers to D, in the measured Plan; and i, 2,
3. 4, answers to the others in the same.
When you have done this, the next Rule you are to
know is, how to raise either Pillars, Trees, Houses, or
any other Bodies, according to their respective Heights,
at different Distances and Proportion, on the Plan you
have laid down.





Lesson III.
How to raise Pillars, or any Bodies of a
certain Proportion, in Perspective.












You have now your Plan measured out, in perspec-
tive, into square of a Foot; one of these Squares in
this Lesson serves for the Base, or Bottom, of a pillar
a Foot thick. This Figure IIl. is exactly of the same
Dimensions of the Plan laid in perspective at Figure II.
First mark the Line L, K, in equal Proportions, by the
same Scale of the Ground plan, Figure II; as, a, 6, c, d,
which are so many Feet in height ; and they, standing
on the Base of the first Figure, are Up-rights, not in per-
spective : Then draw a Line parallel with L, 1, from
Number 4, which gives you the Front of the Body you
are to raise, and it is to be only three Feet high, draw
à Line cross from Cto the Line raised from No. 4; and
that determines the Height, which you will then find to
be a Foot wide, and three Feet high by Measure: Then







from the Top of the Line 4 draw a Line. with a Black-
lead Pencil, to the Point of Sight, and raise another Line
from 3 parallel to the Line 4. till it touches the pencil’d
Line, passing from 5 to the Point of Sight, which gives
you the Side appearance of the Column, or Body, as you
will see it from the Place where you stand. IThe Line
from point 3 fhould be drawn with a Pen, because it is to
remain.) Then with a Pencil draw a Line trom Cto
the point of Sight, which will determine the ether Line,
to make the Shape of the Top of the Column ; and
then raise a Line parallel with L, 1, with a Pencil,
from the l’oint 2, till it touches the Line from Cto the
point of Sight; draw then a parallel Line to C,5. at
6. 7, and you will have the Square of the Top of the
Pillar, or Column, as you can observe it from the place
where you stand, which l suppose to be at A. IYou
iust remember, that the Line drawn from z to 6 is only
an imaginary Line, to be rubbed out ; for it cannot be -
seen from the place where you stand, and the refore must
not appear in the Drawing; but you should not leave
it out, becanse it shews you where to regulate the Top
of your Column. and teaches you how to place your
Column upon its Base with Certainty ) By this means
you may see the Front and one Side of your Column :
And the Line from 1 to z must also be rubbed out, be-
cause it can’t be seen.
Then finisn your Column only with the Lines
from 1 to C,
from C, to5,
from 4 to 5,
from 6, to 7, and
from 3 to 7,
from 1 to 4;
and it will be drawn without any Imperfection, and ap-
pear as follows in Figure IV.












When this is done. you may place another Column
on any one of the Squares erected in the same Manner,
bbserving to fling your Shades all on one Side, and then
vou cannot err : But especially mind where the dotted
Lines are in Figure III.
When you can master these few Lessons, which yon
may gain with very little Pains, you will be capable of
doing any Thing in this Way, that will be regalar and
eertain, and know the Faults of the lgnorant and Un-
skilful.

CH AP. II.
Of Painting upon Glaqs.

PAINTING upon Glass is an Art which has ge
nerally appeared so difficult, that sew have succeed-

ed in the Attempt; and yet there is no Representation
of any portrait can appear more elegant, than in a pie¬
ture done well in this Manner: For yon have all the
Softness and all the Tenderness that can be desired in a
picture, and it is easy too for any person to work upon ,
for there are no Qut-lines to draw, nor any Shades te
make, but you put on the Calours without the Trouble
of either. 






The Pictures, which we use on this Occasion, are those
done in Mezzo tinto, or what we call Mezzo tincto
Prints, for their Shades are rubbed down with an Instru-
ment on the Copper-plates ; so that the several Lines,
which are forced to be drawn to represent the shady Part
of any common Print, are by this Means scumbled toge¬
ther, and appear as soft and united as in any Piece done
with Indian Ink.
When you are provided with such Prints as you like,
cut off the Paper of the Margin, so that none be left but
the Print itself; then take some of the finest Crown-glass,
and have it cut exactly to the Size ef your Prints, and,
when you have cleaned your Glass very well, lay on one
Side of it some fine Venice Turpentine. a3 thin as possi-
ble, with a Brush made of Hog’s-hair; and, if you per-
ceive the Turpentine to lie unequally, pass a piece of
Wood, made like a flat Ruler over it till it lies equal in
every part ; then wet the Back of your Print with a
Sponge and Water, and lay the pictur’d éide upon the
turpentin’d Side of the Glass, taking Care that every
Part of it lies close to the Glass, and that there are no Bub¬
bles or Blisters tobe seen;’then you may roll it over with
a wooden Roll, made like a Cylinder of two Inches dia-
meter, to fix it close to the Glass; and when that is
done, wet the Back of the Print again with a Sponge and
Water, till the Paper will rub off with your Fingers;
then rub it gently till there remains only the Picture itself
upon the Glafs ; fo will you have all the Lines and Shades
very visible, as if it was a sine drawing in Indian Ink :
Thon let it remain till the next Day to dry, for else the
Colours would not take, hecause they are ground in Oil¬
SECT. I. Colours for Painting on Glass with the Neces-
saries for such a Work.
At most Colour-shops of note in London, we may
meet with Colours of several forts ground in Oil, and
tied up in little Bladders to be sold at Three pence, a
Groat, or Six pence a piece, according as they are more
or lefs valuable : Of these provide as follow.





Verditer,
Whites.
Prussian Blue,
Flake White,
White-Lead.
Sanders Blue,
Indigo,
Tello-ws.
Englisn Pink,
Blacks.
Yellow Oaker,
Lamp Black,
Dutch Pink,
lvory Black.
Yellow Orpiment.
Greens.
Verdigrease distill’d,
Redt.
Verdigreafe and Yellow
Rose Pink,
Vermillion,
Oaker mixt,
Verdigrease and English
Red-Lead,
Pink mixt,
Indian Red,
Verdigrease , and
Lake,
Dutch
Carminie.
Pink mixt.
Browns.
Blues.
Spanish Brown,
Uitramarine,
Umber.
Blue Bise.
When you are provided with these Colours, you may
mix them one with another to what Degree of Colour
you think proper upon a Pallet, with a smooth Knise,
with a tender bending. Blade, adding a little more of
one Colour to another, mixing them well till you have
what you want.
To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick a Nole
at the Bottom of each Bladder you design to use, and
press the Bladder till you have Colour enough upon your
Pallet for your present Use ; for in a Day’s Time thie
Colours will dry, and can never be recovered.
Provide on this Occasion a Box about two Foot and
a half long, about five Inches high, and sixteen Incheg
wide, with Partitions in it as follow.






The Use of this Box, which is to keep all your paint-
ing Things together, and preserve them clean, 1 fhall
here very particularly explain.
At Number i must be a Box of tinn’d lron
No. 1. to be placed in the wooden Box, because it
must hold Oil of Turpentine to clean your
pencils when you have done work.
When you paint you must take care to use only ene
pencil in a Colcur, or, in other words, to have a pen¬
cil for cach Colour; and as soon as you have dore using
them for the Day, clean them ffom the Colours, by
dipring them into the Oil of Turpentine. and Iying
the hairy part of the pencil on the tinn’d Di-
No. 2. vision, between Number 1 and Number 2,
press your Finger hard on the Hair, and draw
it four or sive times over the Tin, then will the Colours
which










which came out of the Pencils, fall into the Tin-box,
Number 2, and by that Means the Pencils will be clean
and the several Mixtures of Colours, that fall there with
their Oils, will become a good Size for Gold.
Then lay your Pencils with their Sticks in
the Box No. 5, and they will be fit sor Use
No. 5.
another Time.
Note, the Pencils should be of two Sorts, that is,
some of Camel’s-hair to paint with, such as will ceme
to a Point when the Colour is in them, and some dry
Brushes of white Hair, never to be dipp’d in Colour,
but used only to scumble or join one Colour in another
when they are just laid on, so that they appear soft, and
you cannot distinguisn where any one leaves off abrupelv.
You ought at least to have three Dozen of Camel’s
Hair pencils of all Sizes, and a Dozen and half of rough
Brushes, with Sticks to cach about ten Inches or a Foot
long ; the Sticks may be bought ready made at the Co-
lour-shops ; they are commonly made of Cedar or Brazil-
At numb. 4, you should have a Case
divided of Wood in several Parts to keep your
No. 4.
dry Colours in, such as Carmine and Ultra-
marine, with others that you may keep by you to grind
when you want them, for sometimes you may have Oc-
casion in the Country to grind a Colour that you want.
The Reafon of having Divisions made in this Box is
to keep these Colours from mixing with each other, and
thereby spoiling one another; tor if there were no se-
parate Apartments, sometimes in a basty taking out or
putting in of these Colours you may disturb the Papers
they are commonly wrapp’d in so much, that some of
the Colurs will be spilled. The sine or rich Colours,
such as Uitramarine or Carmine, may rather be bought
in Powder than ground in Oil ; for the first is worth near
four Pounds an Ounce, and the Carmine, if ’tis good,
worth about twenty Shillings; therefore it is better to
have these in Powder, than to have them ground in Cil
at the Colour-shops ; for by Degrees they will dry,
though in the Bladders, and you will have fo much Lofs
from them.






The Method to grind these in Oil, is to put a little
of either of them upon a polished Marble, and with a

Drop or two of Oil mix them well with a soft bladed
Knife, and lay it on your Pallet ; but of the Uitrama-
rine and. Carmine a very little will serve, for the least
Touch on the light Sides of your Drawing will give a
Lustre to your Picture ; and if it be Ultramarine it will
be lasting, whereas l have a great deal of Reason to sus-
pect, that the Pruffian Blue will not, if it is exposed to
the Weather, as l have observed in some Sign-paintings
of two Years standing. and there l find that Colour to
change into a dirty Yellow: But if we mix the Prussian
Nue with Varnish, it will hold and last like Ultrama-
rine; in short, the Air must be kept from it to pre-
serve it.
lf we want to grind any other Colours coarser than
these in their Powder, we must have a Muller, which
must be made of one of the hardest Stones we can get,
and finely polisned ; Porphyry would be the best, made
in the Shape of a Sugar-loaf, if one could get it: But
for the Shape, the Sugar loaf Figure is the easiest for
any one to turn with their Hand, and every Painter
knows the Way. Marble is good, or any Stone that
will polish; nay, even Glass, or Crystal, or any such
like Thing; but, if you have a great Quantity of Co-
lour to grind, you must confider, that you must have a
large Quantity of Oil; but never so much as to over-
come the Quantity of Colour. In the grinding part,
you may observe, that the Colour will frequently turn
from under the Muller, then with a thin Knife scrape
it up, and place it under the Muller again, till ’tis as
sine as you desire it : Then immediately put it into a
Piece of Bladder, first having the Bladder immerged in
warm Water to soften it ; tie it up, and let it remain to
be used as l have directed the others.
Number 3 may in its Use be explain’d thus.
Let that Partition be lined with Tin, or lron
No. 3.
tinn’d, because this is to enclose the Bladders
of Oils, which you should always keep by you, as Oil
of Linseed and Turpentine, Nut-oil, and burnt Oil, and
in the taking of these in and out, the Apartment would




be greasy, and stain the Wood, whereas the Tin will
preserve it from any Stain from the Oils.
Number 6 is the middle of the Box, and
No. 6. fhould be niade of tinn’d lron likewise, to take
out and put in at pleasure, for ’tis to contain
all the Bladders of oiled Colours ; and, as some of
them will be frequently used, the Reservoir for them
must in Time become greasy ; and over them is to be
laid the Pallet, which, every Night after you have done
your Work, should be cleaned of the Colours you have
put upon it ; or else covered with its Colours in Water,
to keep them useful till the next Day. To keep your
Pallet clean, rub it with a coarse Linnen cloath with
Oil of Turpentine, and then rub it till ’tis dry (as one
may call it) with Nut or Linseed oil.
But take what care you will of your Oil-colours in
small Quantities, when they are exposed to the Air,
there will be a Coat of thick hard Scale over them in 2
Ddy or two, which indeed one may take off with a
Knife ; but we lose much of the Colour, and some of
them are very costly. When vou take off the scaly
Part, the rest of the Colour is fit to use; and, if it is
too thick, then put a Drop or two of Linseed-oil to it,
and mix it well with your tender Knife. Some People
when they use Ultramarine and Carmine, because of
their great Price, only put a Drop of Oil on their Pal-
let, and put as much Colour to it as they think will be
enough, only working them together with a Knife;
which indeed is more saving, than to mix it on the
Stone.
SECT. II. How to use the Colours in. Painting on
Glass.
As the Lines and Shades of your Picture happen to
open, so you ought to fispose your Colours, that is,
lay on the lighter Colours first on the light Places of your
Prints, and the darker over the shaded Places ; and, if
you have once laid on the brighter Colours, ’tis no great
matter whether the darker Sorts are laid a littie over





them: For the first Colour laid on will hide those you
lay on afterwards ; as for Example :
YELLOWS.
The lightest Yellow may be laid on first, and the
Dutch Pink will shade it.
REDS.
The Red-lead may be laid on first, as the brightest red
Colour, and to shade it with Lake or Carmine, will
bring your Picture to a beautiful Scarlet, equal to any
Tincture of the finest Dye of Cochineal.
BLUES.
Lay on first the blue Bife, and shade it with Indigo ;
or else take Ultramarine, and lay it on in the Lights,
and shade it with Indigo.
GREENS.
Lay on first some Verdigrease, and then the Mixture
I have mentioned of that and the Dutch Pink : But you
may make this Green as yellow as you please, by ad-
ding more Dutch Pink, as you see occasion.
It is to be noted, that, when any of these Colours are
too strong. they may be lightened to any Degree, by
mixing White with them upon your Pallet; or you may
darken them, by mixing them with the deeper Colours :
But they must be well mixt with the Knife, before you
When you have painted your Glass, it must stand
three or four Days, before it will be dry enough to put
in a Frame.

CHAP. III.
Of the making of Crayons sor dry colouring.
THE Use of Crayons for dry Colours is so neces-
sary in taking of Views and Prospects, and there

are so few Crayons that are good of the Sort, that I
think




think the Way of making them a necessary Article to
be known to every one, who is a Lover of Drawing
and Painting.
WHITE.
As for White, we have no occasion of any other than
white soft Chalk, which should be sawed into Lengths
of an Inch and half or two Inches. I There are litile
Saws made on purpose for such Uses about four Inches
long and very thin. ) When you have saw’d out your
Crayons of Chalk, which should be at most a Quarter
of an Inch thick, round off the Corners with a Penknife,
and point them, by drawing your Penknife upwards
from the Place where the Point is to be. (You pught to
have a Dozen or two of these to lie in a little Case by
themselves, or they will be discoloured by the other Co-
lours. )
YELLOW Pastils, or Crayons.
Yellous come next, which should be divided into four
or five Degrees of Colour.
First. Take fome Grounds of Starch and Flour of
Brimstone, mix them well with a Knife upon a polishied
Marble, so that they produce the Colour of Straw, or a
Yellow as faintly will shew itself; then pour a little
Milk to them, or a little pale Ale wort, till the Colour
become like a Paste; then spread the Paste on a fmooth
piece of Chalk, with a broad Knife, till it is about the
third Part of an Inch thick, and let it lie till ’tis half
dry, then with a sharp Knife cut it in Lengths of an
Inch and half, about the fourth Part of an Inch wide,
and roll it thin between two little pieces of Board, till
they are round like a Straw, and point them as l have
directed for the Chalk. 1f you please you may use
ground Chalk, instead of Grounds of Starch.
24 Yelloew. It is made of yellow Oker, ground well
with fair Water, and then dried and beat. Mix this
with ground Chalk, in sach Quantity as it will be àa little
deeper than the former Colour, and mix them up with
pale Ale wort, in which a little white Sugar-candy may
be dissolved : And make these Crayons as the former.





3d.Yellow. Grind yellow Oker with Water with a
Stone and Muller, and when ’tis dry beat it very fine,
and make it into Pastils, or Crayons, with pale Ale-
wort, or Size made with Glovers Leather, boiled in
Water till it comes to a Jelly ; use it as before directed,
and roll the Pastils between two Boards.
4th Yellow. Take English Pink, grind it as the former
with Water, and when ’tis dry beat it fine, and mix it
with a very little ground Chalk, till ’tis deeper than the
former Colour; then put to it some Wort of pale Ale,
and stir all well together, and make it into Pastils, or
Crayons, by rolling in the foregoing Manner.
5th Fellow. English Pink is to be alone ground as the
former, and to be made in Pastils, or Crayons, by itself
with pale Ale wort.
6th Yellow. Dutch Pink is to be used as the former,
and mixt with pale Ale-wort, or Milk, and so rolled and
dried.
7th Yellow. Orpiment is one of the most poisonous
Colours that can be used ; however, it is one of the
most beautiful Sort, and is next Orange colour. This
must have a little ground Chalk mixt with it, well tem-
pered together, and made up with pale Ale-wort, with
a little Gum dragon dissolved in it : And roll them up
into Pastils, as you did the former.
ORANGE Colours.
1st Orange-Colour. Take yellow Orpiment, mix it
with pale Ale-wort, and when it is in Paste, roll it, and
make it into Pastils, or Crayons.
2d Orange-Colour. Take Orpiment and Red-lead : (but
the Red-lead must be very finely ground in Water, and
dried) then mix a little of this with your Orpiment, tiil
you have the Colour you desire ; and putting to it some
Ale wort, wherein some Gum-dragon has been dissol-
ved, make it into a Paste, and roll it into Pastils, or
Crayons.
3d Orange-Colour. Take English Pink, grind it well,
and put to it as much Vermillion as will make it of the
Colour you desire ; mix these up with Ale wort, that





has been boiled till ’tis more glutinons than ordinary, and
make it into Pastils, as before directed.
Atb Orange Colour. Take English Pink finely ground,
and put to it as much Red lead, well ground, as will
make it agreeable to your Design, mix these well with
Ale wort boiled to a Thickness, and make them into
Crayons.
Sth Orange Coloar. Take some Dutch Pink, grind
it well, and mix with it some Red-lead finely powdered,
to the Colour you want ; then make this into a Paste
with Ale-wort, or Milk, and roll it up into Crayons as
before directed.
Note, In the Mixture of these Colours, observe that
they have as many different Shades as possible.
REDS.
st Red. Take Red-lead, grind it well with Water,
then dry it and beat it to sine Powder, and put to it some
Chalk or White lead finely ground, to brighten it;
mix this with Ale- wort; wherein a little Gum-dragon
has beën boiled, make it into a Paste, and roll it into
Crayona. In this you should make some of your Pastils
deeper, others paler.
2d Red. Take Red lead, and when ’tis well ground
with a Marble and Muller, make it into a Paste with
Ale wort, wherein Gum dragon has been boiled.
3d Red. Red Oker wants no Preparation, but sawing,
as I have directed for Chalk, in the first Article,
4th Red. Take Vermillion, grind it fine, and mix
pulverized ; divide your Composition into three Parts,
and, by adding moreof the White to one than another,
make three different Colours ; then put to each Ale wort
boiled thick, and make them severally into Paste, and so
into Crayons.
Stb Red. Take Vermillion well ground, and mix it
with Ale wort, that has been boiled to a Thickness with
6tb Red. Take some good Lake, grind it well with
Water upon a Marble, and when it is well dried and
powdered, lay it in three Divisions, and mix with each






as much ground Chalk, or White-lead, as will make
them of several Colours ; then make them severally in-
to Paste, and then into Crayons.
7th Red. Take sine Lake, and reduce it to as fine
powder as you can with Water, and, when it is dry, and
again finely powdered, mix it with. Ale-wort, and make
it into Pastils, or Crayons.
8th Red. Take Indian Red, grind it well with Wa-
ter, and dry it like the other Colours ; then mix it
with Ale-wort that has been boiled to a Thickness with
a little Gum dragon : This alone will be a very-strong
Colour, but you should mix some of it with White,
in two or three different Manners, to be Shades to one
another.
9th Red. Take Rose-pink, and cut it into the Shape
of Crayons, without any preparation. Carmine is too
dear for them, for twelve penny-worth would make but
a small Crayon.
PURPLES.
1st Purple. Take Rose-pink finely ground and pory-
dered, mix it well with a little Sanders blae, till the
powder appears of the Colour you want, then make it
into a paste with Ale-wort thickned with Gum dragon,
and roll them into the Figure of Crayons.
2d Purple. Take Lake finely ground, and washed,
put to it as much blue Bise as you think proper to make
it of a reddish Purple, and you should vary this in two
or three Manners, each lighter than the other : In the
lighter Sorts put à sufficient Quantity of Chalk, or
White lead well ground, and mix them up with Ale-
wort boiled to a Thickness with Gum dragon, and roll
them into Pastils.
3d Purple. Take some Lake well ground, and add to
it as much Prussian-blue as will make it of the Co-
lour you desire ; mix these very well together in several
parcels, making some more inclining to red than the o¬
thera, and to the faintest purple of them add some
ground Chalk at your pleasure, and make these severally
into paste with Ale wort thickened by boiling ; so make
them, after the same Manner as the former, into Pastils.
BLUES.








BLUES.
14 Blue. Blue Bise is the lightest blue Colour we use,
and must be well ground with common Water on a fine
Marble ; then let it dry, and reduce it again to powder,
then lay it in four parcels, and pat to three of them,
in different proportions, some ground Chalk, or White-
lead ; so that when they come to be mixt, every one
may be lighter than the other; mix these soparately with
Ale-wort that is thickened with Scraps of Glovers Lea¬
ther, and when they are in a pafte to your mind, make
them- into Crayons : And the fourth part of the blue
Bise must be made up by itself, in the same Manner
2 Bluc. Take Verditer well ground on a fine Marble,
lay it in four parcels, and mix one of them purely with
a thin Size, made of white Glovers Shreds and Ale-wort,
and the other three parts mix with several proportions
of ground Chalk, or White-lead well ground, so as to
make Shades to one another; make these into pafte
with Ale-wort thickened with Gum-dragon, and fo in¬
to Crayons.
3d Blue. Take some Pruffian-blue, and grind it well ;
then lay it in four parcels on your Marble, and mix with
three of them some ground Chalk, or White lead well
ground, to make them of different degrees of Colour ;
and the fourth part must be alone. Make the three
mixed Colours into paste with pale Ale-wort boiled till
it thickens; and the plain Colour must be made into a
paste with some Ale wort boiled and thickened with
white Shavings of Leather from the Glovers. Make
all these into Crayons.
4th Blue. Take Rock Irdigo, and grind it well with
Water on a Marble, dry it and powder it again, and
then divide it in parcels, as is directed above, and with
two or three parts of them mix different proportions of
ground Chalk, or White-lead ground, to make them
paler or deeper; and one part must be the simple Co-
lour. Put to the mixt Colours some Ale wort thick-
ened with boiling, and mix them to paftes, then roll
them into Crayons.





As for the plain Indigo, mix it with Ale-wort thick-
ened with Glovers Shreds of white Leather, by boiling,
and make it into Pastils.
BLACKS.
1st Black. The Black which is commonly used as a
Crayon, is Charcole cut into Lengths; the softest and
best is that which is made of Willow. Have at least a
Dozen or two of these ; for black and white are used a
great deal more than any other colour.
2d Black. Take lvory Black ground very sine with
common Water, and put to it a very little ground In-
digo ; for a blueisn Cast will enliven your Black, and
help it from that Deadness, which a plain Black always
carries with it.
BROWNS.
1st Brown Take for a light Brown, some Fullers-
earth, grind it well with Water, and mix it with some
ground Chalk, or White-lead, to make it in different
Colours, that is, to make it lighter as you think fit ;
mix this up with pale Ale-wort boiled thick, and at least
have four Sorts of it.
2d Brown. Take some Spanish Browii, grind it very
well, and mix with it some Fullers-earth, to make it
lighter, for the Spanish-brown is a dark Colour of it¬
self; and, when you have made this Mixture, you may
put to some part of it a little white Chalk ground, or
White-lead, in different proportions, to have them of
various Shades : These are for the lighter Browns ; and
mix them severally in Pastes with a light Size of Fisn-
glue, or Isinglass, and Water, and some of them with
pale Ale wort boiled thin, or thick Water gruel boiled
with Gum dragon ; then make them into Pastils.
3d Brown. Take Spanish Brown well ground, and
some Indian-red, mix them well together, and put to
them some pale Ale-wort, till they become a Paste ;
you may make some of them lighter, if you will, with
ground Chalk, or White-lead; and then roll them into
Crayons.






1st Green. Take some Verdigrease, and boil it in sharp
Vinegar, and add to it, when it boils, a little Tartar
powdered, which will dissolve the Verdigrease so, that
the Liquor will be of a finc Colour. Then set the Li-
quor in little Gallipots exposed to the Air, which will
dry the Colour, and then it will dissolve in common
Water. This may be taken with just as much warm
Ale-wort as will cover it, and will dissolve the Green ;
then make it into Pastils with white Chalk ground, as
much as you think proper.
2d Green. Grind distilled Verdigrease with Vinegar
on a Marble, wasn it well with Water; the Manner of
which is, to throw the Verdigrease into Water, and in
half a Minute to pour off the Water into a Cup, and
let it settle ; then pour the Water from it, and wash it
again in the same Way ; when this is dry, make it into
Crayons with Ale wort.
3d Green. Take Verdigrease, prepared as before, fine-
ly powdered, and mix it with a little Prussian Blue in se-
veral proportions : In the lightest Sorts put a little
White, or the brightest Yellow, well ground, to make
Varieties of Colour; mix all these with pale Ale wort
boiled to a Thickness.
atb Green. Take some Indigo well ground, and some
English-pink, mix them well together upon a Marble;
and, when they are well powdered, make them into a
Paste, and roll them up with a foft Size and Oil, till
they are of the Figure of Crayons ; or with pale Ale-
wort, or thick Water-gruel ; but when we use Water-
gruel, it must be strained, and boiled with some Gum-
dragon.
5th Green. Take some blue Bise ground fine. and put
to it some Dutch pink well ground ; mix them in Par-
cels; and prepare them in Snades to one another ; then
make them into Pastes, and roll them into Crayons.
You may have five or six Varieties of these. Nore, The
Liquid which you are to use to make them into Pastils
must be Ale-wort boiled a little thick.





6th Green. Grind Rock-Indigo very sine with Water
on a Marble, and, when ’tis dry, beat it fine again;
then lay it in parcels on the Marble, and put to some
of them a little slower of Brimstone, in greater or lesser
Quantities, and to others slower of Brimstone and Dutch.
pink mixt, so that you may have Variety of Colours ;
when these different Shades are as you intend them, then
make them into pastes with Ale wort thickned by boiling
with white Glovers Leather-shreds, or with a little Gum-
dragon.
7th Green. Grind some Rock-Indigo with Water,
and add to it, in several parcels, as much Dutch pink
as you see convenient, to make your Greens of various
Shades ; when these are well mixt, put to them some
Ale-wort thickened by boiling, and make them into
Pastes, and, when they will roll, make them into Cray-
ons.
Memorandum. The Reason why these Crayons are
better than commonly those which are bought at the
Shops is, because they are generally made too stiff with
Guis, and so will hardly touch the Paper ; but ah
these will work freely, and express the several Colours
you dofire.
We must consider, that the Reason why we make five
or six Shades of each Colour is, because in this Case we
cannot mix any when we use them ; whereas in Oil-
painting, and painting in Water colours, we may make
what Mixtures we please in an instant : And when we
set about any painting or drawing in Crayons, which
happens to have a great Variety of Colours in it, we
ought not to be without every Sort of Colour that can be
thought on. Note, These Colours should be kept in a
Box partitioned, every Sort by itself, wiz.
The White.
Vellows. Lay the brightest Sorts in one, and the deep-
er Sorts in another, till you come towards the Orange-
colours.
Orange-Colours. The lighter Sorts of Orange-colours
in an Apartment, and the deeper in another.
Reds 1he paler Sorts, or Fleffi-colours, in one Apart-
ment, the brighter Reds in another, the stronger Reds





in another, and the deepest Reds in another, every one
with its proper Shades, till we come towards purple.
Purples. The paler Sorts inclining to red in one Apart-
ment, the next Sorts, more inclining to blue, in another,
with their Shades; and these which are next to blus
with their Shades, in a part by themselves.
Blues should follow the purples. Put the lightest pre-
parations in the first Apartment, the next Degree into
another, a third into another, and the fourth, to the last,
into others: But keep the Prussian blue quite by itself,
and its Mixtures by themselves ; it serves very well in
this Way to supply the place of Ultramarine; and, as
it is much cheaper, l forbear to mention the Use of Ule-
tramarine blue in this Case, which is extravagant in the
price ; for a Crayon of it could not be made under half
a Guinea : And besides, in this Way of Crayon draw-
ing. the preparation of Prussian-blue does very well an-
swer the same End ; though that Colour will not do in
Water-colours, nor even last in Oil-colours, if it comes
to be exposed to the Weather ; for in either Case it
changes to a dirty Yellow-colour; but I find that the
Crayons hold, by being imbodied as l have directed.
reens should be divided intp three or four Sorts, and
with their Shades, be laid in several Apartments.
Browns should be likewise put in three or tour par-
cels, with their proper Shades, to be laid in each A-
partment of one great Box. And you should never be
without Crayons of Charcole in another Case. With
all these you will be compleatly furnished; and, when
you go out to take any View, have one of every Sort in a
little Box, divided as the foregoing, to carry in your
pocket.
The paper, which you should use on this Occasion.
should be Venice rough paper, almost like our whited
brown paper or even the whited brown paper which
they sell at every Chandlers shop; the stiffer it is th e bet-
ter ; that which they call Cap paper is the best, as l have
found by Experience ; for upon such the Colours easily
distribute themselves. And by this Means every one
may take Figures in their proper Colours as they see
them ; tor they may match the Colours as they appear





with the Crayons they have by them ; and, as the Cray-
ons are dry, they will not alter their Colour, but the wet-
ted Colours will appear deeper when they are wet, than
when they are dry, which will deceive the Eye of a Be
ginner.
Instructions for the Use of Crayons.
Remember when vou use these Crayons, that yon
point them from the bottom upwards, and make not the
points too sharp, unless in the white Chalk, the red
Oker, and the Charcole.
One may make a pretty Drawing on blue Paper with
only Chalk and Charcole ; the strong Lights and the dark
shades make a fine Contrast, and a pleasant Appearance
in a Drawing.













CHAP. IV.
Curious Directions for Drawing with Cray-
ons.
THE Manner of Drawing with Crayons is much
more expeditious, where we would express the
Objects we are to take in Colours, than painting in Wa-
ter-colours ; for, before we use them to strike the Co-
lours we intend, only a slight Out-line need be made, ei¬
ther with Chalk, Charcoal, of Red oker, of the Subject
we would represent. We may bring these Drawings to
a delicate Softness and fine Expression, but then they
mustbe always kept in Books, or under Glasses of Frames,
where they may not rub ; for a touch of a rude Finger,
unacquainted with the performance, may change the
Shades or Lights, and so alter the sine Design of the
Work.
But we must first provide an indifferent coarsé paper,
of the Colour of whited brown paper, fer the colour of
the paper being à little dark, gives a better Opportunity
of




of shewing thet light or white Strokes of our Crayons,
and will give a good Relief to the tender parts of our
Work.
Again. the little Roughaess of such paper will make
the Crayons of every colour express themselves muck
stronger, than if we were to draw with. them upon smooth
paper.
These Crayons of every Sort of colour, you will have
occasion for, are made in Pastils, and sold by most of the
most noted Colour-men in London ; a few will serve you
at first to try your Hand, and in taking off Sketshes of
prospects are very usefal, when you are once Master of
Dzawing enough. to take the Out-lines : for a little Box
of them will serve to mark the colours which you will
remark in the different parts of your prospect, without
the Trouble of Water and Gum-water, which must be
had if we use Water-colours, and would be troublesome
te get for your Use in the Fields, where you should take
these prospects from.
These Crayons being of so easy a Use may encou-
rage us to colour our prospects after the Life, where we
shall discouer the different colours of the several Fielde
which are very different from one another, according ae
tkey happen to be cropp’d, or fituated, and then the
Woods which are in View commonly consist of Variety
of Trées, which have every one of them their different
colour, which at once we may see in our Crayons, and
mark it as it happens to be upon our Drawing : But if
our Wood should prove all of one Sort of Tree, we shall
sfill find. a great Variety of colours in the Trees produ-
ced by their different Situation; and if we match our
Crayons well with the colours of our Trees, and other
parts of the-prospect, we shall learn by it what is a na-
tural Representation of Things.
But to do this effectually, if you cannot furnish a
Draught in colourat once, take the same Hour the next
Day to do it in, because as the Sun happens to beat one
point, at one Hour of the Day, so the next Day it will:
be about the same point at the fame Hour; and if you
was to mifs that Time, the Shades of all your Objects
will be altered, and- your colours will be vary’d : So you






should likewise take either the Mornings or Evenings
for this purpose, for then you will have strong Shades
and strong Lights, which will give a pleasing Variety to
your picture.. Memorandum, if you have a bright
Morning or Evening, when yon begin, finisn your work
when the Hours of your Drawing are as bright as they
were at first, if you can.
For want of such Observations many a one, who is a
good Draughts. man spoils a five Drawing ; he will some-
times place his Greens improperly, and give Strengthe
where only little Touches should be us’d. And some
who are Beginners in these Affairs, will encourage a fa-
vourite colour, and neglect the proper ornamental co-
lours.
I think I have not seen finer prospects to teach us
this Art, than what are on both sides Guilford dowyns,
Box-bill, Leith bill, Ricbmond-bill, and about High wick-
bam, where one has fine Vales, beautiful Hills, and de-
lightful Woods. In the Spring and Autumn, to look
on the Woods, you may almost perceive every colour in
our Collection ; some.Trees will open with a yellowish
Cast, others with a sharp blueisn Green, some Brown,
and others of a reddisni: Colour; and so in the dying
away of the Leaves in Autumn, or towards the Fall of
the Leaf, vou will see as much Variety.
And you will find then the Fields, and all the change¬
able parts of the Country, of different Colours ; about
half a score Drawings in Crayons of these Sorts, will
enliven your Imagination, and teach you the Art of co-
louring in the most natural, and consequently the most
beautiiul Manner.
But if you design principally to draw: Landscapes in
this Manner, 1 advise to make ydur Qut-lines; with-
Charcoal or Black-lead, very gently touchd, but Biack:-
lead is the best.
When in this Way of Drawing, one has an Object
where à light colour and a shaded colour should fall na¬
turally into ane anothier, then, when you have mark'd
yoat paper with both, take a dry short hair’d Pencile
and brushit gently between both, ’till you have mixt-
them so easily together, that you cannot discern where,









the Lights and the Shades separate, or where the Light
and the Shade part from one another; but this is pra-
perly for the larger Drawings, which are to appear soft
and tender.
If one wants a Fencil, of the fort I speak of, take a
piece of soft whited brown paper, and roll it, or twist
it up till ’tis of the Bigness of a Camel’s Hair pencil, of
the Size we generally use in Water-colours, and when
you have rubb’d the pointed End gently on a rough
piece of clean Board, or a piece of rough brown Paper,
twill serve instead of a Pencil to ’ scumble your Work
or make one colour flow into another.
There remains now only to tell you how you ought,
in this particular way of Drawing, to cut or point your
Crayons ; take a fine Penknife, and instead of Drawing
it down from the Body of the Crayon towards the Point,
as one does in pointing a Black-lead Pencil, begin at
the Point and draw your Knife upwards, in such
a Manner, as to leave your Crayon of the same Fi-
gure you would require a Black-lead Pencil to be of
when ’twas sharpen’d ; for these Crayons are hardly
two Inches long, and are brittle enough : Besides, if
they have any Knots in them, they will be very apt to
break.
One may observe too, before we conclude this Chap-
ter of drawing and colouring with Crayons, that all
these appear immediately of the Colour one would
express, whereas the Colours to be us’d with Water
will be mach deeper or darker when the Water is put
to them, than they will prove when they are dry,
which may confound a Beginner, and occasion him to
make his Colour lighter, but when this comes to dry, he
will see his Error.


« Scumbling is rubbing in gently one Colour into apothen.







CHAP. V.
Concarning the Manner of Etching, or
Hetching, to be done witb Aqua-fortis on
Copper-plates.
YOUR Copper plates must be very smooth, and
poished on one Side, as they are done for the En¬
gravers.
Then make a Varnisn of Petrolium, Bees- wax and
Turpentine melted together in a glazed Earthen-vefsel;
when it is cold, put it into a piece of Mantua Silk, and
tye it up, then warm the backside of the Plate over some
hot Small-coal Dust, and pafs the Silk with the Mixture
in it over the fore-side of the Plate, till ’tis all covered ;
after this. hold the varnished part of the Plate over the
Smoke of a Candle, moving it backwards and forwards
till ’tis all equally blacked.
You must next take your Drawing, or Print, and rub
the back of it with Chalk, or red Oker; (but Chalk is
the best) and when the back of this Drawing is rub-
bed a little with a woollen Cloth, lay the Chalk part
of the Print upon the Varniss, and sixing it well, draw
over all the Strokes with a blunt pointed Needle, mark-
ing it as you go along the Shades ; so you will have all
the Lines marked upon your Varnish.
Then provide four or five Needles of different Sizes,
and with the finest make the finer Lines, apd so by De-
grees on to the Larger ; tracing them over the Varnish
upon the Lines of the Drawing. till they touch the Cop-
per plate ; and, to prevent your rubbing out any of thg
Chalk-lines, you must have an even piece of Wood sup-
ported by two Bits to move before you, and to rest your
Hand upon ; when this is done, make your Shades ; and

when they are done, border round the Plate some green







Wax, which, being put in warm Water, will become soft;
and then pour on Aquafortis with a third part of Water,
and, when you think the Aguafortis has eaten deep
enough in the light part, pour off your Water, and
wasn the Plate with common Water; dry it, and, with
a Pencil of Camel’s Hair, paint over the lightest parts
with common Varnisn; then pour on again your Aqua-
fortis, and let it eat into the Copper a iitt’e more. and.
when you think that’s enough, use the Piate as you did
before, and so on to the last : Then take off your green
Wax and Varnissi, by warming the Piate as you did at
first; and ciean the Plate with a coarse piece of Linen.
without any thing in it that may scratch the Plate ; when
this is done, you may have your Plate touched up with a
Graver, or you may send it to the Rolling prefs for a
Proof, and then the Engraver can see best what Sharpnes,
or Amendments ought to be made.

CHAP. VI.
Of Japanning, and Indian Varnispes.
SECT. I. Of Japanning Metals.
Of japanning of Metals we must take notice, that
Steel or lron may be japanned or varnished with any

Colour. I have on-y seen it done by a young Gentle-
man of Montpelier, who performed it extreamly well,
and from him Thad the Receipt.
The part of the Metal which we design to japan in
Colours should not be polished ; but the parts of the Me-
tal, which ought to be polistied, should be done first, or
eise, if we polisn them after the painting. some of the
Colour may be disturbed or taken off. The first Proof
I saw of this Work was a pair Scizzars, where, from
the Biades to the Rings, there were the Figures of Storks
holding the Rings in their Mouths, which Rings were













of Silver. I do not know that Eever saw any Thaag
so genteel ; and the Gentleman before mentioned was
kind enough to give me the following Method of doing
it.
Take any Colour you have a mind to, and grind it
well with Water with a Stone and Muller ; then let it
dry, and ground it in a Mortar, and fift it if there is
Occasion ; then, instead of Oil, mix it with white Var-
nish, and paint with it what you think proper.
The Whites are Ceruse, or Flesn white.
Fellows are Yellow-oker, English pink, and Dutch-
pink.
Reds are Vermillion, Red-lead, and Lake.
Blues are b ue Bise and Indigo.
Blacks are Lamp black, and lvory or Bone black.
Greens are Verdigrease ground, or Verditer and Dutch-
pink ground together.
Browns are Fullers-earth and Spanish-brown.
And Purples may be made between red and blue, till
you see them mixed to your Mind.
SECT. II. Of Japanning lron. Snuff boxes, wbick
now are generaily covered with a black Varnish, that
they may look like China, and gilt about the Edges.
Take your lron plates or Snuff boxes, and lay on the
following preparation on the Top and Bottom, viz.
White-lead ground with Water, and dried, then beaten
again to fine powder, and mixed with Size; this lay
equally on the Top and Bottom of your Snuff-box, and
let it dry well. Then about the Rims, or Edges of the
Box, lay on some Yellow-oker with Size, and over that
some Gold size; when the first is well dried, lay on the
Gold-size I hiave mentioned in the Colour box, you may
huy it at the Colour shops ; when you lay this on, let
it be near dry before you lay on your Leaf gold, that it-
may stick the better.
You must have a Cushion of woollen Cloth to cut
xour Leaf-gold upon, that the pieces of Gold may be
exactly to your Size, or the Shape you desire.
Then






Then take your Leaf-gold on some Cotton, and lay it
onsghe part which is done with Gold-size, and dab it on
till it lies smooth, and let all dry.
When this is done, paint what Figures you please on
the upper and under Side of your Box ; upon the White.
ground principally with blue Bise, mixed with white
Varnisn, and fhaded with. Indigo. The best Figures to
représent China, may-be taken from Tea-eups, or from
Saucers, or ather pieces of China-ware, which will look
best if they be blue and white ; but one might paint
Coats of Arms in all their Colours, or any other De-
vice ; and. when these ane dry, wash the white part
with white Varniss, and the golden part with the gloden
Varnish.
SECT. III. White Varniss, or Amber-Varnissb, frem
a Manuscript of Mr. Boylet.
Take white Rezin about two Drachms, meit it in a
clean glazed Pipkin-; then pat into.it an Ounce of the
whitest Amber- you can get sbeat finely to powder) by lie-
tle and little, stirring it with a small Stick over a gentle
Fire till it dissolves, pouring in now and then à little
Oil of Turpentine, when you find it growing stiff; so con¬
tinue till all your Amber is melted ; but you must take
care you do not set your House on fire, for the very Va-
pours of the Oil of Turpentine will take fire by Heat
only ; but, if it happens to do so any where, put im-
mediately a flat Board, or wet Blanket over the fiery
Pot, and by keeping the Air from it'you will put it out,
or suffocate it: Therefore,: when I make this Varnissi,
I use the Caution to melt my Rezin in a Glass of a
Cylindrick Figure in a Bed of hot Sand, after the Glass
has been well annealedor warmed by degrees in the Sand,
ander which you must. keop a gentle Fire. When you
have made your Varnisi, pour it into a coarse Linen-bag,
and press it between two hot Boards of Oak or lron,
and use it with any of your Colours, as well as to var-
nisn them over when they are painted : But to cover
Gold, you must take the following Varnish.






You must note, that when you have varnished your
Snuff-boxes with this white Varnissi, you may put them
in a declining Oven, which will harden the Varnissi.
SECT. IV. Hard Varnisb, that will hear the
Muffle, (from a Manuscript of Mr Boyle s) to lay
ever Gold, on Brass, or any otber Metal that appears
like Gold, to keep it from changing black, as the Bath-
Metal and such atbers will do, when they are expesed te
the Air.
Take of Colophony, which you may buy at the
Druggists, half an Ounce, melt it in a glazed Vessel ;
then strew in by degrees an Ounce of the Powder of Am¬
ber, stirringit all the while ; and when it begins to bard-
en, or resist the Stick; put in alittle Oil of Turpentine,
which will immediately soften it ; then take an Ounoe
of Gum-copal powdered, and sprinkle that in as you
did the. Amber, every now and then pouring in some
Oil of Turpentine, and strain the Varnisn as I have di-
rected in the foregoing. This is proper to lay upon your
Gold, and the Things done with it must be put in a de
clining Oven three or four Days snccefsively, and then
it will refist even. Fire.
SECT. V. To japan Brafs, such as is used to gild
Brass-buttons, or make them look like Gold.
We may use this upon Gold-leaf, or upon that which
is called the German Leaf-gold, or upon Brass, or up-
on the Barb-Metal, which are designed to imitate
Gold.
Take a Quart of Spirit of Wine, and put it in a Re¬
tort-glass, then add half an Ounce of Gamboge, an Ounce
of Lake, and an Ounce of Gummastick ; set this in a
Sand-heat for six Days, or near the Fire, or put the Bo-
dy of the Retort frequently in warm Water, shaking it
twice or thrice a Day, then put it over a Pan of warm
Small coal Dust ; when your Metal is well cleaned, paint
it over thinly with this Varniss, and it will appear like




the Colours of Gold : You may dry this in a declining
Oven, and it will not rub off.
N. B. This is a good Varnish to mix with any Co-
lours, that incline to Red ; and the white Varnisn to mix
with those Colours that are pale, or of any other Sort.

CHAP. VII.
Of Japanning upon Wood or Paper witb
Receipts sor making several Sorts of Ja-
pan-Wares, eitber Gold, Silver, or in Co-
lours.
In Japan the People have a Method of making
Bowls, Plates, and other Vessels of brown l’aper,
and sometimes of sine Saw dust : These Vessels are very
light and very strong. when they come to be varnished:
and are in great Esteem among us. The Method of.
making such Utensils l shall here disclose.
Take Slips of brown Paper, boil them in common
Water, mashing it with a Stick while it boils, till ’tis
almost become a Paste ; then take it from the Water
and beat it well in a Mortar, till ’tis so reduced as the
Rags are in a Paper-mill ; then make a strong Gum-wa¬
ter with Gum arabick and common Water, a Quantity
sufficient to cover your Paper-paste an Inch ; put these
together into a glazed Pipkin, and let them boil, stirring
them very well, till you think the Paper-paste is im-
pregnated with the Gum ; then have ready your Mould
to give your Paste the Figure you design for it- The
Mould is made as follows :
For Example, suppose you design to make any Thing
of the Figure of a Plate, have a hard piece of Wood
turned on one Side of such a Figure, and make a Hole
or two in the middle quite through the Wood; IYou
mast observe this Mould. mast be like the back of a






Plate ) when this is done tuin another hard, piece of
Wood of the same Figure, about the eighth part of an
Inch less than the former; but about the Rim or Edge
vou may have some little Ornament carved or ingraved
in. the Wood. When these Moulds are made, oil them
very well on the turned Sides, and continue to do so till
they are well soaked with Oil, then they wilk be fit for
Use when you go to make your Plate of the Paper-
paste, take the Mould with the Hole in it, and oil it a-
fresn, set it even upon a strong Table. and spreed over it
some of your pafte as equally as possible, so as to be in
every part about a quarter of an Inch thick ; then oik
the other Mould very well, and set it as exactly as may be
on your laste, and press it hard down; then put a great
Weight upon it, and let it remain twenty four Hours.
The Hole at the bottom is for the Water to pass through,
that is pressed out of the paste ; and the oiling of the
Moulds is to prevent the gummed paste from sticking to
the Wood) When you perceive the Paste dry, it will

be as hard as a Board, and fit to lay a Ground upon,
made with strong Size and Lamp black, letting it dry
gently : and. when that is dried throughly, then take
some lvory black finely ground, and mixit with the fol¬
lowing Varnish.
SECT. I. To make the strong Japan-Varniss.
Take half an Ounce of Colophony, melt it in a glazedt
Fipkin : then sprinkle into it by degrees an Ounce and
half of Amber finely beaten and sifted, stiring it well,
now and then adding some Spirit of Turpentine ; when
this is melted, then sprinkle in an Ounce and half of
Sarcacola finely beaten, stirring it all the while, and put¬
ting frequently more Spirit of Turpentine, till all is
melted ; then pour it through a coarse Hair bag, placed
between two hot Boards, and press it gently, till the
clear is received into a glazed warm. Vessel ;. with this
Varnishi mix your ground lvory black, and, warming
first your Paper-p'ate, paint it on before a Fire in a warm
Room, as equally as you can, and set it in a gentle O¬
ven ; then the next Day put it in a hotter Oven, and.








the third Day into one very hot, and let it stand till the
Oven is quite cold, and then it will be fit for any Use,
either with Liquors that are cold or hot, and will never
change, and ’tis with great Difficalty you can break
them. I am of Opinion, that if the Moulds were cast
in any hard Metal, they would do as well as if they were
turned in Wood
SECT. II. Of making these China-Toys of the Ce-
lour of Gold.
Prepare your Bowls, Plates, or any other Vessel, in
the same Manner as the former, or you may take fine
Saw-dust, if you can have it, and dry it well ; then pour
on it some Turpentine, melted with an equal Quantity
of Rezin, and half as much Bees-wax, mix them well,
and put to them your dry Saw-durt, stirring all together
till the Mixture becomes thick as a Pxlle ; then take it
off the Fire, and warm your Moulds, and spread some
of your Mixture on that with the Hole in the middle, as
equally as possible, and press down the Mould upon it ;
then set it to cool, and your Vessel will be fi for paint-
You may put into this when your Turpentine is
ing.
melted some Sarcacoa finely powdered, to the Quan-
tity of half the Turpentine, stirring it well, and it will
harden it : And yos oaght to make this Compofition in
the epen Air, for it wil endanger your House-
But which ever of the Mixtures you use, if you have
a mind to have them. appear like Gold, paint them over
with Size, and when that begins to stick a little to the
Figure, lay on Leaf-gold, either pure, or that Sert
which is brought to us from Germany; but- the last is apt
to change green, as most ef the Preparations of Brass
will do ; such as those which are called Batb-Metal, and
others of the like Sort, which appear like Gold when
they are not frestr polished, or cleaned every Day : But
as the Air coming upon them will make them alter to an
ngly Colour, so I ehuse Gold, which is durable, and
will never change, and à mach siner Colour than any of
the former for a Continuance. But though- the Leaf-
gold, we are to use, is tender and’ may be lubject to. rub
eff;




off; yet the Varniss, we shall put over it, will keep it
bright and entire.
When the Gold is laid on, and the
flying Pieces brushed off, which must be done when the
Gold-size is dry, then apply the following Varnish to
brighten the Gold, and preserve it from rubbing.
SECT. III. Varnist for Gold, or such Leof of Me-
tals as imitate Gold.
Take some Colophony, melt it, and then put in two
Ounces of Amber well pulverized, with some Spirit of
Turpentine, as the Amber thickens, stirring it well ;
then put an Ounce of Gum-elemi well powdered, and
some more Spirit of Turpentine, stili keeping. the Li-
quor stirring, till ’tis all well mixed': However, use as
little Spirit of Turpentine as you can, because the thicker
you make your Varniss for Use, the harder it will be.
Do this over a Sand-heat in an open Glass, and strain it,
as you are directed for the former Varniss.
Use this Varnisn alone, first warming your Veffels
made of the Paper-paste, and lay it on with a Painting-
brush before the Fire ; then harden it by degrees, at three
several times, in Ovens ;: the first a slow Heat, the next
a warmer Oven, and the third a very hot ope, and your
Vessels will look like polished Gold.
Note, As for those Vessels, made with Saw-dust and
the Gums, you may use a Varnisn for them made of
the same Ingredients as above, excepting the Gum-
e’emi ; and thiswill dry in the Sun, or in. a very genele
Warmth.
SECT. IV. To make your Veffals ef a red. Colour
witb gilt Figures on them.
Prepare your Veffels as before with broton Paper-paste,
and-when they are dry, and prepared as directed in the
first, mix some Vermillion, or Red-lead with the Var-
nish first directed in this Chapter, and use it warm then
stove it or barden it by. degress in an Oven, and it will
be extreamly bright.; or alse lay on your first Ground
with Size and Veriillioa, and in propar Elages stick ope.
with




with Gun-arabick and Water, some Figures cut ont
of Prints, as little Sprigs of Flowers, or such like; and
uhen they are dry, paint them over with Gold size, and
let that remain till ’tis a little sticking to the Touch ;
then lay on your Gold, and let that be well closed to the
Gold size, and dried ; then. if you would shade any
part of vyour Flower, take some Ox gall, and, with a
sine Camels Hair pencil, trace over the shady Parts on
the Leaf-gold, and upon that paint with deep Dutch-
pink ; and, when that is dry, use your Varnisn in a
warm Place, (1 mean that Varnisn directed for the co-
vering of Gold) and set it to harden by degrees in an
Oven ; which Varnish will secure the Leaf-gold (as they
call it) brought from Germany, from changing, by keep-
ing the Air from it.
SECT. V. A Metbod to silver these Japan Vessels.
When you have made your Vessels, and they are well
dried, paint them over with Size and ground Chalk, or
Whiting ; let them dry well, and then paint them over
again with the brightest Gold size you can get ; (for
there is much Difference in the Colour of it, some is
almost white, and another is more yellow ; the first is
proper for Silver, and the other for Gold) when this
Size is almost dry, lay on your Leaf-silver, and close it
well to the Size, brushing off the loose Parts, when ’tis
dry, with some Cotton. (Note, When you lay on your
Silver or Leaf-gold, keep it free from the Air; for the
least Motion of., the Air will rumple your Leaves, and
they will not lye smooth.) Then use the following Var-
nish to cover the Silver.
SECT. VI. To make the Varnish to cover the Silver.
Take some fine Turpentine, and melt it; then take
off white Amber well pulverized about an Ounce an a
half. put it by degrees into your glazed Pipkin to the
Turpentine, and stir it well, adding sometimes fome
Spirat of Tijrpentine, till the-Amber is all dissolved ;
and.
then put. ta it half an Qunce of. Sarcacelp beaten,
half




half an Ounce of Gum-elemi well levigated, pouring in
at times more of the Turpentine spirit; till all is dissol-
ved ; let your Fire be gentle, and stir the Mixture con-
tinually while it is on the Fire.
This Varnisn will be white and strong as the former,
and should be used warm, and is as strong as that which
we lay upon Gold; it must be hardened by degrees in an
Oven, as the Gold varmish, and your Vessel will look
hke polished Silver.
SECT. VII. Varnisb in Japanning on Wood, te
mix witb several Colours.
Vou must, if you design to use Varniffi to mix with
Colours, take Spirit of Turpentine, and dissolve in it
a little Gum-Taccamahacca over the Fire, till it is a lit-
tle thickened ; use this with any Colour that has been
well ground with Water, and pulverized afterwards.
When your Work is done, you may, if you will, var-
nish over your Piece with the same Varnifhi directed to
colour Silver ; and one might also cover Tables of Wood,
as well as Tea boards and Plates, or Bowls of Wood, in
the same Manner, as is mentioned for the Pastes of Paper
and Saw dust.
SECT. VIII. Directions for imifating China, or
Porcelain ware, upon Tea tables, Tea-boards, &c. upon
Gold or Silver Groands.
Prepare your Tea tables, or any other useful Thing;
as l have mentioned in the foregoing Receipts, and then
mark out your Designs upon them; make Ovals or
Rounds upon them in a good Disposition, so as to be
uniform, or well adapted to the purpose, that they an-
swer one another in a regular Manner; then paste on
some Paper in proper Plaoes, and when your paper is dry,
draw your Designs upon them, and paint them with
Water colours ; then with a Brush-lay Gold fize or Sil-
ver size on the other part; and, when that is near dry,
lay on your Leaf-gold or Silver ’and; when all as welf
dried; varnish over with the white Varnisn, if it be a




Silver-ground; or, if it is a Gold-ground, varnisn witk
the strongest Varnisni, excepting only the Ovals or Cir-
cles of Painting, for these must be done with the white
Varnissi, which is so transparent, that all the Painting
will appear through it. lf you lay on a Gold-ground, or
any Colour darker than that, then let your Paintings be
blue and white; or, if it is Silver or Light ground, then
use the most fiery Colours in your Paintings.
BECT. IX. The Method of Glaxing Prints witb white
Varnisp, so as to bear Water, and the Polisb.
It is best in this Way, first to pafte your Print on a
Board, or a Piece of Shock-eloth strained on a Frame ;
to do this well, prepare some stiff Starch, and with a
Sponge, dipt in Water or thin Starch, wet the back of
your Print, and, if you design to lay it on a Board, dip
a large Brushi in the thick Starch, and brushi it over the
Board as even as possible, and let it dry ; then a second
Time repeat the same Work, and so continue till the
Veins or Grain of the Wood is quite silled : In the last
Operation, when the Starch is just laid on, lay upon it
your wet Print as equally as possible, so that there ap-
pear no Bubbles in it, press it close every where till it lies
fmooth, and fo let it dry: In this Operation your Hands
must be very clean, or else you will foil the Print; in a-
bout twenty four Hours it will. be dry enough to varnisti
with the following, viz.
Wbite Varnisb for Prints.
Take of letbyocolla, or lfinglajs, or Fisp-glue, as some-
call it, four Ounces, and pull it into small Pieces, seethe
this slowly in a Quart of Brandy, or strong. Spirits, in a
glazed Pipkin;and when, by takingout a little, you find
it will make a strong Glue, by being a little exposed to the
Air, it will do for your purpose ; but be sure to make
it as strong as you can ; and, while it is warm, with 3
latge Brusni, wash over the Print as quick as possible,
and as smooth as may be; let-this stand a'Day, and theu
brush it over again with the same Varnissi, or Glue, and





let it dry very well; then brush it over with white Varnissi,
at such a Distance from the Fire that it may not be too
hot, or else it will blister, and do this two or three
times over ; then set it by for a Day or two, and brush
it over with white Varnish again three or four times, and
let it stand a Day or two ; then varnish it a third Time
with two or three Passages of the Brush, and in three or
four Days polish it with a soft Linnen-cloth and some fine
Tripoli, rubbing it very gently, till it remains as smooth
as possible, and clear it with Flour and Oil ; it will' then.
appear as bright as Chrystal; and, if it should at any
time be annoyed by Flies, you may wasn it with a Sponge
and Water, which will clean it. Note, for common Ule,
some first dissolve the Isinglass in warm Water, lest it
should take fire.
The white Varnish.
Take Gum sandarick of the clearest and whitest Sort
one Pound, Gum-mastick of the clearst sort one Ounce,.
Gum sarcacolla the whitest one Ounce and half, Venice-
Turpentine three Ounces, Benzoin the clearest half an
Ounce, white Rezin half an Ounce, Gum animæ an
Ounce and half, Gum-elemi 3 Ounces ; these must be
dissolved and mixt in the following Manner.
Put your Sarcacolla, and Rezin into a little more Spi-
rits than will cover them to dissolve ;. then put your
Gum-animæ, Benzoin, and Venice Turpentine into a
Glass, or glazed Vessel, and pour on as much Spirit as
will cover them an Inch, then provide a glazed Vessel,
or Glass, for your Gum mastick and Sandarick, and pour
on them strong Spirits, enough to cover them about an
Inen, to dissolve them rightly; then, in a distinct Ves-
sel, of the- same Sort as before, put your Gum elimi,
and cover it with Spirits to dissolve. IIn this Procefs,
you need only pulverize the Gums Animæe, Sarcacolla and
Benzoin, and you may break the Rezin a little. J While
these are dissolving, for three or four Days, shake the Bot-
tles twice or three each Day, then put all these together in
a glazed Vessel gently warm’d, stiring them well, and strain
the Liquor and Gums gently, beginning with the Gums,
through a Linnen-cloth; (This will prevent any Dirt
getting into your Varn sn) then put it into a Bottle, and





let it stand a Week before you nse it, and pour off as
much of the clear only, as you think you shall want for
present Use. Take Care of Fire.
To paste Prints upen Clotb for Varuisbing.
If you put'your Print upon Shock-cloth well strained
in a Frame, brufh over your Cloth with strong Paste,
made with Flour and Water, and immediately brush over
the back of your Print with well prepared Starch; and
then as readily brusn the Cloth over again with the same
Starch, and lay on your Print as equally as poffible,
without letting any Bubbles or Blisters appear in the Pa-
per ; but you must observe, that, when you lay on your
paper apon the Clotb, as both the Cloth and the paper
are then wet, however close you lay the Paper to the
Cloth, they will both together appear flagging, and un-
strained, yet, as soon as they are dry, all will be smooth,
as either was at the first : Let them remain so in a dry
warm Place for a Day or two, and then varnisn your
Print. as before directed, with Glue made of scthyocol-
la, and then with the white Varnisn.
With this Varnish you may mix up any Colour, that
has been ground dry, upon a Marble, and paint with it
upon any Figure you have drawn, or upon any Print yon
have pasted upon your work ; but the varnisned Colours
what Colours are proper Shades to one another, see the-
Chapter for making of Crayons.
Varnish made witb Seed- Lacca.
Put a Quart of strong Spirit into a large Glass vessel,
and put to it six Ounces of Seed-lacca ; let these stand
together two Days, shaking them often ; then take a
Jelly bag. or a Flannel bag made like what is called
Hippocrates’s Sleeve, and pass it through, letting the Li-
quor drop into a Receiver, and squeezing the Gums
every now and then ; when the Varnish is almost out of
the Bag, add more, and press it gently, till all is strain-
ed, and the Dregs remain dry ; (Take care you do not





Fire, for fear you set your House
put this Dross into the
in a Flame) then putit in Bottles, and keep them close
stopt, setting it by till you perceive all the thick parts
settled to the Bottom, which will be in three or four
Days, then pour off the clear into z frefh Bottle, and
twill be fit for Use.
As for the Varnish made of Shell-lacca, ’tis not of any
great Service, though often recommended, for it will not
bear the Polisn.
When you lay on your Varnishes, take the following
Method: lf you varniss Wood, let your Wood be very
smooth, close grained, free from Grease, and rubbed
with Rushies.
2dly, Lay on your Colours as smooth as possible, and
if the Varnisn has any Blisters. in it, take them off by 2
Polish with Rushies.
3dly, When you varnish, keep your Work warm but
not too hot.
4thly, In laying on of your. Varnish, begin in the
middle, and stroke the Brusn, to the Outside, then to
another extreme Part, and so on till all is covéred ; for
the Brushi if you was to beginat the Edges would leave
Blots there, and make the-Work unequal.
5tbly, In sine Works, use the finest Tripoli to polisn ;
do not polisn your Work at one Time, but, after the
first polishing, let it dry two or three Days, and poliss
again for the last Time.
6thly, In the first polishing you must ase a good deal
of Tripoli, but in the next avery little will serve ; wash
off your Tripoli with a Sponge and Water; dry your
Varnish with a dry Linnen rag, and clear your Work
with Oil, Whiting, and Lamp-black.
SECT. X. To take off the Figure from auy Piece ef
China-Ware, though the Person bas not been acquainted
with Drawing.
When you have any Figures to your liking upon any.
China dish, Cup, Plate, or such like, you must lay a
Piece of oiled Paper over them, so as to. hold the Piece
steady, till’you can trace our the Lines of the Figures ;




then lay the oiled Paper on a Paper blacked on one side,
and the blacked Paper on a clean Paper; then trace the
Lines with a Pen, or blunted Point of a Needle, till the
Lines are all impressed on the white Paper, and draw
them over with a black Lead pencil, and mark the
Shades, where they separate from the light Parts of the
Colour, that so you may lay on your Colours as you see
them painted on the China-ware ; then cut out your Fi-
gures close to the Qut lines, and fix them upon your
Ground of Whiting and Size, or Size with ground Chalk,
with thick Gum arabick and Water, and, when they
are quite dry, paint them, the lighter parts in water-
colours. and the shady parts with Varnishi mixed with
the darker Colours ; when these are dry, wasn all over
with the white Varnisn before a Fire, but not so hot as
to make the Varnisni rise in Blisters; when the Varnish
is dry, lacker-it again with the same Varniffi, and repeat
it a third Time; then scrape some Tripoli very fine,
and with a soft Rag, dipt in Water, take up a little of
the Tripoli at a Time, and polish it, by gentle rub-
bing, till ’tis smooth, then waffi off the Tripoli with
a soft Sponge and Water, and then with a dry fine
Cloth, wipe off the Tripoli, and, when that is dry,
dean it with Whiting and Oil, if it is a white Var-
nissi; or, with Oil and Lamp black, where the Varniss
is black.
But the common Way is to cut out Prints, and pafte
them on such Parts as we think fit, and then colour
them with Water-colours, and varnisni them with white

Varnish.  is an easy Way of Painting, because the
Shades of the Prints, when you lay on a transparent
Water colour, will give the Light and Shade that
Colour to your purpose, without using a dark and light
Colour.
SECT. XI. Some remarkable Directions in coloaring
of Draughts or Prints in Japanning, as Flowers, Birds,
Fruits, &c.
If vou have Prints or Drawings in black and white
of Flowers; if the Centre of the Flower is rising, just





touch the Edges of the Lights with a thin Tincture of
Gamboge, and lay on some Dutch pink, or Gall-stone,
over the Shades, so as to run into the Lights a very lit-
tle. 1 say this because the Thrums in the middie of
Flowers are generally Yellow, but if of any other Co
lour, as by Observation l find they are sometimes blue,
sometimes more light, and sometimes darker, then touch
on the Verges of the Lights a little Ultramarine-blue,
and over the Shades either some Sanders blue. to run a
very little into the UItramarine, or else snade with In-
digo ; and. some of the white of the Print being left
void of Colour, will then give à Life and Spirit to the
Colours so disposed.
All Flowers should be tenderly touched in the Lights,
just to give à little Glare into the light Parts of the Co-
lour you would give to the Flower-Leaves ; and, if you
have a natural Flower to paint by, you will presently see.
that on the shady Side you must lay on the most shady
part, such a Colour as will’force the reft to appear for-
ward ; but do not dawb over the Shades with too hea vy
a Colour, let it be such as may be transparent, if possi¬
ble, and scumble it into the light Colour, which was
laid on before ; use your Pencil lightly on this Occafion,
with a very little Gum water in it, and use it before the
Colours are quite dry.
In the Painting of the Leaves of Herbs or Plants, we
ought to have regard to the Colours of the Greens ; the
brightest is the Verdigrease green, described in my former
Book relatiug to Painting in Water-colours ; we fnould
touch that Colour a little into the light Parts of the Leaf,
from the Place where the lighter Parts of the Shades
end ; and then lay on some Sap green on the shady Parts,
so as to unite with the Verdigrease-green; and if the na-
tural Leaf should be of a darkisn Colour, touch the
lighter Sides of the Leaves with a little Verdigrease-
green, and Dutch yellow Pink mixt together, or with a
Tincture of French berries, but so as to let the Verdi-
grease shine more than the Pink, and by Degrees shade
it with Pink





The Leaving the Lights, when we colour a Print,
has two Advantages, viz.
If we leave the Lights on this Occasion, the white-
ness of the Paper serves instead of the Use of white
Paint, which is an heavy Colour, and would rather con-
found the Edges of the Colours, which l have prescrib-
ed to be laid on, than do them any service; but the
Colours, which I have directed where there is no white
laid on, will agreeably shine into the white of tne Pa-
per.
I am more particular in this, because several, if they
see a Flower of a blue Colour, will lay it all over with
one Colour, though it is-thick enough to hide both the
Lights and the Shades, and then it remains like a penny
Picture, where there is nothing to be seen but a Jargon
of Reds, Blues, and Yellows.
With a little Practice of what l direct, you will soon
see the good Effect of laying on Colours for this Use ;
though the dawbing of Prints in the common Manner
may please the lgnorant, when every one of Taste will
soon discover the Impertinence.
In a Word, when you are about such Pieces of Work,
scumble the Lights into the Shades of every Colour, and
save the Middle of the Lights open on the Papers, for, as
the Paper is white of itself, it makes à Light.








CHAP. VIII.
To melt Amber, and cast it into any Figure
with Flies, or any small Animals in it, as
we see in the valuable Pieces of Amber
sold at great Prices. From Mr. Boyle.
TAKE Turpentine, and melt it in a Glass in a
strong Sand heat, where the Fire may be raised
at Discretion, then have prepared three Ounces of Amber,





either of the whitest or yellow fort ; (Il you want your
Amber white, pick out the clearest white pieces, or if
yellow, the clearest of that sort. J levigate either of them ;
and when your Turpentine is melted, sprinkle the pow-
dered Amber in, keeping it stiring with a Piece of Fir-
wood, till you find no Resistance ; then, if you find your
Melting to resist the Stick, drop in by degrees à little
Venice turpentine, and keep it still stirring, till all your
powdered Amber is dissolved, and is thick enough to pour
into Moulds ; and when ’tis cool, you will have a Fi-
gure, or the Medal you propose, silled with it, and re-
main as hard as Amber itself, with all the same Qualities
that Amber commonly shew us.





Arts COMPANION
PART II.
OR THE




OF
Drawing and Painting
IN
WATER-COLOURS.
WHEREBY
A Stranger to those ARTS may be im-
mediately renderd capable of Delineating any
View or Prospect with the utmost Exactneis;
of Colouring any Print or Drawing in the most
beautiful Manner; and of taking off MEDALS
instantly, by various Ways, never before made
publick : Intermixd with several curious Re¬
ceipts for the Use of Painters, Statuaries, Found-

ers, &c.
WITH
INSTRUCTIONS for making Transparent
Colours of every Sort ; partly from some curious Per-
sonages in Holland, Franee and Italy; but chiefly from
a Manuscript of the Great Mr. Boyle; particularly
a Receipt of that Gentleman’s, for making a Blue
Colour equal to Uitramarine.
The Fifth ÉDITIoN.
LONDON; Printed.
And DUBLIN Re printed by I. Jackson at the Globe
in Meath-street, Beckseller, 1749.







PREFACE
THE following Papers are the Effect of some Years
Study and Labour, collected in my Travels, and

at length put togetber, at the Instance of a noble
Friend, for bis Instruction in the Art of Drawing, and
Painting in Water colours. Among. otber Particulars
wbich they contain, are several Receipts for making and
preparing of Colours, from a Manascript of the late fa-
mous Mr. Boyle, wbich bas never yet appear d in Publick,
and was communicated to me by the late Lord Carleton.
As I have experiené d what is related in this Tract to be
curious and 'extraordinary, I make no Apology for offering
it to the View of the World: And on my own Part, I.
shall tbink my Time well spent, if my Readers reap any
Delight or Advantage from what l bere publisb from my
own Obseration ; fince l can assure them, that it was
aalculated for the Entertainment and Diwerfionof those whe
bave a Genius for such pleasant Amusements, asyaell as for
the Improvement of those whabave already made some Pre-

gress in the dalightful Arts above-mentioned.






THE



Drawing and Painting
WATER-COLOURS.

CHAP. I.
Rules for Drawing any Object in its Outlines,
as exact as the Life or Nature.
TAKE a Sheet of the thinnest, or whitest brown
Paper, and brush it over with Oil of Turpen
tine, which will immediately render it transpa
rent, and then put the Paper to dry in the Air; when
tis dry, strain it upon a Frame, and six it against any-
Object you design to draw; as an House, or Hill. or
Tree, &c. then just belore it, place a piece of: Wood
with an Hole in it, fit for one Eye to look through; and
as you meet any Out-lines of the Object you desire, up-
on the transparent Paper trace them over with a Pencil ;
so will you be sure that you cannot err; for there will
be nothing but just Proportion, and a true Representati-
on of Nature.
To make this still of more Elegancy, observe the
Tracing of your Draughts where the Shades are, and
mark them with your Pencil ; for all the Art in the
World can never dispose the Shades so regularly as one






may touch by this Method :But the Shades must be done
quickly after the Qut lines are drawn, and not at dif-
ferent Times, because every Instant the Sun changes
them.
In this too observe, that in certain Objects you will
have fainter; stronger, and yet more dark Shades , and
in yoar Remarks of them take such Memorandums, as
may direct you how to finish them, with Indian Ink,
or other Colour, when you sit down to compleat yout
Work.
The best Way that l know, is to prepare three Shells
or Gallipots of Indian Ink mix’d with common Water,
before you attempt to trace out your Object, viz. one
of a very faint Black, the next of a middling Black,
and the other of an interse Black, Number them 1,
2, 3, from the lightest to the darkest; and as ygu
make your Observations of the Shades on your Object,
mark upon your Draught the same Numbers as they
happen to appear, so that afterwards you may finisn
with Certainty.
Again, it is neceffary in the Drawing of any thing
after this Manner. to observe, that the Lines on the sha-
dy Side should be thick or bold, and those on the lighter
Sides should be thinner or finer, in proportion to the Light
that falls upon them. As for Example : In the darkest
part a'Line may be of this Thickness ;

in the next
dark Part somewhat thinner

and it the other thus
unless in Things at a great
Distane, hardly to
be understood, or so faint
as hardly to be perceived, thus ;
a mere Shadow as it were.

Some have l been guilty of a great Fault, though
they have taken the Qut lines very exact, to make all
their Lines of an equal thickness.
lf an Object be reprsented, we’ll suppose two Miles
off, and the Drawing be as strong in that Part of the
Picture, as if it was next the Eye, or not ten or twenty
Feet from the Draughtsmian, it would not appear plea-
sant or natural to the Eye. We must not express a Man
wich Buttons on his Coat at two Miles Distance, no
more than we must have them ommitted in a Person so
near the Eye as ten or twenty Feet : Though this has




inadvertently been done by some who have passed. for
great Men. And the Shades in those distant Appearan-
ces must be in proportion to the Strength of the Ob-
jects, as they appear to us, i. e. imperfect. Three or
four well-directed Touches of the Pencil, on the shady
Side, will represent a Figure at the Distance we can dis-
cern it, as lively as some Hundreds will of the same Fi-
gure near the Eye.
But the transparent Paper I speak of, is of another
Use ; for, if we lay it upon any Picture, or Print, in a
loose Sheet, you will see all the Lines through it, and
may then draw or copy it with the greatest Pleasure.
You will then, if the Print or Picture be done by a good
Master, see which Lines are strong, and which aze ten-
der and soft : Imitate them.
There is yet another Way to take Views and Lande
scapes, which some prefer to the transparent Paper ;
that is, either with white or black Tiffany, or Lawn,
strain’d upon a Frame, and us’d in the same Manner as
the Paper ; exceptingthat the Black-lead Pencil is used
to the Paper; on the white Tiffany, and on the Lawn,
we use Charcoal finely poinied, and very soft; but on
the black Tiffany we use white Chalk of the tenderest
fort.

CHAP. II.
How to bring these Drawings to Use: and te
copy from Prints, Paintings, &c.
If we make a Drawing upon transparent Paper, t0

take a Drawing from it regularly, get a piece of Pa-
per of the same Size, and rub on one side of it some
Powder of Black lead, till ’tis well and equally black 'd,
and so well rubbed, that a touch of a Finger will hardly
be tinged with it.
Then take the Drawing you have made, or Print, and
day the black d Paper under it, with the black side down-






wards, upon a piece of white Paper, and pin the three
together in two or three Places ; take then a Pin or
Needle à little blunt at the Point, and trace it over the
Out-lines of your Picture ; which, with a little pres-
sing. will direct the black’d Paper to impress the un-
dermost white Paper, so as to receive every stroke yon
draw.
When this is done, you must with your Black lead
Pencil correct what Errors you find, and slightly clean
the Draught new made with some stale Bread Crumbs.
The Black-lead Pencil is so hard to be found tolerable,
that l know not above one Place. where we can get one
that will do the Service we require. If we find a good
piece of Lead in the beginning, when we have used an
Inch or two, the rest generally proves hard, gritty, and
full of Knots.
The best I have met with are commonly sold by Joy-
ners, from some of these one may have them of soft or
hard Lead. and use them till they are reduced to two or
three Inches Tis a great pleasure to a Draughtsman
to work with a good Pencil, and as great à Plague to
have a bad one.
So the Camel’s Hair Brushes are generally very bad;
they are indeed cheap enough to buy them in common ;
but if one would have the best, which should be full of
Hair, the Price ought to be accordingly, as they can
be made to hold a Quantity of Colour, and be brought
to fine l’oints : 'lis better to give six pence or a fhilling
for a Pencil, than to have a dozen for a groat.
As for the Draughts drawn on Tiffany or Lawn, lay
them only on Paper, i. e. that which is drawn with
Charcoal upon white Paper, and that drawn with Chalk
on black or blue Paper; then, giving each of them a
Knock or two with an Hammer, the Charcoal or the
Chalk will fall through them, upon the Papers, directly
in the Lines they were drawn, and give you the true
Representation of the Object you drew from the Life:
Upon the black Paper you will see it in white Lines, and
so the contrary,





Then strengthen these Shadows of Drawings with
your Black lead Pencil, or Chalk, or red Oker, on the
Sheets of Paper, where they have made the Marks ;
otherwise, the Lines would easily be mbbed out. But
take care, as I have observed before, that this Amend-
ment be made suddenly; for these tender Draughts are
soon vanished, if one does not take care to strengthen
them immediately i Begin first at the bottom of the
Drawing.
Another Way is to take a thin piece of Paper, and
hold it against a Glass-Window, principally at such a
Window as is sashi’d; for the Interruptions of the Lead
in the smaller glazed Windows, will hinder part of this
Prospect; the Point is, draw what you see from the
Glass, and then the Black-lead paper is to be used, as di-
rected before.
There is another Way still, which may be more easy
to the Hand or Arm of a Person not accustomed to draw-
ing upon a Paper or Lawn placed upright, which is by-
the Use of a portable Camera Ofcura; though to help
the first, one may hold a Baguette, or such a Stick in the
Left-hand, as the Oil painters use to rest the Right-hand
upon; or have some other Rest made for the Right-hand,
as may be serewed up and down at one’s pleasure. But
there is this Difference still between drawing a piece of
Perspective, or View, on a transparent Paper or Lawn
placed upright against any Object, that such a piece will
take in more of the View or Object, and from a greater
Distance than the portable Camera Ofcura will. How-
ever, as the portable Camera will at first be most easy to
the Arm for the Beginner, by Reason the Objects ap-
pear upon anHorizontal plane, such as a Table, the Hand
will have a proper Rest, and more readily follow the
Lines represented on the Plane with that Exactness. In-
deed such a portable Camera, as I mention, is of some
Expence, and to such as can afford it, they may have
them at any price, from thirty Shillings to five Pounds
a piece, according as they bespeak them, at the Mae
thematical Instrument-maker’s.






What will make the Difference in the prices, will be
the Largeness of the Sizes of the Glasses, which lye ho¬
rizontally, and receive the Objects which we are to trace
out with our Pencil: The smaller of these Glasses may
be perhaps four Inches square, and the larger fifteen-
Inches. On such Glasses you ill meet the exact Re
presentation (smaller or larger, according to the bigness
of the Machines) of the Objects we point or direct them
to, each one adorned with the natural Colours agreeable
to the point of Distance ; stronger nearer the Eye, and
gradually declining, as the Objects are more remote from
it : The Shades of the several Colours are in this Way
expressed in a very lively Manner. A few Leffons, with
good Consideration, will be of good Information, not
only to a Beginner, but to a Master of the Pencil.
But still, to advance the Knowledge and Use of this
portable Camera, I suppose, that instead of the Glasses,
which receive the Objects I speak of, there should be
placed Frames of transparent paper, to receive the Ob-
jects we have a mind to take, upon which one may use
the Pencil still with greater Freedom. One may have a
Dozen or two witli each Camera; or one Frame will
serve as for many papers as we please to strain upon it,
if one has patience to pafte them on.
There is another way of drawing Objects in the Ca-
mera Ofcura way, which is by making a Room as dark
as may be, only leaving an Hole in one of the Window-
shutters, as low as possible, to receive an Ox-Eye Glass,
as they call it, which is sold by the Mathematical In-
strument-makers. This turns in a Socket, so as to di-
rect every Object, within a certain Reach, to a Sheet of
paper, placed at a proper distance within the Room, to
receive those Objects ; upon which paper, yon may draw
them in great perfection ; but they all appear revers’d,
or the wrong End upwards : However, they are in as
exact proportion and beauty, as those represented in the
former. In this Case, ’tis not however more difficult to
draw or rather copy the Objects, though they are re-
vers’d, than to draw or copy the several Things which
we see upright, on the Frames of transparent Paper,
Lawn, or Tiffany ; for to trace Lines, will be as eafily
done




done one way as the other : And though the Objeets,
falling on the Sheet of paper, will, when we are draw-
ing them, be revers’d, ’tis but turning the Sheet of pa¬
per upside down when they are done, and our Drawing
will be right to the Eye.
When we shew this by way of Curiosity, to those who
âre unacquainted with the Reasons wliy the Images re-
presented on the Sheet of paper appear upside down, it
would not have so desirable an Effect, as if they could
be viewed in their natural Situation: But to obviate this
Difficulty, let the Sheet of Paper, which is to reccive
the Objects, be placed against the back of a Chair.
and let them look on the several Objects, represented on
the Paper, over the back of the Chair, which will set
them upright to the Eye. This way in bringing them
to rights, is thought on by very few, though at the
first Proof every one will wonder that he did not find it
out sonner.
Thas far is shewed, how any oné may copy either a
Print, Drawing, or piece of Painting, or even make
an exact Representation from the Life. But l must yet
add, concerning the Taking off of Prints or Drawings,
a Method or two which are easy and diverting, not be-
foré mentioned. One is, prick with a Pifr any Oût-
lines of a Print or Drawing one has a mind to copy, and
then, laying the said Picture on a Sheet of paper, take
a Powder-puff, or a Tuft of Cotton, dipping it now and
then in Charcoal-dust, or red Chalk-duit, and beat it o-
ver the prick'd Lines, through the picture, renewing it
with Dust frequently by dipping, and then yoû will
have full Directions marked on your Cloth, or Paper,
sufficient to finish a just Drawing.
N. B. Such a prick'd piece of Work will give many
hundred Proofs of its Use. Though it spoil tlie print or
picture, it faves a vast deal of Trouble to the Painter on
the drawing part.
Another way there is to make an Impression from the
print, which shall give a just Copy of it : This is of greât
Use, when we want to carry every Stroke of the Engra-
ver along with us. It will indeed sully the print à little,
though very little, if you are careful ; and this Method
will




will perhaps cost you two minutes Time, when the
drawing of it with every Stroke the Engraver has made,
would keep you busy a Month.
For this take some foft Soap, either white, or of the
green fort ; but, for my part, l always used the green
Soap ; mix this with Water near an equal Quantity, till
tis near the Consistence of a Jelly : Rub some of this
mixture on the print, and gently wet the paper, you
would have to receive the Impression from it, with a wet
Spunge ; then lay it on the print, and cover all with
two or three other pieces of dry paper, and rub it very
hard all over with any Thing that is smooth and po¬
lished, and the wetted paper will have upon it the re-
verse of the print you rubbed it upon, with every di-
stinct Line in the Original, if you have been careful to
rub it equally.

CHAP. III.
Secrets sor Copying of Drawings, &c. con-
tinued.
To take a Drawing witb fixt Ink.
ONE Way is to take a thin Sheet of paper, and
rub it all over with fresh Butter, as equally as pos-

sible ; then dry it well by the Fire and rub the butter’d
Side with Carmine, till ’tis all equally colour’d, or else
rub it over with Lamp black, or Black-lead powder, or
with blue Bise finely ground ; take care in the rubbing on
any of these that the Colour will not come off by a very
slight Touch of the Finger, and they are then fit for your
work.
When you have chosen a Print, or Defign, that you
would copy, lay the colour’d Side of your butter’d pa-
per upon a piece of clean paper, and your print upon
the butter’d paper, and then with a fine Pen or Needle,
blunted




blunted a very little at the point, trace the Out-lines of
your Drawing carefully, and you wiil have a good Copy
of it upon yoar white paper, which may be touched up
afterwards by Crayons of the like Colour.
A red Ink for making an Impression of a Print.
One may likewise use the following Method for taking
off or making a Copy from any print; which is, to mix
somc Vermillion, finely ground, with Linseed oyl, but
so liquid that it will run or flow in a pen ; with this trace
the Lines of your print, and as soon as all is done, then
with a Spunge and Water wet the backside of the print,
and turn the printed side down on a piece of white paper,
so as to lye smooth ; then lay over that a piece of dry
paper, and press it hard in every part, and the lower
white paper will receive the Impression: But if you have
a Linnen-press, ’tis better to put your papers between
two of the wooden Leaves, and skrew the press as tight
as may be, for you will then have a fine Impreffion.
Taking Draughts witb red loose Ink.
You may likewise take some Vermillion finely ground.
and mix it with fair Water in a Gallipot, with some
Cotton, and it will run very freely in the Pen, so that
one may make the finest strokes we desire ; then, with
this mixture draw over all the strokes of your print, imi-
tating both the finer and stronger Lines : When all is done,
then with a Spunge dipt in Gum-water, with a clean
white Paper, and whileit is wet, turn the Print upon
it. and pressing it well, take off the print, and all the
Strokes will remain on the clean Paper, and as soon as
tis dry the Vermillion will be fixt to it.
This fort of Ink is what a famous Writing-master used,
when he had a Book of Writing engraving for him ; he
writ with this, and, having his Copper-plate covered
with white Bees-wax, or white Ground, he turn’d the
written side down on the waxt side of the plate, and rub-
bing it very equally, the Impression will be upon the
Wax.






Taking Draughts witb blue loose Ink.
You may likewise make such a sort of Ink of blu Bice
and common Water, which will run very finely in a
Pen, and serve for the same Use as the above Ink.
To take off a Drawing in a standing red Colour by Traeing-
Take Vermillion finely ground, and mix it with a lit-
tle fresh Butter, then rub a clean Sheet of Paper with it
on one side, till it will bear a slight Touch of the Fin-
ger, without leaving the Paper too freely ; then use this
coloured Paper, by laying the colour’d side upon a clean
Paper ; and upon the colour d Paper lay on your Print,
and trace every Line you think proper, as directed before
in Tracing; but be sure you pin the three Papers together
at the Corners to prevent their slipping ; for if any one
should slip, your work will be spoil’d, or some one or
other may inadvertently take up the Print when you
place it right again ; so that your Labour will be all lost.
This Impression made by Tracing will hold without rub-
bing. In Tracing. the Quills taken from a Swallow’s
Wing are very good, after they are thoroughly dry.
If one has Carmine enough by one, he might mix it
with a little fresh Butter, and colour a Paper with it as
before directed, and then your Drawing will be of a more
beautiful Colour; or, if we would have the Drawing
blue, we may colour a Paper with blue Bice and Butter.
A speedy Way of Printing the Leaf of any Tree or Herb, as
exact as Nature it self.
Take the Leaf of any Plant you desire, and rub the
Veins on the Back-side a little, with a piece of lvory,
or a Dog’s Tooth, to bruise them a little, then rub it
gently with a piece of Woollen,Cloth dipt slightly in Oyl
of Linseed ; when you have done this every where on your
Loaf. put the oyl’d side on a piece of white Paper, and
pressing it equally in every part, the Paper will remain
a pertect Impression of it, which may be afterwards co-
loured ; ’tis soon done, and is useful to such as would
remember Plants.





Aoather Way of Printing the Leaves of Plants, so that tbe
Impression shall appear as black as if it bad been done in a
Printing press.
Take any Leaf, and when there is no Wet upon it,
take such a Ball as they use at the Printers for laying the
Ink upon the Letters ; and when your Ball is equally
covered with Printer’s Ink, strike it gently four or five
times on the back of the Leaf, till all the Veins are
black d with the Ink ; then lay your Leaf on a Trench-
er or small Board, with the black side upwards, and
then wet a piece of white Paper to be somewhat more
than moist, and lay it on your Leaf, and upon that lay
a smooth Trencher, pressing it very hard, but not so
much as to break the fine Fibres of the Leaf; by this
Means you will have a fine Imprefsion.
But it would be still more easily done, if you could get
a piece of Wood, made like a Cylinder, about a Foot
long, and at Inch and a half Diameter, and cover the
middle part of it abous six oreight Inches long, with
Woollen-cloth rolled three or four times about.
With this Roller roll the wlite Paper that lyes upon
your Leaf backwards and forwards four or five times,
and you will have a very curious Impression.
TheNecessaries for this Work are a Gallypot of Print-
ers Ink, a couple of small Balls, such as the Printers use,
to lay the Ink equally on the Leaf, and the Roller l men.
tion. But where printers Ink cannot be got, then take
the following Method.
To take the Impression os any Leaf, as certain as the form'
Way, onsy using such Things as may be had in any part op
England.
When you have no Printers Ink, rub tke back of a
Leaf, as before mentioned, with Linseed oyl burnt, an
then, strewing some Powder of black Lead, or for wan:
of that, some Charcoal or Small coal Dust, or the Pow.
der of burnt Cork, equally, upon a fmooth Board just ta
cover it, stroke it over smoothly with the Blade of a
Knife.





Knife, and when the back of the Leaf is oyl’d, clap it
apon the Board, and then putting your white Paper up-
on the black'd Side of the Leaf either press it or roll it
as before.
But if none of these Ingredients should be found, Ver--
million may always be found at an Apothecary’s ; and,
mixing this with fresh Butter, to the Consistence of
Printers Ink, cover your printing Balls with it, and dab
them upon the back of the Leaf, and so take off your Im-
pression as aforesaid.
N. B. The Reason why the back of the Leaf is the
proper side to make the Impression from, is, because the
Ribs or Vessels rise on that side above the fleshy part of
it; and therefore, when they are colour’d with any of
these Inks, will give an Impression ; but in the Front,
or Fore side of a Leaf. the fleshy parts rise, and these
sine Fibres are sunk below them.
Memorandum. Where Vermillion is used, blue Bice
may be used either with Butte:, or with Oyl, as follows.
A fine red or blue Printers Ink, for making Impressions of
this fort.
Grind either Vermillion, or blue Bice, with some
burnt Linseed oyl, and use it as you would do the other
printing Ink; the blue l should chuse for this Work,
because, if we should colour the Leaf, the blue would be
an agreeable Colour to the green forts.
The Method of Takingoff the Leaves of Plants in Plaister
of Paris, lo that they may afterwards be cast in any Me¬
tal.
Those Persons who cast in Metal, have frequent Oc-
casion to use Leaves of several Sorts to embeilisn their
Works, which are generally made from Models done by
the Hand, which take up a great deal of Time, and at
last are imperfect; but the following Way, which. Ilearnt
from a Gentleman in Italy, is much easier.
When you have gathered the Leaf, you desire to take
an Impression from, lay it between the leaves of a Bool




till it will lye flat, then upon a smooth Board with strong
Gum water (made of Gum Arabic) six the Fore-side or
Front of the Leaf to the Board ; when this is done, raise
about it à little Wall of course Paste, half an Inch high;
or if you can conveniently surround your piece of Wood
with Paste-board or Card paper, so close that it will hold
a Liquid for some time, then oyl the back of your Leaf,
as is recommended in the Chapter for casting of Medals,
and pour on Water and Plaister of Paris as is there di-
rected, which when ’tis dry, will give you an exact Im-
pression of every Vein of the Leaf, and from which you
may easily make a Mould to cast in, as your Fancy di-
rects you.
The Manner of making the Impressions of any Buttersly, in
à Minute in all their Colaurs.
When yon have taken a Buttersly kili it without spoil-
ing the Wings, and contrive to spread them in a flying
Manner as regularly as may be ; then take a piece of
white Paper, and with a small Brusn or Pencil wasn a
part of the Paper with Gumi water, a little thicker than
ordinary, so that it may dry at an easy rate ; then lay
your Butterfly on the Paper, and when ’tis well fixt, cut
away the Body close to the Wings, and throw that a-
way, then lay the Paper on a fmooth Board with the fly
upwards, and on that another Paper, upon which put a
smooth Trencher, and a great Weight upon that; or
else put your whole Preparation into aScrew-press, and
serew it down very hard, letting it so remain for an
Hour ; then take off your Buttersly’s Wings, and their
perfect Imperfection, with all their beautiful Colours
mark'd distictly, will remain on the Paper. I have done
several this Way, which answers very well; and to ex-
plain the Reason why it can be so, you must understand,
that all the sine Colours observed on a Butterfly’s Wings,
are properly Feathers, which stick to the Gum so falt,
that, when the Gum is dry, they leave the Wing.
When you have done this, draw between the Wings
of your Impression the Body of your Butterfly, and co-
lour your Drawing of that Body after the Life.
















CHAP. IV.
Of Taking-off Medals instantly, by various
Ways not known.
It may be useful to some People to learn another
Way of preserving to themselves good Specimens,

and fine Designs of Medals, that is, such as may serve
to draw from at any time; and many thousands of
these Specimens may be taken in one Day, at a tri-
sling Expence.
One Method is, to take lchthyocolla, i, e. Isinglass.
which is sold at the Druggists, and is call’d likewise
Fish-glue ; it is made up in Rolls twisted in the Form
of a Figure of eight. This being broken to pieces,
take about an Ounce, and dissolve it in Water enough
to cover it, over the Fire, stirring it gently till all is
dissolved ; then, with a Camel’s. Hair brushi, stroke
some of this Glue over the Medals you want to take off;
when all the Surface is coverd, let them lie till the Glue
is harden’d; and then with the point of a fine Needle,
or Pin, raise the Edge of the Glue from each Medal,
and the whole Impression in Glue will sly off as hard
as Horn, with all the sine Sharpness of the Medal, as
if it was struck. This Glue may be made of any Co-
lour we please, by mixing the Colour we want in the
Water we melt the Glue in. Five hundred of these
Impressions in Glue will not weigh above half an Ounce,
dry ’d immediately, not in an hot Sun, nor in a damp
place, but regularly:
If we use the Isinglafs without any Colour mix'd with
the Water, we may, when we take our Copies from
the Medals; breathe gently on the concave side of them,
which in some measure will moisten our Medal, and
then lay it upon a piece of the thickest Sort of Leaf-
gold, which will stick to it, and, by fhining through
the Isinglass, will-appear like 2 Gold Medal; and if we









would imitate a Copper Medal, we should mix Carmine
with the Water we dissolve our Isinglass in.
When I prescribe Water for this End, it is because
it will do well, and may be had any where ; but Bran-
dy, or Spitits of Wine, will give Glue a much greater
Strength, so as to be less subject to soften by damp Air.
When I mention this, ’tis from an Experiment I made
for Preserving the natural Colour of Flowers several
Vears, which may be useful to the Curious, who use
this Glue on any Occaasion, and is as follows.
To preserve the Leaves of Tatips. Make some Card.
paper into the Figure of Dripping-pans, and, with a
strong mixture of Gum Arabick and water, six them
to the Card ; then pour on gently warm some of the
Isinglass prepared with Brandy, or Spirits, ’till the
Leaf is quite cover’d, and in an Hour or two the Li-
quor will become hard, and, by keeping the Air from
the Flower, will preserve it in all its Colours for seve-
ral Ycars. The same may be done with the Blossoms
of the Auricula, which will preserve all their Colours
as if they were painted.
I Shall now mention the manner of taking off Me-
dals of the largest sort, which will still preserve to ua
the Delincations of many curious pieces, and valuable
designs. For this Use, with a Tuft of sine Cotton a
little greased with Sallad oyl, rub the Medals gently
over, and melt some Stone Brimstone, enough to cover
the Medal half an Inch thick ; then put an Hoop of
stiff Paper round the Edge of the Medal, and when
the Brimstone is melted, and not too hot, pour it on
thé Medal, and as soon as it is fixed and hardened, if
you untie the Hoop, the Impression on the Brimstone
comes clean from the Medal ; which will produce a
sharp and correct mould to cast another from in Plaister
of Paris. But this should not be used on Silver Me-
dals, because it will change their Colour.
If the Medals are Silver, use the same method of
binding them round with Paper; and oyling them ;
mix:à little Plaister of Paris with Water, and fill the
Hoop with it, then immediately sill the Case in a sprink-
ling manner with the same Plaister till if hardens ;- and

when it is dry take it from the Medal.




But from the Moulds cast in Brimstone, which are
concave, we again cast such Medals in Plaister of Paris
as are convex, oyling the Mould as before, and using
the Plaister of Paris as above directed ; so you may take
off any Medal, or fine Bass-relief, with a great deal of.
Exactness, even so as to form Medals from them in any
fort of Metal. But there is no one that l know so curi-
ous in the Management of this Affair, as Mr Pingo, in
Neu Stree Square, near Shoe Lane, London.
There is a method of taking off Impressions in Plai-
ster of Paris from Copper-plates, by oyling in a minûte
Degree the Plates, and then binding them about either
with Card-paper or other Paste board, and pouring on
some of jthe finest Plaister of Paris and Water you can
get, and finishiing the Work with Plaister, till it be-
comes dry, and hardens ; you will then have a fine Im¬
pression, if one may so call it, of the Lines of the Plate,
in the Plaister, which will serve to draw from, when
you have occasion.
We may add still the manner of taking off any fine
Engravings from the Tops of Snuff Boxes, or Watch-
cases, which is only holding them over the Smoak of a
Candle, till they are quite black ; then wipe off the
black with the soft part of the Palm of the Hand, and
lay on the Engraving a piece of white Paper a little
wetted with a Spunge, and over that a thin piece of
Flannel, or a piece of broin Paper held hard down over
the engraved part, and being hard rubb’d, the Paper
next the Picture will receive a fine Impreffion, as if it
had been pass’d through a Rolling-press.
We may yet recommend another method of taking
off Medals in great perfection, which is by getting thin
pieces of Lead, and placing the Medal horizontally on
the top of a firm post, or any steady place ; lay over
the Lead a flat piece of harder Metal, and over that
place a piece of a round turn’d stick, such as is used in
the Staff of a Broom, sawn off above five or six Inches
in length, and, holding that tight with your left hand
on the lead and flat piece of metal, strike the top of
the stick a smart blow with a large Hammer, and the
Lead will be perfectly impress’d with the Image of the
Medal;




Medal; this Blow must be done at once, to render the
Impression perfect : Even this may be done on any Im-
pression made on Sealing. wax.
We may likewise take off a Medal, by laying over it
a piece of thin Sheet Block-tin, otherwise called Foyle,
which is sold at the same places where the Plaister of
Paris is to be had, or at some Pewterers Shops, and
rubbing it hard upon the Medal, it will give us a very
good Likeness of whatever medal we rub it upon. The
Block-tin Sheet I mean, is such as is laid on the Backs
of Glasses, when they are to be silver’d, to render them
Looking-glass.
We may also take Impressions from Medals with
Putty, such as the Glaziers use, although the Medals
or Bass-reliefs are under-wrought.
Another Way of taking off Medals is to provide the
Scraps or Shavings of white Paper, which you may
have at the Book binders ; you must boil them well in
common Water till they are tender, then bruise them
well in a Mortar till they come like a Paste, and boil
them again in Spring-water, with a little Gum-Ara-
bick ; and, letting this mixture settle a while, pour the
Water from it through a Sieve or Linnen-cloth, and
what remains is extraordinary good, to either press into
any mould, or upon any Medal, and when the Paste is
dry it will come off very sharp.
Some medals that are under- wrought cannot be taken
off this Way ; therefore in such Cases. we must take
common Glue with Water, melt it, and when we have
fixt a Hoop of Paste-board round the Edge of our me-
dal, pour on the Glue hot, having first oyl’d the me-
dal with a lump of greasy Cotton.
When the Glue is dry and hard, we must take off
the Hoop, and the Glue will sly from the Edges of
the Medal ; and it will then easily come off, being
subject to bend and give way, which the other Things
before mentioned will not do We should mind to make
our Glue strong enough, and pour it on one third of an
Inch thick.
When we have taken the Impression by this means,
we must hoop round our mould of Glue with Card-paper
or




or Paste-board, as before ; and oyl it, so that no Bub-
bles or blisters may be seen, that is to say, just make
it greasy ; then we may cast some Plaister of Paris in it,
and we shall have a good Copy of the Medal : When
this is dry the Glue will fly off, or may be broken off
and we shall have a good Pattern to cast from.
We may likewise make a Putty of Linseed-oyl and
sine ground Starch, which, being well workt together
into a paste, will take a good Impression from any me-
dal. This is much better than the common Putty.
When we have these Moulds, we may cast in them
good Medals in Bees-wax ; but they will come off
much sharper if the mould be in Brimstone, than if it be
in Plaister of Paris: But when we do this, our Wax
should be as well blanch’d or whiten’d, as one would
use for Wax candles ; it is however necessarv to grease
the mould before we pour in our Wax, as I have di-
rected before.
However, thot I recommend white Wax as prefer-
rable to the other, l would not chuse to have the copy
of the medal white ; for the darker Colours shew the
Figures much better.
If we would have our Copy of a red Colour, we
must mix Vermillion with our Wax when ’tis meting;
or if blue, put into our melted Wax some Stone-blue
well beaten or ground.
As soon as our Wax Medals are cold enough to take
off, we should lay some Leaf gold upon them, and with
a piece of Cotton press it down gently. without rub-
bing it backwards or forwards, and that will gild our
Medal.
When we have cast medals in Plaister of Paris, to
make them look like steel or metal. we must rub them
over with a piece of cotton dipt slightly in Oyl, and
then put on them some powder of black Lead, and
rub them well with a Brushi, such as is us’d for the
Teeth, ’till the whole is equally cover’d ; and they
will have a fine Gloss upon them.
But we may make the Plaister of Paris medals of the
Colour of Box, by boiling them in Linseed Oyl ; and







it will harden them, so as to bear the Brush to be
clean’d if any dust gets at them.
If we would have our Plaister of Paris medals of a
yellow or golden Colour, we must take a little Pearl affi,
and boil it in a Pint of Water, ’till it makes a strong
Lixivium ; then put in about half a quarter of a pint
of French Berries, and boil them till the Liquor is of a
very strong yellow and use this Liquor with our
Plaister of Paris instead of common Water.
If we would have our Plaister of Paris Medals be of
a blue Colour, we must boil some Lacmus or Litmus in
River-water; ’till the Water is as blue as we think pro-
per ; and must use this Water with our Plaister, when
we cast a medal, to render it of a fine Colour.
If we would have our plaister medals of a red Co-
lour, we should boil a little Raspings of Brasil wood in
pale stale Beer, and, when it is strain’d off, use it as
common Water with the Plaister.
I Have not yet try’d, whather the sine transparent
Gum made of Verdegrease will mix with plaister of
Paris, but I have good reason to judge that it will ;
and, as ia is cheap enough, I fuppose it woald not be
unworthy any one’s Tryal.
I Have often thought, that by these means one might
easily collect a set of all the Coins of our Nation, and
to distribute them as one should, in the several Kings
Reigns, they would make no disagreeable Furniture,
being plac’d in proper Order ; the Gold by themselves
of each King’s Reign, with his Figure and the Reverse
by one another, and under it the Value of the Coin ;
then the Silver in their proper Order; and the Brafs,
or Copper, or Pewter, (for such we have had) and even
the Leather Coins should not escape our Notice.
Or, to improve this, if we had Time to spare and
good Opportunity, we might have the Resemblance of
the Coins of every Country ; and by writing the Value
of each of them, such a Collection would be of use te
Travellers, as well as to Historians.
The eafiest Way of doing this would be with the
lchthyocolla or Fisni-glue; and so for the Gold Coins
ase Leaf gold, as before directed ; for the Silver. Leaf-





silver ; and for the Copper, Leaf copper, which is made
in Germany : Or else for Silver we should make our
Medals with Foyle, as before directed ; and for the Lea.
ther Coins mix à littie Fullers Earth with the Water
or Spirit, before we melt the Fisn-glue or Isinglass
in it.
So far l have given Instructions how we may either
make Drawings from the Life, or coppy whatever we
think proper from Prints, Paintings, Medals, &c. tho
we knew nothing of Drawing before.

Of Colours for illuminating of Prints in the
best Manner or of Painting in Water-
Colours.
COLOURS are to be distinguished in the follow-
ing Manner ; we must first take White, the next
Yellow, the next Orange, and then proceed to the Red,
after that the Purple, then to the Blue, and after that
to the Black. Observe, White and Black are the Ex-
tremes of Colour ; then in the next place, Yellow is
the lesser point of Colour towards the White, and the

next to that is the Green, and after that the Blue.
I speak of this, because every one who has a mind to
know the manner of Colouring of Prints, or painting
in Miniature may profit by it.
I Shall begin then with regard to Colouring of Prints.
If the Paper be pure white, use no Colour upon it,
unless in the shaded parts ; and then in painting of
Flowers, if they tend towards a reddishi Colour, use a
faint Colour of Carmine with Gum water, upon the
Shades only ; if blueisn, use a little faint Indigo in
Gum-water, slightly pass’d over the Shades, easily touch-
ing upon the Lights; where there is a yellow Tinge,
either use a faint Tincture of Gamboge, or of French






Berries, which will be described among the Yellows ;
or if the White have a purplish cast, ule a thin lake on
the shady side, suffering the- Colour only to shine a
little into the Light, it will give a Lustre to the Whites ;
and if a greenish cast should be there, use either a faint
Colour hardly to be disgern’d, of the sap Green, or
in proportion, of the sap Green mix’d with the Ver-
degrease Green.
N. B. AIl these Colours mention’d to shade the
Whites, may be found in the following Directions.

CHAP. VI.
Of Whites for Painting in Miniature.

THE best White that is pretended to be sold in the
Water-colour manner, is the Flake white, which
is better than the White- lead ground : This, if it is
pure, far exceeds the White lead in Beauty ; for the
White lead is apt to turn blackiss, especially if you use
it with hard Water.
But the best White that I know, is madeof Pearl.
or the finer parts of Oyster-shells, made into an impal¬
pable Powder, that is, so soft as to feel like Grounds of
Starch, or Powder for the Hair, when we touch it with
the Fingers; this is called by some of the Colour men
Pearl-white, but ’tis hard to be found. If we have oc-
casion to use it, this White will mix well with any
Colour; but if we use White-lead, let it be first rectifi-
ed with white Wine Vinegar, which will cause a Fer-
mentation, and soon make the white settle ; then pour
off the Vinegar, and wash it with common Water ;
that is, put the Powder into a Glass of Water, stir it
about, and presently pour off the Water, while it is
white, into some clean Receiver ; and when the white
parts are settled, pour off the Water from thence, and
they will be extremely fine. I mention this, that every
one may make their Colours of the finest fort. It may
be perhaps a littie Trouble ; but who would not use





such pains to be superior to any thing that has been
done before in the same Way :
When the White we speak of is settled, add to it
as much Gum-water as is necessary to bind it, or give
it a Glaze; but take Notice that l would not have any
white used in colouring of Prints, but only with dry
Colours, when we paint in Miniature.
It is remarkable that White lead will change black,
if the Water we use with it comes from lron or Clay :
When I say black, I mean that in a Month or two
you will find the places where it lies the thickest, tinged
with black, and when ’tis mix'd with any other Colours
it will soon change, or alter it.
For this reason, I have try ’d divers sorts of White ;
among others, the Powder of Egg-shells, of the bright-
est Colour, and well clean’d and wash’d, is very good
to be ground with Gum water, or else put about a
twentieth part of clear white Sngar candied to grind
with it in Water ; reduce this as fine as possible, that
is to the state of what we call an impalpable Powder,
and use it. A Gentleman, whom I have given this
Receipt to, tells me, that it is still more to the pur-
pose to pour it on some rectify’d Spirits of Wine, which,.
he says, will clear it from the Dross; but I have not
try’d the Experiment : l suppose, that when the Spirit.
of Wine has done its Work, it must he pour’d off. and
then the parts left behind must be mix’d with Gum-
water again ; but that Egg shell powder is of great Ser-
vice as a white in Water-colours, I know very well:
and that also itself, and Oyster-shell powder, well recti-
sy d and mix'd with the White of an Egg well beaten,
will make an extraordinary Mixture with other Co-
lours, and correct them from changing or altering their
Qualities.
While I am speaking of white for illuminating of
Prints, as 1 have already observ’d, that the clear white
of the Paper is proper to be left uncolour’d ; so if it
happens, that the Paper is given to fink, as it is call'd.
or to spread any Water colour we lay upon it more than
isn ecessary, then the Way to correct it is as follows :
We must fix the Paper in such a Station, as may only





receive the Colour we lay on to glaze just as far as we
design’d it ; then take some Starch boil’d and prepared
in Water, of a middle strength, and with a large Paint-
ing-brust stroke it over the back of the Print, and,
when it is well dry’d in the Air or Sun, put the Print
in a Book, with a Weight upon it, to rectify the
Crumplings which it may receive by wetting of it ; so
will any Print be made to receive Water-colours as one
would have them be distributed, and none of them will
then run farther than we intended.
There is an Earth brought sometimes from Cbina of
a very soft Nature, and very white, which I find is
better in Water-colours than any of the rest ; but 'tis.
very scarce,

CHAP. VII.
Of YELLOWS.
THERE are some Objects which have the Ap-
pearance of Gold shining through the Colour of
Green, Red, or Blue ; such as some fort of Flies and
Beetles, and such as the Cantharides, which last sort
every one may buy at the Druggists. This GoldTrans-
parency is very well imitated, by laying on the Draw-
ing some Leaf-gold on the shaded part, a little giving
in to the light side of the print; the Wzy of laying on
of Leaf-gold, is to wasn the part where the Gold is to
be with strong Gum water, and soon after that put the
Gold, on as smooth and even as possible, pressing it
down c’ose with Cotton : But take care that, when you
lay on the Gum-water, you do not exceed the Limits
xou would have the Gold appear to shine. In this Case
the Gold is only to snine through the transparant Co-
lour, which is to be laid upon it.
Now it must be understood, that the Leaf-gold will
not regularly receive Water-colours ; so that. to tender
it subservient to ou purpose, we must, with a little 





thin Liquor of Ox gall in a painting brush of Camel’s
Hair, stroke it over, and then it will receive any Co.
lour we have a mind to paint upon it, and hold it.
So you may have Gold Greens, Gold Reds, and Pur-
ples, Blues, or what you please. The Greens may be,
first the Verdigrease Green, which I shall describe here-
after ; or the Sap Green, or Lake, or Carmine, if they
are good ; or for Purples, Lake and fine Indigo, or
Carmine and Indigo; and for the Blues, Indigo on the
dark side, and on the light side a little stroke of Ultra-
marine Blue, just to shine into the Light, and it will
have a wonderful Effect.
N. B. One may find upon Rose-trees in June and
July, a Beetle of a green Gold-colour, which will serve
to govern this kind of Painting. As for Gold of itself,
I would not advise it to be used, unless we polish it,
and then you may take the following method.
We see in many Manuscripts fine Gold Letters, which
rise above the Surface of the Volume or Paper; these
have raised the Admiration of the Curious, and the
manner of making them is but little known ; the Com-
position, which raises them above the Paper, is made,
as I am well inform’d of Vermillion and the white
of an Egg, whisk’d or beaten up to that Consistence,
as is call’d an Oyl, work’d together like a kind of Paste,
and with a Stamp six’d to the Paper with Gum-Ara-
bick ; on this Figure of a Letter wasn, with a Camel’s
Hair Pencil, some strong Gumwater, taking care that
the Gum does not reach more than the QOut-lines ; then
lay on the Leaf-gold close with some Cotton; and as
soon as it is dry, rub it with some dry Cotton, and
then polish it with a Dog’s Tooth ; this will make it
appear as if it was really cast in Gold.
There is yet another Way of working these Things
in Gold ; and that is, by using the Gold which is pre-
par’d in Shells, but it must be pure Gold, and not such
as is brought froin some places in Germany, which will
change Green in a few Days time.
Before you use this Gold, cover the snady parts with
Vermillion; and then, after your Gold is well rectified
with Spirits of Wine, lay it on with Gum-water, which





will mix with it very well.
and when it is dry, polish
it with a Dog’s Tooth. I chuse when 1 lay on this
Powder gold, to leave the Lights vacant of it, and it
makes a much brighter Appearance, than if one was
to cover the Object all over.
But if one was to cover by Accident the whole piece
with Gold, there is no better way to set it off, than by
tracing over the shady parts with Gall-stones ; or. which
is much preferable. the Yellow, which l shall give the
Composition of below, made of Frexch Berries, I mean
that which is the deepest in Colour ; a little Minium
brightens it very much ; but see how l rectify the Mi-
nium, amongst the Rens, and polish the Gold before
you use any Minium to it.
Since l have mention’d Gold, Iam next to speak
of the Yellows, as they fall gradually in their course
of strength.
The arst is a kind of Straw colour, and is made of
Flower of Brimstone, which in itself is fine enough to
mix with Gum-water ; and the manner of preparing
Gum-water, since I have not yet mention’d it, I shall
insert at the end of this Treatise of Colours.
A Common way of illuminating of prints, is by
giving the Tincture of Gamboge for a Yellow ; and this
may be of two or three forts, either fainter or stronger;
the last to be a shade to the first. and that to be shaded
with the preparation of French Berries, which I shall
presently mention,
The great Mr. Boyle has left some papers behind him
that were never publish’d, which my Lord Carleton
gave me, and I shall insert occasionally in this Trea-
tise. With regard to yellow Colours, he says, that if
the Roots of Barberries are cut, and put in a Lixivium
made strong with Water and Pearl ashies, there will be
a fine yellow Colour produced from it ; which l have
tried, and succeeds very well.
Another Way Mr. Boyle proposes, to make a transpa-
rent Yellow, which is, to take the Root of the Mul-
berry, which affords a very yellowisn Juice, to wash
it well from the Earth in common Water, and boil it
in the Lixivium I speak of, made with Pearl ashes and







Water ; from this we may take out a strong Tincture,
much deepper than the former; but the Roots of the
Mulberries are much harder to be had than those of the
Barberries ; for Mulberry-trees are very scarce, and the
Barberries are in almost every Hedge in Essex, about
Litilebury especially.
With zegard to the Barberry-root, I think it would
be worth while to plant them on purpose, for the Ad.
vantage that one might make from them by Dying :
the Fruit, in my Opinion, being of little Significati-
on. but the Root and the Wood, I think, will nearly
answer the same End, in producing a fine Yellow.
Yellow Oker will make another good pale Yel-
low ; but, for illuminating of Prints, it is a Colour
rather of too- much body ; however, being well
ground with Gum-water, it is of use after it has been
well wasn’d.
Another good Yellow may be made from the plant
call’d Celandine, infusing it in Water, and pressing it
gently, and then boiling the Liquor with a little Allum;
this Yellow will be a little inelining to Green.
But the Yellow which I like the best, and may be
used in several Capacities of Lights and Strength, is that
made of French Berries, prepared as follows.
Take of French Berries an Ounce whole, and boil
them in a Pint of the Lixivium made of Pearl afhies and
Water, till the Liquor will give a fine Tinge of Yellow
to a bit of Paper dipp’d in it; then pour it off from
the Berries, and when ’tis cool, put it in a Bott'e for
Use. But if we only put French Berries to infuse in
common Water they will produce a good Yellow, but
then it will not be durable.
Then again, add half a Pint of the same Lixivium to
the Berries, and half an Ounce of fresh Berries, and boil
them, ’till the Liquor is as deep as Gall-stone ; which
will serve to fnade all the Yellows you can use of any
fort. You may boil this even to produce a brown (o-
lour ; and with a little Ox gall, it will serve to shade
any Leaf-gold that has been laid on t’aper, as directed
before, and is much preferable to Gall-stone in imitating




any Gold-colour. It answers well upon a Tincture of
Gamboge, or any of the former Yelbws.
Next to this is the Tincture of Saffron, which, with
common Water only, affords a bright reddish Yellow,
such as one would have (to cover the shadow’d parts of
a Print) for an Orange or beld e Gold-colour; how¬
ever, there is nothing more high, when we use Saffron,
than when we infuse it in rectified Spirits of Wine; but
then the Colour flies, unless we load it with Gum-Ara-
bick, as I have try 'd.
As for a deep Yellow with a body, Dutch Pink
comes the nearest to the aforesaid strong Yellow made of
French Berries, in point of Colour; and of a lighter
Yellow is the Englisb Pink, which is still made of French
Berries, and in a body likewise.
I Cannot help observing, that one may extract 2
good yellow Colour, for illuminating of prints, from
the fresh Roots of Ginger, if one can get nothing else ;
I speak this, because sometimes one wants a good Yel-
low, and any one may find this any where, if Gamboge
can’t be had ; and it makes a fine Green, with the tran-
sparent Verdegrease I shall hereafter mention. N. B.
This last Hint I took from Mr. Beyle’s Papers.
It is again to be remarkd, that the Engliss and
Dutch Yellow Pinks are made with French Berries
ground to a fine Powder and boiled.

CHAP. VIII.
Of ORANgE COLOUR.
THE Orange-colour, which is useful to wasn fine
Prints with, consists in laying on a Teint of Gam-
boge, and over that, some of the Minium or Red-lead,


* By bel’d is meant the boiling of pure Gold in Liquors,
which will take away the Yellow of it, and bring it to be of
a reddish or higher Colour.




such as l shall describe, to be wassi’d. and render’d fine
and fit for Use; fgr, as it is bought at the shops, it ie
not by any means hne enough to paint with, and especi-
ally will change or turn black after a few Weeks, if it
be not refin’d ; but if it be well prepared, will be very
lasting and beautiful : But we must take this by the
Way, that in the refining of it. two Ounces will not pro-
duce above 40 Grains of good Colour, to stand the Test
of the Painters. I shall presently describe the Methoo
of Preparing it: This Colour may be mix'd witk Gam-
hoge. upon a white Dutch Tile to render it of the Teint
we desire, either soft or stronger; or one may glaze the
Gamboge, and strengthen it with Tincture of Saffron, tg
make it glare into a strong Orange.

CHAP. IX.
Of Minium, or the brightest Red-lead, and
how to prépare it.
HE Minium, or Red lead, is as heavy and strong
a Colour as most we have, but is the most delight-
ful one, when well prepared. that is, when ’tis well
wash’d and clean’d of its more weighty Parts, which oc-
casion it to turn black. My Way of doing it, as the
gieat Mr. Boyle directs, is to put 3 or 4 Ounces of it in
a Quart of Rain-water; then stir it, and pour off the
Vaater immediately, and let it settle to the bottom of e-
very Cup or Glass you pour it in ; then pour off that
Water, and in a Day’s time you will have the Colour
dry, and as fine as you can wisni; put then alittle piece
of Gum Arabick to each Glass or Cup, and as much
Water as will moisten each of them ; Use any of these
asterwards with-the Guin-water, as shall be hereafter di-
rected ; but if the Gum, you should happen to put in at
first, may be strong enough to glaze it, then use only
common Water; in a Word, as your Colour is less
gemm’d or overgumm’d, use less or more Gum water;
kr of itself ’tis a dead Colour.





When you use this Colour, touch it gently on the Yel-
low we have mentioned into the light Side, and if it wants
a Shade, there may be a little Vermillion Put upon it;
but Vermillion is too heavy to paint with, when we illu-
minate Prints, because it hides the Shades of the Engia-
ver ; however, sometimes they had better be hidden than
preserved: For my part, I generally shade this Red lead
or Minium with Carmine, which gives it a fine Effect
and renders it equal to the brightest red Flower l ever
saw, leaving still the Lights uncoloured, only dafhing a
ittle way into the Lights with the Minium.
Vermilion l must advise to be left out of the Questi-
on, unless it is well wasni’d, as I have directed the Mini-
um to be, and then chiefly for dry painting; One may
be abandoned, it should be quite left out of my Table of
Colours ; but l speak at that Time to such Persons as
can use it moderately, and with Judgment ; for all hea-
vy Colours will drown the Shades or Strokes of the En¬
graver.
When the Carmine has shiaded the Minium, or Red-
lead, it may be shaded again with Lake in the strongest
Part, to bring it to a deeper Red.
It may be a Wonder to some, that when I speak of
Orange. colours, I should mention some of these deep
Sorts, tending to Purples ; but l mention them as Shades,
and without which the Orange or Red could not appear
with any Brightness.

CH AP. X.
Of Reds.
SECT. I. of Scarlet.
WHEN we have passed the Orange, we next
conie to the Scarlet, which may be represented
on a Plane with Minium, a little mix’d with Vermillion;




but if you have Occasion to paint a Flower of a Searlet-
colour on a Print, let your Lights, as well as Shades,
be covered thin with Minium, and the shaded Parts glaz-
ed with Carmine, which will produce an admirable Scar-
let, such as we see in the Flower of the Scarlet Marta-
gon.
SECT.
II. Of Crimson.

FROM the Scarlet we next come to Crimson, which
is represented with Carmine; but l must inform the:
verson who is to useit, that there are several forts of it,
some darker, and some much coarser than others, and
therefore it should never be bought by Candle-light, un-
less of such as one can well trust ; for between the very
best and the worst Sort, there is about ten Shillings diffe-
rence in an Ounce, or indeed all the Money an Ounce will
coit, tor the bad will spoil all our Work.
SEC&. III Of Lake.
FTERthis Crimson, coméi next the Lake,
which snades and heightens the Carmine ; but it
A
is to be observ’d, that in the laying of Carmine upon a
Print, let your lights be touched only with a very thin
Teint of it, hardly to be discerned; then just on that part
of the Light which enters upon the shade lay it on strong
and cover the shade with it ; and after that, on the
stronger part of the shade lay some Lake.
SECT. IV. Of transparent Crimson.
UT we may make à liquid Colour, not much in¬
ferior to Carmine itself, with the Raspings of Bra-
sil-wood, sold at the Dry-salters and particularly at the
great Colour-shop at Holborn bridge ; which I mention,
because l have been some time without knowing where
to find it, for sew Colour-shops know what it is.; and
Lovers of Painting in this Way, are now and then impa¬
tient to have such Things, and unacquainted where to
find them out.





To make this transparent Colour, we may take an
Ounce of the Raspings of Brasil-wood, and boil it in
twelve Ounces of pale stale Beer, and a little Allum,
till the Colour of the Liquor is as ftrong as you please ;
which you may discover, by dipping into it a slip of white
aPaper, and when the Colour is as you would have it. and
tis cold, pass it through a Linnen-cloth, and put the
clear Liquor, into a Bottle for Use. This is one of the
Receipts I had from a Manuscript of the great Mr. Borle.
And if we have a mind to bring this Colour to a Bo-
dy, take Ox blood. and dry it, till we can reduce it to
Powder, which, being mix'd with it, will give us a Co-
lour, which I think will be little less in Value than a
middling sort of Carmine : And, as a Gentleman of
Learning and good Understanding in these Matters in-
forms me, the Blood of an Ox or Cow so dry'd, will
make a good Body for any Colour.
SECT. V Crimson from Mr. Boyle.
IAK E the Fruit of the Berry bearing Spinach,
which is known to every Gardener about Zondox,
4
press them, and you will have a beantiful red colour'd
uice from them ; boil this, and put about afourth part
of Alum to it when you pour it into the Vefsel where
’tis to cool, and then it makes as sine a Colour as any o¬
thers that are noted. and it is of little Expence, for it
will grow any where ; and in one Bunch of the Fruit
there are Seeds enough to sow two or three Rods of
Ground.
The red Beet-root, back'd with a little strong Vine-
gar, produces an elegant red Colour, equal to a Tincture
of Carmine, then pour it on Alum, and when ’tis cool
’tis fit for Use, where Carmine should be used in wasn-
ing of Prints : For it is à sine transparent red.
SECT. VI. O Indian-Red.
EXT tothese Colours. Indian- Red. though it is
a Coour of a Body, is helpful for a back Ground,
for Flowers at a Distance, being used thereby with Gum-
water.




water. But l shall have Occafionto give an Example of
it by and by.
I have lately seen an Earth brought from the Isle of
Wight, of a much siner Colour than the Indian-red ;
which l and some others, have try’d, and find to mix
extreamly well with Gum-water ; tho as it is of a vi-
scous Nature, it requires less Gum than most other Co-
lours : And as it is naturally fit for Use without Grind-
ing. and is viscous, so it will asfuredly mix as well witk
Oyl as with Water. This was discovered by Edward
Liste, Esq; to which Gentleman we owe many more
extraordinary Things of Value.
There is one thing very extraordinary in this Earth,
simple as ’tis, that if we rub a Deal-board with it. it ren-
ders it exactly of the Colour of Mohogany wood, and
stains it so deep, and with so much Strength, that it is
very hard to get it out- without washiing. And dry as
this Earth was when I receiv’d it, I cannot get it out of
some Papers, which by Accident were mix’d in my
l'ocket with it; so that I am persuaded it will prove of
extraordinary Use, when its Virtues come to be KhOWE.
SECT. VII. Of transparent Purple.
FTER this we may make a transparent Pur-
ple, either more red, or nearer the blue Colour,
A
as we shall see Occasion, by ufing the same Menstruum as
was prescribed in the former, viz. of pale stale Beer one
Pint, in which boil one Pint of rasped Brafil-wood, and
half an Ounce of Log wood or Campechy- wood, till the
Liquor is heighten’d to the Colour you desire ; which
you must try, by dipping a piece of Paper into it. If
you then find it too red, add a Quarter of an Ounce of
Log wood to the Brasil-wood. and you will find it much
nearer the Purple than the former; and so one may ha¬
mour any Degree of Purple, as you put more or less
Log wood to the former Composition, and six the Co-
lour with a little Alum. This will produce such clear
Purples, as no Mixture of solid Reds and Blues can pro-
duce, and the Receipt has been for à long time kept a
Secret.
Madam





Madam Mariana of
Amsterdam, who has been so-fa-
moas for her Painting
in Minature, and her excelent
Manner of illuminating Prints, told me, that the best
Purple l éould use, might be composed between the Car-
mine and Indigo ; which to strengthen on the red Side
one may add Lake between the lighter and darker Part ;
which l have in many Cases found to be good, and of
Significancy : And so Lake, when it is used in the same
Way on the foregoing Purple, or the Liquid Crimson,
produces a very fine Effect. One may vary the Colour
of the Purple either redder, by putting more Carmine,
or bluer by using more Indigo, which being mixed on a
white Dutch Tite, will shew itself.

CH AP. XI.
Of Blue.
SECT. I. Of tbe Ultramarine.
HHE first and best bright blue we have, is the UI.
tramarine Blue, which gives a Spirit to all Paint-
ings where Blues are used , but it is very dear, if we have
the best, even worth, or at least sold at six l’ounds an
Ounce ; it is made from the Lapis Lazuli, divested of its
Gold, and ground and made into an impalpable Powder.
This Colour however, as it is of a very high price, will
make good its Value in Painting, as the least l’ouch of it
is enough to illuminate a Flower. In using it, leave the
white or light part of the Flower uncoloured. excepting
that on the Edge of the light next tlie shaded larts, co-
lour it with Uitramarine; and, a little into the shaded
part of the Print, add a faint Tincture of Indigo, tne
Indigo covering.a little the Verge on the shady side of
the Ultramarine, so. will your Flower, &c. if it be a
bright Blue, appear extreamly beautiful.






N. B. This is a colour of Body, and will last as long
as one would desire, and even preserve any Colour you
can mix with it.
To use it singly, there is nothing more dazling ; aa
appeared in the case of Colouring lron-gates, which ma¬
ny Years ago was executed at the Entrance of Devon-
shire-house in Picadilly. This Colour was laid upon the
Iron work, at the Expence of many hundred Pounds,
and remain’d in great Beauty ’till they were taken down,
and the Entrance of that Palace altered ; which shews
that this Colour will not change, though it suffers all
kinds of Weather ; for ’tis computed that they had been
exposed upwards of sixty Years. But the best Colour of
this fort is rarely to be met with.
SECT. II. Of the Prussian Blue.
THE Prussian Blue is the next to the Ultramarine for
Beauty, if it is used in Oyl ; tho l imagine it
will not hold so well as the foregoing, considering it has
riot the Body of Ultramarine. This Colour, however,
is attempted to be ground in Water; but there is such
an oily Quality in it, that it does not mix kindly with
Water, and at the best will change, as it is now prepar-
ed in the common Way. It has been attempted to make
a blue Ink ; which indeed held the Colour for a Month-
or two, but then turn’d to a muddy Yellow ; so when
you put your pencil with Gum-water into a chell of this
Blue, you will find where the water spreads, the Blue
will change yellowisn, till the Body of the Blue is well
stirr’d up. And when we have done our best with this
Co’our in Water, it will only serve to shade Ultramarine
with; but in Oyl it serves very well for the present to-
sill the place of Ultramarine.
SECT. III. O Blue Bise.
THE next Colour to the foregoing for Brightness, is
that which we call blue Bise; which thol it is a
Colour of body, will flow pretty well in the pencil ; espe¬
cially if it be well wasned, as I have directed the Whites
and the Minium to be done.





SECT. IV. Of Sanders Blue.
AFTER this Colour the Sanders Blue is of very
A good Use, and may serve as a shade for Ultrama¬
rine, or the blue Bise, where the shades are not required
to be extremely deep, and is of itself a pleasant Blue. to
be laid between the Lights and shades of such a Flower as
is of a Mazarine Blue, as ’tis called.
SECT. V Of Lacmus or Litmus Blue.
NOTHER Blue, which is a beautiful Colour,
A and will run in a Pen as free as Ink, is made of
Lacinus, or as some call it Litmus, which may be met
with at most Druggists. This Colour however is never
met with prepared for Water colours ; and therefore I
shall set down the following Method of preparing it ac-
cording to Mrs. Mariana. for it affords a bright Colour,
which has extraordinary Effects.
Take of Lacmus one Ounce, and boil it in about a pint
of Small beer Wort, till the-Colour is as strong as you
desire, then pour off the Liquor into a Gallipot, and let
it cool for Use ; it will soon become a Jelly, and by De-
grees grow hard. This Colour, however, is to be o-
pened again, and made liquid by Water, so as to be usell
as Ink; and as it is rendered thinner or thicker, so will
it be paler or darker. By what l find of this Lacmus, it
is not only a beautiful but an holding Colour ; for l have
some Designs I coloured with-it inthe Year 1714, which
still preserve themselves in as much beauty as they had
at first; and I have seen some in Holland, which were
said to be done with it forty Years before. which a Year
or two ago lookd still as fresh as one would desire the
first Day one used it. This Colour, however, if it be
touch’d with Aqua fortis, immediately changes to a fine
Crimson, little inferior to Carmine, and then sinks quite
through the Paper so as not to be got out.
So that when we use this Colour as Hue, it is best to
preserve it from Aqua-fortis, or such strong Acids. It
is a good shade for Ultramarine, or blue Bise, where the
strongest shades should not be extremely deep: and for
colouring of Prints it is very good, as it is-a trunspapent
Colour, and goes a-great Way.





SECT. VI. Of Indigo.
UNDIGO is the next Colour I fhall speak of, as it
certainly makes the strongest shade for Blues of any

other, and is a soft and warm Colour, when it is well
ground and wafhi’d with Gum- water, by means of a
Stone and Muller. As one happens to want the Use of
this, put more Gum water to it, if you would have it
of the lightest cast, or less, as you would have it darker;
but besoie you touch your Print with it, try its Strength
upon a white Dutch Tile, for it runs warmly in the Pen¬
cil, and may chance to be too strong for yeur Design ;
which you should always think of, when a flowing Co-
lour is to be laid over a dark shade of a Print; which
shade will much aggravate its Blackneis, and even make
it appear quite Black.
SECT. VII. A fine Blue from Mr. Boyle.
TAKE the blue Leaves of Rhue, and beat them a
little in a Stone mortar with a wooden Pestel ;
then put them in Water, Juice and all, for fourteen
Days, or more, washing them every Day till they are
rotten ; and at last beat them and the Water together,
till they are in a Pulp, and let them dry in the Sun. This
will produce as good a Blue as Indigo, and be much sof-
ter ; but to keep it a long while, when you beat it the
last Time, add a little Powder of Gum-Arabick : You
may put more or less of the Gum, as you design to make
it more free or tenacious in the Working. Tis a fine
Elue for shading, and has a good Body, and runs warm
in the Pencil.
SECT. VIII. Of Mr. Boyle’s transparent Blue,
equal to Uitramarine.
IN the next Place, I have a Colour to describe, wliich
I took from the great Mr. Boyl’s Manuscripts given

me by my Lord Carleton, and proves a beautiful Blue ;
and what l admire it for the more is, because the chietof
the Ingredients it is composed of, may be easily had du-
ring four of the Semmer Months, that is, the Cyanus
or blue Cornbottle-sl, wer, which abounds in almost eve-










ry Corn-field ; Children may gather it, without hurting
any thing, about the Skirts or verges of the Corn-fields
This Flower has two Blues in it, one of a pale Colour in
the larger outward Leaves, and the other a deeper Blue,
which lies in the middle of the Flower; both these will
do, if they are separated from the Buttons or Cases they
grow in; but the deep Blue, of the Middle produces
much the best Colour, as one may try, by rubbing it
whileit is fresh, so hard upon a piece of good writting
Paper, as to prefs out the Juice, and it will yield an ex-
cellent Colour, which will not fade as the Experience of
two or three Years has shewed me. This part of the
Flower is therefore the principal, and what is to be de-
pended upon ; therefore the same Day that People ga¬
ther the Flowers,or the next at the latest, employ some
Children to pick that part clean from the rest ; and when
you have a good Quantity, press what Juice you can from
it; and by adding to that a little Allum, you will have
a lasting transparent Blue, of as bright a staining colour
as you would desire; and in my Opinion, it is not infe-
rior in Beauty to Ultramarine: But for the other parts
of the Flower, which are paler, I must observe, that
when I had a Bushiel of them gathered, and had not an
Opportunity of pressing them immediately, they changed
white ; so that I cannot commend them, left the Alum
should not fix-them ; but as for the middle of the flower,
it is certainly as good a Blue as can be desired, and is du-
rable.
If any one should objece, that 'twill be troublesome to
make it ; let him consider only what pains there is in
gathering and curing of Saffron which sometimes is sold
at thirty Shillings the Pound, and seldom brings three
Pounds per Pound: But a Blue, if it comes up to. the
Colour of Ultramarine, is worth four or five Pounds per
Ounze, especially when it stains so well as this does ;
therefore I should think it worth while, when any one
has made this Experiment, as F have done, to have a
piece of Ground on purpose for this Use, where no other
Thing but this Corn-bottle, or Cyanus should be sown :
And as this Flower is plentiful enough in the Fields be-
tween Twittenham and Tedington, in Middlesex, so there





may be Seed enongh gathered of it, in a Quarter of an
Hour, to sow an hundred acres. There is likewise a-
bundance of it in the large Corn fields in Cambriagesbire.
But how valuable are many Things that we daily tram-
ple under Foot ; if we knew their Virtues, we should
use them, provided we could bring them to a proper
Market. But let that be as it wili ; gather the Flowers
about the beginning of June or in July. or August, and
some you may find in May; these are for your immediate
Work to make the Colour of. and must be dispatched as
Saffron is done, or it will lose its Perfections. And as I
happen to mention Saffron, which l very well know the
Management of, by drying it on Kilns, ldo not see why
thee Chives of Flowers may not be cured in the same
Manner ; they would certainly produce a much greater
body of Colour, and a Tincture might be drawn from
them with more ease, than if we were to press them raw
or fresh from the Field.
The Way then that  would have them dry’d like
Saffron, is. to provide in the first place such a Kiln as is
used for curing Saffron ; within which, make à small
Charcoal-fire, which communicates an Heat to the top of
the Kiln, which is covered with an Hair Cloth; and
upon that, lay on four or five Sheets of white Paper, I
mean such as we use for curing of Saffron ; then lay on
the Paper a parcel of the picked Flowers, till you have
the thickness of two or three Inches, laying close and flat
with a Knife, and sprinkle it with some thin Gum-wa-
ter: then cover the Cake of Flowers with two or three
more Sheets of Paper, and lay upon them a Board with a
little Weight upon it for a fewMinutes ; then take off ther
Board, and, taking hold of all the Papers with both
Hands, turn your Cake of Flowers upon the Kiln, and
when ’tis rightly placed, take off the upper Papers, and
sprinkle the Cake again with some thin Gum water,
and with a Knife settle your Cake of Flowers, and lay on
again your Papers and Board, with a Weight upon it
for a Minute or-two, and then turn your Papers again
and: again, till the Flower cake becomes united, and of
the thickness of à Cake of Saffron ; in this Work you
will findethe Flowers grow darker every time they are






tarned, till at length the Cake will look of à deep Blue
tending to Black. From whence we easily draw such 2
Tincture as l speak off.
During this Operation, great care must be taken of
the Fire, that it does not scorch the Flowers ; let it be
gentie and as constant as may be, which will be a sure
Way to bring your Flower-cake to a good Colour.
l would advise in this Case, that whoever attempts this
they should see the Management of Saffron, or read Ac-
counts that are published of the curing it.
If any one is desirous of seeing the curing of Saffron,
with the Manner of the Kilns ; the best Artists that way,
are about Chesterford and Little-burry in Essex ; though I
think it can be of no great Moment, since there is pub¬
lished a large Account of its Preparation, in Mr. Brad-
ley s Montbly Treatise of Husbandry and Gardening ; and in
the present Case of the Blue, I have made the necessary
Alterations, and I think given what is sufficient for such
as are acquainted already with the curing of Flowers by
Kiln-drying.
But l come now to speak of the Culture of this valua-
ble Flower ; for l must now so call it, since l am well
assured of its perfections.
Every Knob or Head of Seed mustbe open’d before we
sow it, for each Head contains a great number of Seeds ;.
the preparation of the Ground for the Recption of this
Seed, need not be more troublesome or expensive than
common Ploughing requires ; which being done, sow the-
Seed either at the End of August, which will come up
soon enough to stand the Winter, and blossom early the
May following; or else sow it at the End of March, and
it will begin ffowering the following June. When the
Ground is fresh plow’d at either of these Seasons, sow
the Seed, and harrowit in with Bushies, and it will pre-
sently come up.
In the Choice of the Seed l’should observe, that it be
gathered only in such Fields where we are sure there grow
no Corn botiles of any other Colour but Blue, and then
one may expect all the plants which rise from such Seed
to produce blue flowers ; but if they should be gathered in
such places, where there are Varieties of them, we must





expect various Sorts, as White, Red, or Purple, although
we are sure we gather the Seed from such as were truly
of the blue Sort ; for according to the Doctrine of the
Generation of Plants, which has been explained to the
World in a great many Instances, if there is a red Flow-
er of the same Tribe with this growing near it, the diffe-
rence of Colour will be so intermix'd between both, that
the Seed of both will bring a variety from the principal,
depending of the Colours ofboth. And thus l conclude
what I have to say of Blues ; as for the Smalt, ’tis much
too heavy aColour to be used for illuminating of Prints.
   Sn Sn gee ee
CH AP. XII.
Of Black.
HE proper Black for Water-colours, is what they
call lvory black. which if it be pure and well
I
ground, is of use in minature Painting ; but very seldom;
and indeed ought not to be used in colouring of Prints, if
they are good, for ’tis too heavy a Colour, and hides
the beautiful Strokes of the Engraver, unless done with
very great care : lfit is necessary however to use Black
by way of darkening a Print, rather chuse à strong Tinc-
ture of good Indiaa Ink, than the lvory-black ; but to
colour pieces in Miniature, use the lvory black prepared
as follows.
Let your burnt lvory be wellground in Gum-water, and
then beat the White of an Egg very welltill you find a kind
of oily Liquor settles to the bottom ; this Liquor mix
with as much of the lvorysblack as you think necessary
to make it run freely in the Pencil, and it will afford an
extraordinary Gloss; and if the Object is fhining, such
as the Wings of some Beetles, mix with somen of it a little
White upon a Ducch glazed Tile, ti’l you find it light e-
nough to relieve the Sade; and then make anotlier light-
er Mixture of the same, which being used on the brighter
part of the Subject, will produce the Effect you desire.







CHAP. XIII.
Of Greens.
The Progress of Gréens from Yellow to Blue.
I HAVE already given an Account of the progress
of Colour from White, through the Yellows to the

Orange, the Reds, Purples and Blues, to the Blacks ; and
shall now treat of the Greens in their sevéral Orders,
from the Yellows to the Blues.
Greens are allowed by all to depend upon the Yel-
low and the Blue, and by the help of one and the other
Colour, may be framed any green Colour we please.
The Gamboge is one of our first Yellows, which, with
the preparation of Verdigrease, I shall insert, mav be
made to produce five or six Sorts of Green, according as
theGamboge abounds, or is in lessQuantity; if it abounds,
one may make a tolerable Oak green with it, and being
still more mixd with the Verdigrease green, it will be a
Grass green.
But the Yellow that I prefer before all others, is that
which is made of French Berries described above, which I
have observed is of different Capacities, as the Liquor it
is boyled in is more or less stained with it; when it is
very thin, it makes a good Glaze all over the Verdi-
grease, and, as it comes nearer to Duich Pink or Gall-
stone, commands almost any Colour we want, being a-
greeably mix’d with the transparent Verdigrease, and
still is transparent.
So the Yellow drawn from the Roots of Barberries,
and those drawn from the Koots of the Mulberry-tree,
will produce in great measure the like Effect, being mix d
with the transparent Verdigrease.





As for the Verdigrease itself, it produces a fine blueisft
Green, flows easy in the Pencil, and may even serve a9
an Ink to write with.
The preparing of this Colour is yet very little known
and 1 shall therefore inform my Reader how to do
it.
Take of common Verdigrease three Ounees, break it
a little, and boil it gently in a Pint of White-wine Vine-
gar, stirring it continually ; when you perceive it to boil,
add a little Tartar broken, and keep your Mixture stir-
ring till you find the clear Liquor of such a Colour as you
would wishi ; that is, of a sine transparent Green, with
a blue Cast, which you may do by dipping in a Stick,
and touching a piece of Paper with it.
When you have a Colour to your Mind, pour it
through a Linnen-cloth into an open Vessel, and set it to
cool ; when it is quite cold, keep it in a close Vessel for
Use, puring out a little at à time as you want it ; for
when it is exposed to the Air, ie will soon dry, but is
reducible again by common Water.
When we prepare this liquid Colour, do not use the
V¬
distilled Verc.-grease, for it will not answer the end we
propose.
This Liquid should be touched upon part of the Lights
and Shades of a Print, and the Shades afterwards colour-
ed with Sap-green.
N. B. In the making this Green, take care vou make
it strong enough, for it is not to be strengthned after-
wards, without the trouble of boiling afresn, but may at
any time be rendered as faint as we please, by mixing
common Water with it.
Sap green is a colour like that of an Oak leaf, if it is
used thin with common Water ; for this as well as the
former wants no Gum, but it will, if we use it strong.
produce as dark a Green as any we can imagine: We
may try our Colour first on a white Duicb l'ile, and by
thinning it with Water, render it of what Strength we
please, and brighten it very much, with adding to it a
little of the Liquid Verdigrease.





Sap-Green is made two Ways, viz.
First, Take the Flowers of the blue Flag lris, or
Flower-de- Luce, and press them while there is any Juice
to be got from them ; boil this gently in a glazed Pip-
kin, till it grows thick, adding a little Alum to it, and
it will make a very useful and lasting Green.
N. B. In the boyling of any Juice, &c. of the Co-
lours heretofore mentioned, use an earthen glazed Pip-
kin ; for if you boil them in Vessels of Metal, they will
sometimes change from the Design we intend.
Secondly, Another Way there is of produeing a Sap-
green, for washing or illuminating of Prints, which is to
take the Juice of Buckthorn-berries ; and the’ that Juice
simply will yield only a dark Parple, of a very base
Hue, yet, by adding Tartar to it, it will turn to a good
Sap green, and may be brought to a good Consistence by
boiling.
Either of these Colours, will mix with the liquid
Verdigrease above mentioned, as well as maks à delicate
Shade for it.
There is yet one Green more, which is admired by
some, and carries a good Body with it, with a Degree of
Transparency, as l make it; tho as it is commonly used,
it is a full-bodied Colour, fit only for Miniature painting :
For this End they mix Dasch Pink with Indigo, to what
Degree of Colour they please ; but in the Phoe of Duxrh
Pink, my high Preparation of French Berries with Indi
go, I think much to be preferred, as this answers all the
Intent of Dutch Pink, and carries a Transparency with
it, which the Dutch Pink has not. And thus have I gi-
ven such an Account of the Passage of Greens from the
Yellow to the darkest Blue, as l think necessary, for
the Instruction of those who delight in illuminating of
Prints and Painting in Water-colours.

CHAP. XIV.
Tbe Use and Nature ef Dry Colours.
1. BLUE Bise is the most excellent Blue next to

Uitramarine, which is too good to wash withal,





and therefore I leave it out here, and put in blue Bise,
which will very well serve instead of it; and indeed you
may leave out both, and use Smalt instead of them, but
that it will not work so well as Bise ; no Bise is too good
to use upon all Occaslons, but only when you intend to
bestow some Cost and Pains upon a Piece, otherwise
you may use no other Blue in your Work than blue Ver-
diter, with which you may make a pretty good Shift,
without any other Blue, I mean in any ordinary Work.
2. Indigo is a dark blue, and is used principally to
shadow with upon your other blue : Indigo and yellow
Berries mlxed together make a dark Green to shadow o-
ther Greens with'in the darkest Places.
3. Blue Verditer is a very bright pleafant Blue, and
the easiest to work with in Water : It is somewhat in-
elining to a Green, and being mixed with yellow Berries
it makes a good Green : This Blue is most used.
4. Verdigrease is a good Green, but subject to decay;
when it is dry upon the Paper it will be of allighter co-
lour than it is when vou lay it first on, therefore, t6
preserve it from that Fault, put some Sap-green amongst
it to dissolve it in, and it will make it keep its colour:
This colour is of a poisonous Nature, and therefore yon
must be careful how you use it, that it come not near
the Mouth. There is distilledVerdigrease to be bought at
the Colour-shops, that is a far better Green than the o-
ther, but it is somewhat dear, and the other will serve
instead of it.
Verditer-green is a light Green, seldom used in
5.
any Thing but in colouring Landscapes, those Places that
should shew a far off, and it is good for such a Purpose,
because it is somewhat inclining to a blue, but you may
make a fhift to do any thing well enough without it;
for à little blue Verditer mixed with Copper green and a
little White, will make just such another Colour.
6. Sap green is a dark dirty Green, and never used
but to shadow other Greens in the darkest Places, or elfe
to lay upon some dark Ground behind a Picture, which
requires to be coloured with a dark Green ; but you may
make a fhift well enough without this Green, for Indigo
and yellou Berries make juft such another Colour.





7. Copper-Green, is an excellent transparent Green;
of a fhining Nature if it be thickened in the Sun, or
upon a foft Fire, and it is most used of any Green in
washing of Prints, especially in colouring of the Grass-
ground, or Trees, for it is a most perfect Grass-green.
8. Vermilion is the perfectest Scarlet colour; you need
not grind it, nor wasn it, it is fine enough of itself, on-
ly temper it with your Finger in a Galiipot, or Oyster-
shell, with Gum-water, and it will be ready for Use ,
if you put à little yellow Berries amongst it, it will make
it the brighter Colour ; this is principally used for Gar-
ments.
9. Lake is an excellent Crimson-colour ; with it you
may shadow Vermilion, or your yellow Garments in
the darkest Places ; with it you may make a Sky colour,
being mixed only with white ; with it you make Flesh-
colour, sometimes mix'd together with white and a little
Red lead ; it is of an excellent Colour itself to colour
Garments, or the like. Indian Lake is the best Lake,
but too good to be used to wasn Prints with, unless you
intend to bestow great Curiosity upon your Work ;
but the best sort of ordinary Lake will serve well enough
for ordinary Uses, but that also will be somewhat cost-
ly.
Therefore instead thereof you may ulb red Ink
thickened upon the Fire, and it will serve very well
for your Purpose, and better than Lake, unless it be very
good.
Note, if you would make a light Sky colour of your
red Ink, or if you would mix it among your Flesh-
colour, you must not thicken it; you should rather chuse
to fhadow your Vermillion with Spanish Brown, than
thick red Ink. which will serve well for that Purpose,
and is much cheaper, but it is not altogether so bright a
colour and clear.
10. Red Lead is the nearest to an Orange Colour,
and putting à little yellow Berries into some of it, will
make a petfect Orange Colour; but if you mean to
make Flesh Colour of it, you must put no yellow but

only when you would make an Orange Colour. This





Colour is used for the colouring of Buildings, or High-
ways in Landscape, being mix’d with a little white.
Also, it is the only bright Colour to shadow yellow
Garments with, to make them shew like changeable
Taffety ; it is good also to colour any light Ground in
a Picture, taking only the thin Water of it, and so for
several other Uses as you shall see occasion for it.
II. Yellow Berries are most used in wafhing of all
other Colours ; their Colour is bright and transparent,
fit for all Uses, and is sufficient without the Use of any
other Yellow.
12. Saffron is a deep Yellow, if you let it stand a
pretty while ; it is good principally to shadow yellow
Berries with, instead of Red lead ; and it is somewhat
a brighter Shadow ; but you may make shift well enough
without this Colour, for Red lead and yellow Berries
make just such another Colour.
13. Light Masticoat is a light Yellow, just like yellow
Berries and white, and therefore you may make shift
well enough without it, only for saving you a Labour to
mix your yellow Berries with white, when you haveoc-
cafion fora light Yellow, which you may sometimes make
use of to colour a light Ground in a Picture, and then
fhadow it with the Water of burnt Umber or Read-lead,
that is, the thinnest Part of the Colour.
14, 15. Ceruse is the best White, if it be good and
finely ground ready to you Hand, as you may have it at
some Colour shops, or for want of it buy White-lead
pick’d to your Hand ; either of these will serve well
enough, for either of them, being mingled with ano-
ther Colour, make it lighter, and the more you put, the
lighter they will be, as you shall find in the using of
16. Spanish Brown is a dirty brown Colour, yet of
great Use, not to colour any Garment with, unless it be
an old Man’s Gown, but to shadow Vermillion, or to lay
upon any dark Ground behind a Picture, or to shadow
yellow Berries in the darkest Places, when you want
Lake, or thick red Ink.





17. It is the beft and brighteft Colour when it is
burnt in the Fire till it be zed hot ; tho, if you would
colour any Hare, Horse, Dog. or the like, you must
not burn it ; but for other Uses it is best when it is burnt,
for instance, to coloar any wooden f’ost, Bodies of Trees,
or any Thing else of Wood, or any dark Ground in 2
Picture : lt is not to be used about any Garments, unless
you would colour many old Men’s Gowns, or Caps,
standing together, because they must not be all of
one Colour of Black, therefore for Distinction and Va-
rieties sake, you may use Umber unburnt for some of
them.
18. Printers Black is most used, becanse it is easiest to
be had, and serves very well in washing. Nore, you
must never put any black amongst your Colours to niake
them dark, for it will make them dirty, neither should
you shadow any colour with black, unless it be Spanisn
Brown, when you would colour an old Man’s Gown,
that requires to be done of a sad Colour; for whatsoe-
ver is shadowed with black will look dirty, and not
bright, fair and beautiful.
19. Ivory burnt, or for want of that, Bone burnt,
is the blackest Black, and it is thus made; take
lvory, or for want of it, some white Bone, and put it
into the Fire till it be thoroughly burned, then take it
out and let it cool, and so flit it in the middle, and
take out the blackest of it in the middle and grind it for
Use.

CHAP. XV.
Of a portable Case for Colours; with Directions for
making Gum, Alum, and other Waters.
BEFORE, however, l conclude this Treatise of

 Colours, let me advise such Persons,. who are cu-
rious in making Observations of the Colours of Flow-






ers, to have always in their Pocket a small Case with
Colours in it, about the bigness of a Snuff box, made of
lvory, about half an Inch thick, in which should be
scooped several Concaves about half an Inch Diameter
each, and as deep as the lvory would bear, without go-
ing through: These Cavities may be placed as near one
another as possible, and filled with Colours of several
Sorts ; and as for the Liquid-colours, they will dry by
being exposed to the Air, so that one may have them
altogether in a few Days dry enough to be carried in the
Pocket ; I shall suppose the Piece of lvory disposed in
the following Manner, viz.







In the foregoing Figure one may observe the Disposi-
tion of the several Cavities for the Colours in the Num-
bers 1, 2, 3. 4. 5, &c., and on one fide a little Case for
Pencils, and another for Indian Iné, Gum-Arabick porv-
dered with white Sugarcandy, or for any thing else an
Artist may have Occasion for in the painting Way.
In such a Case you may have thirty two sorts of Co-
lour under very easy Command, besides other Necessa-
ries : Then as a Cover to this, let there be a Piece of
plain lvory to open with an Hinge, that may serve as a
Pallet, and all this will lie in a very narrow Compass ;
nay, even though one was to add another piece of lvory
of half an Inch thick, to open below that of the Colours,
to include à small pair of Compasses, a Port crayon, and
some other such useful Materials for Drawing.
Houv to make Gum-water.
There remains now, only to mention the Way how
to prepare Gum, Allum, and other Waters in the best
Manner. To make Gum- water, take of the whitest
Gum-Arabick one Ounce, of clear white Sugar candied,
half an Ounce ; dissolve these in a Quart of clear Water,
and add to it, if you will, a little Coloquintida. When
your Gum-water is thus prepared, pass it easily through
a fine Sieve, or a piece of Mussin, and keepit in a Bottle
so stopped, that no Dirt may get in ; and as you want
to use it, pour out à little at a Time ; for if this proves
dirty or foul, it will spoil the Brightnefs of your Colours.
The use of the Coloquintida is only to keep the Flies from
spoiling your Work, if it should be exposed.
To make Allum-water.
Boil four Ounces of Allum in a Quart of Rain or Ri-
ver-water till the Allum is dissolved, and let it stand
twenty four Hours.
Uje of Allum-water.
With this water wasn the Prints you design to colour.
which will six thePaper so, that the Colours will not sink
or run in it when you lay them on, and will hep like-
wise to brighten your Colours,







If your Paper is very thin and loose, then let your Pa-
per be washed with the above Water four or five Times,
always dry before you lay any of your Colours upon it
But you must observe, that if you design to varnisn
your Prints after they are colour’d, then wash the Prints
all over equally with white Starch befgre you colour them,
and when that is dry, lay on your Colours.
To make Lime-water.
Lime-water is made by taking some anslackt Lime,
and covering it an Inch with Water, and so letting it re-
main for twelve Hours, pour off the gdar, and keep it
for Use.

With this Water you may change your Sap-
N. B.
green into Blue.
Water made witb Pearl-ashes.
Take about half an Ounce Pearl-ashies, and steep them
twelve Hours in Rain or River-water, then pour off
the clear, and that Water is excellent to use with Brasil,
wood, in order to enliven its red Colour.
Size for for Water-colours.
Take the Cuttings of white Glover’s Leather, boil
them in common Water till the Liquor will jelly ; yon
may prepare any Colour with this Size when it is warm,
and it should always be used warm.
The Use of it is, that none of your Colours should
shine by Candle light, as they would do if they were to
be mixt with Gum water ; therefore the Scenes of Play-
houses are painted in Size.




THE
SCHOOL
OF
MINIATURE,
PART III.
Erected for the Instruction of the Ignorant,
the Improvement of Proficients and the general In-
formation of such as are pleased with Pictures in small.
Herein are contained the most expeditious and in-
fallible Ways of Drawing without being taught; and
all the Methods of Colouring. Stippling. &c. Illus-
trated by Numbers of Practical Processes upon each
Head or Article ; particularly useful to those whe
would Copy in Colours from a Print.
To the Whole are annexed many valuable Receipts
for preparing the Colours, which are peculiar to this
Kind of Painting; communicated by the best Italian
and other Masters. As also, the Preparation of an
excellent Polished Gold and Sbell Gold.
Published from an Old MSs.
LONDON; Printed,
And DUBLIN Re printed by I. Jackson at the Globe
in Meath street, Bookseller, 1749.




ALL Connoisseurs and Artists
in Painting, and particu-
larly to the Fair Ladies whoUn-
derstand and Practice in Minia-
ture :
This most Valuable Piece is
offered as à Present every Way
wortby of their Acceptance and
Attention,
3.
By
Their most gbedient Servant,

The Editor.
London, 1739.






A
PREATTSE
ON
MINIATURE

CHAP. I.
Of the Metbods of Drawing, Colours,
Grounds, &c.
It is not my design to make any Encomium on
Painting. Many mgenious Men have done that

Work to my Hands ; but tho’ Miniature has been
ineluded in what they have said, I shall neverthelefs
specify the Characteristicks of this kind of Painting in
particular.
1. It is in its Nature more delicate than any of the
other sorts.
2. It requires to be beheld near at hand.
It cannot well be executed but in small,
4. It is perform’d on Vellum or lvory.
5.
The Colours are moisten’d with Gumwater only.
To succeed well in your Attempts this way, you
should know how to draw very well ; but as most who
concern themselves in this Art are but seldom skill'd
in drawing, and yet would have the Pleasure of Paint-
ing without the Fatigae of kearning to Draw in which
no Progress is made, to speak of, but with Time and







much Practice ; some Contrivances have been started to
supply the Defect in this Point, by which a Person is
enabled to Draw without knowing how to do it with-
out them.
SECT. II.
The first is call’'d Calting. To do this you must
blacken the back-side of the Print or Drawing yon
would Copy, and having lightly brushi’d off the dusty
Particles which might adhere to and offend the clean Vel-
lum you design to use, lay your Original on your Vel-
lum and fasten it thereto with Pins: But if instead of the
back-side of the Print or Drawing itself, you Blacken
only one side of a fair piece of Paper ; put this Paper be-
tween the Print or Drawing and your clean Vellum,
with the black side to the Vellum, then with a blunted
Pin or Needle trace out the principle Strokes of the Print
or Drawing. the Out lines and the Folds of the Drape-
ries, and whatever else requires to be distinguish’d, bear-
ing upon the Pin or Needle hard enough to leave the
Traces thereof on the Vellum benéath.
SECT. III.
Reduction is another way proper for those who are
not vers’d in Drawing, and who would, notwithstand-
ing, copy a Picture or other Piece that cannot be calked.
It is done thus : You divide the whole Piece into many
small and equal Squares, which you are to make with
Small coal if the Piece be light, and with Chalk if the
Piece be dark, that in either Case your Squares may be
the more Conspicuous ; then you must make the same
Number of Squares, and of the same bigness, upon Pa-
per to draw upon; for if you undertook to doit, at
once, upon Vellum, as you might fail in the first At-
tempt, you would run the Hazard of spoiling your Vel-
lum by false Strokes ; but the whole being duly adjusted
upon Paper we calk it upon Vellum, as is said above.
The Original and the Paper being thus mark’d out, we
observe what is contain’d within each Square of the piece
we would Copy, as a Head, an Arm, a Hand, and so
on, and where each is plac’d ; all which you must punc





tually follow on your Paper, and having thus obtain’d
the Situation of each part, we join the whole together.
After this manner we can enlarge as well as diminisn any
Piece we please, by only making the Squares on the Pa¬
per larger than those on the Original, or smaller, ob-
serving always that they be the same in Number.
SECT. IV.
To copy a Picture, or any thing else, of the same size.
we ufe Orled Paper dried, or Goldbeater’s skin ; either
of these we lay upon the Piece, and thro’ them we see the
Strokes, which we trace out with a Crayon or a Pencil..
We then take it off, and making it fast to Paper or
Vellum, and holding it up to the Light, trace out what
has been copied, upon the Oiled Paper or Skin, cither
with a Crayon or a Silver pin.
by the help of a Window, or a Glass held up to the
Light, we copy all sorts of Prints, Designs and other
pieces, upon Paper or Vellum, by fixing them to the Pa¬
per or Vellum we would draw upon. This is an easy and
a very good Contrivance for copying of the same size.
lf we would make the Piece look a contrary way, we
turn the printed or drawn side of the Original towards
the Glass, and faften the paper or Vellum to the back-side
of it.
We have also a good way to take an exact Copy of a
picture, which is in Oyl Colours. We with a Pencil
and some Lake mix’d up with Oyl, trace out all the
principal Strokes of the pictures and thereto applying a
paper of the same size, we pass a Hand over it, and the
Strokes of the Lake take the paper and aprear thereon,
which you may calk as before. Be mindful to clean the
picture with the Crumbs of Bread before the Lake dries.
We also, to the same end, use Coal dust contain’d in
a piece of sine Linnen, wherewith we pounce the piece
we would copy, having first prick'd the principal Strokes
of it, and fasten’da piece of Vellum or paper to the wrong
side of it.
SECT. V
But there is a way more sure and easy than any of the
foregoing, for one who has no Hand at Drawing, by the






help of a Mathematical Instrument, or Compass, as it is
sometimes called, which is commonly compos’d of ten
pieces of Wood like Rulers, about the sixth of an Inch
thick, and half an Inch broad, and for their length it
may be a Foot, more or less, according to the Size ofthe
Piece you would copy. But that you may not mistake,
here follows a Representation of it.
The Board, A, must be Deal, coverd with a Cloth
of some fort or other, for the more convenient fastening
of the piece you would Draw, and what you would
Draw upon. Then plant the Compass with a large, pin
run thro’ the Foot B, If-you would Draw in small, you
must place the Original at the first Foot C, and the Vel-
lum or Paper you would draw upon near to the Foot, B,
removing it to a greater or less Distance according as you
would have your piece greater or smaller.
To draw in great from small you need only shift your
Copy to the Place of your Original, putting the former
at C, and the latter at B ; and in each Case you must
put à Crayon or Silver Pin into the Foot over your
Vellum, and a Pin somewhat blunted. in the Foot over
your Original, with which you are to follow all the Lines,
while you bear, with your other Hand, gently upon the
Pin or Crayon on your Vellum. If one or the other be
well sitted in the Foot you need not bear thereon at all.
You may Draw also of equal size, but to do that you
must plant your Compafs in a different manner, it must
be fix’d with a pin or Axis run thro’ the Center D; and





the Original and the Copy must be at an equal Distance
from the Center. In a word, you may Draw several
Copies at à time, and each of a different size, or equal to
each other, just as you shall please.
SECT. VI.
These are all the Helps needful to be known by those
who are unsxill’d in Drawing. When your piece is
sketched out upon the Vellum, you must with a Pencil
of thin Carmine run over all the Strokes, that they may
not be defac’d in working.
This done, clean your Vel-
lum with Crumb of Gread.
SECT. VII.
Your Vellum must be glued to a Copper Plate or to
a piece of thin Board, exactly of the same size with your
intended piece, to stretch it upon ; but your Vellum
must be a Finger’s breadth larger every way than what
you glue it to, for your way is to lap it round behind and
there glue it, not offering to lay any Glue under your
Paint, not only for fear of some Deformity, but also be-
cause of the Impossibility of taking it off again. But first
of all you must moisten the fair side of your Vellum with
a piece of sine wet Linnen, and put a piece of white Pa-
per to the back side of it, and so apply it to the Plate or
piece of Board, and stretching it thereon equally in all
Directions glue it as we just now directed.
VIII.
SECT.
The Colours ui’d in
Minature Painting are,
Black Lead.
Carmine.
Brown Red.
UItramarine.
Gal Stone.
Lake of all forts.
Brown Oaker.
Vermilkon.
Spanisn Brown.
French Pink.
Umber.
Orpiment.
Gumboge.
Bladder Green.
Verditer.
Naples Yellow.
Masticoat Pale.
Sea Green.
German Affies.
Masticoat- Yellow.
Indigo.
Plake White,
lvory Black.
and
White Lead,
Lamp Black








SECT. IX.
As all Terrene Colours and other grofs Substances are
too coarse for fine Works, how well soever they may be
grannd, because of a kind of Sand which still remains ;.
you may seperate the finest Particles by tempering your
Colour in a Cup of Water. Having stirred it weli with
vour Finger, and the whole being thoroughly soaked,
let it subside for a little while, and then pour it off, by
Inclination, into another Vessel, and what you pour
off will be the finest Particles, which you must af-
terwards set to dry. The Colour thus prepared must,
when vou want it, be temper’d with Gum-water, as
shall be said hereafter. This is a good Contrivance, and
perfectly calculated’ for the Delicacy of small Works.
SECT. X.
If you mix à little of the Gall of Ox, Carp, or Eel,
but chiefly of this last, with all your Greens, Blacks,
Greys, and Yellows, you will give them a Lustre and
Vivacity not natural to them. You must take the Gall
of Eels when they are sxind, and hang them by a Nail
to dry, and when you want any, you must steep it in
Brandy, and mingle some of it with the Colour already
tempered. It will cause the Colour to take to the Vellum
more strongly, which it will not easily do when the Vel¬
lum is greasy ; again, the Gall prevents it from Peeling.
SECT XI.
There are Colours which purify by Fire, such as the
Yellow Oaker, Brown Red, Ultramarine, and Umber;
all others blacken thereby: But if you burn the above-
nam’d Colours with a strong Fire they change ; sor the
brown Red turns Yellow, the YellowOaker turns Red, the
Umber reddens also, and White Lead becomes of a Le-
mon Colour, and is call'd Masticot. Observe, That the
Yellow Oaker burnt cecomes softer and kinder by far
than before, and more so than the pure Brown Red :
And reciprocally the Brown Red being burnt becomes
more soft and agreeable than the pure Yellow Oaker ;
they are both very good. The finest and most sincete
Uitramarine burnt in a red-hot Shovel, becomes much
more brilliant than before ; but, refind aster this Man-
ner,




III
aer, it diminishet and becomes coarser and harder to work
with in Minature.
SECT. XII.
All these Colours are temper’d in small lvory Cups,
made on purpose, or in Sea Shells, with Water, in
which have been previoussy dissolv’d Gum Arabic and
Sugarcandy ; for Example, in a good Glass of Water
put the Quantity of your Thumb of Gum-Arabic, and
half that Quantity of Sugarcandy. This last prevents
the Colours from scaling when applied, which they com¬
monly do without it, or when the Vellum is greasy.
This Gum water you must keep in a neat Bottle al-
ways stopp’d up, and never dip a colour’d Pencil into it,
but take it out with a Quill or some such thing.
Some of this Water you must pour into a Shell, toge-
ther with the Colour you want, and temper them with
your Finger till the whole be very fine. Ifyou find your
Colour too hard, leave it to soften in the Shell before
you temper it, then set it to dry, and so do by all, ex-
cept the lris Green and Bladder Green and Gamboge,
which must be tempered with Water only : But Ultra-
marine, Lake, and Spanisi Brown must be more gumm’d
than other Colours.
lf you use Sea Shells, you must first soak them for two
or three Days in Water. then scower them well in hot
Water, to clear them of a certain Salt which spoils the
Colours if not washi’d away.
AE C T. XIII.
To know if your Colours are sufficiently gumm’d, you
need only make a Stroke with your temper’d Colours,
upon your Hand, which will immediately dry : lf they
break and scale, they are too much gumm’d ; and if
they rub out by passing your Finger across them, they
have not enough. Again. if you lay your colours upon
Vellum, and upon Trial find that the Colours come off
upon your Finger like Dust it is a Sign they are not e-
nough gumm’d, and therefore you must put more Gum
into the Water you use : Take heed, tho, that you put
not in too much, for that will have a hard and dry Ef-
fect, your Colours will be glutinous and shining : Thus





the more they are gumn’d the darker they are ; and if
you would give a greater Body to a Colour than it natu¬
rally has, you need only Gum it well.
SECT. XIV.
You must have a smooth lvory Pallet, of the size of
your Hand, upon which you must distribute the Colours
for your Carnations or Flesh, after this manner: In the
middle you must put a Quantity of White, well spread
out, because it is the Colour most resorted to, and from
the Left to the Right of it, along the side you must place
the following Colours.
A Blue, made of Ultra-
Masticoat,
Orpiment,
marine, Indigo, and
Oaker,
White. It must be ve-
A Green, made of Ultrama-
ry pale.
rine,
Vermillion,
French-Pink, and White,
Carmine, and
Black.
equal Parts of each.
On the other side of your Pallet you must also spread
out some White, as before ; and when you are to paint
Draperies, or any thing else, you must, near it, pat the
Colour you intend to make them of, therewith to work
as I shall instruct you hereafter.
SECT. XV.
It is of great Importance that you should have good Pen-
cils : When you chuse them, wet them a little, and twirl
them upon your Finger; if they keep their Point they
are good, but if they break into many Points of different
Lengths, they are good for nothing. particularly for
Srippling, but above all for Carnations. When they
are too sharp pointed, with only foar or five Hairs stick-
ing out beyond the rest, you must blunt them carefully
with a pair Scissars. It will be proper to have them of
two
« This is the Term in Minature for making of small Points or
Dots







two or three Sizes; the largest may serve for your
Grounds, the middling for Drawing and Colouring, and
and the least for Finishing.
To keep your Pencil to a good Point, you must often
put it between your Lips, and press it, and moisten it
with your Tongue, tho yon have just taken up Colour
with it; for if you have taken up too much, you by
this Means diminish it, and correct your Error. You
need fear no Harm from doing of this; all the Miniature
Colours ( if you except Orpiment, which is a Poyson y
have nothing displeasing to the Tafte, or noxious in them¬
selves, when prepar’d for use. You must be careful to
repeat this very often when you are Stippling, or Fi-
nishing, particularly Carnations, that your Strokes may
be neat and clear : As for Draperies and other Things,
whether in the Drawing, Colouring, or Finishing of them,
you need not be so nice ; in this Case it will be enough if
you make your Point upon the Edge or Rim of your
Shell, or upon the Paper you rest on when you are at
work.
SECT. XVI.
To work as you ought, you must be in a Room that
has but one Window, which you must place yourself ve-
ry near to, with a Table and a Desk almost as high as
the Window, and so six yourself that the Light may al-
ways strike in on the Left Hand of you.
SECT. XVII.
When you would lay on a Colour equally strong eve-
ry where, as a Ground for Example, you must make
your Mixtures in Shells, and take Care that you have e¬
nough for your Purpose ; for if they fall short, you will
be put to it to prepare them of exactly the same Degrees
of Light or Shade.
SECT. XVIII.
Having spoke of Vellum, Pencils, and Colours, let us
now say how they are to be us’d. First of all, if you
would paint Flesn or Drapery, or ought else, you must
begin by sketching or drawing with large, bold, but clear,





Strokes, like those who paint in Oil; your Lights muft,
at firft, be somewhat brighter, and your Shades not quite
fo dark as is required for Finishing ; because in stippling
thereon you strengthen the Colour, which if too dark at
first, would, in the finishing, become too deep.
SECT. XIX.
There are several Ways of Stippling or Shading. as it
may be also call’d s every Painter has his Manner; Some
do it with round Points, others make them longisn, o-
thers again hatch with fine Strokes crossing each other in
all Directions, till the whole appears as if stippled or
wrought with Points ; this last Method is the best, bold.
est, and soonest perfected, wherefore l advise all Minia-
ture Painters to practise it, and to accustom themselves be-
times to be rich, mellow and soft in weir Work, that is
that the Points may be lost in the Ground they are
wrought upon, and appear but just enough to evince that
the Piece is stippled. Hard and dry is the reverse of this
manner of working ; beware thereof : It proceeds from
stippling with a Colour too dark for the Ground, and too
dry a Pencil, which gives the Work a rude Cast or Favour.
SECT, XX.
Endeavour also to drown your Colours into each other
that no Line of Separation may be seen between them, and
soften your Strokes with the Colours on each Hand of
them, so as to be equally blended with and confounded
into each.
SECT XXI.
When your Pieces are finish’d, heightening them a lit-
tle has a fine Effect; that is, strengthening the Lights
with touches of a paler Colour than at first, which must
be softned away into the rest.
SECT. XXII.
When the Colours are dry upon your Pallet, or in
your Shells, temper them with pure Water, and when
you perceive they have lost their Gum, whick you will
know by their easily rubbing out, either on your Hand
or Vellum, as I have said before, temper them with
Gum-water till they are in geod Order.






SECT. XXIII.
There are several sorts of Grounds for Pictures and
Portraits : some are quite brown with Spanis. Brown,
Umber, &c. with a little black and white ; others are
more yellow, being mixed with a good deal of Oaker ;
and others are upon the grey with Indigo. For this
Work, make a Wasn of the Colour or Mixture you
propose, or according to the Picture or Portrait yon are
about to copy, and with this thin Washi soak or prime
your Vellum : This done, lay it on thicker, and spread
it out boldly, but uniformly, as fast as you can. never
touching twice upon one Place till it be dry, because the
second touch carries off what the first laid on, particular-
ly if you bear a little hard upon the Pencil.
SECT. XXIV.
There are still other dark Grounds, and these are of
a greenisn Colour; they are most in Use, and best adapt-
ed for all sorts of Figures and Portraits, because they set
off the Carnations to great Advantage. and are very ea-
sily laid, there being no Occasion to stipple them, as
must often be done to the others, which are seldom uni¬
form at first, whereas these hardly ever miss ; You must
prepare them with Black, French Pink, and White
mingled together in different Proportions, according as
you would have your Ground lighter or darker : Lay it
on thin at first, then thick, as before directed. You
may mix up Grounds of other Colours, but these are the
most common.
SECT. XXV
If you are about to paint a Saint upon one of these
Grounds, and would make a small Glory round the
Head of your Figure, you must lay on your Ground ve-
ry thin in that part, or even leave it naked, especially
just where the Glory ought to be brightest : At first lay
on a pretty thick Mixtre of White and a little Oaker,
and as you move off from the Head, let your Oaker pre-
vail more and more, and that it may die away into the
Ground, hatch it boldly with a Pencil ; and as you pur-





sue the round of the Glory, take sometimes the Coloor of
the Glory, and sometimes that of theGround, mixing some
white or Oaker when it is rather too dark, and this con-
tinue till they are utterly confounded or scumbled into each
other, and that no separation between them be distin-
guishable.
SECT. XXVI.
To make a Ground all of Glory, you first lay on a
bright Mixture of a little Oaker and White, adding
more and more of the first as you draw more and more
towards the Extremities of the intended Picture ; and
when the Oaker happens not to be dark enough, (for you
you must go on darkening and darkening) add Gall stone,
then Carmine, and at last Spaniss Brown. This Ground
you must lay in such manner that the different Degrees of
Darkness may, as much as possible, insensibly increase
and strengthen. Then you must stipple the Whole with
the same Colours to blend it nicely together, which is te-
dious and difficult enough ; particularly when there are
Clouds of Glory in your Ground. You must strengthen
their Lights as you remove from theFigure, and finisn still
with stippling, swelling out the said Clouds, whose Lights
and Shades must be imperceptibly lost into each other.
SECT. XXVII.
For a Day-sky you must mingle some Uitramarine
with a great deal of White, and lay it on as smooth and
uniform as poffible, with a large Pencil and broad Strokes
as for Grounds, layingit on paler and paler as you de-
scend towards the Horizon, which you must make of
Vermillion and Mine de Plomb, and of White of the
same Strength as finishes the Sky, and even a little weak-
er, artfully blending the Blue and the Red, which must
come down to the Front, mingling, atlast, Gall-stone
and a good deal of White, so that the Mixture may be
paler than the first ; and all this must be so laid on, that
no Separation be seen of the Colours of this Sky.
SECT. XXVIII.
When there are to be Clonds in your Sky, you-need
lay on no Blue where they are to be, but fketch them





ont ( if they are Reddish ) with Vermillion, Gall-stone
and White, together with a little Indigo; and if they hap-
pen to be darker, you must use a great deal of this last,
making the Lights of one and the other with Masticoat,
Vermillion and White, the Proportions of each more or
less, according to the Degree of Strength you would give
them, or according to the Original before you, swelling
out the whole with stippling, for it is a hard Matter to
lay them on uniformly in the Drawing ; and if the Sky
de not sufficiently uniform, you must stipple that like-
wise.
N. 3. You may cover also the Places of your Clouds
in laying on the Ground of the Sky, heightening the
Lights with a good deal of White, and deepening the
Shades : This is the most expeditious Way.
SECT. XXIX.
A Night or stormy Sky is made with Indigo, Black
and White, mix’d together, which is laid on like the
Day Sky. To these add Vermillion, Oaker and Brown
Red for the Clouds, whose Lights must be of Masticoat
or Mine de Plomb, and a-little White. sometimes Red-
der and sometimes Yellower, as Necessity shall require :
And when it is a stormy Sky, and that in some parts you
see Lights, whether Bluc or Red, you may order them
as in a Day Sky, scumbling the whole together in draw-
ing and finishing.

CHAP. II.
DRAPERIES.
SECT. I.
TO make a blue Drapery, put Ultramarine near
the White on your Pallet, and mix them n such
Proportions as to produce a very pale Colour, and ofa
good Body. With this you may express your brighteft
Lights ;




Lights; and afterwards add more Ultramarine for such
as are darker, and so continue to do to the deepest Fold
and darkest Shades, which must be pure Ultramarine;
and all this must be done with broad Strokes of the Pen-
cil, with adue Regard had to the scumbling of the dif-
ferent Degrees of Light and Shade, lofing the Lights in-
to the Shades with a Colour not so pale as the Lights,
or deep as the Shades. Then stipple the whole with the
same Colours and the same Degrees, but somewhat
strongly, that the points may be seen : The whole must
flow imperceptibly together, that the Folds may not ap-
pear cut, and no Line of Separation be seen. When
the Uitramarine happens not to be dark enough for the
deepest Shades, how much soever it may be gummed,
you may mix Indigo with it to give them the last Degree
of Depth; and if the Lights are not strong enough,
they may be heighten’d with White and a very little
Uitramarine.
SECT. II.
A Carmine Drapery is done after the same Manner
with the Blue. except that in the darkest places you lay
on Vermillion before you use the Carmine, which is
apply’d without any White, and in the deepest snades
it must be well gumm’d. To deepen it the more add a
little Bistre.
SECT. III.
There is also another Drapery all of Vermillion,
with a Mixture of White for the Lights, laying it on
single upon the darkest parts, and adding Carmine for the
deepest Shades. You finish then with the same Colours,
as in other Draperies; and if the Carmine and Vermilli-
on together are not strong enough, take Carmine alone,
but only for the deepest shades.
SECT. IV.
A Drapery of Lake is done like that of Carmine,
mixing a good deal of White therewith for the Lights,





and but very little for the shades : You are to finish with
stippling, but we use no Vermillion.
SECT. V.
Purple Draperies are made by the same Rule, having
first prepar’d a Mixture of Carmine and UItramarine,
and continually using White for the Lights. If you
would have it a Columbine or light Purple, your Car-
mine must be in greater Quantity than your Ultramarine;
but if you would have it more blue and deep, let there
he more Ultramarine than Carmine,
SECT. VI.
For a Flesn- colour Drapery begin with laying on 2
very pale Mixture of White, Vermillion and Lake, and
shade with the same Colours, diminishing theQuantity
of the White. This Drapery must be very pale and de-
licate, because it must represent à slight Stuff, and cyca
the shades must not be dark.
SECT. VII.
For a Yellow Drapery lay on all over, first Masticoat,
and then over that Gamboge, excepting only the light-
est parts, where you must leave the Masticoat pure.
Then you must shade with Oaker mingled with a little
Gamboge and Masticoat, increasing and decreafing the
Quantity of this last, according to the strength of your
shades; and when you want to be still darker, add Gall-
stone. Moreover you may work with Gall-stone alone
for the deeper snades, adding thereto Bistre if it be not
dark enough. You finisn with the Colours you began
with, stippling and blending the Lights with the snades.
SECT. VIII.
If you use Naples Yellow or French Pink instead of
Masticoat and Gamboge, you will have another sort of
Yellow.
SECT. IX.
Green Drapery is produc’d by colouring all over with
Verditer,





Verditer, with which, if it prove too blue for you, you
may mix Masticoat for the Lights, and Gamboge for the
shades : Then add a Proportion of Sad Green to shade
with ; and as your shades grow very deep, you must add
the darker Greens, and even use them unmix’d, where
you want to be extreamly dark. You finish with the
same Colours, à little darker than at first.
SECT. X.
For a Black Drapery, you must lay on Black and
White, and finisn with the same, encreafing the Black ap
you want it for the shades ; for the deepest of which add
some Indigo, especially if you would give your Drapery
the look of Velvet. You may in all Cases touch up your
Lights with a brighter Colour.
SECT. XI.
For Drapery of White Woollen Cloth, lay on a Mix-
rure of White, à very little Oaker, Orpiment, or Gall-
stone, to give it a yellowifhi Cast, then shade and finish
with Blue, a little Black, White, and Bistre mix’d toge¬
ther, adding this last for your brownest shades.
SECT. XII.
A light Grey is laid on with Black and White, and
finisn’d with the fame, made a little darker.
SECT. XIII.
For a minim, dark, brown, tawney, or dun Dra-
pery, lay on Bistre with White, a little Brown Red,
and shade with the fame Mixtute, but let it be a little
darker.
SECT. XIV.
There are other forts of Draperies, call’d Changeable,
because the Lights are of one Colour, and the shades of
another; these are us’d for the Cloathing of Angels,
and for other young and gay Figures, as also for Scarves,
and other light parts of Dress, which fall into a Num-
ber of Folds and flow to the Wind. These are most
commonly







commonly Purple, and of these there are two forts, the
one with blue Lights and the other with Yellow.
SECT. XV.
For the former lay on Uitramarine and White very
pale for the Lights, and shade with Carmine, Ultra-
marine, and White, the same as for a purple Drapery,
so that only the very brightest Lights appear Blue, and
even then you must stipple with Purple, with a large
Quantity of White, and scumble the whole artfully to-
gether.
SECT. XVI.
For the latter, use Masticoat for your Lights, instead
of Blue, then proceed as for a Drapery of pure Purple,
except that you must stipple and blend the Lights with
the Shades, that is the Yellow with the Purpie, by the
help of a little Gamboge.
SECT. XVII.
is order’d like this last, that is, the
Carmine Red
Lights must be Masticoat, and the shades Carmine, and
you must use Gamboge.
to scumble them,
SECT. XVIII.
Lake Red like Carmine,
SECT. XIX.
Green must be order’d in the same manner as Lake,
continually mixing Verditer with the sadder Greens tor
the middling shades.
SECT. XX.
Many other Sorts of these may be contriv’d at Plea-
fure, keeping to the Union of the Colours, not only in
one Figure, but also in a Group of several Figures,
avoiding, as much as the subject will permit, to put
Blue next to a Flame Colour, or contrasting Green with
Black, and sp of others that disagree or afford no proper
Union.





SECT. XXI.
Other Draperies may be made of sad, dirty, and
brown mixtures and simples; and all by the Directions
we have already given; and otkers also may be con-
triv’d, both of broken and complicated Colours, but :
Harmony between them must be preserv’d, that they do
not offend the Eye. There is no laying down a Rule to
guide you in this ; you must by Experience and Practice,
make yourself acquainted with the Power and Effect of
your Colours, and work accordingly.
SECT. XXII.
Linnens are painted thus : Having drawn your Foldt
as when you doDrapery, lay onWhite all over, and then
proceed and finisn with a mixture of Ultramarine, black
and white, taking more or less of this last according to
the degrees you want of Light and Shade; and for the
deepest Folds, take Bistre and a little White, using it
sparingly and with artful Touches : and you may even
take the sormer pure for the deepest shades, where yoa
must express the Folds and lose them into the rest.
SECT. XXIII.
They may be made after a different Manner, by lay-
ing on all over, a very pale Mixture of Ultramarine,
black, and white, and then proceeding in the manner a¬
bove directed with the same mixture, but à little deeper.
And when the shades are stippled and finisn’d ; you must
heighthen the Lights with pure White, blending them
with the first Colour or Ground. But of what fort
soever you make them, you must, when they are fi-
nish’d, prepare some yellowish Tints for certain Places,
laying them on lightly, as it were a Washi, so as to be
transparent, and neither to hide the stippling nor the
shades.
SECT. XXIV.
Yellow Linnens are made of White mix'd with e
little Oaker, then proceed and finisn with Bistre, mixed
with





with White and Oaker, and for the deepest shades with
Bistre alone. Before you finish, lay on Tints of Oaker
and White here and there, and others of White and Ul-
tramarine, as well. upon the shades as the Lights, but
very thin, and then stipple and scumble the whole toge-
ther, and it will have a fine Effect. As you finisn,
touch up the Extremities of the Lighes with Masticoat
and White. These Linnens, and the former, vou may
stripe like Agyptian Scarves, with Blue, Red, Ultrama-
rine, and Carmine, a Red one between two Blue ones,
very bright on the Lights, and stronger in the shades.
The Heads of Virgins are generally dress’d with Veils
of these Sorts, and of the same are made a Sort of
Handkerchiefs for an open Breast, because they are very
becoming to the Flesn.
SECT. XXV.
When vou would have either the one or the other of
them to be transparent, and shew whatever, whether Stuff
or Flesh, is underneath, lay them on at first, very thin,
and mingle with your shading Colour, a little of that
which is under them, particularly at the Extremities of
the shades, and touch only the Extremities of the Lights,
only for the Yellows) with Mafticoat and White, and
for the Whites with White alone.
They are also to be make another way especially
when you would haye them quite transparent, as Muslin,
Lawn, or Gause. To this purpose you must begin and
finish what is beneath as if nothing was to be over it ;
then heighten the brightest Folds with White or Masti-
coat, and shade with Bistre, and White; or Black, or
Blue and White, according to the Colour you aim at,
and taking away from the Liveliness of the rest by soiling
it over, tho’ that be not altogether necessary but for the
darker parts.
SECT. XXVI.
For Crape you must do as above, only observe that
you draw the Folds and the Borders or Edges with little
Threads alone, upon what is beneath, which must first
be finish’d,





SECT. XXVII.
When you would water a Stuff of any fort, you must
wave it with lighter or darker Colours, according as
what you are upon is Light or Shade.
SECT. XXVIII,
There is such a way of touching your Draperies, so as
to distinguisn the silken from the woollen; these are more
coarse and stiff, the others are finer, and more free or
glossy ; but it must be remember’d that these are Effects
which depend partly upon the Stuff itself, and partly
upon the Colour of it; and in order that you may apply
them in such a manner as shall be agreeable to the Sub¬
ject and to the Distance, I will here dwell a little on their
different Qualities.
SECT. XXIX.
We have no Colour that partakes more with Light
than White, or that comes nearer to the Air, which
shews it to be weak and fading, nevertheless you may
use it for the nearest Parts of your Picture, or bring it
out towards von, by the Assistance of some heavier and
stronger Colour, or by mingling them together,
SECT. XXX.
Blue js the most fading, or rather the weakest Coloar
of all, whence the Sky and distant Prospects are of that
colour : but it will fade the more, the more it is mixd
with White.
S.ECT. XXXI.
Pure Black is the heaviest and the most terrene of all,
and the more you mix it with other colours, the more
will they be of the same Nature.
Now the different Natures of Black and White pro.
duce different Effects in them; for often the White
throws back the Black, and the Black brings forward
the White. Under White, we here comprehend all the
light





light codoure, and uader Black we fuppose all that are
heavy.
Uitramarine is then a colour weak and light.
Oaker is not quite so much.
Masticoat is very light, and. so is Vorditer.
Vermillion and Carmine are next to them.
Orpiment and Gamboge axe à little less so.
Lake holds a mean more kind than rude.
Pink is of ino parricular Class, and easily takes the
Qualities of the others ; so you may mako it dark and
heavy, by mixing it with Colours which are so : And
on the contrary, faint, weak, or fading, by mingling
with it White or Elue.
Brown Red, Umber, the dark Greens, and Bistre, are
the heaviest and next to Black.
SECT. XXXII.
Able Masters who are vers’d in Perspective and the
Harmony of Colours, take care always to use their strong
Colours, for their fore Grounds, and the weaker for di¬
stant Views. As for the Union of Colours, you may, by
mingling them together, understand the Friendship or
Aversion they have for each other, and thence take your
Hints, and consult the Pleasure of the Eye.
SECT. XXXIII.
. Far. Laces, Foint, and the like, lay on first a Mixture
of Blue, Black, aàd: White, as for Linnens;; then heigh-
ten the Pactern, Flovers, or Flourishes wich White on-
ly. ;. thensshade and finifh wic the first Colour. When
they are upon Flesn, or ought else which you would
have to be seen through them ; finish what is under
them, as if you intended to lay nothing thereon, and
then lay on the Lace or Point, with pure White, and fi-
nish with the other Mixture.
SECT. XXXIV
If you would paint a Fur, lay on a Ground, as for
Drapery, according to the Colours of it, and then shade
by
PART III.




by the same Rule ; and having done, you muft, instead
of stippling, draw fine strokes, this way, that way, and
t’other way, according to the Grain of the Fur you aim
at. Heighten the Lights of a Brown Fur with Oaker
and White, and those of a light Far, with White and
a little Blue.
SECT. XXXV.
For a Building. if it be Stone, take Indigo, Biftre,
and White, for your dead colouring or ground, and then
shade with less of this last, and more of the Bistre than
Indigo, according to the Colour of the Stones you woald
make ; you may also add a little Oaker, both to begin
with and to finish. But to add still to its Beauty, you
must here and there, especially for Ruins, imake yellow
and blue Tints, the former of Oaker, and the latter ofUl¬
tramarine, always mixing them with white, whether for
your first Ground. provided they appear through what
you lay upon them, or whether you use them 3t last, f¬
nishing and blending them with the rest.
SECT. XXXVI.
For wooden Buildings, as they are of very different
Kinds, they are left to Discretion ; but the most com-
mon way is to begin with a Mixture of Oaker, Bistre,
and White, and finish without White, or with very
little, and when the snades require Strength, with
Bistre alone. For otheri you may add, sometime
Vermillion, and sometimes Green or Black, in a Word,
according to what you intend, you must mix your Co-
lour, and finish with stippling, as for Draperies and ill
the rest,
















CHAP. III.
Of Carnations or Flesb Colouring,
SECT. I.
HERE is so great a Variety of colouring for
Flesn, that it is a hard matter to lay down any
general Rules for vour Instraction therein ; nor are any
Rules minded by such as have acquired a Skill this way ;
for such copy from Originals, or work by their own
Heads, without knowing, particularly, why or where-
fore. So that the most able Hands, who work on with
the least thought and trouble, wonld be so much the
harder put to it, were they called upon to aliign a Rea¬
fon for their Doctrine and Practice as to their Colouring
and Tints.
However, as Beginners, for whom this little Work
is intended, stand in need of immediate Instruction, I
will here, in general, declare how you are to paint the
different sorts of Flesh.
SECT. II.
First of all, having drawn your Figure with Carmine
and adjusted your Piece, you must lay on, for Women,
Children, and, in general, for all soft and tender colour-
ing, White mix’d with a very little Blue sor Faces, the
Composition of which will be given hereafter; but it
must hardly appear.
SECT. III.
And for Men, instead of Blue substitute Vermillion
for your dead colouring, and when they are old let it be
mix’d with Oaker.










Then you are to run over all your Features with Ver-
million, Carmine and White mingled together, and
with the same Mixture form all the shades, adding
White as they weaken, and scarce using any of it as
they strongthen, bat particularly in certain Places, where
you must lay it on boldly, for Example, at the Cor-
ners of the Eyés, under the Nose, the Ears, under the
Chin, between the Fingers, in all the Joints, the cor-
ners of the Nails, and generally m every part where
it is necessary to expresssa Separation in the dark shades :
Nor must you fear to give them all the strength they
ought to have from the arst Sketch, because in working
thereon with Green, it constantly weakens the Red whick.
had first been laid on.
SECT. V.
2 .2.
Having drawn with Red, make blue Tints with Ul.
tramarine agd’a good deal of White, upon the Temples,
bengath ahd at the Corners of the Eyes, on each side of
of the Mouth, above it and below it, a little upon the
midèle-of the Forehead, between the Nose and the Eyes,
on ghe fides of che Cheeks, on the Neck, and other parts
where the Flesh has a bluishi Cast.
You must also make xellowish Tints with Oaker,
Orpiment and a liitle Vermillion mixed with White,
above the Eye-brows, ât the sides of the Nose towards
the bottomn, a little beneath-the Cheeks, and the other
parte- near.
In these it is-that you must keep a watchful Eye upon
Nature, for Painting baing no more than an Imitation ef
Nature, every Deviation from her is a Blemishi, and -tru-
ly a Fault.

SECT. VI.


 Having dead teeloured, drawn, and dispofed of vour
Tints, you must proëeed to shade, stippling with Green
for your Flesn, mixing therewith, according to the Rule
we have-given for Tints, alittie Blue for the fading Parts.
and




and on the contrary, a little Yellow for the stronger
parts, or such as are nearest to you. On the Extre-
mities of the fhades next to the Lights, you must im¬
perceptibly blend your Colour with the Ground of
the Flesn, first with blue, and then with Red, accord-
ing to the- part you are upon. And if this Mixture of
Green do not darken enough at first, you must go over
the shades at several Repetitions, sometimes with Red
sometimes with Green, and always stippling till the
whole be as is ought to be.
SECT. VII.
And if with these Colours you cannet give your
shades all the Strength they ought to have. you may
finish the darkest parts with Orpiment, Oaker or
Vermillion, and sometimes with Bistre only, according
to the colouring you would make, but lightly, laying it
on very thin.
SECT. VIII.
You must stipple upon the Lights with a little Ver-
million or Carmine, mixed with a good deal of white
and a very little Oaker, to lose them with into the
shades, and make the Tints imperceptibly die away into
sach other, taking heed while you are stippling or hatch-
ing that your strokes follow the out-line of the Flesh ;
for altho your hatching must cross in all Directions,
that ought to appear a little more, because it rounds off
the parts.
And because thisMixture might make the colouring too
Red if it was always used, you must moreover endeavour
to confound the Tints and the Shades with Blue, a little
Green, and a great deal of White, so that it be very pale ;
but with this you must not work upon the Checks, nor
upon the Extremities of the Lights, no more than with
the other Mixture upon these last, which are to be left in
all their brightness, as certain parts of the Chin, of the
Nose, upon the Forehead, and upon the Cheeks, which,
and the Chin, ought, however, to be redder than the
rest,




reft, as well as the Feet, the inside of the Hands, the
Fingers, and the Toes.
Pray observe here, that these two last Mixtures onght
to be so very pale, that you should hardly see yourself
work, they being purely designed to soften the Piece,
to melt the Tints into each other, to blend the shades
with the Lights, and to deface the Lines. Be cautions
not to make much use of the red Mixture upon blue
Tints, nor of Blue upon others ; but change colour trom
time to time, as you perceive you work too blue or too
red, ’till the Piece be finisn’d.
SECT. IX.
You must shade the White of the Eves with the same
Blue and a little Flesn Colour, and make the Corners on
the sides of the Nose with Vermillion and White, with
a sinall stroke of Carmine. All this is softened with
that Mixture of Vermillion; Carmine, and White, and
a very litt'e Oaker.
The lris of the Eye must be a Mixture of Ultrama-
rine and White, this little more in Quantity than the o-
ther, adding thereto a little Bistre, if it is to be of a
Kind of light Hazel, or a little Black if it is too Grey.
The Pupil or Sight of the Eye is done with Black, and
the lris is shaded with Indigo, Bistre, or Black, accord-
ing to the Colour it is of; but of what colour soever it
is, you would do well to draw a sine Circle of Vermillion
round the Sight, which blended with the rest, in finishi-
ing, gives Life to the Eye.
The Circumierence of the Eyes, that is, the Slit and
the Lafhies, must be done with Bistre and Carmine, when
they are strong. particularly the upper part, which must
be afterwards softened with the Red or Blue Mixtures, I
formerly mentioned, that the whole appear of a Piece and
continu'd.
When this is done, give à small Touch of pure White
upon the Sight of the Eye, next to the Light, which
makes it shine and alive.
You may also heighten the White of the Eye next to
the Light.







SECT X.
The Mouth must be Vermillion mix'd with White,
and finish’d with Carmine, which is softned like the rest:
And when the Carmine, does not prove dark enough for
your purpose, mix Bistre with it : This is to be under-
stood of the Corners, between the Lips, and particularly
for some half open Mouths.
SECT. XI.
The Hands and the other Nudities are to be done as
the Faces, observing that the Tip or End of each Finger
be redder than the rest. Your work being coloord and
stippled, you must go over all the Separations of the Parts
with sine Touches of Carmine and Orpiment together,
as well in the Shades as in the Lights, but stronger in
the first; and then handle them away into the rest of the
Flesn.
SECT. XII.
The Eye-brows and the Beard, are colour’d like the
Shades of the Flesh, and are finish’d with Bistre, Oaker,
or Black, according to the colour they are of, drawing
them with sine strokes as they ought to lie, in exact imi¬
tation of Nature; and the Lights must be heighten’d
with Oaker, Bistre, a little Vermillion, and a good deal
of white.
SECT. XIII.
For Hair, lay on Bistre, Oaker, White, and a little
Vermillion, but when it is very dark you must use Black
instead of Oaker, and then shade with the same Mixture,
diminishing from the white, and finish with Bistre alone-
or mix’d with Oaker or Black, by fine thin Strokes, very
near to each other, waving and curling them according to
the turn of the Hair
You must also refresh the Lights,
with sine Strokes of Oaker, or Orpiment, or White, and
a little Vermillion; after which blend away the Lights
into the Shades, working so metimes with brown and
sometimes with pale.










As for the Hairs upon and round the Forehead through
which the Flesn is seen, you must colour them with the
Colour of Fleffi, shading and working beneath as if yon
intended there should be none ; then shape them, and fi¬
nisn them with Bistre, and refresh the Lights as you did
the rest.
Grey Hairs are colourd with White, Black, and

Bistre, and finished with the same Mixture, bat
stronger, heightening the Lights with a very pale blue
and white.
SECT. XIV.
But the Matter of the greatest Importance is to soften
the Work, to run the Tints intp one another, as well as
the Hair on and about the Face into the Flesn, taking
especial Care that you work not dry or hard, and that the
Out lines of your Flesn be not cus.
You must accustom yourself to mix with White, bat
just as you want more or less of it, for the second co-
louring must be always a little deeper than your first, ex-
oept it be for softning.
SECT. XV.
The various Colourings may be easily produc’d by
taking more or lefs Red, Blue, Yellow, or Bistre, whe-
ther for your first colouring or for finishing
The Co-
louring for Women should be bluish, for Children a little
Red ; both Fresh and gay ; and for the Men it should in¬
cline to Yellow, efpecially when they are old.
SECT. XVI.
To make a Colouring to represent Death, you must
first clap in White, Orpiment, and Oaker, very pale,
and then proceed with Vermillion and Lake, instead of
Carmine, and a great deal of White; and work thereon
with a green Mixture, in which is more blue than of any
other Colour, that the Fleffi may be livid. The Tints
must be the same as for anocher Colouring ; but you
must have more of them blue than yellow, particularly





for the retreating Parts, and about the Eyes ; and the
Yellow must be us’d only for the Parts which advance the
farthest out. They are made to die away into each o-
ther, after the usual manner, sometimes with a very
pale blue, and sometimes with Oaker and White, and a
little Vermillion, softning the whole together. Yoa
must round off the Parts and the Out-lines with the same
Colours.
The Mouth must be almost a Purple ; bat neverthe-
less you begin upon it with a little Vermillion, Oaker
and White, but you finish it with Lake and Blue ;
and for the strong Strokes you take Bistre, and Lake,
which are used also for the Eyes, the Nose and the
Ifit is a Crucifix or some Martyr, where there must be
an Appearance of blood ; after the Flesn is finished you
niust colour with Vermillion and finish with Carniine,
fwelling out the Drops of blood, and giving them a
roundness.
As for the Crown of Thorns, lay on Sea-green and
Masticoat, and shade with Bistre and Green, and refrests
the lights with Masticoat.
SECT XVII.
Iron is coloured with Indigo, and a litte black and
white, and finifhed with Indigo alone, heightening with
white.
SECT. XVIII.
For Fire and Flames, the lights must be Masticnat
and Orpiment, and for the Shades, mix Vermillion and
Carmine.
SECT. XIX.
Smoke is imitated with Black, Indigo, and White,
and sometimes Bistre. You may also add Vermilli-
on, or Oaker, according to the Colour you would have
it of.






SECT. XX.
For Pearls, lay on a Mixture of White and a little
bluc, and shade them and swell them with the same, but
a little stronger. Lay on a small white Spot just in the
mièdle of the light Side, and on the other, between the
Shade and the Border of the Pearl, give a touch of Masti-
coat to make a Reflection ; underneath you must give
them a cast of the Colour they are upon.
SECT. XXI.
Diamonds must be laid in quite Black, then heighten-
ed with gentle touches of White on the light side.
The same must be done for all other precious Stones,
only varying the Colour.
SECT. XXII.
For a Gold Figure, lay on Shell- Gold, and shade
with Gall stone.
Do the samefor Silver, only shade with Indigo.
SECT. XXIII.
Thus have l dwelt upon some small Articles for the
Assistance of Beginners. What I have said may afford
some light into what I have not said, by the help of
Time and Practice, which are much required to attain
any degree of Perfection in our Art. One excellent way
to become a Master is copying after well-chosen Origi-
nals : It is with Pleasure we reap the Fruit of the La-
bours of others. Much is required to be able to produce
such sine Effects : In short, it is far better to be a good
Copist than a bad Inventor.
The Instructions l have laid down for the Mixtures,
and the different Tints, for the finishing of Flesh and o-
ther Things, may be of particular Use when you work
after Prints, where you have nothing before you but
black and white ; and they will not be much more un-
useful when you begin to copy after Paint, tho: you
know not how to handle your Colours, and happen not
to be acquainted with their Power and Effect: For there






is this difference between Miniature and painting in Oil,
that in this last the Colours were taken off from the
Pallet just as they appear to you in the Picture ; so that
in this Case you have nothing to consult but such a light
and such a shade. Now it is far from being the same in
Miniature, where often it happens that the last colouring
you lay on does not preserve its colour, but partakes of
the colouring benaath, or rather, the one than the other
compose a new one to form the Effect you aim at : For
althor it be White, Green, Carmine, Blue, Orpiment,
Bistre, and the like, which form your colouring, they
nevertheless would not produoe it if they were mixed to-
gether ; for it is by proceeding from one to the other,
that you can succeed ; and when you have a piece of this
Kind before you without having seen how it was done,
you must be a Conjurer, at least, to guefs at the Order
and Method it was done in, without the help of a Ma-
ster or a Book. Upon this Consideration, l have appli-
ed my self to instruct you in so many small Matters, and
I flatter my self that Experience will evince to all such
as are able to make Use of them, that as small as they
are, they are valuable.

CHAP. IV.
Of LANDSCAPES.
SECT. I.
IT is particularly for Landscapes that you must be
mindful of tke s8th Article, and of the following.

which speak of the various Qualities of Colours, because
the Order and Disposition of them contributes much to
the Retreats and Distances which deceive the Eye: And
the greatest Masters in this branch of the Art have
ever observed to cover their fore Fronts with tne hea-
viest and ftrongest Colours, reserving the lighter for Di-
stances.





Bat that I may not err from my purpose, I will,
instead of general Instructions, endeavour to give be-
ginners some particular Documents to be observed in
Practice.
SECT. II.
First of all, having drawn your Landscape such as
you would have it, as for another Pictare, you must
colour your nearest Fronts, if they ars to be dark, with
Sap Green, lris Green, Bistre, and a little Verditer, to
give your Colour a Body. You must stipple with this
Mixture, but let it be à little darker, adding thereto,
sometimes, blaek.
For the lighter Fronts, lay on Oaker and White, then
sbade and finish with Bistre : In fome you fhiould mingle
a little Green, especially for shading and finifhing.
Sometimes you have reddishi Fronts, which must be
made of Brown-red, White, and a little Green, and
finished with the same, with the Addition of a little
more Green.
For Grafs and Herbage on your nearest Fronts, you
must, after they are drawn, colour them with Sea-Green,
Verditer, and a little White; and for such as are yellow-
iffi, you must mingle Masticoat, and then fhade with Iris
Green, or Bistre, and Gall-stone, if you would have
them appear dead and withered.
The Fronts at some distance must be coloured with
Verditer, then they must be shaded and finished with
Sap Green, and add Bistre to give a touch with here and
there.
Such as are still farther off are made of a Sea Green,
a little Blue, and a little White ; and are shaded with
Verditer.
The further they are off, the more bluish they must
be ; and the utmost Verge should be Ultramarine,
and White, mixing in certain Places fine Tints of Ver-
million.
SECT. III.
Waters are painted with Indigo and White, and shad-
ed with the same, but it must be stronger; and to finish
them






them you must, instead of stippling, draw waving
Strokes when necessary, or strait without crossing, for
a still Water. You must sometimes use a little Green,
and heighten the Lights with pure White, particularly
where the Water bubbles up-
You must proceed with Rocks as with Stone Archi-
tecture, except that you mingle a little Green in your
colouring and shading. In this Case your Tints must be
yellow and blue, and- in finishing must be scumbled into
the rest : And when you make little branches with Moss
on them, or Herbs of any fort, vou must, when you
have done, touch them up with Masticoat and Green.
You may make some Yellow, some Green, and some
Reddish, as upon the near Fronts. Rocks must be stip-
pled like the rest; and the farther they are off, the grayer
must they appear.
Castles, old Ruins, and buildings of Stone and Wood,
must be ordered as I have already directed, when they
are upon the fore Fronts ; but when they are at a Di-
stance, you must add Brown Red and Vermillion, with
a great deal of White, and shade very tenderly with this
Mixture; and the farther they are off, the tenderer must
the Strokes be for the Separations. As they are gene-
rally slated you may make the Roofs a little bluer than
SECT. IV.
The Trees are not touched till the Sky is finished ; so
that when you are abont the Sky, you may, if you will
leave room for them, especially if they are to be many
in Number. But which way soever you order this, you
must cover such as are nearest to you with Verditer, ad-
ding, sometimes, Oaker to it; then shade with the same
Colours and a little Iris Green ; then leaf them with.
stippling without crossing; for it must be done with slight
longish touches, of a darker and warmer Colour, which
must all be directed to humour the Branches, by little
Tufts of a somewhat darker Colour, as we have said.
Then touch up the Lights with Verditer and Masticoat,
forming your Leaves after the same Manner; and when
there are withered Leaves or Branches, cover them with
Brown-





Brown red, or Gall- stone and White, and finish with
Gall stone without White, or Bistre.
The Trunks of Trees must be coverd with Oaker,
White, and a little Green for the Lights; and for the
Shades, mingle with Black, adding Bistre and Green for
the one and ftor the other. Your Tints must be yellow
and blue; and here and there you must bestow tender
touches of White or Masticoat, to imitate what you com-
monly see in the Bark of Trees.
The Branches which appear between the Leaves must
be Oaker, Verditer and White, or Bistre and White,
according to your degree of Light. You must shade with
Bistre and Iris Green.
Trees at a Distance are covered with Verditer and Sea-
green. and are shaded and finish’d with the same Colours
mixed with lris Green. When there are any that ap-
pear yellowiss, they may be cover’d with Oaker and

White, and finish’d with Gall stone.
For those at the greatest Distance, and very far off,
cover with Sca-green, and, to finish, mix with it Ultra-
marine ; heighten the one and the other with Masticoat
in little distinct Leaves.
It is the most difficult Thing in Landscape Painting,
and likewise in Miniature, to leaf a Tree as it ought to
be. To obtain this Art you must break your Hand to
it a little by copying good Originals ; for it requires a
peculiar Manner of touching, which cannot be attain-
ed but by working after Trees themselves, around which
you will take care also to have little Branches or Sprays,
which you must leaf upon whatsoever they happen to
lye, whether the Sky or the Ground of the Landscape
in general.
And in general your Landscape must be properly
colour’d, and full of Truth, for tkerein consists its
beauty.






CHAP. V.
Of FLOWERS.
SECT. I.
IT is most charming to paint Flowers, not only be-
cause of their Lustre, but also because they take up
but a little Time, and require hardly any Pains to do
them : It is all Pleasure and no Trouble. You spoil a
Face if you make one Eye a little higher than the other,
if you make a small Nose or a large Mouth, and so on
of the other Features : But the fear of these dispropor-
tions never troubles the Mind when you are about Flow-
ers ; for except they be quite out of the way indeed you
spoil nothing; and accordingly most of the Quality who
apply themselves to painting, concern themselves with
nothing but Flowers. You must, however, learn to
copy a little axactly ; and for this Branch of Miniature,
as well as for the rest, 1 refer to Dame Nature as your
only Guide. Work then after natural Flowers, and
search for their Tints and various Colours upon your
Pallet ; a little Use will easily bring you to be expert
in this ; and in order to pave the way for you at first, I
will shew you, continuing my Design, how to paint some
of them. It is not always you can have natural Flowers,
and you may be often obliged to copy from Prints where
you see nothing but Graving.
SECT. II.
It is a general Rule that Flowers be drawn and co-
vered like other Figures ; but the manner of colouring
and finishing them is different ; for they are coloured
with broad Strokes or Touches, which have the turn the
smaller must have, with which you finish, this first turn
being a principal help. And to finisn, instead of stip-
pling or hatching, you draw sine Strokes very close to





each other without crossing, going over them at several
Repetitions, till your Lights and Shades have all the
Strength you would give them.
SECT. III.
ROSES.
Having calked and drawn the red Rose with Carmine,
let your first Lay be a very pale Mixture of Carmine
and White ; then lay in the Shade of the same Colour,
but with less White, and at last use Carmine alone, but
it must be very thin at first, adding, however, to the bo-
dy of it more and more, as the piece advances, and that
the shades grow darker and darker, and this is to be done
with broad bold Strokes. To conclude, you finisn with
the same Colour, with sine Strokes, which must be turn-
ed like those of the Graving, if you copy after a Print,
or like the turn of the Leaves of the Rose, if you copy
after a Painting or Nature ; scumbling the whole, and
touching up the strongest Lights, and the Edges of the
brightest Leaves, with White and a little Carmine. You
mutt always make the Heart of the Rose, and the shady
Side, darker than the rest, and use a little Indigo in
shading the first Leaves, especially when your Roses are
blown, to make them appear a little fading.
The Seed
is done with Gamboge, mixed with a little Bladder
Green for shading.
Your streaked Roses must be paler than the others,
that the Streaks may be the more conspicuous ; which
must be done with Carmine, somewhat deeper in the
Shades, and very bright in the Lights, hatching continu-
ally with sine Strokes.
For white Roses lay on white, and proceed and frnish
as in the Example of. red Roses ; but with Black, White
and a little Bistre, and make the Seed somewhat yellower
than before.
For yellow Roses lay on Masticoat, and shade with
Gamboge, Gall- stone and Bistre, heightening the Lights
with Masticoat and White.
The Stalks, the Leaves, and the Buds of all sorts of
Roses, must be laid in with Verditer, mixed up with a
little




litile Masticoat and Gamboge; and to snade them, use
lris Green, with less of the other Colours when the
shades are deep. The wrong Side of the Leaves must be
bluer than the other, therefore you must there lay on
3ea Green, and mix it with Iris-Green to fhade with,
making the Veins or Ribs of that Side lighter than the
Ground, and those of the right Side deeper.
The Prickles upon the: Stalks and the Buds of the
Roses, are made with slight touches of Carmine in all
Directions, and those on the Stem of the Tree and larger
Branches are struck in with Verditer and Carmine, and
shaded with Carmine and Bistre, making also the bot-
tom of the Stems aad Stalks more reddish than the Tops,
that is, you must mix Green with Carmine and Bistre to
stinde wich.
SECT. IV
Of TULIPS.
As there are infinite forts of Talips, at least too many
to be all traeed out, I sfiall touch only on the finest,
which are call'd striped or streaked. Their Stripes or
Streaks are laid in with Carmine, very thin in some
Places and very deep in others, and they, are finish’d
with sine Strokes of the same Colour, which must all ob¬
serve the turn of the Stripes. For others, you begin
with Vermilhion, then proceed by mixing it with Car-
mine, and finifh with Carmine only.
For others again, you lay Indian Lake upon Vermil-
lion instead of Carmine.
Some also are coloured with Lake and Carmine
mixed together, and Lake only, or with White to begin
with.
Some of them are of a Violet or Purple Colour, and
are to be done with Ultramarine, and Carmine or Lake,
sometimes bluer and sometimes redder. The manner of
ordering both is just the same, there is no difference but
in the Colours.
You must in certain Places, as for Example, between
the stripes of Vermillion, Carmine, or Lake, put some-
times a blue made of Ultramarine and White, and some-






times a transparent Parple, which must be finifh’d wich
sine hair strokes like the rest, and scumbled into the
Stripes. Some there are that have fallow Tints, which
are made of Lake, Bistre, and Oaker, according as they
happen to be ; these are only for fine and uncommon
Tulips.
To shade the Ground of those whose Stripes are Car-
mine, take Indigo and White.
For those that have Lake Stripes, take black and
white, therewith sometimes mixing Bistre, at other timen
green.
Some also you may shade with Gamboge and Umber,
and always with sine hair strokes, that follow the turn
of the Leaf.
Others also may be painted, which we call edged.
This Tulip is al of one Colour, excepting the border,
which is white with purple.
Red with Yellow.
Yellow with Red.
And Red with White.
The purple Tulip of this bordered sort, is laid in
with UItramarine, Carmine, and White, and you must
with the same, snade and finisn. The edge or bor-
der must not be touched, that is, you must only lay on
a thin White, which must be shaded with a very thin
Indigo.
The yellow is colour’d with Gamboge, and is shaded
with the same Colour, Oaker, Umber or Bistre. The
edging must be Vermillion, and finish’d with a very little
Carmine.
The red is laid in with Vermillion, and finish’d with
the same Colour, adding thereto Carmine or Lake. The
border must be Gamboge, and to finisn, add to it Gall-
stone, or Umber, or Bistre.
The white is to be shaded with black, blue, and white ;
Indian Ink is very proper in this Case, forit shades soft,
and is alone equal to the Effects of blue and white, mix'd
with other black. The edging of this white Tulip must
be Carmine.
For




For all these sorts of Tulipe you must, in the middle
of the Leaves, express a Nervure, which must be much
brighter than the rest ; and you must scumble the edges
into the Grounds. by fine strokes, for they must not seem
cut or separated like the stripes.
Others there are of still different Colours. When vou
meet with any which are as it were black with infide,
you colour and finisn them with Indigo, as well as the
Seed. If the Ground be yellow take Gamboge, and fi-
nish by adding thereto Umber, or Bistre.
The Leaves and Stalks of Tulips are commonly paint-
ed with a Sea Green, and shaded and finish’d with Iris-
Green, with broad strokes along the Leaves. Some also
may be made with Verditer mix'd with Masticoat; and
these may be shaded with Bladder Green, that they may
be of a more yellowisni Cast.
SECT. V.
Of ANEMONIES.
There are many forts of this Flower as well double as
fingle, which last are commonly plain. and are either
Purple, with Purple and White, shaded with the same
Colour, some bluer, some redder, sometimes very pale,
and sometimes very deep.
Others are coloured with Lake and White, and finish’d
with the same, diminishing the White, or even ufing
none at all.
Others again are coloured with Vermillion, and shaded
with the same Colour, deepen’d with Carmine.
Others once more, are White, and Lemmon-colour.
These last are done with Masticoat, and both the one and
the other must be shaded and finish’d, sometimes with
Vermillion, and sometimes with a very deep Lake, and
especially at the bottom of the Cup about the Seed,
which is also often of a blackisn Colour, and is imitated
with Indigo, or with black and blue, mingling in some
a little Bistre, and working continually with sine strokes,
and scumbling the shades into the lights.




There are some that have the bottom of the Cup much
brighter than the rest, and even so as to be quite white,
altho’ the rest of the Anemony be deep.
The Seed of all these Anemonies is imitated with Indi-
go and Black, with a very little White. Shade with
Indigo alone ; sometimes it must be heighten’d with
Masticoat.
Double Anemonies are of very various Colours, bux
the finest of them have their largest Leaves strip’d. Some
of these Stripes are perform’d with Vermillion, to which
is added Carmine to finish them, shading the rest of the
Leaves with Indigo. For the smaller Leaves within,
lay on a Mixture of Vermillion and White, and shade
them with Vermillion mixed with Carmine; and here
and there be very strong., particularly, in the Heart or
Cabbage, near the great Leaves on the shady Side, and
finisn with hair Strokes of Carmine, which must humour
the Stripes and the turn of the Leaves.
The Stripes of others are coloured and finished with
Carmine only, as well as the inner or smaller Leaves ;
observing, however, to leave, in the midst of these last,
a littie round, where you must lay in a deep Purple or
Violet, which must be scumbled into the rest; and the
whole being finished, lay on broad Strokes of this same
Colour around the smaller Leaves, especially on the dark
Side, and scumble them into the greater, which must, for
the rest, be shaded with Indigo, or Black.
In some others the smaller Leaves are of Lake or
Purple, altho the Stripes of the greater be Car-
mine.
There are others whose Stripes are Carmine in the
middle of most of the largeft Leaves, with Vermillion
under it in some Places, all which must be scumbled in¬
to the Shades of the Ground, which are of Indigo and
White. The smaller Leaves are laid in with Masticoat.
and are shaded with a very deep Carmine on the dark
side, and a very bright Carmine on the light side, leaving
here the Masticoat almost to itself, and only dividing the
Leaves with fine touches of Orpiment and Carmine,
which smaller Leaves may be sometimes fhaded with a
little very pale Green.





There are double Anemonies all Red, and of a Vio-
let Colour ; the first are coloured with Vermillion
and Carmine, with hardly any White, and are shaded
with Carmine alone, well gumm’d, that they may be
very deep.
Purple Anemonies are imitatad with Purple and
White, and are finifhed without White.
In short, there are of all Colours of these double Anemo-
nies as well as of the single, which are to be painted by
the Rules here suggested.
The Green of both the one and the other must be
Verditer mixed with Masticoat for the dead colouring,
and it must be finish’d with Bladder Green. Their Stalks
incline to be a little reddifni ; therefore they are shaded
with Carmine mixed with Bistre, and sometimes with
Green, after they are laid in with Masticoat.
SECT. VI.
Of PINXS and CARNATIONS.
It is the same with Pinks and Carnations as with
Anemonies andTulips, for some of them are wariegat-
ed or mixed with several Colours, and some are of pne
Colour alone.
The first are sometimes streak’d, strip’d or mark'd,
sometimes with Vermillion and Carmine, and sometimer
with Lake and Carmine, at ofher times with pure Lake,
or with White. Some aredeep, others are pale. Some-
timés they are variegated with small or narrow Strokes,
sometimes with broad or great.
Their Grounds are commonly shaded with Indigo and
Wbite.
There are some of these Flowers of a very pale Fleff
Colour, and variegated with another deeper, made of
Vermillion-and Lake.
Others are of Lake and White, which are shaded and
variegated without White.
Others again are all Red with Vermillion and Carmire,
ass deep as pollible.
Others, once more, are all Lake.





In short, others there are of great Variety, which
Nature herself, or your own Fancy, can best guide you
to.
The Green of all of them if of the Sea Hue, which
shade with Iris-Green.
SECT. VII.
Of the MANY-FLOWER'D LILY.
Let your first Colour be Mine de Plomb. the Vermil-
lion, and in the strongest of the Shades Carmine; and
finish with the same in strokes which correspond with
the turn of Leaf. Heighten the Lights with Mine de
Plomb and White, and imitate the Seed with Vermillion
and Carmine.
The Greens must be Verditer, shaded with Iris-
Green.
SECT. VIII.
Of the DAY-LILY.
There are three Sorts of this Flower :
Gridelin, a little Reddisn,
Gridelin, very pale,
And White.
For the first lay on Lake and White, and shade and
finish with a deeper Mixtare of the same, adding thereto
a little Black to sadden it, especially for the deepest Pla-
ces. For the second lay on White, mix’d with a very
little Lake and Vermillion, so that these two last do
hardly appear; then shade with Black and a little Lake,
observing to be redder in the Heart of the Leaves next to
the Stalk, which, as well as the Seed, must be of the same
Colour, particularly towards the Top,and lower a litie
greener.
The Stalk of the Seed must be Masticoat, shaded with
Bladder-green.
The other Flowers of this fort are laid on with
White only, and are shaded and finished with Black and
White.





The Stalk of these last, and the Green of them all,
must be of the Sca fort, shaded with Iris-Green.
SECT. IX.
HYACINTRS.
O
They are of four forts :
A deepish Blue,
A paler Blue,
Gridelin,
And White,
The first must be Ultramarine and White, shaded and
finished with less white.
The second must be of a paler blue.
The third must be Lake and White, and a very little
UItramarine, and must be finish’d with the same Colour,
but of a deeper Degree.
In short, the fourth must be all White, and then shad-
ed with Black and a little White; finish with strokes of
the same turn with the Qut line of the Leaf.
The Green and Stalk of the blue Kind, must be of
the Sea sort, shaded with a deep lris; and in the Stalk
of the first you use à little Carmine, to give it a reddisti
Cast.
The Stalks of the two others, and their Greens, must
be coloured with Verditer and Masticoat, shaded with
Bladder Green.
SECT. X.
Of the PIONY.
Let your first Lay in general be of Indian Lake and
White, of a pretty good Bady ; and then shade with a
lesser Quantity of white. which you must quite disuse
in the deepest Places ; this done, finisn with strokes of
the same Colour inthe manner we have so often intimat-
ed, charging it strongly witn Gum in the darkest shades,
and heightening the lights and edges of the brightest
Leaves, with White and a little Lake : You must also
express small Veins just like the strokes of hatching, but
they must appear more.





The Green of this Flower must be of the Sea kind,
and shaded with the Iris.
SECT. XI,
Of COWSLIPS.
They are of four or five Colours :
Of a very pale Purple,
Of Gridelin,
Of White and Yellow.
The Purple must be laid on with UItramarine, Car-
mine and White, observing to diminisn the Quantity of
this last when you are fhading.
The Gridelin-coloured must be painted with a light
Lake, a very little Ultramarine, and a greât deal of
White. Shade with the same, but lêt it be darker.
For the white Sort, let it be white alone, and shade
with black and white Strokes.
The Eye of these three Cowstips, must be done with
Mastieoat, in form of a Star, which is shaded with
Gamboge, and must, in the midst of it, have a fmali
Round of Bladder green.
The yellow Cowssip, must be Masticoat, shaded with
z. IIII
Gamboge and Umber.
The Buds, and Leaves, the Stems, must be Verditer
mixed with a little Masticoat, and finished with Iris-
green, with this same Colour expressing Ribs or Veins
on the Leaves, and heightening the Lights of the largeft
with Masticoat.
.
3
SECT. XII.
Of ibo. RENUNCULUS..
There are many forts of this-Flouer; the finest of
which are Reddisn and Orange-colour’d. For the fick,
use Vermillion, wich a veryt small Quantity of Gamt
boge ; adû Carmine to shade wath, land ifinifh. with, tkis
last Colour, and a lietle Gall stonal:
For others, use Indian Lake iastead of Carmine, but

especially at the Heart.






The Orange coloured, may be imitated with Gam-
boge, finished with Gall-stone, Vermillion, and a little
Carmine, leaving some yellow Stripes and Spots.
The Green of the Stalks, is Verditer and Masticoat
very pale, to which must be added lris-green to shade
with.
The Leaves must be of a deeper Green.
SECT. XIII.
Of tbe CROCUS.
It is of two Colours :
The Yellow,
And the Purple.
The Yellow is done with Masticoat and Gall-stone;
shaded with Gamboge and Gall-stone ; expressing on
the Outside of each Leaf, three Lines of Rays, separate
from and parallel to each other, with Bistre and pure
Lake, which must be scumbled into the Strokes of the
Ground or Leaf. The inside of the Leaves must be all
Yellow.
For the Furple, lay on Carmine, mixed with a little
UItramarine and White ; expressing deep Purple Stripes
on fome of the Leaves, as you did for the Yellow; and
on others only fine Veins. The Seed of all is Yellow,
and must be done with Orpiment and Gall stone; and for
the Stalk, lay on White, and shade with Black, mixed
with a little Green.
The Green of this Flower is a pale Verditer, shaded
with Bladder green.
SECT. XIV.
Of the IR1S.
The Persian or Indian Iris is done by eovering the in-
nermost Leaves with White, and shading them with
Indigo and Green mixed together, and leaving a small
White separation in the middle of each Leaf. On the
outermost Leaves, vou, in’the same Part. put on a lay
of Masticoat, which must be shaded with Gall-stone and






Orpiment, making small deep and longifh Dots or
Spots, at some small Distance from each other, upon
the upper Side of all the Leaf ; and at the End of each
Leaf make large Spots of Bistre and Lake for some,
and of Indigo alone for others, but very deep. The
rest, aed the outside of the Leaves must be shaded with
Black.
The Green must be of the Sea fort and Masticoat,
very pale, and shaded with Bladder green.
Another sort of lris is laid on with Purple and White,
mixed up with a litile more Carmine than Ultramarine,
and for the shades, but especially for the middle Leaves,
be mindful to diminish the Quantity of White, and on
the contrary to what has been said, let the UItramarine
prevail over the Carmine, expressing Veins with this same
Colour, and leaving in the middle of the Leaves within-
side a small yellow Nervure.
Others there are that have this same Nervure on the
first Leaves, whose end only is bluer than the rest.
Others again are shaded and finished with a redder
Purple, and have also a Nervure in the middle of
the Leaves without ; but it is white and shaded with
Indigo.
Some of them are Yellow, and are done with a lay of
Orpiment and Masticoat, shaded with Gall stone, with
Veins of Bistre on the Upper side of the Leaf.
The Greens of them all, must be of the Sca-colour,
which must be mixed with a little Masticoat for the
Stems and Stalks, and shaded with Bladder-green.
SECT. XV.
OfJESSEMIN.
Is done with a lay of White ; shaded with black and
white. For the outside of the Leaves add a little Bistre. 
giving the half of each, on that side, a faint reddiffi
Cast with Carmine.











Of the TUBEROSE.
Lay on white, and shade with black, and a little
Bistre in some Places ; and for the outside of the Leaves,
mix à little Carmine to give them a reddishi Tint ; par-
ticularly towards the Ends.
The Seed must be Masticoat ; shaded with Bladder-
Green.
The Green of the Leaves and Stalks must Verditer;
shaded with Tris-green.
SECT. XVII.
OF HELLEBORE.
The Flower of Hellebore is done by almost the same
Rules we have given for the Tuberose ; that is, it is laid
on with White, and shaded with Black and Bistre, mak-
ing the outside of the Leaves a little reddishi here and
there.
The Seed must be a deep Green heightened with
Masticoat.
Its Green is sad, and is imitated with be Verditer,
Masticoat, and Bistre ; finished with Iris-green and
Bistre.
SECT. XVIII.
Of the LILT.
Be covered with White, and shade with blaeg and
white.
The Seed ; Orpiment and Gall stone.
The Green ; like that of the Tuberose.
SECT. XIX.
Of the SNOW-DROP,
Cover and finish as for the Lily.
Let the Seed be Masticoat, shaded with Gall. stone.
Let the Green be Verditer and lris.







SECT. XX.
Of the JunQUIL
Lay on Masticoat, and Gall-stone; finish with Gam-
boge, and Gall stone.
The Leaves and Stalks; Sea-green, shaded with Iris-
green,
SECT. XXI.
Te NARCISSUS.
For all of this Flower, of the Yellow sort, whether
double or single, let your first lay be Masticoat, then
Gamboge ; and finish by adding thereto Umber, or Bistre,
excepting however, the Cup or Bell in the middle, which
must be done with Orpiment and Gall-stone, and edged
with Vermillion and Carmine.
For the White sort, be covered with White, and
shade with Black and White ; excepting the Cup afore.
said, which must be done with Masticoat and Gamboge.
The Green ; Sea, shaded with Iris.
SECT. XXII.
The MARIGOLD.
Let your first lay be Masticoat, the second, Gamboge,
and’shade with this last, mingled with some Vermillion.
To finish, add Gall stone and a little Carmine.
The Green ; Verditer, shaded with lris.
’SECT. XXIII.
TheFRENGH MARICOLD.
Lay on, first, Masticoat : secondly, Gamboge; then
proceed with Gall stone mixed with this last; finisn with
this last Colour, adding thereto Bistre, and a very little
Carmine forthe deepest snades.
SECT. XXIV
The AFRICAN MARIGOLD.
Lay on Gamboge ; shade with the same, mixing there-






wth a good deal of Carmine, and a little Gall-stone;
but about the Leaves make an Edging of Gamboge.
very bright in the lights,. and darker in the snades.
The Seed is shaded with Bistre.
The Green of both these last, must be Verditer, shad-
ed with Iris.
SECT. XXV
The SUN FLOWER.
Be coyered with Masticoat and Gamboge, and finisn
with Gall stone and Bistre.
The green must be laid on with Verditer and Masti-
coat; and shaded with Bladder-green.
SECT. XXVI.
The PASS ROSE.
Like the French Marigold, and the Green of the
Leaves the same ;. but their Veins must be of a deeper
Green.
SECT. XXVII.
The SCABIOUS.
There afe two forts of the Scabious, Red and Purple.
The Leaves of the first are Indian lake with a little
White, and in the middle, where there is à large Pod or
Bud which holds the seed, it is to be coloured and finish-
ed with Lake only, but with the Addition of a little
UItramarine or Indigo to make it darker. Then make
little longish spots of White for the upper Part, at a
pretty good Distance from each other ; but forget not to
let them be stronger in the lights and weaker in the shades,
and to make them true in all Directions.
For the others, be covered with a very pale Purple ;
as well on the Leaves, as on the Receptacle or Pod in the
middle ; shadingboth with the same Colour of a deeper
Dye ; and instead of using small white strokes for the
seed, let them be Purple, and make a Round about each,
and that, all over the Pod.





The Green ; Verditer and Masticoat, shaded with Iris
Green.
SECT. XXVIII.
The GLADIOLA.
Lay on Columbin Lake, and White, very pale ; then
proceed and finish with Lake only, very bright in some
Places, and very deep in others, ever adding therete
Bistre for the strongest shades.
The Green ; Verditer, shaded with Iris.
SECT. XXIX.
Tbe LIVER-WORT.
It is sometimes Red, and sometimes blue; for this
last be covered all over with Uitramarine, White, and
a litile Carmine, or Lake ; shade the inside of the Leaves
with this Mixture, but let it be deeper, except for the
outermost ; for which and the outside of all, you must
make an Addition of Indigo and White, that the Coloar
may be deadned.
For the Red ; lay on Columbin Lake, and White,
very pale ; and finish with less White.
The Green ; Verditer, Masticoat, and a little Bistre.
Shade with lris, and a litte Bistre, but chiefly for the
SECT. XXX.
Tbe POME-GRANATE BLOSSOM.
For this, lay on Mine de Plomb, shade with Vermil-
lion and Carmine, and finisn with this last.
The Green ; Verditer and Masticoat, shade with
Iris.
SECT. XXXI.
The Blossom of the INDIAN BEAN.
Lay on Indian Lake and White, shade the middle
Leaves with Lake only ; but thereto add adittle Ultra-
marine for the rest.
The Green, Verditer; shade with lris.







SECT. XXXII.
The LARKS-SPUR, or HEEL.
It is of several Colours, and striped.
The most com¬
mon are Purple, Gridelin, and Red.
SECT. XXXIII.
VIOLETS and PAUNSIES OT PANSIES.
The same may be said of these, except that for these
last, the two middle Leaves are bluer than the rest, that
is, towards the border, for the Infide of these is yellow
with little black Strokes or Veins, which dye away to-
wards the middle.
SECT. XXXIV.
Tbe IMPERIAL LILX.
It is of twe Colours, viz. Yellow, and Red, or Orange-
Colour. For the first be coloured with Orpiment, and
snade with Gall stone and a little Vermillion.
For the seaend be eovered with Orpiment and Vermil-
Tion, and shade with Gall stone and Vermillion, making
the Beginning of the Leaves, next to the Stalk, of Lake
and Bistre, very deep, and for all, Veins of this Mix-
ture along the Leaves.
The Green, Verditer and. Masticoat, shaded with Iris
and Gamboge.
SECT. XXXV
The GILLY.FLOWER.
There are many forts of Gilly-flowers, as White,
Yellow, Purple, and strip'd, streakd, or variegated
with several Colours.
For the White ; be covered with White, and shade
with Black, and a little Indigo for the Heart of the
Leaves.


















For the Yellow ; Masticoat, Gamboge, and GaHl-
stone.
The Purple is done with Purple and White. You
must finisn with leis White, minding to be brighter in
the Heart, and even a little yellowishi.
For the Red; Lake and White, and finish without
white.
For the striped or variegated, lay on white, and va-
riegate sometimes with a Purple, wherein UItramarine
Fredominates ; or sometimes with a Purple wherein Car-
mine prevails, or Lake ; sometimes with white, at o-
ther times without it, fhading the rest of the Leaves with
Indigo.
The Seed of every one must be Verditer and Masticoat
finished with lris.
The Leaves and the Stalks, with the same Green,mix-
ed with lris, to shade with.
I should never have done, were lhere to dwell on all
the Flowers that may be painted; but I have said e-
nough, and even too much, to instruct you fully in this
branch of Painting ; for ten or a dozen Examples had
been sufficient for any oae who should begin to copy Na-
ture herself; for in this Case he has nothing to do bet ta
imitate what he has befgre his Eyes. But l imagin’d it
is more useful to copy after Prints; and that l should un-
dertake no ungrateful Tafk, did l dwell on the method
of colouring and finishing a good Number of Flowers, at
least (to conclude as I began) every one may take or
leave what he sces proper.
SECT. XXXVI.
I shall not here subjoin any particular Instructions on
an infinite Number of other Subjects: for it were to
little or no purpose, and this little Work is already mare
diffuse than lat first intended it. Therefore l only add
in general, that Fruits. Fishes, Serpents, and all sorts of
Reptiles, must be touched after the manner of Figures,
that is, hatched or stippled: But that Birds and all the
other Animals must be finished with strokes after the man-
ner of Flowers.




SECT. XXXVII.
Take heed to use no White Lead for any of these
things, for its is good for nothing but Oil, turning as
black as Ink when tempered with Gum-water only, and
especially if you put your Work in a damp place,
or where Perfumes are. Instead thereof use Ceruse of
Venice, or Flake White, which is to the full as fine ;
fear not to use this, especially for your first Colonrings,
but mix a Portion of it in all your compounds to give
them. a certain Body which strengthens your Work, and
makes it appear warm and mellow.
Painters, however, practise differently upon this Head;
for some use but little of it; and others none at all ; but
the manner of these last is hard and dry. Others again
nse it in abundance, and these are certainly to be follow-
ed, as conforming to the most usual Opinion of the most
skilful Artists ; for besides that it is the most ready, you
may thereby (a thing almost impossible to be done with-
out it) copy all sorts of Pictures, notwithstanding the
contrary Opinion of those, who pretend that in. Minia-
ture you cannot come up to the Strength and the differ-
ent Tints of Pieces in Oil; a mistake, at least with refe-
rence to good Painters, as is sufficiently evinced from the
Effects ; for we see Figures, Landscapes, Portraits, and
every thing else in Miniature, touched in the grand man¬
ner with as much Truth, and as nobly, altho’ more
prettily and delicately than in Oil.
I know indeed this kind of Painting has its Advan-
tages, were they only that it dispatches more in less
time, that it is more easily preserved, and that it claims
to be the eldest Sister, and boasts its Antiquity.
But notwithstanding all this, it must be granted that
Miniature has her Advantages also, and, withont repeat-
ing what lhave already said, it is more neat and conveni-
ent ; you may carry all your Apparatus in your Pocket;
you may work where you please without so much Pre-
paration ; you raay leave it and refume it just when and as
often as you please, which cannot well be practised with
the first, in which you ought hardly ever to work dry.





the other as in Comedy ; in which the greatest or the
least Perfection of the Actors confists not in acting the
higher or lower Parts, but in acting, what they do act,
extreamly well ; for if he who acts the meanest Charac-
ter acquits himself better therein than he who acts the
Heroe of the Play, he will doubtless deserve a greater
measure of Applause.
And the same is it in the Art of Painting ; for its
Excellence is not confined to the Grandeur of one parti-
cular Subject, but to the manner of treating it : Have
you a Talent for this, plunge not yourself rashily into
that; and if you have from Heaven received some Spark
of the Divine Fire, know for what End it was bestowed
on you, nor deviate from the Path cut out for you.
Some shall take the different Airs of Heads, others shall
succeed better in Landscapes ; some shall work finely in
small, who could do little or nothing in great; and others
are good Colourists, but bad Designers; and others, in
short, have a Hand for nothing but Flowers. To con-
clude, the Bassans have rais’d to themselves a Name for
Animals, which they most excellently touched, and
much better than any thing else.
Let every one therefore be contented with his Genius,
nor presumie upon another’s Ground, or attempt a Flight
unequal to his Strength; it being in vain to strive againft
Nature, and- imprudent and immodest in us to aim at
what does not belong to us, for we thereby uncover our
own shame, and work our own disgrace. On the other
Hand, it is no dishonour to you that you are not possess’d
of all the great Talents which have ennobled all the great
Painters, each of whom has had his Blemishes as well as
Bcauties ; let us therefore, l again repeat it, sit down
quietly with the share allotted to us, the great matter is
to cultivate it with Care and Diligence.
And altho’ this small Tract may contribute to your
Assistance, as it asfuredly will, I present it to you as no
other than a Supplement to more immediate Helps :
Doubtless you wiil learn more effectually under the Di-
rection of an able Master, from whom you may imbibe
all the sound Precepts and true Rules, and see all made










plain to you by Practice. Now, altho the Contrivan-
ces for Drawing, which in the beginning l gave vou,
be infallible ; it were much better to have a Hand ex-
pert thereat without any such servile Helps ; for if you
are not actuated by a superior Genins to guide you, and
if you have not a most accurate Eye, in vain will be all
your Pains to adjust your pieces correctly, and it will be
a mere Chance if after all they are not lame and spirit-
less ; for in laying on the Colours, you easily lose
the Strokes, and with far more Difficulty will you be
able to re trace them, if you are quite aukward at Draw¬
l do therefore most earnestly recommend it to al
ing.
Lovers of Painting, that they apply themselves to draw
learnedly, to copy with indefatigable Perseverance, and
that this they always do most tenacioussy from good
Originals : In a Word, be satissy ’d to ascend regularly
by those Steps which lead up to the Perfection of this
fine Art, whose Precepts, as happens in all other Arts,
are soon obtained ; but this is not enough, you must
execute also. Theory is of little worth without Practice,
as Practice without Theory is a blind Guide, who leads
us astray instead of conducting us in the right Road : But
to know well what you would do, and to do well what
you know, is the true Means of attaining your End,
greatly to increase in Knowledge with Time, and to
become the good Scholar of an excellent Master.
For my part, Iboast not of being such ; but however,
I will venture to promise all those who shall be pleased to
step into this my little School, with never so little a dis.
position and longing to learn, That they will have no
Cause to repent themselves in their Trouble; for if they
stay with Pleasure, 1 flatter my self they will not go
out as they came in.







THE
Secret of an Italian
FOR MAKING
Carmine and Ultramarine
AN anonymous Painter, one who appears to have
been a sound and excellent Judge, express him-
u
self to this Effect concerning this Arcanum,

Nothing is more safe or easier than this manner of
making these Colours; they have a Lustre, a Viva-
city not to be expressed, they never change, and may
 be prepared at so easy a Rate, that for one Pistole you
 may make as much as would cost you seven or oight
 at Florence ; but the Proof will confirm what I here
 advance, much more effectually than all l can say.
Carmine.
Take a pound of Brasil-wood from Fernambuco. of the
Golden-colour, and pounding it in a Mortar, steep it for
three or four Days in a Bocal of White-Wine Vinegar;
then boil it for half an Hour, and passing. it through 2
close Cloth, put it again over the Fire. In the mean
time have another Vessel or Pot at hand, in which shall
be eight Ounces of Alom diluted in White-Wine Vine-
gar. which Dilution pour into the other Liquor, and stir
it about with a Spatula : The Froth or Scum which will
hereupon arise, will be your Carmine, collect it there-
fore and drv it. This may be done with Cochineal in-
stead of Brazil wood.
Ultramarine.





Ultramarine.
Take ten Ounces of Linseed Oil, and pour them ina
so an Earthen-dishi. with seven or eight Drops of com-
mon Water, and set it upon the Fire, where let it remain
till it begins to fry or boil, and then throw in a pound of
white Virgin-wax, broken into snall Bits. When the
Wax is melted, throw in a pound of Greek Piich, and
add thereto four Qunces of powder of Mastick, which
has been previoussy melted by it self, together with two
Ounces of Turpentine, and let the whole melt over the
Fire for an Hour together. The Hour expired, pour this
Composition into cold Water, and if it prove soft like
Butter it is enough ; but if you feel any hard Grains or
Grit, conclude that your Mastick is not sufficiently melt-
ed, and clap it over the Fire again.
The whole being in due temper, put blue Lapis into a
Crucible, and let it remain in the Fire till it be red hot
like the Fire itself, and then throw it into White-Wine
Vinegar, which it will absorb till it burst and break into
small Bits, which bray to a Powder, and then incorpo-
rate this powder with a little of the above Composition,
but let it be as little as possible, and let it remain thus for
about a Fortnight. After this lay a Board, a little in-
clined, upon the Edge of a Table, (it would be the more
convenient if this Board had a Trench or Channel cut
along it ;) and under the Foot of this Board place a Glass
Vestel or Receiver, and put your blue Paste at the Head
of it, and above the same, place a Vessel of Water, so
that it may distil drop by drop upon the Paste. All
things being disposed in this manner, help the Water to
dilute the Paste by stirring it very gently with the small
The first Blue which will come
End of a fmooth Stick.
away drop by drop, will prove the finest; and when
you perceive it to lose of its Beauty, change the Recipi-
ent for another, to receive the second Blue, after which
yau will have a third, which you may use very sasely.
Set these three forts of Uitramarine to dry, then collect
them, and put them up separately in Bags of White
Leather.







OTHER
SECRETS
FOR
Making Ultramarine after dif-
ferent Ways; Fine Lakes, and Colom-
bine Lakes , Greens, and other Colours,
after different Ways; particularly adapt-
ed to Miniature.

ULTRAMARINE.
TAKE half a Pound of Lapis Lazuli, and lay
it upon burning Coals, where let it remain till
I
it be red hot, and then quench it in very strong
Vinegar. Afterwards, grind it upon some hard Marble
or Stone, with rectifi-d Brandy ; the more you grind it
the siner will be your-Uitramarine; and being ground
to your mind, leave it upon the Marble, or put it into
some Vessel, while you prepare your Paste, or Pastel,
wherewith to incorporate your said Lapis.
To make this paste, take a quarter of a pound of yel-
low Wax, a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, as much
Rofin, and as much Linseed-oil ; melt them all together
over a slow Fire, and when they begin to bubble, they
will be sufficiently done. Pour this melted Compofition
into glazed Pans, and it will be your Ultramarine, Pa-
stel or Paste, of which take a Quantity, equal to that of





your Lapis, and knead them together upon your Marble,
that is, your Lapis and Pastel together, which being in-
corporated, leave them in that State for a Night. To
force out the Uitramarine in the said Pastel, pour fair
Water upon it, and knead it with your Hands, like so
much Dough, and the Uitramarine will squeeze out and
fall into a Pot, which must stand under your Hands to
receive it ; leave it then to settle in the said Water, till
you perceive the Ultramarine to be subsided.
Another Way.
Take four Ounces of Linseed Oil, four Ounces of new
Wax, four Ounces of Arganson, one Ounce of Rosin,
one Ounce of Mastic in Tears, four Ounces of Burgun-
dy-pitch, two Drams of Incense or Frankincenie, and
two Drams of Dragon’s Blood ; bruise each Ingredient,
by. it self in a Mortar; then put your Linseed-Oil in a
pan over the Fire, and when it begins to fry, throw in
your Ingredients one after the other, so that your Dra-
gon’s Blood be the last thrown in ; in the mean time, con¬
tinually stirring the others with a Stick or Spatula, and
when the whole becomes glutinou: and stringy between
your Fingers, your paste is fit for Use. Then throw
in your Lapis Lazuli, having previoussy burnt it in a
Coal fire, quenched it in White Wine-Vinegar, ground
it when dry upon aMarble, and païs’d it through a very
fine Sive, as has been before specified ; your Lapis thus
prepared, and then incorporated with your pasté, leave
it in that State for twenty-four Hours, and then force
out your Uitramarine with Spring Water, but use no
other, and knead well your paste wich this said Water ;
you will then have the first Tincture or Degree of your
Biue, which will be the sinest and most lively of all ; con¬
tinue this to the third Repetition ; and if after all, you
throw the Remains into a proper chemical Vessel, you
may have the Gold with which vour Lapis was impreg-
nated.
Some theré are who knead their paste, at once, in a
Vessel of milk warm Water, into which they squeeze
their Ultramarine, which they leave to settle for twen ty-
four Hours and more, when poaring off the Water by
Inclination,




Inclination, they find the UItramarine at bottom, and
set it to dry in the Sun. Sometimes they leave the La-
pis incorporated in the paste for the space of a Month,
before they express or squeeze out the-Uitramarine, and
in the said paste, instead of Linseed Oil and Turpentine.
substitute only Oil of Turpentine, and black Pitch instead
of Burgundy. pitch; as sor the Lapis itself, they heat it,
quench it, grind it, and searze it, in the manner we have directed above.
Fine Lake.
Take a pound of good Brazil, which boil with three
Quarts of Lye, made of the Ashes of Vine-sprigs, till
it be half evaporated, then let it settle and strain it off.
Boil it over again with fresn Brasil, Cochineal, and
Terra-merita ; that is, only half a pound of Brasil, and
half a quarter of a pound of Cochineal, with the fur-
ther Addition of another Quart of fair Water, which
must boil till it be also balf evaporated as before, then
left to settle, and then strained. as for the Terra-merita,
you need have but an Ounce of that. When you take
this Liquid from the Fire, observe to throw into it an
Ounce of burnt Alom, reduc’d to an impalpable powder,
and dissolve the same therein by stirring it with a Stick,
and adding thereto half a Dram of Arsenic. Then to
give it a Body take two Cuttle-fisn Bones, pulverize them
and throw them in ; leave it to dry up at leisure, and
then grind it with a good Quantity of fair Water, in
which leave it to steep; then strain it thro a Cloth, and
make it up into small Tablets or Cakes, which set to dry
on a Card or Pasteboad. If you would have your Lake
redder, add to it Lemon Juice ; and if you would have
it deeper, add to it Oil of Tartar.
Another Lake.
Take Shavings or Sheatings of Scarlet, and boil them
in a Lye of the Asnies of burnt Tartar or Oil of Tartar,
which Lye has the property of separating the Scarlet;
when it has hoiled sufficiently take it off, and add to it
Cochineal, Mastick in powder, and a little Roch Alom ;
boil the whole over again, and while it is het, strain






it two or three times through a Jelly-Bag, the first time
squeezing the Bag from top to bottom with two sticks ;
then take out what remains behind in the Bag and wasti
it well ; pass the Liquor you express’d with the sticks
thro’ the Bag again, and you will have a paste stick ing
to the sides of the Bag, which you may spread out up-
on a Paste- board, or divide into small Parcels upon paper;
and leave it to dry.
Columbine-lake.
Take three Quarts of the most subtily distill'd Vine-
gar, one pound of the finest Brasil-wood of Feraambuco,
which rasp and set it to steep in the said Vinegar a
Month at least, and if longer so much the better; then
boil the Whole in Balneo Mariae, three or four wabbles
dp, and leave it for a day or two ; after which prepare
a quarter part of Alom-powder, which put into a very
clean Earthen-pan, and upon it strain your Liquor throt
a Cloth, and so let it remain for a Day ; then heat the
Whole till it fimmers, and leaving it again for twenty-
and thereupon pour your Liquor which must be a little
warm ; stir then the whole with a stick till it is cool,
and leave it again for twenty-four hours before you
strain it: Observe that you must previoussy strain it up-
on the Alom. before you pour it upon the Cuttle-fisn Bone.
The Mare or Dregs of Columbine-lake.
To make a fine purple Colour, befides the Carmine
for Oil and for Distemper, take the Dregs or Mare of
the Columbine lake which subsides with the Cuttle sisn
Bone, and dry it and grind it ; there is no sine Lake so
splendid, and if you mix it with Lake you add to its body.
lris Green.
Take of the blueft Flower-de. luces, otberwise called
Flag.Iris ; strip off the upper or sattin part of them, and
keep only that ; the rest is good for naught, and throw
away even all the little yellow Nervures, pound them in
a Mortar what you thus pick, and being well pounded,
throw upon it à little Water, three or four Spoonfuls,
more







more or less, according to your quantity of Flowers :
Previons to this you must have dissolved in this Water
a little Alom and Gum-Arabic, but a very little, and
then bray them well all together, and strain the whole
thro a close Cloth, and put this Juice into Shells which
dry in the Air.
Another Way.
After you have pick'd the above-mentioned Flowers,
pound them, and put to them a little Alom-water, as
above directed ; throu in a liule powder of quick Lime,
as if you was salting a Sallad ; it has the property of
changing the Colour and cleansing it : In fine, express
the Juice into Shells.
Anotber Way.
Pound the same Flowers in a Mortar, expreis the
Juice into Shells, and salt the Juice in each Shell with
Alom a little unequally; that you may thence have
Greens of different shades.
Anotber Way still better.
e
Pound Alom, and bruise French or Avigaen Berriss,
 
tuia them together with Water, and boil them ei. her 6¬
ver a Fire or an Affi-heat till the Water become very
Yellow’; then pound Flower-de-luces or the Flag-lris in
a Mortar, and pour thereto à little of this yellow Wa-
ter, in proportion as you would have it a bright Green
or a sad Green ; then strain it thro a Cloth of Goats
Hair, for it would be the worse for passing thro Linen,
and put the Juice so strained or express’d into large Shells,
which expole to all the Heat of the Sun, sor the Green
will become mouldly or mothery in the shade, and prove
too clammy.
Another Way.
Take Leaves of the Flag-lris, mince them very small,
and put them into some Glafs ar Earthen Vessel, or
what would do better, in some Copper pot or pan with
powdered Alom and quick Lime; leave them to putrisy
in this state for ten or twelve Days ; being rotten squceze
them into Shells. The Green  is more lively and rich
when you only bray the Leaves, and express them at
once




once without giving them time to rot, having previously
salted them over with powdered Alom.
Anotber Way aith the Flower of Violes.
The Green made of the Leaf of the March Violet is
done by the same Method, but you must have a greater
Quantity of it, and this is a deeper Green than that of
the Iris. Observe that instead of Lime you may use
French Berries bruised with Alom. It exceeds Lime for
changing Blae into Green.
You may also make a Green with the Flowers of Pan-
sies, after the same manner.
Bladder-Green.
Take the Fruit or Berry of the Plant or Bramble call'd
Rhamnus, poand it in a Morter, anctbrow into it à little
powdered Alom ; then express the Juice of it, and put it
up in a Bladder, which tye close and leave it to dry till
your Green is hard.
French Pink.
It is commonly made with the White of Troye, Sther-
wile call Spaniss White, and French ot Avignon Berries,
but it is apt to change Colour; so that it will be safer to
make it of white Lead or Ceruse, which grind very fine
and dilute it upon a Marble, whence take it up with a
wooden Spatula, and leave it to dry in the shady part of
any Room; then take French Berries, bruise them in a
Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and boil them with
Water in a leaded Earthen-pot, till a third or more be
evaporated ; strain this Decoction thro’ a Linnen- cloth,
and put into it the bignes, of two or three small Nuts of
Alom to hinder it from changing colour ; when it is dis-
solved, dilute the White with this Decoction to the Con--
sistence of a pretty thick pap, or rather paste, which
work well between your Hands and make up into Tro-
chisks, which set to dry in an airy Room ; when it is dry
dilute it again two or three times with the said Decoction
according as you woald have your Pink bright or deep
and leave it to dry each time till it be very dry. Observe
that your Liquor or Decoction must be warm when you
dilute your paste therewith, and that you must make it
afresti




afresh wben the first is tainted, taking heed hever to
touch it with lron or Steel, but all along use a wooden
Spatula.
How to make a rigbt Use of Alom.
The best way of using Alom for lris-Green, and the
other Compositions of colours, which would change
without this Mineral, is to break it small and to pat
it into à little Water over a Fire, sor otherwise it
would never dissolve; and with this Water sprinkle o-
ver your Flowers on the Juice of your colours ; but the
less Alom the better, for it burns when it is used too
freely.
How te purify Vermillion.
Cinnabar or Vermillion being a compound of Mer-
cury and Sulphur, must be divested of the Impurities it
contracts from those Minerals, which Imparities darken
its Lustre, and causeit to change. Now this purificati-
on is thus ordered.
Grind the Cinnabar, in Stone, with fair Water upon
a Marble or Porphyry ; put it into a Glass or earthen
Vessel to dry, then put Urine toit and mix it, so that
it be thoroughly wet and swim : Letit settle then, and
the Cinnabar being precipitated or fallen, pour off the
Urine by Inelination, and put frefhi in the Room of it,
leaving it so all Night, and repeating the same Change
for sour or five days till the Ciunabar be thoroughly
purified. Continue your Process with beating up the:
White of an Egg, which mixing with sair Water, pour
it upon your Cinnabar, and stir the whole about with
a Walnut tree-stick ; change this Liquor two or three
Times as above, and keep the Vessel well stopped up
or closely covered tor fear of dust, which would spoil
-your Cinnabar; and when you would use it, temper
it with Gum-water; with this it will not change its
colour.
Another Way.
Grind Cinnabar, previoussy pulverized, upon a Pro-
phyry with the Urine of a child, or with Brandy, and
dry it in the shade.






If vou would entirely divest it of all its Obscurity,
and give it-a brighter or redder countenance, infuse in
the Brandy either Urine or a little Saffron, and with this
Liquor grind your Cinnabar.

A MEMORANDUM,
For making a verp fine poliss d Gold.
The Pieces of Wood you would gild, whether Frames,
Borders, or ought else, must be very smooth-; and to
make them the more so, païs Sez-dog’s-skin over them.
Then you must glue or size it with a stuff made of the
cuttings. of white Gloves, and lay on nine or ten layers
of White when it is thoroughly dry. When it is per-
fectly dry use your Shave Grass that it may be so much
the kinder, and then warm some Size and Water, into
which dip a fine piece of Linnen, which wring, and
with it rub the White. Then lay on two or three layers
of Gold-colour, and more if it be not of a good Body
or deep enough ; and when it is dry, rub it soundly
with a dry Cloth till it be bright again. Then take of
the strongest Brandy you can find, and wasn the Gold-
colour with this Brandy by the help of a pencil : but you
must have your Leaf Gold cut and ready upon the
Cushion to clap it on the Moment the pencil is gone over
the part ; and when it is dry, polisn it with a Dog’s
Tooth.
Te make Glove leather Size.
Take a pound of the cuttings of white Gloves, and
let it steep in Water some time ; then boil it in a Pot
with twelve Quarts of Water, till it be reduced eo two
Quarts ; then strain it thro’ a Cloth into a new Earthen-
pan. To know if your Size is strong enough, try when
it is cooled, if it feels firn; under your Hand.





To make the White.
The Size being done, take Crayon White, and serape
it with a Knite, or grind it upon a Marbie; melt and
heat your Size to a violent degree ; then taking it trom
the Fire, throw in White enongh to give it the confist-
ence of a pap, leave it to infuse for a quarter of an Hour,
then stir and mix it wich a Hog’s Hair Brush.
Take this White and add more Size to it, that it may
be the thinner lor the first and second goings over.
Observe that your first Lay be dry belore you cover it
with the second ; ifit be Wood vou are upon, it will re-
quire a twelve-fold Repetition, but for Pastboard six or
seven will be enoagh.
This done, take Water, and into it dip a soft Brufh
and strain it between your Hande or Fiagers, and rub
your Work over with it, to make it lye more even ; as
soon as your Brushi is full of White, you must wash it
over again, and even change your Water, when it is too
white.
Vou may sometimes use a wet Cloath instead of a
Brush.
Your Work being smooth and even, let it dry, and
when it is dry, rub it over with shave Grass, or a piece
of new Cloth, to make it the kinder.
How to lay on a Ground to Giid and Silver upon, after a
different manner.
Take a Quarter of a pound of fine Bole Armoniac
well chosen, fresn, and greasy to the Touch ; -steep it in
Water to make it dissolve, then grind it, adding thereto
the Bigness of a Filberd of Crayon, and of a Pea of Tal-
low, which prepare this :
Melt them, then throw them into fresh Water, and
therein work them with you Hands to fit them for Use ;
the Size of a Peai s enough for one grinding.
In grinding you throw a little Soap-suds among the
Bole. This compound being ground, put it into fair
Water, which change from Time to Time to preserve it.
When you would use it, temper it with warm’d Size,
and if it prove as strong as what you whitened with,
put in a third of Water, and mix it with the Bole,
which





which you shall make of the Thickness of a Cream ;
then lay it on your work with a pencil, and go over the
whole with it three or four times, leaving it each time
to dry before you go over it again ; being finished and
dry, rub it with a soft Cloth, before you proceed to lay
on your Gold or Silver.
When vou use this Ground for Gold, you must add
a little Red Lead to it.
How to lay on the Gold and Silver.
Set your piece slanting, and wet a part with a large
pencil dipped in fair Water, then lay on the Gold,
which must be ready cut apon à Leathern cushion,
whence- you may take it up with Cotton. The whole
being gilt. leave it to dry, but neither in the Wind nor
Sun, and being sufficiently dry, burnifh it with a Dog’s
Tooth.
To know when it is in dne temper, pafs the Dog'e
Tooth over it in some little places ; and if it does not
rub kindly, but peels off, it is not dry enongh.
On the other Hand, take care that it be not too dry,
for you will have so much the more Trouble in polishing
it, and after all your pains, it will not be so bright as
y ou may wishi it. In great Heats three or four Hours
drying is enough ; but sometimes it requires à Day and
a Night.
To Mats Gold.
Make a Red with Red Lead, a little Vermillion and
the White of an Egg well beaten ap; grind the whole
upon a Marble, and clap it into the deep or hallow Pla-
ces with a fine Pencil.
To Matt Silver
Take White of Ceruse, grind it with Water, and then
temper it with schthyocolla or Fisni-Glue, or else
Glove size very fine ; the first is most beautiful ; you
are to lay it with a Pencil upon the places you would
Matt.





To make Sbell-Gold and Shell.-Silver.
Pat Leaf-Gold upon a clean Marble, according to the
Quantity you would have, and grind it with Honey just
out of the Hive, or very pure, till it be extremely soft
under your Hand ; then throw it into a Glass of fair
Water, and stir it, and change the Water till it be very
clear or fine. Then pour it into about a Penny worth
of Aquafortis, and there let it remain two Days ; take
out your Gold, and your Aquafortis may serve another
time. The same may be done with Silver.
When vou would lay on either the one or the other,
temper it with oné or two Drops of a very thin Gum-
water, and to give it the smoother Face, let your Wa-
ter be soap'd. It is proper also that you should have
a Wash of Gall-stone under your Gold ; it sets it off
mach.
You must be very sparing of your Gold and Silver
when you work in Miniature, excepting the Borders
round your Work ; because it savours too strongly of
the Golden Image of Baal.
FINIS.

















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































