



  o 


F  
 it 
2

2

 ty
3
Fn 
it

3
E
T
S 
s
as 

3
i
29
F



2&D
IA
OF THE


  d

eafured from the moft Beautiful
D

L 2 42 

21
IIULLLUl 12

R AN.
ENGR A VER to the late King of FRANCE,
Done from the ORICINALs Engraved at PARl S.
On TWENTY-SEVEN TAkee Fle COPPER-PLATES.
15. The Statue of Venus Apbrodites, belonging to
1. The Statue of Laocoon; this Figure was cut out of
the Family of the MEDICIS.
nc tirie d Ritte, andonte Cericon
The same Statue.
three famoussculptors, ACEsANDER, POL YDORUs,
16.
This Statipe
17. Apoilo Pythins thooting his Arrows.
and ATHENODORUs. Plin. lib. xxxvi. chas. v.
15 in the Garden of the Vatican of Rome.
Side View of the fame Statue.
2.
A fide View of the same Statue.
18.
2. Another View of the fame Statue.
Another View of the same Statue.
19.
a. Another View of the same Statue.
Another View of the same Statue.
20.
5. The Statue of Hercules, called the Farnesian; by
An Antique Fragment.
22.
Glicon, a Grecian Statuary.
Thre Fnine of Rirmite in the Lnspripan Carder
22.
o. Te tire Firnt Mens Eeman
2t Rome.
7. Another View of the fame Statue.
The Jame Statue.
8. Pyramus in the Ludevifian Garden.
23.
The Greater of Laocoon’s Children.
24.
9. Another View of the fame Statue.
Another of Laocoons Children.
25.
10. The Term, an Exybtian viece of Work.
The Parts of the Face of the Statue of Venus,
20.
11. The Starue of Antinous.
meafured in their natural Bignels.
12. Another View of the fame Statue.
The Parts of the Face of the Statue of Apolle,
27.
13. The Grecian Peace.
meafured in their natural Bigness.
14. The Grecian Shepberdess.





0



35
3
.
8

C ARINGTON BOW L ES, at his Mas and Print Warebouse, 2½
Printed for the Probrietor
12. 
2
2.7

3
No. 69, St. Pauls Church Tard, London.

3


it


2.9.


1
95

3.7
FK
1

77


28
S


TUST PUBLISHED,
s
F



S
2


F
BOWLESs Pasions of the Soul; reprefented in feveral Hleads engraved in the Manner of Drawings in Chalk from

Tis er 
5
hs Fit
DrFC. ApSos
25

the Deligns of the late celebrared Monsieur le Bran, on 20 Folio Copper-Plates: EEfh
 pe
12.
455
C
B

 
Sis n

 


Cst Fi






Tn
r
2

Teen o a  

er
ies
 



3










T H E
H 0
P
RS
A D
R E F
 C Bo
HERE will be, I think, but little occafion to en-
themfelves from this Perplexity. Some of thefe Difficulcies
8
large upon the Neceffity of a perfect Knowledge
were not fuch to them, and they have perfectly underffood
of the PROPORTIONs, to every Perfon converfant
how to furmount the others.
in Defigning; it being very well known, that
FiRsT, as to thofe which regard the Country, they worked

without obferving them they can make nothing
in Greeceand Ialy. Wekrowthatthe one abounded with Beau-
but monftrous and extravagant Figures.
ties; and the other, being the Miftress of the World, every
Eveny one agrees to this Maxim generally confidered, but
thing that was beautiful and curious came there from all Parts.
every one puts it differently in Practice; and here lies the
As to their Temper and Paftions, without doubt they
Difficulty, to find certain Rules for the Jultacts and Noble-
were subject to them as well as we; indeed, a natural Inten-
nets of the Proportions; which, fince Opinions are divided,
fibility would be no very happy Difpofition for an Artiff; and
may fland as an infallible Guide, upon whofe Judgment we
his Works would hardly elcape having a Teint of this extreme
Coldness: but however thefe great Men did not fuffer them-
may rely with Certainty.
This appears at firft very eafy: for fince the Perfection of
felves to to be drawn afide by their Paffions, as not to obferve
Artconfifts in imitaring Narure well, it feems as if we need
what was to be avoided and practifed according to the differ-
confult no other Matter, buronly work after the Life; never-
eat Charalters of their Figures; and that with to much Exact=
thelefs, if we examine the Matter farther, we shall find,
ness, that no one in to many Ages has yet been able to artain
that high Perfection they gave their Works.
that very few Men, or perhaps none, have all their Parts in
WE may boldly fay, that they have in some fort excelled
exact Proportion without any Defect. We muft therefore
Nature; for though it be true, that really they have only
chule what is beauriful in each, taking only what is called the
Beautiful Nature. But who will fay that he has himself Dif-
imitated her; that muft be underffood of each Part in parti-
cernment enough, not to be mittaken in fuch a Choice 3
cular, but not of the Whole together; and there never was
OUR greateft Mafters find themfelves at a Loss in this
any Man to perfect in all his Parts as some of their Figures.
Matter, and often difagree; they form to themfelves different
They have imitared the Arms of one, the Legs of another,
Ideas of Beauty, which they generally regulare according to
collecting thus in one Figure all the Beauries which agreed
to the Subject they reprefented, as we fee in the Hercuies all
their Country and Temper.
the Strokes that are Marks of Strength; and in the Venus
I fay according to their Country; for fince all Men, in
all the Delicacy and Graces that can form an accomplifhed
their Air and Manners, have much in them of the Climare
Beauty. They (pared neither Time nor Care; there have
where they were born, the Painters from their particular
been some that have worked their whole lives in view of pro-
Custos from the Objects that are continually before their Eyes,

ducing one perfect Figure.
with which they fo fill their imaginations, as to make all their
To animate them they had three powerful Motives, Re-
Figures conformable to them.
ligion, Glory, and Intereft. They confidered it as a kind of
HENcE it comes that we give a Charalter of Painters by
religious Worship to give the Figures of their Gods fo
the name of certain Countries, faying, the Piece is of the
much Nobleness and Beaury, as to be able to attract the
Custo of fuch a Country; and indeed this Guste is always found,
Love and Veneration of the People. Their own Glory was
more or less, in all the Defigners of thofe Nations.
concerned, particular Hfonours being bellowed on those that
As to our Temper, that acts ftill more powerfully in us.
tuccceded. And as to their Fortune, they had no farther Care
He is that, which makes the moft effential Diftinction between
to take, when they were arrived to a certain Degree of Merit.
tone Man and another, and has a Part in every thing we do.
BESIDE thefe Realons, which have the moft contribured
in this fenfe we may fay, that a Painter paints himself in his
to form thefe excellent Men, it is certain there are happy Ages
Works; and if we had Penetration enough, we might there
like thofe of Alexender and Auguffus. Welive at prefent under
find his moft prevailing inclinations. A fecret Prejudice
a Reign like theirs, where we fee the Arts ffounthing in such
Born with us, the Reafon of which we many times do not
know, is generally that which determines our Choice, and a Manner, as there is Reafon to hope that they may artain
caufes us to make our Figures agreeable to the Air of thofe at laft to the Perfection of the Greefs and Romans in their
moft finifhed Works.
Perfons we have moft Inclnation to.
HowEvER, the high Etteem we have for the Ancients,
THERE are Some Painters, in whole Works their Temper
though well grounded, muft not make us blindly admire all
is to remarkable, that it is impoftible to be miftaken in it.
the Antique; FiguresthereisReafonrobelieve, thatastherewere
We have had some that have been carried by their Inclinations
MMafters, to there were Scholars too, fome of whofe Works
tonly to pleafant Subjects, fuch as Diane bathing, the Sports
have been brought down to us, though they do not indeed
of Nymphs, and the like; others always choofe difagreeable
deferve the Care that has been taken to preferve them.
Subjelts, as Sorceries, Aparitions of Gholls, and fuch
Therefore among the great Number there is of them, I have
Things as are frightful and cerrible.
only chofe thofe that have the moft univerial Approbarion,
ir we were to take the Pains to observe them according to
and which the greateff Defigners look upon with Admiration;
this Remark, we shall find that their ways of living agreed
and allow to be the moft certain Models to work after.
with their Works, and that the Character of their Dispolition
Toun principal Study being to be made upon thefe Figures,
might be found, not only in the Choice of the Subjects, but
it may be proper to mencion to you, that in the beft of them
yet farther, in each Figure in particular.
we obterve certain Things which would certainly be counted
LET us add, to to many Prejudices which we have from
Faules if they were in the Works of a Modern. TheLeft
ourfeives, thofe which proceed from our Mafter, of whofe
Leg of the Laocoon, pag. 1, is Four Minutes longer than the
Manner we almoft always recain fomething. Upon which
other; the Left Leg of the Apolle, pes. 17, is about Nine
we may observe by the by, that what is called a Manner,
Minuceslonger than the Right. Thar Leg of the Vents, pas.
in Painting, is generally a Fault; it being commonly only
15, that bends, is almoff a Part and Three Minures longer
some particular Agreeableness with which we are fo much
than that which bears the Body. The Right Leg of the
pleated as to load it with Excess; by doing which, we have
greater of Laocoon’s Children, pay. 24, is near Nine Minures
paffed the juft Point of that Truch which all the World feeks,
longer than the Left.
and to which it is to difficult to artain.
Veneration
NEVERTHELESS, I cannot forbear having a
WHaT can a Deligner do amidft all thefe Difficulties? I
even for thefe feeming Faules; I believe the Scuipiors had
fee nothing but the Antique in which we can place an entire
7
their Reafons for them, and that it would be Rathricfeco

The Sculpiors who have left us thofe beautiful
Confidence.
.
demn them; How can we think that rher.
Figures which remain to this Day, have happily ditengaged


F

m






7



   h  y a n o theat atte oe  

THE AUTHORS PREFA C E.
I have caolen Figures of different Characiers, and meafur.
Eave been the Authors of Works that may be called perfect,
ed them on feveral sides, that you may find in one or in the
should fall into fuch gross Mistakes as thefe I have been speak-
other fomething that may be ufeful to you. I have dispoted
ing ef, if they had not been done with Defign?
my Meafures in fuch a Manner, that you may make ufe of
AMONc feveral Confiderations with which we are not ac-
them wharever Profeffion you are of, where there is occafion
quainted, one of them is likely to be the Fore-thorrening.
for Drawing.
I take the Matter to be thus: Thefe figures was made to be
Ir you are a Sculpior, you will eafity find more than ano-
fet in Places where they were chiefly to be viewed from certain
ther, tuch things as may be of most Service to know; for fince
Sides, with Heights and Diftances that might change the Ap-
your Art counterfeits nothing, and repretents the Figures
pearances of the Object; the Parts we have taken Notice
with theirreal Dimentions, you may meature with the Com-
of being Fore-shorrened would have feemed defective, and
paffes any Place about which vou have any Doubt.
it was that, 1 fuppole, that obliged them to make them
Ir you are a Painter, or Grover, you will find likewife
longer; whence we may draw an importanf Contequence,
many ufeful things; becaute, in wharever View a Figure pre-
which is, that where a Figure is to be viewed on all Sides,
tenes ittelf, there are always many meafurable Purts. I have
and at a Diftance, that gives us leave to examine it thorougly,
befides in eared Two Ways of meafuring different from the
we muft make the Proportions fuch as we find them in the
Common; one will ferve for the parts that go off, you will
Antigte, in thofe Parts that are feen without Fore-fhorining;
find it in the Seventh Plare; and the other to meafure the
but if the Figure be placed where it can be viewed only at
fore-thorrned Parts in the Righteenth Plare.
such Places and Diffances as hide some Part from the Eyc;
I coniels,
you would perplex very much the greatest part
in that Cafe, it would have good Effect, (if it is not neceffa-
of Painters,
if you were to meafure their Works with the
ry) co put in Practice thofe ingenious Artifices of which the
Compaffes in all the Flaces that can be meafured; feveral fave
Ancients have made fuch a happy Ofe.
themfelves by the help of the Graces of Painting; but let us
I proposed to myself to make this Work larger, by adding
not harter ourtelves, neither the Livelinets of the Colouring,
the same Figures shadowed with as much Gusto and Correct-
nor the Richness of the Difpeficons, nor the frongeft Ex-
nets as I could, and sbove all, according to my Meafures;
but being preffed to give it to the Public, for the Benefit of
prellion, will make a beautirul Whole, except they are fut-
the Studious, I thought I ought not to put ir off any longer;
tained by the Correctness of the Drawing. However, letnot
that difcourage you; for though few Pictures will bear fuch
the rather becaute all that is neceftary is here, and the reft
an Examination, yet we may ufe all the Severiry of the Com-
would only forve for Encertanment. I muft only advercife
palies to the Works of Rapheel, Hannabel Cerracci, Peuffin,
you, that theie Figures not being thadowed, and the Places
and fone of our moft famous fffafters; we even know fome
which would appear round, prefenting nothing but a flat
at this Day with whom we may ute this way; their Modelty
Surface, you may chance to think them fhere; bur trouble
forbids my naming them; their Works make them fuffici-
not yourtelf with that Doubt; they are in the molt elegant
ently knowr; examine them well; you will find Painters
Proportions; if you doubt of it, draw one of them in the
whofe Pictures are juft in all their Proportions by Ourlines
Jame Meafures I have marked, fhadow it renderly, and you
Both correct and graceful.
will have a very light Figure.
WHIEN I give luch great Commendaions to those Painters
DIPTERENT Books have been written upon this subject; it
whole Works may be meatured, I do not mean to make you
teems to me, that feveral of thofe that have treated of Ii, have
spend too much Time in meafuring your Figures with the
affected to make themfelves Hleads of a Sect, by giving fuch
Compaffes, which would certainly hinder your Progress in
Meafures as pleated themfelves, withour relying on any Au=
Drawing; but you may ule the Compaffes and my Meafures,
thority. I believe they are millaken, it is your part to judge;
whenever you have any Difficulty about the Proportions;
compare their Proportions with mine, delign the fame Figure
then having informed your Judgment feveral times, it will
according to the different Rules, and you will fee the Elicct.
become natural to you, and you will gera Habir of obferving
OTHERS having firft drawn Figures very regular and of a
them regula:ly without the Compaifes.
good Gufto by Sight, after the Antique, have afterwards mea-
Is the lall Place, do not take it ill that I speak well of my
fured the Starues to find the Proportions, which not being
own Work, the principal Honour is not for me, it is the
done with all the Exactnets neceflary, their tyrirings did not
Antigue I commend. The Antigue prefents me admirable
agree with their Figures.
Works; I make them my principal Study, I am obliged to
I have endeavoured equally to avoid thefe two Faules. I
it for the lerle I know; I colicet the eatures that I may the
give you nothing of mylelf; every thing is taken from the
better examine the Beauries, and now offer them to you,
Antigue: but I have drawn nothing upon the Paper rill I had
firft marked all the Meafures with the Compaffes, in order to hoping you will find as much Benefit by them, as can be got-f
ten from them.
make the Out Lines fall juft according to the Numbers.
A D VER T TSEME N T.
7
The Meefures of the Whole are regulated by those of the Hlead
V erder to understand these Measures and their UUse, it ceill
according to the usual Wetbed. The Head is divided into foml
I be necesfary to know, that it is the Manner of good
Parts, one of which reacbes from the lower part of the Ckid
Painters and Sculpiors, to make their Figares a little bending,
to the lower Part of the Nose; anotber, from the lower to the
to give them an Appearance of Freedom and Gracefulness; and
upper part of the Nose between the Eye-brcus; a third, from
almost all the Antique Stetues are in this Manner, more or less,
between the Rre-brows to the Heirs upon the Forehead; and if
as the different Subjects require. The places where this bending
fourth, from thence to the top of the Heed. Rach Part is divil
is made, are, the Knees, the Loins, and the Head; which bowever
ded into twelve Minules, end the Ninates into Halfs, Thirdil
in some Figures is but very little, as in the Apollo which is almost
and Quarters. For example, P. fizzifies a Part, M. a Minuled
bright; but in otbers, as the Antinous, amounts to about one.
W½, half a Mince, M½, one third of a Minute, WiL.
Part ten Ninates. Therefore when we say that a Figure bas so
quarter of a Minate. It is to be observed, that wken I marl
much in Height, it is not meant, that the Statue measured from
balf a Ninate it is thas, 8d;, and wben a Minate end balf
the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Feot, in the Attiiude
thus IN ½. The figure celled the Grecian Peace, is Meca
it is in, has so mach Height as we give it, but it is to be under-
sured by Feet, Inches, and Lines, for greater Exactness, it bein;
Rtood, (upposing the Figure to stand upright, and equally poized
very small; but you will find that it agrees enirely with the otha
on both Feel, that then it would have the Height we set down.
way of measuring; and that the Length of this Figure, wbich
This being supposed, I have measured these Figures according
comes to Forty-five Inches seven Lines, is juf 30 Parts of th
in the Height they would have if they ftoed upright; I have
-thus places where the Parts appear less than they are,
Head; so that you may redace year Nieefures te such  RIckS
as you shalf like best.
iale Meafures from these parts which ap.






