


BOWLES’S,

Art of Painting
I N
WATERGOLOURS;
EXEMPLIEIED IN
LANDSCAPES, FLOWERS, &c.
TOGETHER WITH
INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
PAINTING on GLASS and in GRAYONS;
Explained in a full and familiar Manner.
WITH
Particular DIRECTIONs for preparing the COLOURS,
agreeable to the Practice of the most eminent Masters,
By the AuthOR of
BOWLES’S ARTIST’S ASSISTANT. 
THE NINTH EDITION,
Corrected and greatly Improved with Additions.
Priated for and sold by the Proprietor CARInGTON BOWLRS,
At bis MAP and PRINT WAREHOUSE,
No. 69, St. Paul's Chuarch Terd.
1787.




























































PREFACE.


well asfured it contains sufficient in¬
STRUCTIONS FOR THE HOLE ART OF PAINTING in
Water Colours, on Glass, &c. and as it
includes the latest, and consequently the
most useful discoveries, with the greatest
variety of new cheap, and approved re-
ceipts for mixing the colours, and laying
them on to the best advantage. Considera-
tions which make all apologies for pub-
To
lishing it needless and superfluous.
enter into the singular beauties the Noble
Art of Painting exhibits, would be too te-
dious here; suffice it to say, the real enter-
tainment it always affords the spectator as
well as practitioner, and it so nearly re-
sembling nature in her gayest attire and
brightest colours, must surely be persuasive
arguments to enforce the practice of it.



















This book is intended as a necessary
companion to Bowles's Artift's Assistant,
Price 18.
N.B. A List of new, pleafing, and instructive Drawing
young Gentlemen and Ladies in this polite and ac-
complished Art, is added at the end of this Book. )
which is thought truly worth the notice
and regard of the painter in particular, and
the public in general, to whose candid ac-
ceptance and perusal' the author offers them,
not doubting but by a steady adherence to,
and observation of the various directions,
the student will, in a fhort time, have his
labour amply rewarded. But after all,
who can paint
Like Nature : Can Imagination boast,
Amid its gay Creation, Hues like hersl
Or can he mix them with that matchless Skill,
And lay them on so delicately fine,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In ev’ry Bnd that blows :
THOMSON’S SPRING.
INDEX






























































































.



I. BOWLES's new and accurate Four-sheët Map of
England and Wales, comprehending all the cities,
boroughs, market and sea-port towns, villages, lakes,
rivers, forests, ruins, and principal feats of the nobi-
lity, with the roads described by Daniel Paterson, the
distance of each place of note from the metropolis,
and a great variety of other modern improvements.
To which is added, the south part of Scotland, and
east of Ireland, with the maritime provinces of Francè
from Dunkirk to Brest, and inland country to Paris.
Meafures 3 feet 4 inches wide; and 4 feet 4 inches
deep. Price 158. in sheets ; tt. is. on cloth in case,
or on cloth and rollers.
2. Bowles s new and accurate Four-sheet Map of Scot-
land, comprehending all the cities, boroughs, market
and sea-port towns, villages, lakes, rivers, forests, ruins,
and principal seats of the nobility, from the original
survey of James Dorret, corrected by late surveys of
particular counties, the coast, and roads, with the distances
modern improvements, from the best authorities. Mea-
fures 3 feet 4 inches wide, and 4 feet deep. Price 155.
in sheets; il. 1s. on cloth and rollers.
3. Bowlés s new and accurate Four-sheet Map of lreland,
divided into its several provinces, counties and baronies,
comprehending all the cities, boroughs, market, and sea-
port towns, villages, lakes, rivers, forests, ruins, inland
navigation, and principal seats of the nobility, laid down
from Sir William Petty’s original description, corrected
by late surveys of particular counties, the coast, and
roads; with the distances in measured miles, and a
great variety of other useful modern improvements,
from the best authorities. Meafures 3 feet 4 inches
wide, and 4 feet deep. Price 15s. in sheets; il. 1s.
on cloth and rollers.
The above new Four-sheet Maps are laid dozvn from the
latest observations and discoveries, neither pains nor expence
has been spared to render them superior in point of accuracy
and elegance to all ofher Maps of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, cver engraved.





BOWLES’S
Art of : ainting

IN
WATER-COLOURS, &c.
PAINTING in water-colours, is an art which
has been encouraged by princes, eminent for
their virtues, but particularly patronized by our pre-
sent most gracious Majesties; and no wonder, since no
representations can show forth nature with. more splen-
dour and magnificence, than a painting executed in
this manner.
The materials necessary, are gum-colours, of swhich
we shall treat more particularly hereafter) camel’s-hair
pencils, fitches,, a pallet and pen-knife.
The general or simple colours are, white, black,
brown, red, yellow, blue, and green.
The






4Ss
3


( 3 )
The various species of each are as follow 
Whiles.
Greens.
Ceruse.
Green Bice.
Constant White.
Green Verditure.
White Lead.
Grass Green.
Spanissi White.
Sap Green.
Flake White,
Verdigrise distilled.
Spodium.
Blues.
Blacks.
Saunders Blue.
Burnt Cherry
Stones.
Terre Blue.
Ivory-Black.
Blue Verditure.
Keating’s Black.
Indigo.
Lamp Black.
Litmose,
Smalt.
Browns.
Prussian Blue.
Spanish Brown.
Light ditto.
Spanish Licorice.
Uitramarine.
Umber.
UItramarine Affies
Bistre.
Blue Bice.
Burnt Terra di
Sienna.
Unburnt ditto
Yellows,
Tobacco Water,
Englisn Ochre,
Gall-Stone.
Reds.
Gambodge.
Native Cinnabar.
Mafsicot.
Burnt Ochre.
Ochre de Luce.
Indian Red.
Orpiment.
Red Lead.
Roman Ochre.
Minium.
Dutch Pink.
Lake.
Saffron Water.
Indian Lake.
King’s Yellow.
Vermilion.
Gold Yellow.
Carmine.
French Berries;
Red Ink.
DIRECTIONS











DIRÉCTIONS FOR PREPARING THE
FOLLOWING SINGLE COLOURS.
WHITES.
THE best white for painting in water-colours, is
flake white: some recommend a white made of
pearl and oyster-shells, brought to an impalpable pow¬
der, called a pearl white, which will mix well withi
any colour. If you use white lead, clarisy it with
white wine vinegar; after the white is settled, pour
off the vinegar, and washi it with watcr, thus: put
the powder into a glass of water, stir it and presently
pour the water off while it is white, into another clean
glass, when it is settled pour off the water, and yon
will have an excellent white; to which add as mucli
It has been often noticed that white lead will turn
black, if mixed with water that comes from iron or
clay; so that in the space of a month or two, you
may perceive it, and it will also change any colour,
with which it is mixed.
It is recommended by some to take the powder of
egg-shells, of the brightest and whitest sort, well ground
with gum-water, to the state of an impalpable powder,
to which add one twentieth part of white sugar-candy;
others esteem it most when clarified in spirits of wine,
and then use it with gum-water.
It has been found by repeated experience, that this
egg-shell powder is extremely serviceable as a white in
water-colours; and that this, and the oyster-shell powder
rectified, and well bruised, will make an excellent mix-
ture with other colours, to keep them from changing.









A fine white for water-colours may be made by dif-
solving filings of silver, or silver leaf, in aqua-fortis,
evaporating the aqua-fortis, till it appears like chrystal
in the bottom of the glass: decant the other part of
the aqua fortis, and wash the silver four or five times
in pure water, till it is entirely cleaned from the aqua-
fortis, drving it for use. It must be used. with the
waters of gum and sugar-candy.
A good white for water-colours proper for miniature-
is made thus ; take a pound of the shreddings of glove-
leather, and steep them in water; boil them with-
twelve quarts of water, till- it wastes to two; strain it
through a linen cloth, into a well-glazed earthen pan;
this is called glue or size, and proper to use with co¬
lours in candle-light pieces; to know if this be strong
enough, feel if it be stiff and firm under your hand.
The glue being melted, reduce some white chalk to
a powder; and while it is hot, add such a quantity of
chalk, as will bring it to the consistency of a paste ;
letting it steep for a quarter of an hour, stir it with a
brush made of hog’s bristles.
In order to make this white Brighter, add’more glue.
Be careful’to observe that every layer be dry, before
you put on another. If you work upon wood, you
must put on a dozen; but six or seven is sufficient, if
your paper is thick. Afterwards dip a soft brush in
some water, draining it with your fingers, rub the
work with-it, in order to make it smoother. When-
your brushi is full of white, you must wash it again,
and also change the water, when it is too white. Or
you may use a wet linen rag instead of a brushi.
YELLOWS.
In some objects there may be seen a ffiining, like
thiat of gold, through colours of red, blue, or green,
such.




such as some fort of flies, or beetles, and the cantha-
rides; this gold transparency may be very well imi-
tated, by laying some leaf-gold on the shaded side of
che drawing, giving à little to the light side. To lay
oh the gold leaf, press it smooth and close with cotton,
after you have washied it with strong gum-water. But
care must be taken that in laying on the guin, you do
not exceed the limits through which you would have
the gold appear. In this case, the goldis only to shine
through the transparent colour, which is to be laid
over it.
As leaf-gold will not receive water-colours regularly,
iit is necessary to be provided with water of ox-gall,
and with this hiquor to stroke over the gold-leaf; by
which it will receive any colour you are desirous of
laying over it, and will also retain it.
In June and July, there may be found upon rose-
ttrees, a kind of beetle, of a gold and green colour;
which may prove extremely serviceable in this kind of
painting; but in ufing your gold, it will be best te
polish it in this manner.
In some manuscripts there may be seen gold letters,
which séem to rise above the surface of the paper.
The composition which raises them is made of ver-
milion, and the white of an egg, beat to the consist-
ence of an oil, and fixed to the paper with gum-arabic:
on this figurative letter, wash some strong gum-water,
with a camel’s hair pencil; lay on the gold-leaf close
with some cotton; and when dry, rub it again with
icotton, and burnish it with a dog’s tooth; and it will
appear as if it was really cast in gold.
There is also another way of working in gold, which
is performed by shell-gold (but then it must be pure,
and not that brought from Germany, which turns green
in a few days). Cover the shady parts with vermilion,
before







before yon use ihis gold: and when you have rectified
it with spirits of wine, lay it on; when dry, burnish
it as before directed.
In laying on this gold, it is best to leave the lights
without it, as it will appear to a much greater advan-
tage, than if all the object was covered ; but providing
the whole performance should chance to be covered,
the best way of setting it off, is to trace over the shady
parts with gall-stone, or the yellow made of French
berries sof which we shall treat hereafter), heightened
with minium.
Having treated thus much upon gold, we shall now
speak of yellows in general. Gambodge is, beyond
doubt, one of. the mellowest colours nature has pro-
duced : it is of so mild a temperature, that when it
is touched with any fluid, it instantly-dissolves ; so that
consequently it wants neither gumming nor grinding;
it is productive of à variéty of the most agréeable and
pleafant yellow tints, that fancy or art could ever im-
agine; it will generally shade itself; though you will
sometimes find in the description of flowers it requires
help.
Gall-stone is a very rich deep yellow, tending to-
wards a brown; exceeding useful in many cases ; needs
but little gumming or grinding ; works free, but will
not shade itself.
Mr. Boyle says, if you cut the roots of berberries,
and put them into a strong lixivium made of pearl-
ashies and water, from them will proceed a very agree-
able yellow; this experiment has often been made and
as often attended with success.
He also gives an account of another sine transparent
yellow, by boiling the root of a mulberry-tree, well
cleansed, in the foregoing lixivium.
Yellow






Yellow-ochre makes a very good pale yellow; and

being ground with gum-water, will prove extremely
useful.
Another very useful yellow, is made by infusing the
plant celandine in clear water, gently pressing it, add-
ing to the liquor some alum-water, letting it boil.
The virtues of the yellow extracted from French
berries is so well known, that we need not discourse
upon it, but only give the directions for preparing it.
In a quart of the preceding lixivium, boil two ounces
of French berries till the liquor is of a fine yello ;
strain it from the yellow berries, and when cold it is
fit for use. To the berries put a pint of the same ixi-
vium, and boil it till the liquor is as strong as gall-stones,
with which you may shade any-yellous. This you
may boil till it comes to a brown, ald will, with the
addition of alittle ox-gall, serve to fhade the gold leaf.
You may likewise make a yellow, by infusing saffron
in pure water. When this is steeped in rectified spirits
of wine, there is nothing higher; but it is very apt to
fly, unless it is high guinmed.
A good yellow for the illumination of prints, may be
extracted from the roots of ginger, which makes a good
green when mixed with transparent verdigrise.
Those yellows, called english and Dutch pinks, are
made with French berries ground to a fine powder,
and then boiled.
King’s yellow, a fine body colour, much used in
heightening the ochre for gold lace, &c.
ORANGE COLOUR.
This colour is made of a mixture of vermilion and
gambodge, the latter most predominant ; in which you
are presented with a pleasant and serviceable colour in
painting








painting lilies, and all other orange colour flowers.
Orpiment is likewise a pleasing orange.
REDS.
Red lead, or minium, is a ftrong heavy colour, Mr.
Boyle has given us the following directions for prepar-
ang it : Put four ounces in a glass, to a quart of rain
water, and when it has been thoroughly stirred, pour
off the water; and by a frequent repetition of this,
there will remain at the bottom of the glafs a beautiful
red when dry, which is to be used with gum water.
When the colour has been thus prepared, you must nof
expect above twenty grains to remain out of four
ounces.
Carmine affords the brightest and most perfect crim-
fon, and it the most beautiful of all reds ; for with this
colour and lake you may make the shades as strong as
you please. This colour should never be purchased but
by day light; for if it is not good, it will but spoil your
work.
Lake is a fine transparent colour, not much inferior
to carmine: but in painting with carmine on that part
of the print, on which the light is supposed to strike,
lay on the first tint as light as possible, working it
stronger as it grows darker, and touch it in the darker
parts with lake.
Lake may be bought at most colour fhops ready pre-
pared for water colours : but if you are desirous of
making it yourself, it is necessary to adhere to the fol¬
lowing directions.
Having prepared a lixivium made with the afhes of
vine twigs, to three pints of it, add a pound of the best
ground Brasil wood, boil it till half the lixivium is
evaporated, strain it off; boil it again with the addi¬
tion





tion of four ounces of fresh Brasil wood, two ounces of
cochineal, half an ounce of terra marita, and a pint of
fair water, let it evaporate as before ; add half an ounce
of burnt alum, reduced to an impalpable powder,
quarter of a drachm of arsenick ; dissolve them in it,
by
To
stirring it with a stick, when settled strain it off.
give tnis a body, reduce two cuttle-fisn bones to

powder, and putting it in, let it dry leisurely. Grind it
mn a quantity of fair water, in which you may let it steep;
strain it through a cloth, and making it into a few cakes,
fet it by for use, after drying it on a piece of marble.
If you would have this lake redder, add some of the
juice of a lemon; and to make it deeper, add oil of
tartar.
Another lake; boil the shreds of superfine scarlet
cloth in a lie made of the afhies of burnt tartar, when
fufficiently boiled, add some cochineal, powdered mas-
tich, and roche-allum, boil this again; while it is
quite hot, strain it through a bag several times. The
first time, the bag must be strained from top to bottom,
and the remaining grofs matter being taken out, let
the bag be well washed; after this, strain the liquor-
through the bag again, and you will find a paste re-
maining on the sides, which divide into small cakes,
and set by for use.
Another lake ; steep four ounces of the best Brafik
wood in a pint and a half of the finest distilled vinegar,
for three weeks at least, though the longer it remains
the better it is; seeth the whole in balneum mariae,
till it boils up three or fous times; let it settle for à
day or two, put it to an ounce of powdered alum, and
into a clean pan with the liquor, let it remain for
twenty-four hours ; heat the composition, and stir it
till it is cold; when it has stood about twelve hours,
strain it, and add two cuttle-fish bones, prepared as
before.






A liquid colonr of a very good crimson may be made
as follows; in twelve ounces of pale stale beer, boil
one ounce of ground Brasil wood till the colour is as
strong as you desire; strain it through a linen cloth, and
bottle it up for use. If you want to bring this colour.
to body, take some dried ox-blood reduced to a pow-
der, and mix it with the colour.
We have the following directions from Mr. Boyle,
for extracting a sine crimson from the berry-bearing
spinach, which, being pressed, affords a very agreeable
juice; to which add a fourth part of alum, boil it, and
when cold it is fit for use.
Or you may extract a very beautiful red, from the
red beet-root, baked with a little strong vinegar and
alum ; when cold it is fit for use.
Another way to make a crimson; put twenty, or
more, grains of bruised cochineal into a gallipot, with
as many drops of the lie of tartar, as will make it give
forth its colour ; add to this mixture about half a spoon¬
ful of water, or more, and you will have a very agree-
able purple ; reducing some alum to a very fine powder,
put it to the purple liquor, and you will have as beauti-
ful a crimson. Strain it through a fine cloth, use it as
soon as possible; for though this is a colour, which if
soon used, looks extremely well, yet by long standing is
subject to decay.
Indian lake is far superior to any other of the kind,
for the deep shades of reds of all kinds, and works as
free as gambodge: the best is brought from China in
pots, and has the appearance of raspberry jam, but very
bitter to the taste ; it requires no gum.
PURPLES.
Take eight ounces of logwood, a pint of rain-water,
and an ounce of alum, infuse it well over a slow fire in
a well




à well-glazed pan, or pipkin, for about twenty-four
hours; add a quarter of an ounce of gum-arabic; let
it stand for a weck, strain it through a piece of sine
cloth. Keep it close, or it will mould.
Or you may make à redder purple by adding to one
ounce of the above, sour ounces of Brasil wood, and
a pint of stale beer, boiling it till the liquor is as
strong as you defirc. It may be made darker by add-
ing more logwood.
The richest purple is made by blending carmine and
Prussian bluc, or indigo, to what shude you please.
BLUES.
UItramarine is the best and brightest blue: prepare
it by heating six ounces of the lapis lazuli till it is
red ; cool it in strong vinegar; grind it with a stone
and muller to an impalpable powder: then make a
composition of bees-wax, resin, linseed oil, and tur-
pentine, of each three ounces; incorporate the whole
together over a slow fire, till it is near boiling; pour
them into a pan well glazed. This is called the paste
of ultramarine. The lapis lazuli being prepared, add
to it an equal quantity of the pastil, or paste; mix
them together thoroughly, and let them remain twelve
hours ; to extract the ultramarine from the paste, pour
clear water upon it, pressing the paste with your hands,
the ultramarine will come out ; for its reception place
a glass tumbler under your hand; let it settle in this
water till the ultramarine sinks to the bottoin.
If the colour seems foul, cleanse it thus: dissolve
some tartar in water; add as much of it to the ultra-
marine as will cover it; let it stand twelve hours ;
washi it in warm water, and you will have your co-
lour well clarified and perfectly clean. Let vour iil-
tramarine be of a high colour, and well ground. Next
to







to ultramarine in beauty is Prussian blue, when used
in oil, though it will not stand so long, its not having
the body of ultramarine. The Prussian blue does not
grind kindly with water, on account of its oily sub-
stance.
Blue bice is a colour of a very good body, and flows
very agreeably in the pencil : wasn it according to the
rules laid dovn for ultramarine.
Blue verditure is a very bright pleasant blue, of a
good body, and works very well when ground with
gum-water. It is a little inclinable to and makes a
very good green, when ground with gambodge, or
French berries. This blue is mostly used for à fky, or
a garment.
Saunders blue is extremely serviceable in the shading
of ultramarine, where no verv dark shades appear;
when they do, you may add a little indigo to it.
Litmose is a very agreeable blue; to prepare it, take
a quart of fmall beer wort, in which boil two ounces
of litmose, till the colour is as strong as you require;
pour the liquor into a glazed pipkin, and it will soon
congeal.
Indigo is the darkest blue, is a foft free colour, and-
runs very warm in the pencil ; it requires to be well
washed and ground, and may be made darker or lighter
by the addition of more or less gum-water. Care is-
required in the using this colour; for, as we before
hinted, its running fo free may be a means of deceiv¬
ing the student, and prove too dark for the completion
of his desires.
Mr. Boyle has given us the following directions for
making a very fine colour of the blue leaves of rue,
by pressing, bruising, and infusing both leaves
juice





juice in pure water, for a fortnight, washing them every
day ; incorporating them and the water, till they be-
come a pulp, letting them dry gradually.
These will produce an excellent blue for shading,
which runs free in the pencil; put into it the powder
of gum-arabic, which will be a means of making it
keep ; add of the gum as much as you would have
it more or less stiff in working.
A sine transparent blue, (from the preceding author
equal to a tint of ultramarine--The flower from
which this blue is extracted is the cyanus, or blue
cornbottle, which is possessed of two blues, the outer
leaves being light, and inner dark, the latter is held
in preference ; pick both from the buttons and cases in
which they grow, the same day they were gathered.
Having prepared a quantity of the middle leaves,
press out as much juice as possible, with the addition
of a little alum, you will be possessed of a fine, dur-
able, transparent blue, little inferior to ultramarine.
The procuring of the flowers, and the pressure of
the juice, should be done with all possible expedition,
lest the flawers should lose their perfection.
It has been thought by some, if the leaves of these
flowers were cured as those of saffron, there would
proceed from them a much greater quantity of colour,
from which might be pressed more tincture, than when
fresh from the hield.
In curing of which it would appear, that each time
the cake was turned, the slowers would be darker,
till they became a dark blue. Great care is required
during this operation, that the sire be kept very constant
and gentle, that the flowers may not be scorched,
which will be an incontestable way of bringing the
flowers to perfection.
Theresore





Therefore to put this operation in execution, akiln
must be procured, as for curing faffron; the top of
which is to be covered with hair cloth, upon this lay
several sheets of paper, afterwards a parcel of tle
inner leaves of the flower, two or three inches thick,
pressing them close, and sprinkling them with gum¬
water, after which, a small charcoal fire must be made
in the kiln, so as to communicate heat to the top.
Cover the cake with a few sheets of paper,and a board
with a small weight upon it; after à few minutes the
cake is to be turned; when it is placed, take off the
upper papers, sprinkle the cake again with gum-water,
lay on the board a weight, as before, sor a few mi-
nutes; and so repeat the turning and sprinkling several
times, till the cake is united, and of the thicknefs of
a cake of saffron,
BLACKS.
The proper blacks for water-colours are as follow:
Ivory black, which is prepared in the following man¬
ner ; let the ivory black be thoroughly ground, and
there will naturally proceed from it a liquor of an
oily substance; mix as much of it as will make it
work freely in the pencil. It has a fine gloss, and is
extremely serviceable in painting of shining objects.
There is another very agreeable and useful black
called Keating’s black, and may be had at most co-
lour-shops ready prepared,
Indian ink is a very good black, and of great ser-
vice, as it may be laid on to any shade, and will always.
shade itself, on which account it is often used for
drawings.
GREENS.






GREENS.
Sap green is a colofr extremely serviceable, and the
best green for water colours our age affords, being of a
gummy substance, and diluting easily in water; it
produces an endless variety of tints, and has the ad-
vantage of shading itself. In the purchasing this colour,
remember to observe, that it looks very black and
bright.
A sca or artificial green is made, by mixing indigo
and sap green, which may be made darker or lighter by
adding more or less indigo: It is a very serviceable
colour, easily worked, and productive of many tints.
This colour, as well as sap green, shades itself. The
indigo must be well ground, before you mix it.
1
Another green is made with indigo and gambodge weli
ground together, extremely useful in painting of trees,
grafs, vegetables, &c. with the addition of sap-green it
is very serviceable in flowers and shading of garments,
A transparent green is made by mixing verdigrise
and yellow to various tints, by leaving either pre-
dominant.
BROWNS.
Burnt and unburnt terra di sienna, the warmest brown
for front grounds, dead leaves, &c. works very free,
and is of general use.
Bistre is a good and serviceable colour: the best fort
is very bright and close ; as it is a colour difficult to
work of itself, mix a little Spanish licorice with it, that
will mellow and taken off its harssiness. It must be well
ground, and the higher it is gummed, the better for use.
Spanish licarice is allowed by the best masters to be
productive of a great variety of brown tints, of a very
agreeable




agreeable colour; it will not shade itself, but works as
free as any gum colours, by diluting it in fair water.
A brown mixture is made by incorporating sap green
and carmine, which is of an extraordinary soft nature :
It is a colour extremely serviceable, as you will find
hereafter in a description of painting flowers in water
colours.
Another, by blending vermilion and bistre thorough-
ly ; the bistre must be extremely well ground before
you incorporate it with the vermilion, and it will pro¬
duce a brown worthy of your esteem.
DIRECTIONS FOR PREPARING THE
FOLLOWING MIXED COLOURS.
Asp Colour--Ceruse, Keating’s black ; and white shaded
with cherry-stone black.
Bay—
Lake, and flake white, fhaded with carmine,
bistre, and vermilion, shaded with black.
Silk Red lead and mafficot water, shaded
Changeable
with sap-green, and verdigrise.
Another.
-Lake, and yellow, shaded with lake, and
Prussian blue.
loud Colour--Light mafficot, or lake and waite,
shaded with blue verditure.
Another- Constant white, and Indian ink, with a
little vermilion.
AnotherWhite, with a little lake and blue verditure,
makes a very agreeable cloud colour, for that
part next the horizon.
Gimson--Lake and white, with a little vermilion
shaded with lake and carminer
Flame




Flame Colour--Vermilion and orpiment heightened
with white.
Another-Gambodge shaded with minium, and red
lead.
Flesp Colour- Ceruse, red lead, and lake ; for a swarthy
complexion, add yellow ochre.
Another-Constant white, and a little carmine, shaded
with Spanish licorice, washed with carmine.
French Green--Light pink and Dutch bice, shaded
with green pink.
Glass Gray-- Ceruse, with a little blue of any kind.
Hair Colour. Massicot, ochre, umber, ceruse, and
cherry ftone black.
Lead Colour--Indigo and white.
Light Blue--Blue bice, heightened with flake white.
Another—-Blue verditure, and white of any sort well
ground.
Light Green-Pink; smalt, and white.
Another-Blue verditure, and gambodge.
Another-Gambodge and verdigrise. The chief use of
this green, is to lay the ground colours for
trees, fields, &c.
Lion TawnyRed lead and massicot, shaded with
Murrey- Lake and white lead.
OrangeRed lead and a little mafficot, shaded with
gall-stone and lake.
Orange




Orange Tauuny--Lake light pink, a little mafficot,
shaded with gall-stone and lake.
Pearl Colour--Carmine, a little white, shaded with
lake.
Green--Green and massicot : or pink and a
Popinjay
little indigo, shaded with indigo.
ndigo, Spanissi brown and white; or bltte
Purple-
bice, red and white lead; or blue bice and
lake.
Russet—Cherry-stune black and white.
Scarlet Red lead and lake, with or without vermilion.
Sea Green-Bice, pink and white, shaded with pink.
Sky Colour--Light mafficot and white for the lowest
and lightest parts; second, red ink and white ;
third, blue bice and white; fourth, blue bice
alone. These are all to be softened into one
another at the edges, so as not to appear harsh.
for Drapery--Blue bice and ceruse, or ultra-
Sky Colour
Straw Colour- Massicot and a very little lake, shaded
with Dutch pink.
Violet Colour-Indigo, white and lake; or fine Dutch
bice and lake, shaded with indigo; or lit-
mose, smalt, and bice, the latter most pre-
dominant.
-Blue and white, shaded with blue, and heigh-
Water.
tened with white.
AnotherBlue verdigrife, shaded wiih indigo, and
heightened with white.
DIRECTIONS




DIRECTIONS FOR USING THE COLOURS.
Your pencils must be fast in their quills, and shiarp
pointed (after you have drawn them through your
mouth) not apt to part in the middle.
Before you begin, have all your colours ready, and a
pallet for the conveniency of mixing them, a paper to
lay your hand, as well as try your colours upon, also a
large brushi, called a fitch, to wipe off the dust from
them.
Being prepared according to the foregoing method,
proceed in your painting, which if a landscape, lay on
first dead colours all over your piece, leaving no part
uncovered : And in this part of the performance there
required ; and the work, though seemingly rough upon
a close inspection, will have a good effect, when plac-
ed at à distance.
Let not the roughness of the work discourage you,
for it is easily softened by degrees, with the other
shadows, observing only to sweeten, mellow, and
heighten them as tne light falls.
In some places lay on strong and masterly touches,
and in those places bring up your work to an equal
roundness and strength; tempering and sweetning your
colours with a sharper peneil than the first, that no
lumps or harsh edges be left, but that all your shadows
may lie dispersed, soft, and smooth, gliding gently into
one another.
You are not to finish any one part first, but work up
every part gradually alike, till you see nothing wanting
to complete your piece.
Havinglaid your dead colours, begin next with the light-
est parts, as the sky, sun-beams, &c. then the yellowisn
beams,







beams, with mafsicot, and white; next the blueness of
the sky with blue verditure alone: For purple
clouds mix only lake and white, making your colours
deeper as they go upwards from the horizon, except in
tempestuous skies. Fhe tops of distant mountains muft
be worked so faint, that they may seem to lose them-
selves in the air.
Bring your colours forward, as your distance decrea-
ses ; painting your first ground next the horizon down¬
wards, of bluisni sea green, and as you advance for-
wards, of a darker green, till you come to the fore
ground itself, which as it is the darkest part of all, with
dark green, worked in such a manner, as to give the
appearance of shrubbery, &c.
In painting of trees, having first laid a verdigrise
green for a dead colour, proceed with working it, so as
to give à leafy appearance: seeming to hang free and
natural, especially towards the edges, where you may
touch a few leaves close to the tree, which will give
your performance à masterly effect. Bring some of
your leaves forward with massicot and white : for the
trunk, work the brown with sap green; if you should
introduce oak trees, lay on some touches, to exprefs.
leaves of ivy twined- about it.
All distant objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the eye.
Theserules are adapted to general appearances,but the
student may deviate from them, as nature shall dictater
OF COLOURING NAKED FIGURES.
We shall begin with the naked figures of Women and
Children; and though the life is to be principally fol¬
lowed,





lowed, we think it necessary to give some directions to
prepare the colours seen in nature. Take flake white,
and a little lake, blend them together, and with that
lay the ground colour, then shade with red ochre,
cherry-stone black, and a little lake mixed together,
touching the lips, cheeks, &c. with a tint of carmine,
and heighten the flefh with white, and a little carmine.
Remember that you are never to heighten it with pure
white, which will rather give it the appearance of fisn
than flesn.
Old Women, Vermilion, white, and brown ochre for
the ground colour, shaded with red ochre, and cherrV
stone black ; to put a little bloom in their faces, use
dake and vermilion, heightened as before.
Young Women and Children deceased, Brown, white, and
à little vermilion shaded with cherry-stone black ; to
old women you must add more brown ochre, shaded as
before.
Young Men, add more brown ochre, shaded with
Keating’s black and brown ochre, touching the lips
and cheeks with carmine and lake.
Dead Men, Brown, a little white and vermilion,
shaded with black.
OF COLOURING HAIR.
Young Women and Children, brown ochre alone,
heighten with mafficot, or brown ochre and white,
heightened with the same. Or light ochre darkened
with brown ochre, and heightened with mafficot.
Old Women's Hair, brown. ochre and black mixed,
heightened with brown ochre and white. In gray
hair, use more black than white; heighten with pure
white, or ceruse. These colours may be applied to
the hair of men, making them darker or lighter as oc-
casion requires.






OF COLOURING BEASTS.
Chesnut broun Horses, red ochre and black mixed
together; shaded with black, heightened with red
ochre and white.
Asp gray Horses, black and white mixed; shaded with
black, heightened with white.
White Horses, black and white mixed; shaded with
black, white, and bistre; heightened with pure water.
Black Horses, black lightly laid on, shaded with
Keating’s black.
Spotted Horses are to be variegated according to na¬
ture, and the discretion of the artist.
Sheep, white, shaded with Spanish licorice,
Hogs, brown ochre ; shaded with Keating’s black
and bistre, heightened with mafficot; the bristles strong
brown ochre: the eyes dark massicot, shaded with ver-
milion, the mouth indigo, darkened with Indian ink:
touch likewise black sparks among the hairs : the in¬
side of the mouth yermilion, shaded with lake.
Lions, colour much the same manner as hogs, add-
ing lake in the ground colour.
Bears, brown ochre; red ochre, and black mixed;
shaded with bistre and ivory-black.
Leopards, brown and light ochre ; darkened with
ivory-black ; the spots red ochre, and black shaded
with black.
Wolves, Spanish licorice and black, shaded with black.
Gray Wolves, black, white, and brown, shaded with
black ; the eyes chesnut colour.
Asses, black and white mixed. Or add a little brown
ochre, shaded with black.
Elephants,





Elephants, black and white, and Spanisn licorice
mixed; shaded with black and bistre ; the inner part
of the nose vermilion and white, shaded with black.
Rats and Mice, to be coloured the same as the
former.
Apes, Monkies, &c. Dutch pink and black, heightened
The face, black and bistre
with mafsicot and white.
mixed, as also the feet and below their bellies, shaded
with black and pink, mixed with a little brown ochre,
Stags, brown ochre, shaded with bistre towards'the
back, the neck and belly white, the mouth and ears
inclining to red, the hoofs black, and legs shaded
with black.
Hares, brown ochre, the belly white, and the back
shaded with bistre.
Rabbits, black and white, the belly white, shaded
OF COLOURING BIRDS,
Eagles, black and brown shaded with indigo; the
feathers heightened with brown ochre and white; the
beak and claws saffron; shaded with bistre ; the eyes
with vermilion heightened with mafsicot, or saffron
shaded with vermilion.
Falcons, brown ochre, black and white mixed, shaded
with black ; the feathers describe by strokes of black,
the breast sprinkle with black, the eyes and talons the
fame as eagles, tlie beak gray.
Turkeys, both male and female, the back black and
white mixed gradually, shaded off to a white under
the belly, sprinkled and shaded with black ; the legs
indigo shaded with the same, the beak and eyes blue;
heightened with white; the red skin hanging over the
bill, vermilion shaded with lake.







Scoans, white shaded with black ; the legs and bills
black, the eyes yellow, a ball in the midst.
Geese, ceruse shaded with black, the legs black, the
bill red.
Pheasants, white and black mixed, the eves like
those of the falcon, the legs, Dutch pink shaded with
black.
Owls, ochre mixed with white in different shades,
the legs yellow ochre.
OF COLOURING FRUIT.
Apples, thin massicot mixed with verdigrise, shaded
with brown ochre, give them a bloom with lake, height-
ened with mafsicot and white.
Pears, mafsicot, deepened and mellowed with brown
ochre ; the bloom the same as the apple.
Cherries, vermilion and lake, shaded with carmine,
heightened with vermilion and white.
Spaniss Cherries, the middle vermilion, lake, and
white mixed, softened off towards the extremities; the
bloom, lake heightened with white.
Mulberries, carmine and black, in such manner as
between the stalk and berries there may appear red,
according to nature,
Strawberries, white, draw it over with vermilion and
lake, shaded with fine lake; heightened with red lead
and massicot mixed, and after with white; stipple
them with white and thin lake only.
Blue Grapes, dark purple, shaded with blue; the
bloom bice.
White Grapes, a mixture of verdigrise and mafficot,
shaded with thin verdigrise, heightened with mafficot
and white.
Peaches,




Peaches, thin massicot, shaded with brown ochre ;
the bloom lake, heightened with white.
White Plums are coloured according to the former
directions.
Blue Plums, purple, shaded with bice; softened into
a green towards the stalk.
Green Walnuts, verdigrise, and sap-green mixed,
shaded with sap-green; those without husks, brown
echre, shaded with bistre.
OF COLOURING VEGETABLES.
Radishes, white, shaded with lake, near the top
foftened into a blooming purple; in some places green;
the leaves verdigrise, shaded with sap-green.
White Cabbages, gambodge, and a very little verdigrise,
shaded with sap-green ; touched in some places with a
little brown ochre, heightened with white.
Red Cabbages, lake and a little Prussian blue mixed,
fhaded with lake and indigo, the veins lake and white.
Cucumbers, yellow for the ground colour, washed
over with verdigrise, shaded with sap-green.
Yellow Pompions, yellow fhaded with brown ochre,
the veins a stronger brown ochre.
Green Pompions, fap-green, verdigrise, and indigo
mixed, shaded with indigo and sap-green.
Turnips, white shaded with verdigrise touched with
brown, the leaves verdigrise touched with sap-green,
heightened with mafficot.






OF COLOURING FLOWERS.
A CONITES.
VAMBODGE, shaded with gall-stone or Dutch
C pink; the leaves strong green, made of indigo
and gambodge, the stalks a mixture of verditure, gam¬
bodge, and white lake, shaded towards the flower
with bistre.
ALMOND BLOSSOMS.
A tender wasn of carmine, shaded with carmine and
tons massicot, shaded with gambodge; the stem, bistre,
shaded with Keating’s black ; the footstalks and cups,
pale green.
While these flowers are in bloom, only a few leaves
appear, which begin to fhoot out from the branches,
and are of a pleasant green.
DOUBLE ALMOND BLOSSOMS.
These flowers are darker than the former; add more
Prussian blue to the carmine, and carefully blend white
in the light parts.
The stalks, leaves, &c. as single almond blossoms.
ALTHEA FRUTEXES.
The pod gambodge and sap-green mixed, shade the
dark side with a mixture of sap-green and Indian ink;
hatch round the outside with liquid purple and carmine,
shade the white leaves with Indian ink only; stipple
the flower with Indian ink.
The leaves begin and finish with sap-green, and
make the stalk to imitate wood.
SINGLE





SINGLE ANEMONES.
Anemones are enriched with the most variegated
colours, which are laid on so delicately fine, and
blended with such matchless skill, that in painting
them we would recommend the student to pay
great attention to nature; but not being willing to
leave him quite destitute of directions to colour these
beautiful flowers, we shall insert the following.
A thin wasn of gambodge, shaded with bistre, or
carmine, and sap-green blended together-: the stripes
carmine, shaded with the same, indigo in the darkest
parts, or stipple with it; the leaves sap-green, shaded
with indigo and French berries; the stalk brown.
BELSILVIA ANEMONES.
Stripe with a mixture of liquid purple and carmine,
shaded with liquid purple ; wasn and shade the heart
or apple with sap-green, stipple it with white; the
seeds gambodge.
The leaves and stalks sap-green, mixed with a little
indigo.
AURICULAS.
Nature, together with the art of the botanist, has
rendered auriculas productive of such a variety of co-
lours, as to enter upon a particular description, would
carry us beyond the limits of this treatise: we shall
therefore describe two only, and give the following di-
rections ; a tender wasn of gambodge, shaded with
sap-green and carmine blended together. Round the
eenter







centre leave a broad white space, which shade witf-
Indian ink and sap-green mixed, stipple the gambodge
with a purple extracted from logwood; the cup in the
inside strong yellow shaded with Dutch pink or gall-
stone; stipple it with white, darkening the white
gradually with Indian ink as the shade increafes.
The stalks and leaves green, made of ceruse, indigo,
and sap-green, darkening it as the shade requires.
ANOTHER METHOD.
A light wash of purple extracted from logwoody
shaded with a stronger extract of the same, in the
darkest parts carmine and indigo mixed; the white
circle shaded with sap-green, the inner part purple,
the seed gambodge.
The leaves and stalks sap-green, shaded with that
and indigo mixed.
CARNATIONS.
These flowers, as well as many others, afford as
variety that makes them past description ; in one we
fee the ruby, with its bleeding radiance ; in another the
sapphire with its skv-tinctured blue; and. in all, such-
an exquisite richness of dies, as no other sort of paint-
ings can boast.--With what à masterly fkill is every
varying tint disposed, whilst they seem to be thrown-
on with an easy dash of security and freedom, and ad-
justed by the nicest and most judicious touches of art-
and accuracy l Shade in the same manner as the striped-
rose, put in red. stripes, stipple it in different parts with.
carmine.
The leaves and stalks verdigrise, shaded with the-
same.






DOUBLE CHINA ASTERS.
These flowers are very much variegated in their
colours; some are white, others crimson, and some
are tinged with a blueish purple ; the centre of the
flowers are yellow ; the leaves are of a strong green ;
the stalks bistre, shaded with the same, the darkest
parts touched with Indian ink.
COLCHICUMS.
A tender wasn of carmine, and a little of the pur-
ple of logwood mixed, stipple it with carmine only.
The stalks and leaves as the cyclamens.
CONVOLVOLUSES.
Light royal smalt mixed, well ground and gummed,
the rays excepted, fhaded with Prussian blue alone;
the buds the same; the rays white, shaded with Indian
ink and sap-green mixed next the cup, the inside rays
hatch with a mixture of white and gambodge.
The leaves and stalks as French marigolds.
CONVOLVOLUS MAJOR

Wafh with carmine; deepen with the same, till
you have brought it to its proper roundness; shade the
rays with sap-green, Indian ink, and a little indigo,
blended together.
The leaves and stalks as the preceding.
CROCUSES.






Of these flowers there are two colours, the one
purple the other saffron; wash the purple one with
Prussian blue and carmine mixed, shaded with the
same, but the readiest way is to colour with the purple
of logwood, washed over lightly ; preceed to darken,
renewing the shade with a darker tint of the same;
mix à little Prussian blue (if need be) with your darker
shades.
Yellow crocuses work upon the same principles as
jonquilles. The stalks and leaves as martagons. There
is another fort (though not so common) white striped
with purple.
DOUBLE CROWFOOTS.
A tender wasn of gambodge, shaded with the same,
the darkest parts touched with gall-stone.
The leaves and stalks a very pale green, tinged with
red towards the bottom.
YELLOW CROWN IMPERIALS.
A thin wasn of gambodge, upon that another of
minium, shaded with carmine: the leaves sap-green,
shaded with indigo and French berries,
va
ORANGE CROWN IMPERIALS.
A thin wasn of red lead; the light shades carmine,
the dark vermilion and bistre mixed: the seed the same
as the flower.
The leaves and stalks as the preceding.





A pale tint of gambodge, the light parts shaded with
gall-stone, the darker carmine and sap green mixed.
The stalks and leaves as scarlet lychnises.
CYCLAMENS.
White shaded with a mixture of Indian ink and sap-
green: the pod the same manner, from the pod there
is à fine shade of crimson, done with carmine care-
fully worked in the shades of the leaves.
The stalk and back of the leaves, begin and finisn
with carmine and sap green mixed.
DAISIE8.
Of these flowers, there are three colours, red, white,
and others striped with red and white. The leaves are
of a pleasant green, the stalks of a light green, tinged
with red towards the bottom.
HEN AND CHICKEN DAISIES,
The hen, or principal flower, round which the small
ones, called chickens, grow, is beautifully mottled
with red and white, those which inclose it are almost
all white; for the first, flake white, stippled with car-
mine; and in the same manner for the smaller ones,
only using less red.
The leaves and stalks as the preceding.
DAFFODILS.











DAFFODILS,
The same as jonquilles, excepting the middle leaves
being much lighter.
FRITILLARIES.
Purple, composed of indigo, carmine, and a little
vermilion, adding so much of each, as will give it the
appearance of a dull reddishi purple : stipple it with a
darker shade of the same, or Dutch pink. The stalks
Prussian blue and sap green mixed, adding indigo for
the darkest shades: the leaves to be done with the
fame.
CHEQUERED FRATILLARIES.
Carmine, shaded with purple, and the purple ex-
tracted from logwood ; chequered with Indian ink.
The leaves verdigrise and gainbodge, for the shade
add thereto a little indigo.
GERANIUMS,
A vaft variety, but the principal one is the fame as
scarlet crown imperials.
GLADIOLAS.
Carmine, fhaded with the same and Pruffian blue
blended together. The bottom of the flower white,
shaded with sap green, darkened with Indian ink; but
great care is required in this part of the performancè,
that the colours may appear soft, and lose themselves
in each other.
The leaves and stalks carmine and fap green, the
bottom sapgreen, and a small quantity of Pruffian blue,
shadeg




shaded with the same colour, darkened with indigo and
French berries mixed.
HEARTS. EASE, OR PANSTES.
The blossom consists of five leaves or petals, the twe
upper of which are beautiful purple, for which carmine
and liquid purple mixed, fhaded with the same; the
other three light yellow, or straw colour edged with
purple ; the base tinge with deep purple, impercepti-
bly blending itself with the straw colour, from which
place five or six lines delicately extend themselves over
each petal.
The stalks and leaves, begin and finish with sap-
green.
HELLEBORES.
White, the base of each petal stain with crimfon ;
the button yellow, the same as other roses.
The leaves indigo and French berries, the stalk paler
green, stippled with crimson.
SINGLE HOLLYHOCKS.
A thin wash of gambodge, a deeper of the same,
thie darkest shades gall-stone; finished with gall-stone
and sap green.
The pod; leaves and stalks, begin and finish with
fap green.
DOUBLE HOLLYHOCKS.
A slight wasn of carmine, preserving the white paper
for heightening, hatch with carmine, the darker shades







sap green, the bloom pale liquid purple, but in the buds
make no use of purple.
The stalk and leaves, begin and finish with sap
green.
HONEY SUCKLES.
The inside of the petals white, shaded with sap
green, or massicot shaded with sap green, or gambodge
and bistre ; which insides are to be shewn by curling
the leaves back at the ends, or splitting them; the out-
sides a thin wash of carmine and lake mixed, shaded
with carmine, indigo for the darkest snades. It is to
be observed, that some of the flowers growing on the
same stalks, are inclinable to purple, others to carmine;
the style and buttons seen at the ends of the flowers, are
of a faint green.
The stalks sap green and carmine. The leaves sap
green, shaded witn indigo and French berries.
BLUE BELL HYACINTHS.
UItramarine or verditure ; be careful to put in your
first hatches very free and soft ; shaded with Prussian
blue in the same manner, for the darkest indigo.
The leaves and stalks as orange lilies.
DOUBLE HYACINTHS.
White shaded with indigo, Indian ink, and a very
little sap green; for those with a crimson blushi, wasn
a faint tinge of carmine, leaving in the white towards
the top, strengthening it towards the bottom.





The leaves and stalks Prussian blue and sap green,
shaded with sap green and indigo.
DOUBLE HYPATICAS.
Prussian blue, snaded with that and indigo mixed ;
the darkest part indigo alone.
The leaves indigo and gambodge, or French berries;
the stalk pale green, tinged with red towards the root.
Another, lake shaded with the same, the under part

of the leaf white.
IRISES,
The three upright petals white, tinged with gam-
bodge: at the base of each, the white to be done the
same as the narcissis: the other three are purple with
a vein of yellow, which begins in the middle, and so
widens till it comes to the base.
The leaves and stalks, the same as wall-flowers.
JESSAMINES.
White, shaded with Indian ink, and sap green blend-
ed together, and worked extremely soft: for the darkest
shades add more Indian ink; also in a few places
add some soft tints of French berries at the backs of
some of the flowers, and others entirely yellow.
The leaves and stalks mix sap green, verdigrise, and
a
little indigo, adding more indigo for the darkest
shades.







JONQUILLES.
Nature, ever ambitious of showing us what she is
capable of performing, hath in these flowers given us
an indisputable proof of her air and delicacy, and
therefore in order to preserve them in painting, let the
first tint of gambodge be very tender; wasn the cup
likewise, proceed with another wash over the first; the
leaves shaded with vermilion and bistre mixed, let this
be done so foft, that the colours may feem to glide
gently into each other ; shade the cup with gall-stone,
mixed with alittle bistre, or carmine and sap green;
but in all be careful to preferve a foftness.
The leaves and stalks Prussian blue and sap green
mixed, shaded with the same.
LARK SPURS,
Nearly the same as China asters.
LLLIES,
White lilies, the same manner as white hyacinths ;
orange lilies the same as nasturtians.
GUERNSEY LILIES,
Strong gambodge, wash that sexcept the lighteft
parts) witn minium; the darker parts vermilion,
finished with carmine.





The leaves indigo, Prussian blue, and French berries
mixed, the stalk green, tinged with red towards the
bottom-
LYCHNIDEAS.
Pale red with a purplisn tinge.
The leaves the same colour as the former, thé stalk
green near the flower, but grows brown towards the
base.
SCARLET LYCHNISES.
Wasn very tenderly with carmine and vermilion
mixed, finisn with carmine, used with strong alum
water; put in the lights with white, tinged witli
gambodge.
The leaves and stalks as single hollyhocks.
AFRICAN MARIGOLDS.
The same as orange lilies.
The leaves and stalks begin and finish with sap-
green.
FRENCH MARIGOLDS.
These flowers demand great attention to colour
them well ; the edges of the leaves gambodge, the in¬
side leaves red lead, shaded with carmine, the deeper
shades bistre.
MARTAGONS OR TURK’S CAPS.
A soft wasn of gambodge, shaded with gall-stone,
that with bistre, or sap-green and carmine, mixed.







There are others of a rich scarlet, first use a lay of
red lead thoroughly prepared, shaded with carmine, ad-
ding thereto for the darkest
parts, a small quantity of
indigo; the style and buttons gambodge shaded with red
lead, and that with carmine.
The stalks and leaves begin with sap-green and Prus-
sian blue; finished with the addition of indigo.
MARVEL OF PERU.
A thin wasn of carmine, proceed to a deeper shade
of the same; finished with carmine and sap green
mixed.
The leaves gambodge and green, finished with indigo
and French berries.
The stalks light green, tinged
with-brown towards the base.
MEZEREONS.
Pale crimson, the outside darker.
Those leaves which appear while the flowers are in
bloom, are of a pleasant green; the stem brown.
When the flowers are off, they bear a scarlet berry.
NASTURTIANS.
The orange colour with which these flowers are
adorned, is so rich as makes it past conception; the
colour which comes the nearest, is orange colour; the
rethod of compounding which, is given in the direc-
tions for preparing water colours. On the two largest
petals, draw seven or eight lines, the same colour and
manner as hearts. ease.
DOUBLE NASTURTIANS.
These are to be coloured according to the foregoing
directions : only with this exception, the two large
petals in that, are obliterated in this.
PASQUE--




PASQUE-FLOWERS,
Rich purple, somewhat inclihing to a blue, by mix-
ing carmine and ultramarine.
The stalk whitish green, tending to a purple to-
wards the base ; the leaves and stalks white, gambodge,
and a little indigo mixed together; the foot-stalks.
livid red.
SWEET SCENTED PEAS,
OR
The blossoms are compe
sed of red and purple leaves ;
the red begin and finish as the mundi rose; for
purple ones a thin wash of liquid purple; for the
darker shades a mixture of carmine and Prussian blue,
finished with indigo.
The leaves and stalks, a little white and sap-green,
shaded with sap-green alone.
PASSION FLOWERS.
The petals white, shaded with sap-green, and In-
dian ink mixed; the threads are ranged in such order
as to form three circles, each of a different colour:-
the first or outer one is blue verditure, shaded with
Prussian blue; the second white, to be expressed by
carrying on the stroke with slake-white, the space be¬
tween the strokes indigo and Indian ink; the third
circle reddisn purple, by blending carmine and Prussian
blue together. The inside of the five buttons (which
parts are chiefly seen) yellow, as the centre of the
flower: the other parts which project from the centre
are light green, those three from the top excepted,
which are blueisn purple.
The leaves French berries and indigo, for the shades
add a little Indian ink; the tendrils and stalks sap-
green and carmine.
PINKS.





PINKS.
The single pink does not admit of so great a variety
as the carnation; but is neverthelefs agreeably
va-
riegated. The most common are either white
crimson, others are striped white and red, others are
white spotted with red; others edged with red; all
which may be worked according to the rules for the
other flowers so diversified with the same colours.
The leaves and stalk are a blueish green, only at the
joints there is for the most part a yellowish tinge,
which is also at the bottom of the cup and scales.
PIONIES.
Deep carmine, darkening with the same, as the
shades grow darker, add indigo to the carmine; the
stalk sap-green and carmine; the leaves sap-green,
shaded with indigo and French berries; the under parts
not so dark.
POLYANTHOSES.
These flowers, like many others of different sizes
and colours, are so variegated, that nature seems to
have taken a pride in showing how far she can ex-
ercise herself.: But we would not advise the student
to look on them with an eye of contempt, nor think
it condescension to copy the works of unerring na-
ture ; since in them, there are so many various beau-
ties, as gives auriculas very little, if any preference.
This which we describe is mottled with purple and
white, the edges and cup pure gainbodge, shaded with
gall-stone; marble the leaves with Prussian bluë and
a e




carmine mixed ; wash the flowers at the back with-
carmine and a little lake ; shaded with carmine and
fap-green.
ANOTHER METHOD.
In the centre of the cup is a small spot, which
with the cup paint straw-colour; the spot must re-
main, the cup shaded with vermilion and bistre mixed;
some space round the cup hatch with straw-colour,
in the shape of the flower, the outside edges white ;
circle.
POMEGRANATE BLOSSOMS;
Red lead shaded with carmine.
The stalk and leaves green.
RANUNCULUSSES.
There are a great variety of these flowers; the
student will have a delighful pastime in studying from
nature; and as his eye will be agreeably entertained
with a diversity of colours, so will he find himself im-
proved by painting from them. We should recom-
mend him therefore carefully to observe and peruse with
attention the rules of nature and the following :
A sine wash of red lead, striped with carmine,
finished with carmine and sap-green mixed; the seeds
indigo or Indian ink, stippled with white: the leaves
and stalks as fritillaries.
ANOTHER








White, the upper parts striped with red; the white
leaves shaded with sap-green and Indian ink, the sap-
green predominant ; stripe the outside of the leaves
with carmine.
ROSES.
ee No Flower that blows is like the Rose. When
we consider their noble and majestic appearance, it is
no wonder we see them so often introduced in wreaths
and bafkets of flowers. The nearest directions we
can give for imitating this king of flowers are the fol¬
lowing : a light tint of pure carmine, over which an-
other equally light of Prussian blue, which will give
the flowers a tint of that bloom which appears in na-
ture: proceed with darker shades of carmine of the
best sort, in the darkest parts of the flower add a lijtle
indigo, which will give a roundness and body to your
work; if the seeds are seen, lay on some gambodge,
shaded with-gall-stone; the upper sides of the leaves
sap-green, shaded with indigo and French berrics
mixed; the under part white, indigo, and sap-green
mixed, shaded with the same.
The stalks brown made of sap-green and carmine,
shaded with indigo.
ROSE BUDS.
We shall not here undertake to describe the different
colours and various tints, with which nature has fur-
nished us ; a pale wasn of carmine, shaded with a
stronger wasn of the same; let the hatchings be ex-
tremely tender, preserving that transparency and sweet-
nefs the flower has by nature.
The stalks and leaves begin and finish with sap-
green, after which a slight wasn of carmine.
GUELDER-




GUELDER ROSES.
Flake white, shaded with Indian ink and sap-green
mixed, keeping a proper gradation of shades.
The leaves as crown imperials; the stalk bistre,
shaded with Indian ink, so as to express wood.
MUNDI ROSES,
A slight wasti of carmine, heightened with white;
shaded with Indian ink and sap-green mixed, adding
more Indian ink for the darker shades, striped as holly-
hocks. The leaves and stalks sap-green, adding a
little indigo for the darker shades.
ST. JOHN’S WORTS.
Gambodge, shaded with bistre or carmine and sap-
green mixed.
Tlie leaves as Guernsey lilies.
SNOW-DROPS.
Flake-white, the inner petals edged
green.
The leaves and stalks Prussian blue and vellow ber-
ries mixed, the first most predominant ; shaded with
indigo and gambodge mixed.
SINGLE STOCKS.
A thin wash of carmine, proceed with a stronger
layer of the same; sinish with sap-green and carmine
mixed; shade round the seeds sap-green.
The leaves and stalks gambodge, white, and sap-
green ; shaded with a tint of indigo, finissied with a
darker of the same.






DOUBLE STOCKS.
There are of these flowers different colours; some
are a purplish crimson only, others mottled with crim-
son and white, and some are all white: for the crim-
fon a little Prussian blue and carmine mixed ; for the
mottled ones use the same colour, stipple them with
flake-white; the white fort shade with Indian ink and
sap-green mixed.
The leaves and stalks pleafant green, inclining to a
white.
SUN-FLOWERS.
There are only two forts, the common fun-flower,
and the same improved; for the first, a slight wasn of
carmine, deepen that with another, shaded with ver-
milion, carmine and bistre, mixed ; finisn the deepest
shades with the same, being careful to relieve the flower,
making it look round; the feeds shade the same as
the flower, the darkest much deeper; the seeds on the
light side heighten, stippling them with flake-white,
washed over with gambodge very lightly ; the lights in
the same manner.
The leaves and stalks fap-green and gambodge mixed,
finished with sap-green alone.
SWEET WIELIAMS.
Some of these flowers are endowed with an agreeable
variety, some are stippled by nature, and others possess
one colour only ; we shall endeavour to show how to
colour two, and leave matchlefs nature to direct the
pupil in his farther studies. In working the first, wash
with carmine till it is a rich crimson; finished with
carmine and sap-green.





The other, a pale tint of carmine, shaded with the
same very dark, stipple round the fibre with flake-
white; the fibres in the middle Indian ink.
The leaves and stalks begin and finish with sap-
green ; touched with pale carmine.
TULIPS.
These flowers are justly admired for their gaiety
and multiplicity of colours; what a profusion of dies
array their painted cupsl their tinges are glowing i
their contrasts strong; and the arrangement of them
both elegant and artful: nature has in the tulip diverted
the eye with an agreeable and enchanting variety.
Begin by striping with white well blended with car-
mine; add some very tender stripes with gambodge,
heightened with carmine, for the darkest shades a little
sap-green mixed with it; shade the yellow stripes with
the same mixture, the darkest shades vermilion and
bistre mixed.
ANOTHER METHOD.
Begin by striping with gambodge, proceed with
purple stripes; in doing of which be careful to pre-
serve the white ones, which will give an agreeable
effect: the darker shades liquid purple, to which (if
requisite) add a little Prussian blue.
The leaves and stalks sap-green, shaded with the
same.
PARROT TULIPS.
These flowers derive their name from the uncommon
appearances at the back of each petal, which very much
resembles the beak of a parrot: the edges of these tu-
lips are jagged, and much unlike the other tulips in
shape, though not in colour.
DOUBLE





DOUBLE VIOLETS.
The ground as the former, the inner petals tinged
with purple ; the stalks, which are green, tinge the
same as the petals towards the bottom.
The leaves strong green.
WALL-FLOWERS.
For the common fort gambodge shaded with gall-
stone. But that fort most esteemed by the florist, is
called the bloody wall; the outer petals gambodge,
tinged with a little of the purple of logwood; the inner
petals red lead finished with carmine; the cup purplish
brown.
The leaves and stalk bluisn green, to be worked as
those of the flowers of the same colour.
DOUBLE WHITE NARCISSUS.
Flake-white, the first shade fap-green, and a little
Indian ink, adding more Indian ink in the darker
shades; tinge the bottom of each petal green; the
narrow edge that surrounds a turf of small petals in
the centre, carmine.
The stalks and leaves the same as lris’s.
The sheath at the bottom, pale brown.
 Wherever while occurs, it is always better to leavs
the paper, if sufficiently white, to represent that colour.




SOME EXCELLENT RECEIPTS FORTHOSE
WHO PAINT IN WATER COLOURS.
DOIL two ounces of the best and clearest glue,
Dwith one pint of pure water, and half an ounce of
the finest roche alum, till dissolved. This is a very
serviceable liquor, with which you may temper those
colours intended for sky, as it will preveut them from
cracking.
TO MAKE GUM WATER.
Dissolve an ounce of the best white gum arabic, and
half an ounce of double refined sugar, in a quart of
spring water, strain it through a piece of mussin; then
bottle it off for use, keeping it free from dust.
ANOTHER METHOD.
Take the whitest sort of gum arabic, bruise and tie
it in a piece of woollen cloth, steep it in spring water
till dissolved. If too stiff, which is known by the
shiining of the colours, add more water, if too weak
more gum. With this water you may temper most of
your colours, using such a quantity of it, that the
colours when dry, being touched, will not come off.
To make Size for Candle Light Pieces. See Page 10.
TOKEEP THE FLIES FROM YOUR WORK.
Having prepared your gum water according to either
of the preceding directions, add a little coloquinteda,
which, if your performance should be exposed, will
keep it from being damaged by the flies.









TO PREPARE ALUM WATER.
Take four ounces of roche alum, and a pint of pure
spring water, boil it till the alum is thoroughly dissolv-
ed silter it through blotting paper, and it is fit for use,
Before you lay on the colours, take fome of this water
hot, and with a sponge wet the back of the paper,
which if it is not good must be wetted three or four
times. This will not only prevent the sinking of the
colours, but will also keep them from fading, and give
an additional beasty and lustre. Remember that the
paper must be dried each time before you wet it
again.
TO MAKE LIME WATER,
Put some unslaked lime in a well glazed pan, cover
it with pure water, one inch above the lime, let it re-
main so for one day ; then strain off the water and
keep it for use : by the means of this water you may
change sap green into blue.
TOMAKE ALIXIVIUMOF PEARL ASHES,
Steep half an ounce of pearl ashies in clear water for
one day, strain off the water as clean as possible; this
infusion will prove extremely serviceable in many co-
lours, particularly Brasil wood, to which it will give
an additional beauty and lustre.
TO RECOVER DECAYED COLOURS.
Take douhle-distilled rosemary water, or pure essence
of rosemary, and with a few drops temper your colours,
which








which however dead and faded will recover their pri-
mitive brilliancy; this essence will prevent the bubbles
which are troublesome in grinding white and umber.
TO PREPARE LIQUID GOLD. FOR
VELLUM-PAINTING, FANS, &c.
Having procured some of the finest leaf gold, grind it
with strong gum water, adding more gum water as
you see requisite ; when thoroughly ground, temper
it with a small quantity of mercury sublimate, binding
it in the shell with a little dissolved gum; spread it
equally over the shell, and use it with fair water only.
A LIQUID SILVER, FOR THE SAME USE.
The manner of making this is the same as that of
liquid gold, only remembering to temper it with the
glaire of eggs, and not water.
TO MAKE THE GLAIRE OF EGGS.
Beat the whites with a spoon, till they rise in a
foam ; let them stand twelve hours, and it will be
good glaire.
TO RECOVER LIQUID SILVER THAT
HAS CONTRACTED RUST.
If your silver becomes rusty, cover that part of
the performance with the juice of garlick, which will
recover it effectually.




 
TO MAKE A SINGLE GROUND TO LAT
SILVER OR GOLD UPON,
Take the new shreds of parchment (they being pre-
ferable to glove leather) boil them in a quart of spring
water till consumed to a pint ; strain the size from the
shreds, and put it into a well-glazed pan; use it before
it is cold; be careful when you lay on your silver or-
gold, that your size is not too moist nor too dry, for
in either case you will be in danger of impairing your
performancc.
TO TAKE THE IMPRESSION OF THE WINGS OF A
BUTTERFLY IN ALL THEIR COLOURS.
Kill it without spoiling; cut off the body close to
the wings, which contrive to spread in a flying position;
then take a piece of white paper, wash part of it with
thick gum-water, when dry lay it on a smooth board
with the wings on the gum-water; lay another paper
over that, press both very hard, let them remain under
pressure for an hour; afterwards take off the wings of
the butterfly, and you will find a perfect impression of
them with all their various colours remaining on the
paper. Draw between the wings of the impression
the body of the butterfly, and colour it after life.
TO TAKE THE IMPRESSION OF A LEAF
OF ANY TREE.
Gently rub the leaf on the backside with a piece of
ivory, or such like substance, so as to bruise the veins
a little; wet the same side gently with linseed-oil, and
press it hard upon a piece of white paper, and you will
have the perfect figure of the leaf, with every vein
justly expressed; then colour it, and it will appear a
correct and beautiful imitation of nature.
OF







OF PAINTING ON GLASS.

PAINTING on glafs is an art which has been
esteemed by the generality of mankind an amuse-

ment attended with many difficulties ; yet nothing can
afford a moré splendid and magnificent representation
of nature, than a painting well executed in this man¬
ner ; there being no outlines or shading required, those
in the print answering that end.
Mezzotinto prints are generally used for this pur-
pose, the shades and lines not being so harsh and abrupt
as those of engraving, as they are-Blénded into each
other, and have the appearance of a drawing in
Indian ink.
Having procured such mezzotinto prints as you in-
tend to paint, cut off thè margins, and get a piece of
the best crown glass, the size of the print (free from
knots and scratches); clean it well with whiting, lay on
one side some Venice turpentine with a hog’s hair
brushi as thin and smooth as possible ; lay the print flat
in water, and let it remain on the surface till it sinks ;
take it carefully out with its face downwards, and dab
it between some papers till no water appears, yet so as
the print remains damp.
Afterwards lay the damp print on its back upon a
ffat table ; hold the glass over it without touching the
turpentine, till it is exactly even with the print, then
letting the glass fall gently on it, carefully pressit down
with your fingers in different parts, so that the turpen-
tine may stick to the print: then taking it up, hold
the glafs towards you, pressing the print from the cen-
tre towards the edges till no blisters remain.









Next wet the back of your print with a sponge, till
the paper will rub off with your fingers, rub it gently,
and the white paper will come off, leaving a very plain
impression on the glass: when dry, wet it all over with
a camel’s hair pencil dipt in turpentine oil, and it will
be perfectly transparent, and fit for painting.
COLOURS FOR PAINTING ON GLASS.
  HE colours fit for painting on glass are ground
in oil, and tied up in small bladders; which
are to be had at the colour shops.
Whites.
Blues.
Flake-White-
Blue Bice.
Spodium.
Prussian Blue.
Indigo.
Saunders Blue.
Blacks.
Smalt.
Lamp-Black.
lvory-Black.
Greens.
Verdigrise.
Brouns.
Green Verditure.
Spanish Brown.
Terre Verte.
Umber.
Jellows.
Reds.
English Pink.
Dutch Pink.
Rose Pink.
Vermilion.
Mafficot.
Orpiment.
Red Lead.
Indian Red.
Englisn Ochre.
Lake Cinnabar.
Spruce Ochre.




The reason of not mentioning the carmine (for red)
and the ultramarine (for blue) in the above list is on
account of its being beft to purchase and keep them in
powder, as they are liable to be lost, as a small touch
of these will give the painting an enlivening cast; what
you require for present use, mix with a few drops of
nut-oil upon your pallet, with your pallet knife.
The pallet and pallet knives may be had at the
colour shops.
Prick a small hole at the bottom of each bladder
you want to get the colour out of, and press out no
more upon your pallet than you intend for immediate
use, as the colours are apt to dry and skin over.
Then laying a sheet of white paper on the table, set
the glass rather sloping against two small sticks fixed
perpendicular, about twelve inches afunder, which will
be à sufficient support, and the outlines and tints will
appear on the glafs : hold your pallet on your left hand,
and proceed to decorate as follows :
OF WORKING THE COLOURS.
S the lights and shades are dispersed on the picture,
A be careful in disposing of the colours accordingly;
lay on the light colours on the lightest parts of the
print, and the darker over the shaded; the brighter
colours being laid on properly, it is not of any material
consequence, if the darker ones should by accident run
over them; for the upper colour cannot be seen
through that which was laid on first; for instance :
GREENS.












GREENS.
First lay on some verdigrise, mix that and Dutch
pink for the next: this may be made darker or lighter
by adding more or less Dutch pink.
BLUES.
The lights, ultramarine or blue bice, the first shade
Saunders blue, the darkest indigo.
REDS.
or red lead (thoroughly ground),
The first minium,
shaded with lake, in the highest parts touch with car-
mine, which will enliven your painting, and set it off
to great advantage.
YELLOWS,
The lightest yellow massicot, shaded with Dutch pink,
Any of these colours may be darkened by adding to
them a darker shade of the same colour on your pallet ;
or lightened by mixing them with white.
If the colours are too thick, make them thinner by
mixing with them a few drops of turpentine oil, for
they must never be used thick; as you will be in danger
of spoiling the piece.
Have a pencil for each colour; never put a brush
which you have used ’for one colour into any other,
before you have washed you brush well in turpentine
oil, particularly green, as that colour will appear pre-
dominant when dry.
Observe when you have done using your brushes, they
are to be thoroughly washed in the oil of turpentine.
The glafs being painted, let it remain three or four
days free from dust, and it is fit for framing.
& All Sorts of Mezzotinto Prints proper for painting on
Glass, may be had of CARINSTON BOWLES, No. 69,
in St. Paul’s Church Yard.








TO MAKE A CONVENIENT BOX TO
HOLD COLOURS, &c.
Let the size be two feet six inches long, one foot
four inches wide, and five inches deep, with partitions :
C. To receive
A. Turpentine
the Leavings of
Oil for washing
Colours.
Pencils.
D. For Bottles
F. For
E. For Colours
lof Oil and the
in Bladders,
dry Colours.
Knife.
and the Pallet.
G.
For Pencils and Sticks.
A, a box lined with tin, fixed in the great box, to
contain turpentine oil for washing the pencils after they
have been used before they are laid by.
Between A and C upon the tin, at B is the place
for pressing the colour out of the brush after being
dipped in the oil of turpentine to clean it : the colours
which fall into the box C, will, with their oils, make a
very good size for gold.
The partition D is lined with tin, as it is to enclose
the bottles of nut and burnt oil (which you should
never be without), also the oils of turpentine and lin-
seed; which was it not lined, the frequent taking the
bottles out, would grease and stain the wood, whereas
the tin will preserve it free from any stain.
The




The partition E in the middle of the box is also
made of tin, to take out whenever it is required, as
that is to contain the bladders of oil-colours. Over
these lay the pallet, which clean as soon as done with,
with turpentine oil, or else lay it in water sufficient
to cover the colours, which will keep the colours till
the next occasion, preventing a very great waste. Rub
the pallet with a clean cloth and linseed or nut oil, till
it is quite dry, it will be neat, and fit for the recep-
tion of the colours.
The box F is divided into several parts for keeping
the dry colours distinct, and from spoiling each other;
in the same place keep the ultramarine and carmine.
The box G is for the reception of the pencils after
they are cleaned, where they will be ready whenever
they are wanted. Observe that some of the pencils are
to be used in laying on the colours, while others are
of white hair for the softening and blending them in
each other as soon as laid on, that if the student should
leave off harsh and abruptly, the place may not be
distinguishable.
The professor in this polite art, fhould not have lefs
than two or three dozen camel’s hair pencils of va-
rious sizes, with sticks to each, about ten or twelve
inches long, made of cedar.
If there is occasion to grind the colours, provide 2
stone, which may be made of a pebble or fine marble
thoroughly polished, to be had at any stone-mason’s.
If there be a large quantity of colour to grind, the
oil must be in proportion, and never overpower it with
à superfluous quantity ; the colour must be ground as
smooth as butter; dip a piece of bladder in warm
water to mollify and make it more pliable; this done,
immediately tie up the colour in it, and it will be fit
for use when required.





But though you take all the care possible, when the
colours are exposed to the air, and used in small quan¬
tities, there will be a thick hard skin over them in a
very short time, which though it may be taken off
with a pallet knife, will occasion a great decrease of
colour. After the fkin is taken off, the remainder will
in all probability prove too thick for use, without a
drop or two of nut-oil, which must be well tempered-
with the pallet-knife.
Once more let us caution the artist to keep his
brushes to their separate colours ; for the mixing of
them is attended with many ill consequences, and will
greatly endanger the whole of his performance.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS.
.
1HE best pastils or crayons are those imported from
4 Switzerland, which are to be had at the colour-
fhops. The forts are as follow :
White, black, yellow, orange, purple, red, blue
green,. and brown, each of which may be used in
ihading, the two first excepted.
DIRECTIONS FOR USING THEM.
Rough Venice paper is used on this occasion, which
is of a whited-brown colour, the stiffer the better; but
there is a fort much preferable called cape-paper, as it
distributes the colours to the best advantage.
By
crayons, figures may be represented in their proper co-
lours as appearing to the eye, because the colours can
be matched with the crayons, which being dry will
not fade; whereas colours, when wet, seem deeper
zhan when dry, which perplexes a young beginner.
Provide




Provide also some thick smooth light blue, or other
paper, getting a straining-frame from a frame-maker,
strain a piece of Scotch or lrifh cloth over it, which
may be done by drawing and fastening it with small
tacks round the edges till quite finooth; damp your
paper with a sponge dipt in water, paste it, layrng it
on the cloth, being particular that it is even with the
straining-frame ; place à piece of white paper upon the
table, put the straining-frame with the hlue paper
downwards upon it, keeping it steady with one hand;
rub the cloth close to the paper with the other; then
turning the frame, with a piece of white paper in your
hand rub close the edges. When it is dry set it on an
easel (which vou may have at the colour shops) and
proceed as follows :
With charcoal sketch your rough draught, and with
black, white, or red chalk, correct your faults. Hav-
ing thus outlined your object compleatly, the crayons
may be rubbed in ; but care is required concerning the
proper colours ; then soften or blend them together
with your singer or fitch.
When you prepare the crayons for use, remember to
cut the points from the bottom upwards, and take care
they are not made too sharp, the red ochre, charcoal,
and white chalk excepted.
As it is difficult to get crayons that are really good,
we think it no way superfluous to give the student the
method of preparing them.
DIRECTIONS





DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING CRAYONS.
WHITES.
No other is required than the best and softest French
or Italian white chalk cut into pieces about two inches
long, and a quarter of an inch in thickness ; with your
penknife round off the corners, and point them as
before directed.
Of these it will be expedient that the artist should
have a great number (as they are of continual use) and
must be kept separate from the rest,tor they will other-
wise be much discoloured.
YELLOWS.
As yellows are next to be treated of, we shall divide
them into seven different shades.
First. Take flour of brimstone and grounds of
starch, with the pallet knife incorporate them upon a
polished marble, it will make an agreeable straw
colour; bring it to the consistency of a paste, with
milk or pale ale wort: with the pallet knife spread it
on apiece of smooth cloth, till it is in thicknessabout one
third of an inch, let it remain so till half dry ; with
a sharp knife reduce it into pieces about two inches
long, and one third of an inch wide : roll it between
your hands, or two pieces of board, till round as the
stem of a tobacco pipe, and not much thicker, point
it as directed for the chalk. Or if most convenient,
use ground chalk instead of the grounds of starch, as
that will work near the same effect.
Second. Yellow ochre well ground upon a stone
with a muller in fair water, dry and beat it by mixing




fuch a quantity of ground chalk, or grounds of starch,
as will render it à little darker than the preceding :
mixing with it as much milk as will make it a pafte,
forming it into crayons as before. A little sugar candy
may be dissolved in the milk-
Third. Grind yellow ochre and water; when dry
beat it well, mix it with a very little ground chalk to be
darker than the former, add to it pale ale wort or size ;
make it into crayons as before. For the method of
preparing the size, we refer the reader to those useful
receipts, published in the directions for painting in
water colours, page 10.
Fourth. Grind English pink with water as the for-
mer; when dry beat it in the same manner; mix it
with a little of the grounds of the best white chalk, that
it may be darker than the former colour; incorporate
with it as much pale ale wort as will bring it to a paste,
a
prepare and reduce it into crayons as before directed.
Fifth. Mix English pink with pale ale wort.
After being ground with pure spring water, reduce it
to crayons, according to the aforementioned directions.
Sixth. Dutch pink prepared as the former.
Seventh. Orpiment, mixed with a fittle ground
chalk or grounds of starch well incorporated, and
brought to the consistency of a paste with pale ale
wort, in which must be dissolved some gum dragon,
then rollit in crayons according to the first direction.
N. B. Orpiment is poisonous.
GRANGE.







ORANGE COLOURS.
First. Grind orpiment, and make it into crayons
from the foregoing directions.
Second. Grind red lead with pure water very fine,
when dry beat it with ground orpiment; mix a small
quantity of red lead (that is, so much as will make it a
shade darker than the preceding) ; dissolve gum dragon
in milk or ale wort, and with it temper your colours ;
roll it into crayons as before.
Third. Grind English pink with pure water, mix
ât with as much vermilion as will make it agreeable to
your design ; boil ale wort till it becomes glutinous,
with which bring your colour to a paste, then cut it in
lengths; roll it as before.
Fourth. Prepare English pink and red lead as be-
fore ; mix as much of them together as will make it a
shade darker than the former. Mix these with ale wort
prepared as above, and so into crayons.
Fifth. Mix as much Dutch pink finely ground
with red lead as will bring it to the shade required,
and proceed as before.
Be careful in the compounding these colours, to
make as many shades as possible.
REDS.
First. Grind red lead very fine with pure water;
when dry beat it as sine as possible, heighten it with white
chalk finely ground; dissolve some gum dragon in ale
wort, make your composition into paste; cut and roll
it






it into crayons. Of this composition you may make
different shades, by adding more or less white.
Second. The best red lead ground ; proceed as
before directed.
Third. Prepare red ochre in the same manner as
white chalk.
Fourth. Fine white chalk, or white lead well pul¬
verized ; with it mix some vermilion ground to the
state pf an impalpable powder. Divide them into
three or four shades, make each of them into paste
with ale wort boiled ; cut and roll them as before.
Fifth. Grind vermilion very fine with a stone and
muller, mix it with pale ale wort as before directed
roll it into crayons.
Sixth. Lake of the best sort, well ground with
water, when dry, beat it to an impalpable powder.
Divide it in three or four separate parcels ; add more
or less white to each, as will give them different
shades, work each parcel into paste with ale wort,
afterwards into crayons.
Seventh. Reduce pure lake to as fine a powder as
possible with clear water; after it is dry reduce
to as fine a powder as before, mix it with milk,
or ale wort, and bring it into crayons according to the
first directions.
Eighth. Indian lake ; prepare it as the former.
This alone will be a very strong. colour; but make
three différent shades at leaft, by the addition of more
or less white.
Ninth. Cut rose pink into the shape of crayons,
they will be fit for use without any farther prepara-
tion. Carmine will come very expensive, as a shiil-
lings-worth will make but a very small crayon.
BLUES.








BLUES.
First. Blue bice, well ground with pure water,
when dry, reduce it to a powder again, adding to it
white chalk finely powdered; divide it into parcels,
put to each more or lefs chalk, fo as to produce vari-
ous shades. Bring these to the consistency of a paste
with ale wort mixed with a litile size, made ac-
cording to the former directions ; proceed with mak-
ing them into crayons.
Second. Blue bice alone finely ground, and pre-
pared as the preceding.
Third. Grind verditure with water ; let it dry;
after wliich beat it into a powder, so fine as that no
lumps can be seen ; divide it into four or five parcels,
to all of which, except one, add such different pro-
portions of white chalk, as will make them fhades
for each other: make these into paste with pale
ale wort, wherein gum dragon has been dissolved ;
and that blue with which no white has been mixed,
make into paste with pale ale wort and a little size,
into crayons as before.
Fourth. Prussian blue; be very careful that it
is thoroughly ground; make it into paste with pale
ale wort boiled, and thickened with size, so into
cravons, in pursuance of the first directions. To
make lighter shades, Prussian blue; after you have
groind it well by itself and dried it, divide it into
two or three parcels, to each of which add white
chalk, in proportion as you would have the shades
lighter or darker; make these into paste with ale wort
boiled, into crayons, as the former.
Fifth. Rock indigo well ground in pure water,
dry it, reduce it to a very fine powder, divide it into
several parcels, to which add white chalk in diffe-
rent









rent proportions ; mix these with pale ale wort
boiled, have at least four shades of them; for the
darkest use indigo made into paste as the rest, and into
crayons according to the first directions,
PURPLES.
First. Rose pink; grind it as fine as possible, when
dry powder it, mix it well with a little Saunders blue,
till it appears of the colour you desire; then bring it
to a paste ; proceed as before.
Second. Lake finely ground and washed, add to it
as much blue bice as will make it of an agreeable
reddisn purple ; make this of two or three different
degrees, each lighter than the other, and into the
lighter parts put white chalk or grounds of the best
white starch; make them into paste with ale wort
boiled, and mixed with size, and then into crayons as
before.
Third. Grind lake with pure water; add as much
Prussian blue to it, as will make it of the purple you
desire ; mix these well together in several parcels,
making some more inclining to blue, others to red; to
the faintest add as much white chalk as you see ne-
cessary; make the separate parcels into paste with ale
wort boiled till it becomes glutinous, then into crayons
in the same manner as before.
BLACKS.
First. The black which is generally used for cray-
ons, is charcoal cut into pieces about two inches long,
and a quarter of an inch wide; the softest and best
are those made of willows. Have of these at least
one dozen, because the contrasts black and white are
most wanted.






Second. Grind ivory black as fine as possible witli
pure water, adding to it in the grinding a small quan¬
tity of indigo, which will very much enliven the black,
and relieve it from that deadness which attends it
when used by itself; make it into paste with boiled
ale wort, inbo crayons, as before.
BROWNS.
First. Fullers earth of the best and purest sort,
grind it well with water, add to it some ground chalk
in, different quantities, that you may have three or
four different shades; mix each of these up with pale
àle wort, boil it till it becomes glutinous, and roll it
into crayons.
Second. Spanish brown, ground well with water,
add in the grinding some fullers earth, which will very
much enlighten it, the Spanish brown being of itself
a very dark colour; when dry beat it into a powder
again, divide it into four different parcels, to three of
which put grounds of starch in different degrees, so
that you mav preserve several shades of colour. Mix.
each of these separately into paste with a little size of
isinglass, or pale ale wort boiled, or thick water-gruel
wherein gum-dragon has been dissolved; make it into
crayons, according to former directions.
Third. Indian ink and Spanish brown, well ground
together, mix them with ale wort till they are as stiff
as paste. Of this colour you may make different
fhiades, by adding more or less white.
GREENS.
First. Distilled verdigrise well ground with strong
vinegar, wash it well with water, as follows : Put the
verdigrise into water, let it remain there about a mi-
nute,






fiute. pour the water off into a cup, let it settle ; then
pour that from it, washi it again in the same manner,
when dry make it into crayons of different shades
with ground white chalk.
Second. Boil the best verdigrise, with sharp vine-
gar, while boiling add to it a little powdered tartar,
which being of so sharp a nature will soon dissolve the
verdigrise, then you will have à liquor of a very fine
colour, somewhat inclinable to blue; set the liquor in
siall galilpots, exposed to the air, which will soon be
congealed and become hard; mix it with as much-ale
wort as will bring it to a pafte and crayons as befoce
directed.
Third. Verdigrise prepared after the last manner,
reduce and divide it'into several parcels, add Prussian
blue in different proportions, as you would have them
lighter or darker, to the lightest parts add a little white
chalk, or a little straw colour, to variegate the shades
as much as possible. Mix all these with pale ale wort
boiled, as before directed.
Fourth. Grind blue bice very fine, in the grinding
add to it some of the best Dutch pink: divide it into
several parts, make different shades with white chalk ;
bring them to a paste with ale wort boiled, then into
crayons.
Fifth. Grind rock indigo very fine with pure water;
dry it, reduce it to powder, divide it into four parcels
at least; add to some, Dutch pink, to others Dutch
pink and brimstone, for the lightest, flour of brimstone
only. After you have made as many shades as you
desire, bring them into a paste with pale ale wort
mixed with size, made according to that receipt
prescribed in the directions for painting in water-
colours, page 10 ; cut them into lengths, roll them into
crayons as at first directed.
Sixth.





Sixth. Grind rock indigo with water, divide it
into parcels more or less as you think proper, add
Dutch pink in such different quantities as will produce
several shades: after these are well incorporated, make
them into paste with boiled ale wort, roll them into
crayons according to the former directions.
The artist will find these crayons far preferable to
those generally bought at shops, which being frequently
tempered so high with gum-water, renders them so
stiff and obdurate,that they will too often rather scratch,
than give any appearance of colour upon your paper-
on the contrary, those which we have recommended,
may be used with all the ease and freedom imaginable,
and will express the diversity of colours as pleasant and
agreeable as can be desired.
When the student is desirous of making a drawing
in crayons, either from nature, or from a correct imi-
tation of nature, he should be careful, before he be-
gins, that he has every colour that is in his original,
as he cannot hére, as in a painting either in water or
oil colours, prepare a colour at a minutes warning;
which consideration it was that induced us to direct so
many shades to be made from each colour.
The artist, in order to keep his colours separate,
(for if they mix, it will, on account of their softnefs,
be very prejudicial to them) should be prepared with a
box which contains as many partitions as will keep
each shade by itself.











































































































































































































































































































