DIRECTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN
D
R A)
6.
IA

-
6
rDn.6
VIIIS ufeful, noble, and extentive Anr, befides its be-
4 ing an immediate Introduction to Pagnring, Scculpture,
Engraving, with all the train of graceful ftudies coinciding
therewith, is even neceliary to form the minds of Vouth for
S.7
whatever ftation designed, fince nothing informs or corre-ts
our ideas to foon as a trae knowledge of Symmetry and Pro-
portion. Although this Art, in its exrent, be as (pacious as
Observation can difcover, or Imagination conceive, yet in
the following sheets may be found an Abstract, containing
Examples amply fuflicient to direct a reaius, in the leaft apt
or inquifitive, not forgetting diligence, but laying afule fear;
becauteevery freth attempt on the fame fubjest wille dence
1312
an amendment to encourace the rearner. It would be rail on
3
2 fudden to expect perfection in this Art; yet, after a rew
painful Essavs, a pleature facceeds in the prespect, and

grows in the praciice, beyond that of any other Acquintion;
and fare no one would fpare the Means where the and is to
defirable. Not one Book has hitherto appeared in this coun-
try well fuited to tacilitate the artainment of this Rrt; yer
we are always invited to attenl to auple anl learned in-
siructions to beginners, where the preliminary diccourtes
often puzzle and confute the ideas more than the examples
they recommend are ever able to cradicate. But fince cxain-
ple has made verhal Inftructions expected, we here fobjom
fuch as feem to us necettery for a Work of this kind, viz.
Any of the following Examples being placed before you,
a BLACK LEAD PERCTL. and PAPER are all the requitites
reedful. Then Highily tkeich the general proportions, from
the object to placed, which carefully furvey, and alter by


2
Pubbing it gently out with Htale bread or Indiarubber, flights
ly and cautioutly retouching with more correctness, Hill
keeping your copy fo faint that you may with cafe rub out
When you can find no farther difagreement
and amend it.
from the original in your Lketch, freth point your pencil,
and keeping a wafte paper under your hand, begin to finith
your out-lme, taking particular care to obferve and imitate
ruch parts as appear dark, diffinctly from thofe which are
faint or fmaller, the ftrong touches being what give fpirit to
the out-line, and when properly given, always denote a
tnafter's hand. Let your greateft application be employed in
miking a perfect out-line, for in this principally confifts the
Art of Dincing; this fully attained, the ftudy and practice will
becomedelightful. Theout-line compleated, light and hadow
become your next concern; which is a labour to pleafing,
that no commendation can be given, adequate to the pleafur.
a real Profeffor finds in the execution of this Art, or rather
Science fucceeding Art. Beginners are apt to leave the Hudy
of out-lines too foon, and to commence painters; like thote
who raife a firucture cre the foundation be compleated. Light
and Shadow are produced by Eicbing or Hatching, Wushine
7
Chiaro Ojcuro, Painting, Modelling, Sculpture, tcc. s the
firft threeare chiefly uted by learners, we shall give a few hints
for the executing of cach.
And firtt of Hatening: carefully observe the Burin, or
manner in which the rokes of the original are laid, and
keep with exactncts the form, not to much regarding their
number; firft flightly making them all of a thicknets, and
after by various retouchings, frengthen them to the tone of
colour in your original, whether you ufe black or red chalk:,
or black lead; which may be ufed fingly or thus compound-
ed, working the fainter parts with black lead, and wive
2


Hrength with black chalk: or finithing your drapery, hair
and eyc-brows in this manner, and the fleth or naked with
fed chalk. This method ir beft for copying engraved prints,
which we principally recommend to beginners.
Next of Walhing or Shading with Indian Ink. Goexactly
over your out-line with a pen dipped in common Ink, with
clean ftale bread or India rubber, rub cut all remains of
your black lead; then mix your indian Ink, by rubbing it
in an earthen faucer with water, till it is pretty blact. Then
take another clean faucer and dip your pencil in the tLim
Ink, and with water mix it to the lighteit frade; as is aries
deepen it, where neceffary, till you come up to the Hrengtl
of your original. This method is molt proper to ufe in
drawing from mezzotintos or paintings.
Laftly of Crayons, beginning with black and white: take
blue or purple-coloured paper, and having ccattly formed
your out-line, begin on the fecond degree of your thades,
and with black chalk darken downwards; then take white
French chalk, to be had at all colour shops, and heighten
the lighter parts to a perfect white. In this manner all
paintings may be copied in their proper colours, by haring
different Crayons of each colour, from dark to light in due
gradations; and practifing by the preceding rule, rolling a
piece of paper to a point, and dezzeling or rubbing each co-
four on the paper when finithed, to prevent their coming off,
which yet will be tender, and shhould be kept behind a glats.
Alaterials ased in Draceing
Charcoal, cut in long Slip..
Camels Heir Verncil.
Biack 1ead Pencils.
FittE.
Cravon: of black, white, and rid Rall..
row-CQuill Pen..
A Port Crayon.
A Ruler and a Pair of Compatles.
Indian ink.
Jnlid Rubber.


4
Sul Bublilbcd.
LONDON: Printed for the Preprictors EOWLES aid CaRVEk,
At their Niap and PRINT WAREHOUSE,
No. 69, St. Paits (burch Fard.
I. Borulers Priciples of Draaving; forminr a Complete Drawing Book:
illuffrated with a curious collection of exampes, beginning with an eaty and
timple method, calculated to conver inftrnction to young minds; by which they
may acquire the art without the affiftance of a mafter. Lvery branch of drawing
is contained in this book; fuch as the different parts of the human body, academy,
dreffed figures, landicapes, birds, cattle, shipping, &c. elegatly engraved on fixty
folio pages of copper plates, all from the original drawings of the moft approved
matters. To which is prefixed, an introduction to drawing; containing rules and
directions for the choice of infiruments and materials, and how to apply and
manage them. With eafe and proper letions for the young ftudent. Tranlared
from the French of Monficur Gerard de Lairetfe, with abtiracts from C. AI. du
Trefnoy. The feventh edicion, corrected and greatly improved; with additions.
Price 155.
1I. Bowles's Pasions of the Soul, reprefented in feveral heads, engraved in the
manner of drawings in chalk, from the defigns of the lare celebrated Pronlicur
Le Brun. In this tuperior performance, the lineaments of the face, that great
mirour of the foul! are not only minutely defcribed by letter-prefs, but are
admirably delineated on 20 folio copper-plates, in a friking and molt mafterly
Manner. Price 7s. 6d.
11l. Berohss Preforsions of the Human Bedy, meafured from the moft beautiful
antique ftatues, by Monficur Audran, Engiaver to the late King of France; done
from the originals, engraved at Paris, on 27 large Jolio copper-plates. Price 7s. 6d.
IV. Bavles & Drawing Bock fir Ladies; or, Complete Florys; being an extenfive and
curious collecion of the mott beautifil dowers, all drawn after nature, by A.
Fleckle; with a short introduction to drawing, and directions for mising and uing
of colours. Allo, feveral proper and ealy examples; the whole adapred for the
improvement of ladies in needle work. Engrared on 2½ Joho copper-plates.
Pricot.. Colied 125.
V. Rowse Kiw and Complete Buk of Crftme, detigned and engraved on 2.
capper platec by John Lockingion, imbuting a curiou frint of the Finguror
t hatlewsenc crown; to winch:. added, a print of the coronets and helmis ve-
longing tothe nobulity, &c. Thecyphers in this bock are ornametalle ditpoted
in the modintale, more requar than any ever publifired, afefid to artifis in va-
sime procetions, as feal and plate engravers, orvers, coach-painters, deligners for
cdals, trephier, embroiderers, cec. quarto. trice 6s.
N. E. of great Pariety of otber Draing Books.
5
ndnt Fi

EtiN xj


15
32
35
5
22
tand

25
341
14
14
132

5
5
t
34
D
A

i



