



F. 6 Parre

3
B O WL E S.

1595
X
Lattilts Allintant
I N
MEZZOTINTO
DRAWING.
SCRAPING.
PERSPECTIVE
PAINTING on GLASS,
ETCHING
in CRATONS, and in
WATER-COLOURS,
ENGRAVINC
And on SILk or SATIN.
C O N T A I N I N C
THE EASIEST AND MOST COMPREHENSIVE
S
E
L
0
R
For the Attainment of thofe truly
USEFUL and POLITE ARTS.
Methodically digefted, and adapted to
The CAPACITIES Of TOUNC BEGINNERS,
ILLUSTRATED WITH
SVITABLE EX AMPL ES
Engraved on FOUR COPPER-PLATES.
By the Av THOR of
Bowles's Art of Painting in Water-Colours.
1

   
   
THE SEVENTH EDITION.
Corrected and greatly Improved with Additions.

    


L ONDON:
Printed for and sold by the Propristor CARINCTON BOWLES,
At bis Mar and PRINT WAREHOUSE,
No. 69, St. Pauls Church Terd.
67
1





.

t

 a e n i es ae e a t     
R E F A C E.
T has ever been the misfortune of thofe who
a have profeffed to lay down rules for the ar-
tainment of any art or fcience, to leave them
enveloped with difficulties, which, if not ut
terly infuperable, at lealt difcourage the learner
from proceeding in a fudy which he can have
little hopes will ever reward his purfuit.
From hence we may reafonably infer, that the
said profeffors were tocally unacquainted, if not
with the theory, at leatt with the practical part
of what they underrook to teach others; and thar
the instructions they have given were founded
father upon a bare fuppofition of their efficacy,
than upon the furer bafis of long and repeared
Experience, which alone could have enfured their
fuccess, and from which, with all due deference
to the judicious, (whole fanction we shall at all
tines be ambitious to deferve) we may venture
to anfwer for the practicability of our own.
To obviate every objection, and to remove
all thofe difficulties which had fo long blocked
up the path of fcience, and retarded, if not
wholly impeded the pupil, in his progress to
the Temple of Fame, was the chief view in
compiling the fublequent little Treaufe.
A3
Over



18
P R E F A C E.
Overand above the improvements made in il.
luftrating the leveral arts hitherto to mperfectly

and unincelligibly expiained, we have introduc-
ed directions for Screping in Miezzolinto, which,
in this edition, are Hill further enlarged, and
which, as they have never been before artempt-
ed in any book of this kind, we flatter our-
felves will be the more acceptable; especially
when it shall appear from the rules laid down
for the performance of this art, that it is fo eaty
to be attained, that a rolerable proficiency in
Drewing, will enable any one to undertake is
with all imaginable prospect of fuccels.
The reader will alfo find, in this impreftion,
the addirion of very ufeful problems, in the ar-
ticle of Perspective, illuftrated by a new plate.
As this book is chiefly intended for the ufe
of young prectitioners, we have purpofely
avoided all abfirufe expressions and obfolete
terms, contenting ourfelves with such a familiar
Hile as we judged moft likely to inform thofe
minds we would with to improve yet, as the
ideas of an artifl are not wholly to be conveyed
without some neceffary terms peculiar to each
branch, we have taken care to explain fuch as
could not be omnted without a manifeft injury
to the work, by familiar words of a fynony.
imous tendency, wherever they occur; to that
we apprehend we have not left the leaft fum-
bling-block for the reader to encounter.
INDEE





 





E

N
1
CHAP. I.
Pase
FDRAING.

5 General Rules for Drawing..10
Of Copying of Draughts...12
Of Enlarging and Contratting....13
Of Imitation of Life.13
Of Drapery24
Of Landscape.15
Of Light and Shade..16
Of Hiftory.18
CHAP. II.
Of PERSPECTIVE...29
Explanation of the Terms used in Perspective...19
To raise a Perpendicular...22
Another Way.
22
To draw a Parallel Line.22
To divide a given Line into two equal Parts.... 23
To raise a Perpendicular at the End of a Line... 23
To turn a Circle through three given Points... 23
To draw an Oval..
02
Another Wethed for an Oval...24
To draw a square Pavement..24
T0


Vi
I N D E X.
Page
To find the Proportion of Objects above the Herizon 25
The same exemplified in Objects below the Herizon.. 26
To drow a direci Vicw27
To draw on oblique View..28
To drow a View with accidental Pants.. 29
To find the Center for the Roof of a House...:. 29
To ferm a square from a Line given.....1. 30
To form a Parallelogram from a grven Line....30
CHAP. III.
OFETCHING..31
Direttions for laving the Ground....31
Directions for Tracing..32
Directions for Elching..
33
Of Biting, or Eating in the Work with Aqua-Fortis. 34
CHAP. IV.
Of ENGRAVINC.....36
Of whetting and tempering the Graver...30
Of holding the Graver.3.
Directims for Engraving....38
CHAP. V
Of MEZZOTINTOSCRAPING...40
Directions for laying the Mezzofinio-Ground...40
Directions for whelting the Grounding-Tool...41
Directions for Scraping the Picture...41
CHAP. VI.
Of PAINTING upn GlASS......43
Colours proper for Painting upon Glass...44
Mcthed of using the Colours...49
CHAP











I N D E X.
Vii
CHAP. VII.
Page
Of PAINTINGMCRAYONS.....47
Directions for using them..47
C HAP. VIII.
OF PAINTING M WATER COLOURS.49
Names of the simple Colours..49
Directions for mixed Colours...50
Drrections for using them....52
STo make Gum Water.54
Another Way55
So keep the Flies from your Work..55
1
To make Liquid Gold.55
STo make Liquid Sitver.55
To make the Claire of Eggs..55
To recover Liguid Silver from Ruft..56
To keep the Colours from sinking...50
To make Size for Candle-Light Pieces...56
To recover Colours when decayed...56
35
31


CHAP. IX.
5
Of PAINTING On SILk, or SATIN.. 57
 Lif of nerw Drawing Bocks...58
957


UST PUBLISHED.
X. POWLESs new and accurate Four-sbect Map of the
World, or Terreffrial Globe, laid down by the bett
obfervations and neweff difcoveries; particularly thofe
lately made in the South Seas, by Anfon, Byron, Wallis,
Bouganville, Cook, and other celebrated circumnavi-
gators; illuftrated with a variety of ufeful projections
and reprefentations of the heavenly bodies; the mofl
approved aftronomical and geographical definitions,
tables, and problems with an ealy and familiar expla-
nation of the moil curious and interefting phoenomend
in the unverfal fyttem. Meafures 4 feet 1 inch wide,
and y feet jinches deep. Price 15s. in fheets, 1l. 1s.
on cloth and rollers,
2. Brwles s new and accurate Four-sbeet Mapof Enrope.
divided into its empires, Kingdoms, ftates, republics, and
principalities, laid down from furveys and observations
of the molt celebrated geographers, corrected from late
rerirks, with many additions and valuable modern
improvements. Meafures 4 feet 1 inch wide, and 2
feet s inches deep. Price 1ys. in sheets; 1l. 1s. of
cloth and rollers,
3. Bowles's new and accurale Four-(beet Map of Neril
merica, and the Weft Indies, exhibiting the extent and
Doundaries of the Unted States; the Britith dominions,
and terntories polleffed in that quarter by the Spaiards,
the French, and other European powers. The whole
compiled and laid down from the beft authorities, regy-
lated and divided according to the definitive treaty of
Meafures 4 feel
peace, figned at Verfailles, 1783.
wide, and z fect 4 inches deep. Price 15s. in sheets;
1l. 1s. on cloth and rollers.
5 The above new Four-fheet Maps, are laid down from
the lateff observations and discoveries, neither pains nor ex-
pence has been spared to render them superier in pami of ac-
curacy and elegance, to all other Aiaps of the Werld, Eu.
rope, and North America, over engrared.


1






9




BO WL ES:S
Hrtilis Hillliali, ac.
th

CHAP I
OF DRAWING.
88

& RAWING is the art of reprefenting by out-
as lines and fhadows, the various productions of
:nature and art, and of enlarging and contracting ob-
jeets in the moft exact proportion.
This art recalls to our memory things long fince
palt, and refeues from oblivion the deeds of our moft
villufirious anceffors, at the fame time that it revives
their image in our mind, by preferving their features
for many generations. In a word, it may be faid to
The the filent, but moft expreffive language of nature,
3
which peaks to the eye, is underffood by all nations,
land conveys an idea where even words themfelves
would prove deficient.
3
After giving foms general directions for the ai=

Etainment of this truly polite and rational amufement,
Twhich is the bafis on which all the reft of the arts

depend, we shall confider it more particularly under the
Jok
B


10
following heads, and lay down the moft copious and
intelligible rules for each respectively, viz.
Copying of Draughts,
Landscape,
Entarying and Contracting,
Light and Shadrw,
Imitation of Life,
Hiftory.
Drapery,
The implements necelfary for drawing are, a ruler,
compalfes, charcoal, a black-lead pencil, penknife,
porte-crayons, black, whire, and red chalk, crayons,
Indian ink, crow-quillpens, camels hair pencils, firches,
India rubber, paper of feveral forts, and porte-folios.
GENERAL RULES TOR DRAWING.
TYYHE firft thing to be obferved is the choice of
proper originals and here we would recom-
mend Bowles's louth's Affiffant in Drawing, by Seb. Le
Clerc, engraved en Fifty Copper Plates, as the ealielt and
bett calculated for the inttruction of beginners. Elshis
may be had, Price 3s. of Carington Bowles, No. 69.
St. Paul’s Church Fard.
[N.B. A lift of new, pieasing, and inftructive Drawing
Bocks, adapted for the further improvement of young
gentlemen and ladies in this polite art, is added at the
end of this biok.
Having provided this, begin with the outlines of the
feveral features, as eyes, nofe, mouth, ears, &cc. as they
occur in the book. Practice thefe often over, till you
are quite mafter of them then proceed to a profile or
fide face, after that to an oval or full face, always re-
membirng that each of thefe muft be perfectly attained
before you venture to proceed further.
When you can copy a face correctly, the next
thing is, to draw the feveral limbs or parts of the
body, as the hands, arms, feet, legs, &c. then go on
10


 T0 IFORtBAYEIO.

FIRSTDRAIVGPLATE.






t
C


9
A


te an



 6. 5


to
5


1











11
2


rd
23

t



1
2

5




o


2


f


2
o

 ny


taysan


tn
40
S
to
1



11
Ale
t



4
5





1
C
24

maee


   
  
Printed for Rowles & Carver, Nc Com St Pards ChurchLardLendon
5
2


11
to the body itfelf which being done, you will be able
to undertake a whole figure, obferving carefully the
exact proportions and bearings of one part with respect
to the other.
The learner ought to be particularly cautions that
he does not attempt a whole figure before he has made
himfelf mafter of the feveral parts, for this is begin-
ning the work at the wrong end, and is indeed the
fame thing, as if a man should attempt to climb to
the top of a houfe without the heip of the fairs.
As for beafts, birds, fruit, plants, &&c. we deem it
ufeless to give directions for drawing them, as it is
well known, that he who has to far improved his
ideas as to be able to draw a human figure correctly,
will find it no difficulty to perform every other branch
of this art.
Sketch or draw all your outlines faintly. with 2
piece of foft charcoal (which may be known by the
pith in the middle) cut to a point like a pencil; and
when you fee any thing annfs, whilk it out with a
Landkerchief or feather, correct your errors with a
black-lead pencil, and compare your work with the
original, till every part of them perfectly correspond.
This done, finith your outlines with black-lead or
Indian ink. This advice, properly attended to, will
lave you an infinne deal of trouble, in drawing over
and over again, to your no finall difcouragement.
If you prefer indian ink, rub it with water upon a
marble, and with a crow-quill pen perfect your out-
lines, then rub out the marks of the pencil with
bread, or India rubber —Keep three or four different
Shades of ink in the hollows of your itone, to diffin-
guith your dillances, referving one of the holes for
WatEI.
B2
When


32
When you are thoroughly verfed in the outlines,
your next bufiness will be to learn to Chadow but of
this hereafter, under the aricle of Light and Sbade.
Be not too hally at firtt fetting out, which will im-
pede your progress, and hunder your improvement
whereas, by bellowing a little more time, you will
attain perfection fooner than you can well imagine,
and expedition will come of itfelf as you become
more experienced.
OF COPYING OF DRAUGHTS.
7 HEN you would copy a print or drawing
exactly of the fame fize, rub the back of it
with the duff of red chalk or black lead; lay this upon
your paper, and pin it down at the four corners
then with a blunt point trace the outlines and breadths
of the fhadows; which done, having carefully ex-
amined it, to fee that nothing be omitted, take it off,
and finith it with the pencil or pen.
Another way to make an exact copy, and at the
same time to preferve the original, 1s, to lay a piece
of tranfparent paper upon 1t, and draw the outlines
thereon with a black lead pencil; then between that
and the paper you intend to draw upon, place a piece
of thin poft-paper, reddened or blackened at the back;
after which, proceed to trace and finith it according to
the foregoing rule.
If you would reverfe your original, you need only
turn the tranfparent paper, with the drawing you have
made upon it, downwards upon the polt paper, and
face it as before direted.



3
2
2


6


- To front page i1.
 




8


--






2




4

44
5
2
1


 S 


f.


25 

t

S
54



31R 


11


4
J43
1
-

✓5
Y
4 Legf 14
FisII.
N6
14
4
1
7


8


2
411







3
19
3
9


1
14

m

8


10
PIiyd.
4




I
55



6

5
Cf



3

S
1



3

9

244
2


d



9
2 2
3 4 5






Frirdjor Rowles & Carver NP6din.St Pauls Church Lord London.



3
Fis.I.
6
3



12

5
a
SF ENLARCINC AND CONTRACTING.
IIDE your original with a pair of campalfes
I into any number of (quares, and rule them acrots

with a black lead pencil from fide to fide, and from
top to bottom.
Then, having your paper of the fize you intend,
divide it into the same number of (quares, either bigger
or lets, as you would enlarge or contract it.
Place your original before you, and draw (quare by
(quare the feveral parts, obferving to make the part you
are drawing, fall into the same part of the (quare as it
does in your original. To prevent miltakes, number
the squares, both of the original and copy, as in Fig. I.
and II. of the drawing plate.
Then outline it with Indian ink, rub out the marks
of the pencil with bread, or India rubber, and fhade
1I at pleafure.
OF IMITATION OF LIFE.
ET the perfon you draw after be of a proportion-
2able fizc, and well chaped; place him in the ealiett
and moft natural attitude; then lketch faintly with your
charcoal the head, or any of the limbs feparately;
which having carefully done, proceed to finith with
yourpencil.
When you have fufficiently practifed the feveral parts
or limbs, you may draw the whole figure in whatever
attitude you think proper to place it beginning with
the eafieft and proceeding by degrees to the more diffi-
cult poftures, as time and experience shall enable you.
Be


14

Be fure to finith your outlines to correctly, marking
all the mufcles as they occur, that, even before you
give il any fhadow, it may have some refemblance of
the perfon.
The true proportion which one part of a human
figure bears to another, may be feen in Fig. III. which
will ferve as a flandard to examine your drawing by,
except where the figure is to be fore-thortened, in which
cafe nature will be the belt guide.
In drawing of a likeness, care muft be taken to ex-
prels the paftions in the moft lively manner which is
to be done, by obferving the peculiar call and difpofi-
tion of every feature, with the exacteff nmcety : and
as this is, of all the parts of drawing, by far the moft
difficult, it will require a more than ordinary attention,
and should be laft attempted.
OF DRAPERY.
RAPERY is the art of cloathing your figures
As with elegance and propriety.
When your naked figure is outlined, firtt draw the
outlines of the drapery lightly, then the greater folds,
and afterwards the leffer, obferving never to let them
crots each other.
Particular regard is to be had to the quality of the
drapery, as the folds of fluff or woolen cloth are more
Drupt and harth, and thofe of filk more flowing and
caly. Linen, cambrick, gauze, &c. as their fubllance
is lighter than either, require a ftill greater delicacy in
exprefting the waving of the folds, by the faimtnets of
their Chadows.
The


35
The drapery should not ftick too clofe to the body,
but muft feem to flow round it as it were, yet in fuch
2 manner, that the motion of the figure may be free
and eafj. A great lightness and motion of the drapery
should only be ufed, when the figures are fuppoted to
be in much agitation, or expoted to the wind; but in
a calm place, and free from violent action, their dra-
pery should be large and flowing, in order to give them
2 more graceful appearance.
Ler the loofe parts of the drapery blown by the
wind all flow one way; and draw that part which lies
clofelt to the body, before you draw thofe which
By off.
Suit your garments to the body, and make them
bend with it: the clofer the garment flicks to the body,
the narrower and fmaller mutt be the folds, and if it
fits quite clofe, there will be no folds at all, but muft
only have a faint fhadow to reprefent the part of the
body which lies under it.
By obferving diligently in what manner the drapery
lows upon any perfon ftanding or fitting before you
for that purpofe, you will fee in what manner to dif-
pofe your folds and (hadows, according to the unerring
rule of nature.
OF LANDSCAPE.
ANDSCAPE reprefents the face of the country,
As as it appears to our view, with all the various
objects analogous thereto; as towns, caltles, churches,
houles, trees, hills, cattle, rivers, rocks, ruins, &c.
Be careful to angment of leffen every object, accord-
ing to its diffance, making the moft remote objects
fainter and lets diffinct, as they appear to the eye, and
cplarging them proportionably as they advance nearer.
Shew


(16
Shew the thy cloudy or clear as occafion requires
 and if you introduce the fun, let it be rifing or fetting
either of which reprefentations will give an additiona
prace to your picture, as they reprefent nature in it
livelieff and moft agreeable appearance.
Adapt every part of your landlcape to the feafon o
the year, and the time of the day you intend it to re
prefent, and dilpofe your eights and (hades with con
fifient propriety.
Laftly, we would recommend it to practitioners ir
this noble art, to rite eariy in a fine morning, that the
may have a better idea of the harmony and beauty o
the works of the Great Creator, which would wonder
fully replentin their minds, as to colour and effect.
OF LICHT AND SHADE.
VTHE distribution of light and shade in a pictue
15 ablolutely necelfary to be Known as it no
only determines the proper diftance of one object from
another, without which the whole would be an un
diftinguithable mats of confution, but it gives likewif
to each respective object its fubfiance, roundnels, an
EHfcA.
Shadowing is performed with the pen or pencil; in
either of which grear judgment is required.
Having made your ourlines correct, the firft thing
is to obferve from which fide of the original the light
comes in; which if naturel, is either from the right
hand or left; for whenever the light appears in the
middie of a picture, and feems to glare more than or
dinary, it is cauled by a candle, a lamp, or some other
luminous body, and is called an artificial light.
L27


17
Lay on your light tints firft, difpoling them as you c
fee they are done in the original; and then proceed to
the deeper ones, till you come to the darkeff parts of
all. for you may at any time darken your thadows, o
when you cannot lighten them.
Let all your fhadows in the fame piece fall on the
same fide, that is, if the right-fide of a man's face be
dark, to muft be the right-tde of his body, arm, leg,
thigh, &c. But if the light fide be darkened by the op-
polition of fome other body intercepting the light, it
muft receive a contrary fhadow:
Make your (hadows fainter as they grow towards the e
light, beaking them gradually, that they may not ap-
pear too fudden or harth.
If you shade with black lead, or with crayons, you
may blend your fhadows; and foften them one into
another as you require, with a ftunp made of paper of
glove-leather, rolled and ried hard, and cut almoft to
the point, with which you may alfo weaken your fhades
where they are too ffrong:
11
When one part of the body projects over or before
another, the part projecting muft receive a fironger
light: thofe parts that bend inward muft be made fo
much the darker, and (hadowed deepeft next the light.
Two equal lights muft never be made in the fame
picture; the firongeff light should fall upon the middle of
the piece, where the principal figures ought to ftand,
diminithing gradually towards the extremities.
By frequently examining into nature, you will have
an opportunity of improving your ideas of light and
shade, and will be enabled to form a proper judgment
of the effect which the different rays or degrees of light
C
Wwill


5


18
will produce in a picture; for which reafon yor
should never let slip an opportunity of remarking the
Various appearances you meet with.
OF HISTORY.
 vIIS branch of drawing prefents to our view
t things paft, prefent, and future.
An hifforical picture muft defcribe the tranflection
reprefented, in 2 manner fo clear and confpicuous, as
to convey an ides of it to our minds, as fully as could
be done by a verbal defcription; and care muft be taken
to preferve fuch an analogy or connection between the
figures, that not one may feem to be introduced but for
tome end or purpofe. And as, in dramatic writing, it
is effential to make every perfon (peak confifient with
the part he reprefents, to here it will be equally ne-
ceffary to obferve the same propriety of character, and
make every figure look the fentiment it is intended to
ExpieIs.
For the choice of subjects the practitioner is left to
his difcretion. Books will furnish him with abundance.
But there will be no need to ranlack the venerable rub-
bith of Greek or Roman antiquity, while there is fo
fair an oppoitunity of doing juftice to the merit of our
gallant countrymen and fellow subjects, by recording
the heroic actions they have atchieved, which, as they
reffect the higheft honour on this Kingdom in general,
it will be meritorious to perpetuate, by fuch a landa-
ble tribure of gratitude to their memory.
GHRP.


19
CHAP. II.
OF PER SPECTI VE
DERSPECTIVE is the art of delineating objects
(as they appear in nature upon a plain furface)
according to their diftance and height perpendicular to
the horizon, between the object and the eye.
This art is of great confequence to thofe who would
excel in drawing, etching, engraving, carving in bas-
relief,, or painting; for being well underffood, the ar-
till will be enabled to know when to adhere to the strict
fules, and when to depart from them with propriety.
EKPLANATION OF THE TERMS USED
IN PERSPECTIVE.
L. T)ASE or Fundgmental Line, is the bottom line
(D of the drawing on which the perfon is suppofed
to fland, with his face towards the point of fight.
2. Perpondicular as a line drawn upright with respect
to any part of the bafe.
3. Parallel Linesare lines equidiftant from each other
as the horizon to the bafe.
4. Herizon is the moft diftant part of a plane, where
the clouds, feeming to touch the earth, limit the fight.
Thehorizontal line gives the height of the eye for we
cannot fee any thing above the horizon which does not
exceed this height: yet the fummit of a mountain may
be above the horizon, though its foot be far beneath it.
S. Poizt
C2


(20
S. Point of Sight is that part of the horizontal line
where all the vifual rays center in a point.
6. Visual Rays are beams of light conveying the like-
nets of any object to the eye or fight, and the know-
ledge thereof to the mind or underftanding.
7. Points of Distance are fuppofed points fet off on
the horizontal line, at equal diftances on each fide the
point of fight.
8. Diagonal Lines are thofe drawn from the points
of diftance to the extremities of the bafe line.
9. Abridgment of the Square is the line where the
diagonals interfect or crots the vifual rays, and mult
always run parallel to the bafe. It is only made where
the fight is limited by a perpendicular, as the farther
end of a church, hall, room, &c. And fuppoling
2 perfon to fland thereon, a parallel line drawn through
the point of fight will feem to pals through the eyes,
and will confequently thew what height that perfon
ought to be,
The nine foregoing definitions gre illufrated in
3
Fis. I. of the perspective plate.
10. Point of direct View. This is nothing more
than the front view of a houfe, church, &c. or,
in other words, a geometrical elevation raifed from
2 plan or ground-plot, and comprehending an equal
Irace on both fides of the point of fight. See Fiz.
XIV.
12. Point of oblique View, is when we fee the
object fideways or aflant. Example: Suppofe 2 per-
fon was to draw a view of a canal, with fome remark
able building he is defirous to thew more diffinct,
he muft place himfelf (on the bafe or fundamental
line


27
line; oppofite to that building, that the ray of light
may be more oblique; by which means the admired
building will be lets fore-shortened, and appear to
greater advantage, the points of fight being fill
before ium, though not in the middle of the picture.
See fig. XV.
12. Accidental Points are thofe where objects
end in the horizontal line, but neither in the points of
fight or diftance,, and ferve for ftreets, houfes, chairs,
roads, ec. which take different directions. As for
example :, Suppofe a fireet leading to the point of
light, and from it two others branch, the one on
the right hand, the other on the left, and take a dit-
ferent direction, thefe two laft firects make what
we call Accidental Points, terminating in fome part
of the horizontal line, on each fide of the point
of fight. See Fis. XVI. The same is to be ob-
served in a grove, park, &cc. where the walk you
are in directs immediately to the point of fight, and
the avenues branching out on either fide terminate
alfo in different parts of the horizon.
Ichnegraphy is the plan or ground plot of any
object that is to be raifed in Perspective.
Scenograpby is the art of bringing any thing
raifed in Perspective from an ichnographic plan to
iis due proportion, according to the diftance in
which it is placed; that all objects may be dimi-
nithed according to their diftance in a picture, in
the fame degree as they are diminithed by diftance
in a nnatural prospect. A fcenographic view may
be either direcl, as in Fig. XIV. or oblique, as
2 Fig. V.
2
A S.


22
of S the art of Perspective is conftructed upon geo.
£2 metrical principles, it will be neceffary, previous
to the rules themfelves, to learn the following intro-
ductory operations.
I. From a point in a given line RE to raife a perpen-
dicular. See Fig. II.
Draw with the ruler the given line A B; then fet
one foot of your compaffes in B, and extending them
to rather more than half the length of the line A E,
weep the arch ed and with the fame extent of com-
paffes fet one point in c, and fweep the arch e f; then,
without altering the compaffes, fet one foot in g, and
defcribe the arch br; next rule through the points cs.
to interfect the arch b1 in t, and draw the line from
& to B, which is the perpendicular required.
2. Another way. See Fig. III.
From the point A take the equal diftances A B and
A C on each fide of it; then ftretch the compaffes to
any diftance greater than A B or AC, and with one
foot of them in B, fweep the arch f e; then, with
the same extent of the compaftes, fet ane point in:C.
Iweep the arch fg; and thefe two arches will interfecd
each other in the point b, from which a line drawn to
the point A is the perpendicular required.
2. To drow one line paralled (or equidiffant) to another given
3
line AB. See Fig. IV.
Extend your compaffes to the diftance of the pa-
fallel you require; then with one foot in any point of
the given line, as in c, defcribe the arch de. Again,
without altering the compalfes, fix one foot in any other
point, as in f, and fweep the arch gb then rule the
fine I K, touching the outward parts of the two arches,
and that will be the parallel to the given line.
4. To


23
4. To bifect or divide a given line AB into tue equal
parts. See Fig. V.
Tak: with your compaffes any diftance greater than
half the given line; then, with one foor of them in
B, sweep the arch cc; and with the same diftance,
fetting one foot in A, Tweep the arch dd; and thefe
arches will interfect each other in the point gb. which
jorned by a perpendicular, will interfect AB in the
middle point 1.
5. Upon the end R of a given line RE to raife a per-
pendicular. See Fis. Vi.
Place one foot of the compaffes in A, and extend
them to any point c without the given line; then fer
one foot of them in c, and turn the circle de and A,
and through dc draw the diameter dce, meeting the
circle in e, join Ae, and that right line is the perpen-
dicular required.
6. To turn the circle through any three gruen paints not
n d right line. See Fiz. Vil.
Fix three points at any diftance you think proper,
2s at AB and C, and jon them by the right lines
AB and BC: then by Fig. V. bifect the line AB
with the line de; which done, bifect the line BC
with the line fe; and from the centere, where thefe
lines meet, extend your compaffes to A, and defcribe
the circle ABCG.
7. To draw ah Oval. See Fig. Vill.
Draw a given line AB, which divide into four equal
parts fet one foor of the compaffesat C, and from that
center deferiks a circle ec; with the fame extent of
Com-


24
compaffes place one foot in the center D, and furn the
cucle ff; then with one foor still in D, extend your
compalfes, and turn the arch gg; and with the fame
extent, placing one foot in C, defcribe the arch 5b
join the interfections with a perpendicular from i toik;
next, place one foor of the compaffes in 1, fveep the
arch:L. L, and without altering them, fet one foot in t;
and defcribe the arch MM.
8. Anrther methed for an Oval. See Fiz. IX.
Draw a given line AD, and with the compaffes ex
tended, placing one foot in B, with the other turn the
circle ec; then, without altering your compaffes on the
line ADd in the fuppofed point C, fveep the circle j
S.
and through the points gg, where the two circles inter=
feet, draw the perpendicular bi; then fix your com
palfes with one foor in 6, and extend them to as to
describe the arch ff to the lower extremities of the cir-
cle; then, with the same extent, with one foot in i,
fveep the arch 11, to join the upper extremities.
By thefe examples it will appear, that an oval of any
form or fize may be conttructed at pleature, only taking
care always to fix the compaffes equidiftant from the
given line A D in the perpendicular bs.
PRACTICAL EKAMPLES IN PERSPECTIVE,
1. To draw a square pavement in Perspective.
See Fiz. X. and XI.
IPPOSE your piece of parement to confift of 64
3
pieces of marble, each a foot (quarc. Your firtt
bufinets is, to draw an icknographical plan or ground
plot of it, which is thus performed. Having made
an exact (quare of the fize you incend your plan, divide
211


25
the bafe and horizon into eight equal parts, and from
every divition in the bafe to its oppolite point in the
horizon, rule perpendicular lines; then divide the fides
into the same number, ruling parallel lines acrols from
point to point: to will your pavement be divided into
64 (quare feet; becaule the eight feet in length, mul-
tiplied by the Came in breadth; give the number of (quare
feet or pieces of marble contained in the whole: then
rule diagonals from corner to corner; and thus will your
ground-plot appear as in Fig. X.
Now; to lay this in Perspective, draw another fquare
to your intended fize, and divide the bafe line A Binto
eight equal parts, as before; then fix your point of
fight C in the middle of the horizon DE, and from the
same point rule lines to every divition in the bafe A B;
after which, rule diagonal lines from D to B, and from
E to A, antwerable to thofe in the ground-plot, and
your (quare will be reduced to the triangle ABC; then
from the point F where the diagonal DB interfects the
line AC, to the oppofite interfection G, where the dia-
gonal EA croffes the line C B, rule a parallel line, which
is the abridgement of the (quare.
Then through the points where the diagonals crots
the reft of the lines which go from the bafe to the point
of fight, rule parallel lines, and your (quare pavement
will be laid in perspective, as in Fig. Xl.
2. To find the height and proportion of any objects, as
they appear above the herizon on a supposed plane.
See Fig. XII.
Firftrule your horizontalline NO, and fix your point
of fight, as at Ml; then mark the place of your neareft
pillar, by making a dot for the bafe or bottom, as at A,
and another for the fummit or top, as at B: rule a line
from
1


26
from A to the point of fight MI, and another from E
to M, and thefe two lines will give the height of any
number of pillars. As for example: Suppofe you
would have a pillar at C, fix your dot for the bafe,
and rule from thence a parallel line to meet the diago-
nal AM at D; then rule the perpendicular DE to
the diagonal BNI; which perpendicular is the height
of your figure required at C. Or, if you would place
pillars at F and 1, obferve the same method, ruling
the parallels F6G and I K, and the perpendiculars 6 H
and KL will give their heights at the diftances
required.

To find the diameter or thickness of pillars at
any particular diftances, you are alfo to be guided
by, that nearell the bafe. For inftance: Suppole your
nearelt pillar AB to be ten feet high, and one foot
in diameter: divide it from top to bottom into ten
equal parts: and fet off one of them upon the bafe of
the pillar: then rule a line from the point of light
M to the diameter P, and you will have the thick-
nets of all your pillars on their respective parallels
of Bafes.
3. The same rule exemplified in objects below the be-
rizm. See Fig. Kill.
If you would know the heights of a number of
figures below the horizon, rule your horizontal
fine OR, fix your puint of light, as at P. then
place your neareit figure, or mark the dots for the
head and feet, by the points A and B, which an-
fivers the same purpofe; and rule from thefe dots to
the point of fight the lines A Pand EP; and if
you would find the height of a figure to be drawn
at c, rule from thence the parallel cd to the diago-
nal BP, and the perpendicular de will give the
height


2
height required. The fame directions will thew the
height of a figure at any other dittance you have a
mind to place it, as at j; 1, and m, by ruling the pa-
rallels 7s. it, and mn; and from each of thefe
their respective perpendiculars gb, 8), and n o;
which perpendiculars will thew the heights of the
figures at J, 1, and m.
4. To draw a direct View. See Fig. XIV.
To illuftrate this example, fuppofe you were to
draw the infide of a church, as reprefented in this
figure; Firtt take your flation at the point A, in
the centre of the bafe line B C; from which you
have a front view of the whole body of the church,
with all the pillars, Coc. on each fide; then fix your
horizon at any height you think proper, as at DE:
bifect it by the perpendicular E A: and where thefe
two lines interfect, is the point of fight F. (This
perpendicular will pass through the centres of all the
arches in the dome or cupola which centers may be
found by any three given points, as in Frg. VIl.)
Next divide year bafe line into any given number of
feet, and the vifual lines, ruled from thefe divifions
to the point of light, will reduce all your objects to
their jult proportion, by fetting off their height upon
a perpendicular raifed at their respective diftances.
The bafe, in the example here given, is divided into
twelve equal parts of fire feet each from which (fup-
poting your front column to be 2s feet high) take
feven divitions from the bafe line of your drawing, and
fet them off upon the perpendicuar GHt; then, (Jup-
prting this column to be five feet thick at the bafe,
iet off one of thofe divifions upon the parellel IX,
which is the breadth required. So that, by propor-
tioning the fcale to any dittance by the foregoing dis
reclions,
2


28

rections, you may not only find the dimentions of all
your columns, but alfo of every diffinct part of them,
as well as of all the doors, windows, and other objects
that occur. For inftance: Having found the height
and breadth of your firft, or nearelt column G, draw
from the top and bottom of the faid column to the
point of fight, the lines HI F, and K F, after which,
rule the line I F from the bafe of the column to the
point of fight, and you have the height and breadth of
all the reft of the columns, as has been already shewn
in Fis. XII.
By ruling lines from the points, a, 3, c, d, c.
to the point of fight, you will fee that ail the fum-
mits and bafes of your columns, doors, windows,
E5c. muft tend immediately to that point, and by
lines drawn from the points 1, 2, 3. 4, 5c. on
each fide, to the correfpondent points on the oppo-
fite fide, may be feen all the parts of your building
lying upon the same parallel.
5. To draw an oblique View. See Fis. XV.
Fult, draw your hornzental line A B; then, if
your favourite object be on the left hand, as at C.
place yourfelf on the right hand upon the bafe line,
as at D; then from that ffation erect a perpendicu-
lar DE, which will pats through the horizon at
the point of fight F; to which rule the diagonals 6 F
and HF, which will thew the roof and bafe of your
principal building C, and will alfo, as before directed,
ferve as a flandard for all the reft.
Obferve allo, either in direct of oblique views,
whether the profpect before you make a curve for
if.


29
if it does, you muft be careful to make the fame
Curve in your drawing.
6. To draw a Perspective View, wherein are accidental
points. See Fiz. XVI.
Rule your horizontal line a b, and on one part of
it fix your point of fight, as at c. from which rule
the diagonals cd and ce on one fide, and of and
cg on the other which will thew the roofs and bafes
of all the houfes in the firect directly facing you;
suppoting yourfelf placed at A in the centre of the
bale line. Then fix your accidental points g and h
upon the horizontal line, and rule from them to the
angles: k and 1m, where the ftrects on each fide take
a different direction, towards the accidental points e
and b,) and the lines gr and gk give the roofs and
bafes of all the buildings on one fide, as 1b and mb
do on the other.
Accidental points feldom intervene where the dif-
tance 1s (mall, as in noblemens feats, groves,
canals, (Oc. which may be drawn by the firict rules of
perspective but where the prospect is extenfive and
yaried, including mountains, bridges, cafiles, rivers,
precipices, woods, cities, 6oc. it will require fuch an
infinite number of accidental points, that it will be
better to do them as nature shall dictate, and your
ripened judgment approve.
7. To find the centre for the reof of a boufe, in an oblique

view. Fig. I. See plate IV.
Suppofe from the point of fight, A, the vifual
lines A B and R C be drawn, BC being one per-
pendicular given, and DE the other, rule the dia-
gonals
2


30
gonals from D to C, and from E to B, and the per-
pendicular FG raifed through the point of their in-
terfection, will thew the true centre of the roof, as
will appear by ruling the lines GE and GC.
For want of being acquainted with this necelfary
rule, many who have been well verfed in other parts
of perspective, have spoiled the look of their picture,
by drawing the roofs of their houfes out of their true
perpendicular.
8. To firm a Square from a Line given.
See Fig. II.
Firft rule your bafe line to any length you pleafe,
as from A to B, then raife the perpendiculars (as in
Fig. 1I. Plate 1ll.) from A to C, and from B to
D; next meature with compaffes from A to B, fetting
one point in A, turn the arch EF; then with the
same extent of compaffes, fet one foot in B, and de-
fcribe the arch Gil: laftly, rule from 1 to K, touch-
ing the outward parts of the arches where they inter-
feet the perpendiculars, and you will find the required
quare.
9. To form a Parallelagram from a given Line.
See Fis. IIl.
Firft rule a given line the length required, as at A B;
next raife a perpendicular at A, another at B, (as in
Fig. 1I. Plate 11l.) and on them fet off the proper
heights, as AC and BD; jom CD with a line, and
you have the parallelogram complete.
CHAP


37
CHAP. III.
OF E T CHI N G.
7Y TCHING is a method of working on copper,

Xs wherein the lines or flrokes, inflead of being cut
with a graver, are eaten with aqua-fortis.
This art being executed with greater cafe and free-
dom than engraving, reprefents curious subjects better,
and more agreeable to nature, as figures, landicapes,
ruins, and small faint, or remote objects, buildings, &ic.
The principal materials for this art are the plate, hard
and foft ground, (the firft for winter, and the other
for fummer) a dabber, turpentine varnith, lamp-black,
foft wax, and aqua-fortis, or spirits of nitre.
The tools are, an oil rubber, a burnither, a fcraper,
a hand-vice, etching-boards, etching-ncedles, an oil-
ftone, and a parallel ruler.
The plate may be had of any fize, and well polifhed,
fit for ufe, of the copper-plate makers, in Shee lane,
Holborn.
Directions for laying the ground.
7 AVING provided yourfelf with a print, which
1s is to be had of Carington Bowles, No. 69, St. Pauls
Church Fard, and with a plate of the fize of the print
or drawing you intend to copy, rub it well with an
oil-rubber made of Twantkin-flannel, till all the marks
of the charcoal ufed in polithing it, enurely difappear;
then


32
then wiping off the dirty oil with a linen rag, dip your
finger in fome clean oil, and touch it over every part
of the plate after which, with your burnifher polith
the place, till you can fee your face in it; and in cafe
any fand-holes or flaws appear, the fcraper will affift
you in taking them out. The marks left by the (craper
are to be taken out with the burnither, till nothing ap-
pear. Having fixed your hand-rice at one end of the
plate, with a rag and whiting clear the plate carefully
frem greafe; then heat it over a charcoal-fire, of
lighted paper, till it will melt the ground, which is to
be laid on thinly, and dabbed all over with the dabber,
till it is perfectly finooth and even, then warm the
plate again, and holding it up with the ground down-
wards, fmoak it all over with a large candle, taking
care that the fnuff of it do not touch the ground, and
waving the candle continually over every part, to that
the ground may not be burnt by heating it more in one
place than another. If the plate be large, you may
bind four penny-candles together.
Directions for tracing.
IHE firff thing to be done, (while the plate is
4 cooling, after the ground is laid) is to rub the
back of your print or drawing all over with a bit of
rag or cotton, dipt in the fcrapings of red or white
chalk, and thake off the loofe dirt, or wipe it off gently
with a clean rag. Place the red fide upon the plate,
making it fall at each corner with a little bit of foff
Wax. Lay your etching-board under your hand, to
prevent bruning the ground; then with a bluntetching-
needle trace lightly the outlines and breadths of the
Thadows, till the marks of them appear upon the ground,
which you muft take care not to penetrate by tracing
100 hard.
A5


33
As great nicety is required in this part of your work,
It will be neceffary now and then to lift up one corner
of your original, and examine whether every part be
traced before you take it off, as it will be extremely
difficult to lay it down again in its former pofition.
Direttim. for Eiching.
TAVING carefully traced your onginal, take it
ax off, and lay a filk or linen handkerchief next the
plate, and over that your etching-board; then proceed
to the etching, for which obferve the following direc
tions, which are adapted to every particular branch,
as landfcapes, shipping, portraits, hiftory, architec-
Ture, &c.
Diftances in landicapes, of the faint parts of any
other picture, are the firft to be done and these are
to be worked clofer, and with a fharper-pointed
needle; the darker parts muft be etched wider, and
with a blunter needle but, to prevent mittakes, the
ncedles may be marked according to their different
degrees, and the ufes for which they are intended. As
for the very faintelf parts of all, they are to be left
for the graver, or dry point; of which hereafter.
In building, and all architecture in general, ufe a
parallel ruler, till frequent practice enables you to
do them well enough without.
The needles may, when necelfary, be whetted upon
your oil-fone, keeping them turning in your hand, to
as to whet them equally all round. The oil-fone
will be fartherufeful in whetting the fcraper, which
is to be rubbed flat upon the ffone, and with a fready
hand, keeping oil conftantly upon the fone.
Of



34

Of Biting or Ealing-in the Work with Aqua-Fortis.
 IRST examine your work carefully, to fee that
nothing be omitted; and if any fcratches appear
upon the ground, or mistakes be committed in the
etching, they are to be stopped out, which is done by
covering them with a mixture of lamp-black and tur-
pentine-varnish, laid on thinly with a pair-pencif,
which, when dry, will refift the aqua-fortis. But if
will be beft to stop out thefe as they occur to you in
the courfe of your work, for by this means they will
be lets liable to elcape your notice, and when the
varniff is dry, you may etch it over again, if
required.
The next thing is to enclofe the work with a rim
or border of foft green, or other coloured wax, about
half an inch high, bending the wax in the form of a
Ipout at one corner, to pour off the aqua-fortis; and
that it may not run out at any other part, take care to
lay your wax fo clofe to the plate, that no vacancies
be left.
Vour aqua-fortis muff be fingle; and if too frong,
as will be feen in the buing, take it off, and mix it
with a little water, thaking them together in a bottle;
and when it is foo weak, it may be firengthened by
mixing it in a bottle with a little double aqua-fortis.
The bottle, which contains the aqua-fortis should have
2 large mouth, and a glats Hopple.
5
Let the aqua-fortis lie on the plate a short time,
wiping off the bubbles, as they arife, with a feather,
which may remain upon the plate while it is biting;
after which, take it off, and wath the plate with water
then


33
then let it dry, and by Icraping off part of the ground
from the faintell part of the work, try if it be bit
enough and if not; ftop out the part you have tried
with the lamp-black and varnith; and when that is
dry, pour on the aqua-fortis again.
When the faint parts of your work are bit enough.
Rop them out, and proceed to bite the fironger parts,
Ropping them out as occafion requires; till the whole
work is fufficiently bit: then warm the plate and
take off the foft wax; after which, heat the plate
till the ground mells, pour on a little oil, and wipe the
whole off with a rag
When the ground is taken off,
rub the work well with the oil rubber, and wipe the
plate clean, then proceed to finith it with the graver;
according to the following directions.

l
E2
CH AP.


6. 36
CHAP. IV
OF E N G R A V I N G.
INYHE tools necelfary for engraving are, the oil-
rubber, burnifher, fcraper, oil-(fone, needles,
and ruler, already mentioned to be ufed in etching;
alfo gravers, compaffes, and a fand-bag.
Graversare of twe forts, (quare and lozenge: three
of each fort should be provided. The firft is ufed in
cutting the broader flrokes, the other for the fainter
and more delicate. No graver should exceed the lengtli
of five inches and a half, the handle included, except-
ing for strait lines.
The fand-bag, or cuthion, is ufed to lay the plate
on, for the conteniency of turning it about, and may
be had, together with the gravers, at the lronmongers,
in Fofter lane, as may likewife the oil-fione, which
muft be of the Turkey fort.
1
If whelting and tempering the Graver.
5 great pains are required to whet the graver
£2 icely, particularly the belly of it, care muft be
taken to lay the two angles of the graver, which are to
be held next the plate, flat upon the ftone, and rub
them fteadily till they are polifhed like a mirror, and
till the belly rifes gradually above the plate, to as that,
when you lay the graver flat upon it, you may juft
perceive the light under the point; otherwife it will
dig into the copper, and it will be ungoffible to keep a
point,


37
point, or execute the work with freedom. In order
to this, keep your right arm clofe to your fide, and
place the fore-finger of your left hand upon that part
of the graver which lies uppermoft on the fione. When
this is done, in order to whet the face, place the flat
part of the handle in the hollow of your hand, with
the belly of the graver upwards, upon a moderate flope,
and rub the extremity or face upon the ftone, till if
has an exceeding fharp point, which you may try upon
your thumb-nail. The oil-ftone, while in ufe, muft
never be kept without oil.
When the graver is too hard, as is ufually the cafe
when firft bought, and may be known by the frequent
breaking of the point, the method of tempering the
Heel is as follows:
Heat a poker red -hot, and hold the graver upon it
within half an inch of the point, waving it to and fro
cill the ffeel changes to a light Rraw-colour then put
the point into oil to cool; or, hold the graver clofe
to the fame of a candle, till it be of the same colour,
and cool it in the tallow: but be careful either way
not to hold too long, for then it will be too foft; and
in this cafe the point, which will then turn blue, muft
be broken off, and whetted afresh, and tempered again,
if required. But be not too hafty in tempering; for
fometimes a little whetting will bring it to a good
condition.
Of bolding the Graver.
VT off that part of the handle which is upon
f the same line with the belly, or sharp edge of the
graver, making that fide flat, that it may be no
obstruction.
Hold


C 38.
Hold the handle in the hollow of your hand; and
extending your fore finger towards the point, let it relt
upon the back of the graver, that you may guide it ffat,
and parallel with the plate.
 Take care that your fingers do not interpofe between
the plate and the graver for they will prevent you
from carrying the graver level with the plate, and from
cutting your slrokes so clean as they ought to be.
Directions for Engraving:
ET the table or board you wark at be firm and
I feady; upon which place your land bag with the
plate upon ii, and holding, the graver as above direct-
ed, proceed to bulinels in the following manner:
For ftrart ftrokes, hold your plate firm upon the fand
bag with your left hand, moving your right hand for-
wards leaning lighter where the flroke should be fine,
and harder where you would have it broader.
For circular or crooked flrokes, hold the graverfied
faft, moving your hand, or the plate, as you fee
convenient.
Learn to carry your hand with fuch a fleight, that you
may end your froke as finely as you began it; and if
you have occafion to make one part deeper or blacker
than another, do it by degrees; and that you may do
11 with greater exactnets, take care that your flrokes
be not too clofe, nor too wide.
in the courfe of your work, fcrape off the barb of
roughnets which arifes, with the belly of your graver;
but be careful, in doing this, not to feratch the plate;
and that you may fee your work properly as you goon,
Tub


39
rub it with the oil rubber, and wipe the plate clean,
which will take off the glare of the copper, and thew
what you have done to the beft advantage.
Any mistakes or fcratches in the plate may be rub-
bed out with the burnither, and the part levelled with
the scraper, polifhing it again afterwards lightly with
the burnither.
Having thus attained the ufe of the graver, ac
cording to the foregoing rules, you will be able to
finith the piece you had etched, by graving up the
several parts to the colour of the oiginal; begin-
ning, as in the etching, with the fainter parts, and
advancing gradually with the flronger, till the whole
i5 compleated.
The dry point (to called becaufe not ufed till the
ground is taken off the plate) is principally employed
in the extreme light parts of water, sky, drapery,
archifecture, &ec.
For your firft practice, copy fuch prints as are openly
shaded; the more finifhed ones being too difficult, till
you have gained farther experience.
Great choice of prints of every kind, fit for young
beginners, may be had of Carington Bowles, No. 69,
St. Paul's Church-yard.
N.B. To prevent any obstruction from too great a
degree of light, we would recommend the ufe of a fath,
made of tranfparent or fan paper, pafted on a frame, and
placed lloping at a convenient diftance between your
work and the light. This will not only preferve the
light, but, when the fun fhines, cannot poffibly be
ditpented with.
CHAP.


40

CHAP. V
OF MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING.
TAYHIS art, which is of late date, is recommended
to the practice of the ingenious reader, for the
amazing eafe with which it is executed, especially by
thofe who have any notion of drawing.
Me2zotinto prints are thofe which have no hatching
or ftrokes of the graver, but whofe lights and shades
are blended together, and appear like a drawing of In
dian ink.
The tools ufed in this art are, The copper plate,
oil fione, grounding tools, fcrapers, burnither and
hneedles.
Direttions for laying the Wlezzalinto Ground.
ARK off upon the bottom of the plate the
Il ditance you intend
to leave for the writing,
coat of arms, &cc. then, laying your plate with 2
piece of Twanlkin Hannel under it upon your table,
hold the grounding-tool in your hand perpendicu
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually rock-
ing your hand in a right line from end to end, till
you have wholly covered the plate in one direction.
Next, crols the flrokes from fide to fide, afterwards
from corner to corner, working the tool each time
all over the plate, in every direction almoft like the
points of a compals; taking all poffible care not to
let the tool cut (in one direction) twice in a place.
Thie


41

This done, the plate will be full, or, in other words,
all over rough alike, and would, if it were printed,
appear completely black.
Having laid the ground, take the fcrapings of black
chalk, and with a piece of rag rub it over the plate, or
you may, with two or three candles, finoke it, as be
fore directed for erching.
Now, take your print or drawing, and having rubbed
the back with red chalk duft, mixed with white lake,
proceed to trace it as directed, page 32.
Directions for Whetting the Grounding-Tool.
F a tooth of the tool should break, it may be per-
I ceived in the working by a particular (treak or gap,
which will appear in the ground in a ftrait line; in
which cafe the tool muft be whetted on the back, hold-
ing it flopeing, and in a circular manner, like the bor-
fom of the tool.
Directions for Scraping the Picture.
F AK E a blunt ncedle and mark the ourlinss only;
then with a fcraper fcrape off the lights in every
part of the plate, as clean and finooth as poffible, in
proportion to the frength of the lights in your picture,
taking care not to hurt your outlines. And that you
may the better fee what you do, with the thumb and
fore finger of the left hand hold a piece of tranfparent
paper, flopeing, juft over your right hand, and you will
toon be a judge of the different tints of the work you
are doing; fcraping off more or less of the ground, as
the different ftrength of light and tints require.
The


42
The ufe of the burnither is, to foften or rub down
the extreme light parts after the fcraper is done with,
such as the ip of the nofe, forehead, linen, oc. which
might otherwife, when proved, appear rather mifty
than clear.
Another method ufed by mezzotinto-(crapers, is to
eich the outlines of the original, as allo of the folds in
drapery, marking the breadth of the shadows by dots,
which having bit of a proper colour with aqua-fortis,
according to the directions given page 24 and 3s, take
off the ground ufed in etching, and having laid the
MeTZOunto-ground as in page 40, proceed to Icrape
the picture as above.
Four or five days before you think the plate will be
ready for proving, notice mult be given to the copper
plate printer, to wet fome French paper, as no other
will do for printing them, and as that time is necelfary
for it to he in wet. When the proof is dry, touch it
with white chalk where it should be lighter, and with
black chalk where in should be darker; and when the
print is retouched, proceed as before for the lights, and
for the shades ufe a small grounding-tool, as much as
you judge necellary to bring it to a proper colour, and
when you have done as much as you think expedient,
prove it again, and to proceed to prove and touch, till
it is entirely to your mind. When the plate tarnifhes
in the part where you are at work, a little vinegar and
fall kept by you in a vial will take it off, wiping it dry
with a clean rag.
Avoid as much as poffible overfcraping any part be-
fore the firft proving, as by this caution the work will
appear the more elegant.
CHAP.


43
CHAP. VI
OF PAINTING UPON GLASS.
DAINTING upon glats is an art which has gene-
rally appeared difficult; yet there is no repre-
tentation can be more elegant than that of a picture
done well in this manner for it gives all the fofinels
that can be defired in a picture, and is eaty to work;
as there are no outlines to draw, nor any (hade to
make, but the colours are put on without the trouble
of either.
The pictures are thofe done in mezzounto for
their shades being rubbed down on the glats, the ferc-
ral lines which reprefent the fhady part of any common
print, are by this means blended together, and appear
as foft and united as in any drawing of Indian ink.
Provide fuch mezzotintos as you like; cut off the
margin then get a piece of fine crown glats, the fize
of your prints (as flat and free from knots or foratches
as poffible); clean the glats, and lay some Venice tur-
pentine, quite thin and fmooth, on one fide thereof,
with a bruth of hog's hair. Lay the print flat in
water, and let it remain on the furface till it finks, it is
then enough; take it carefully out, and dab it between
some papers, that no water may be feen, yet to as to be
damp.
Next, lay the damp print, with its face uppermoft,
upon a flat table, then, holding the glats over it, with-
out touching the turpentine till it is exactly even with
the print, let it fall gently op ii. Prets the glats down
F 2
carefully


44)
carefully with your fingers in feveral parts, to that the
turpentine may stick to the print; after which, take it
up; then holding the glats towards you, press the print
with your fingers, from the center towards the edges,
till there be no blifters remaining.
When this is done, wet the back of your print with
a ponge, till the paper will rub off with your fingers
then rub it genly, and the white paper will roll off,
leaving the impreffion only upon the glats. Then let
11 dry, and with a camels-hair pencil, dipt in oil of tur-
pentume, wel it all over, and it will be perfectly trant-
parent, and fit for painting.
Colours praper for Painting upon Glass.
IoiHIE feveral forts of colours oround in oil for this
purpofe, and ried up in little bladders, may be had
at the colour thops.
Whites.
Fellows.
Flake Whire,
English Pink.
Spodium.
MMafficot.
Englith Ochre.
Blacks.
Spruce Ochre.
Durch Pink.
Lamp-Black.
Ivory-Black.
Orpiment.
Blues.
Browns.
Bluc-Bice.
Spanith Brown.
Pruffian Blue.
Umber.
Saunders Blue.
Smalt.
Reds.
Indigo.
Rofe Pink.
Greens.
Vermilion.
Verdigrife.
Red Lead.
Terre Verte.
Indian Red.
Green Verditure
Native Cinaber


The


45
The ultramarine (for blue), and the carmine (for
red), are rather to be bought in powders, as in that
cafe they are less apt to dry, or be loft; and as the
leaft touch of thefe will give the picture a call, mix up
what you want for prefent ufe with a drop or two of
nut-oil upon your pallet, with your pallet-knife.
The pallets and pallet-Knives, may be had at the
colour-(hops, or ivory turners.
To get the colour out of the bladders, prick a hole
at the bottom of each, and press it till you have enough
upon your pallet for prefent ufe; becaute the colours
are apt to dry and IKin over.
Then lay a sheet of white paper on the table, and
taking the picture in your left-hand, with the turpen-
tne fide next you, hold it llopeing (the bottom relting
on the white paper), and all the outlines and tints of
the print will be feen on the glats; and nothing re-
mains but to lay on the colours proper for the different
parts, as follows:
The Method of using the Colsurs.
S the lights and fhades of your picture open, lay
42 the lighter colours firft on the lichter parts of your
print, and the darker over the fhaded parts; and having
once laid on the brighter colours, it is not material
if the darker forts are laid a little over them; for the
firft colour will hide thofe laid on afterwards. As
for example:
Reils.
Lay on firtt the red lead, and shade with lake or
Earinine.
Vellows.


46

Ichrws.
The lighteff rellow laid on firtt, may be shaded
With Durch pink.
Blues.
Blue-bice or ultramarine, ated for the lights, may
be shaded with indigo.
Greens.
Lay on verdigrife firft, and then a mixture of that
and Duich pink. This green may be lightened by an
addition of Duich pink.
When any of thefe colours are too frong, they
may be lightened to any degree, by mixing white with
them upon your pallet; or you may darken them as
much as you pleafe, by mixing them with a deeper
hade of the fame colour.
The colours mulf not be laid on too thick, but if
troublefome, thin them before you ufe them, with 2
litile turpentine-oil.
Take care to have a pencil for each colour; and
never ufe that which you have ufed for green with any
other colour, without firft wathing it well with turpen-
tine-oil, as that colour is apt to appear predominant
1
when the colours are dry.
Wath all the pencils after ufing in turpentine-oil.
Your glats, when painted, muft fland three or four
days free from duft, before it be framed.
65 All forts of mezzstinte and other prints proper for
painting on glass, may be had of CARINGTON BOWLES,
No. 69, St. Pauls Church Vard.
CHAR.


47
CHAP. VII.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS
VRAYONS are to be had in boxes, every
1 colour partitioned off feparately, to prevent
mixing.
The beft are thole of Switzerland.
The different colours are white, black, yellow, orange,
red, purple, blue, green, and brown; and each of thefe
have their feveral shades, excepting the two firtt.
Directions for using them.
HE paper to be ufed on this occation is rough
Venice paper, of a whited -brown colour, and the
Riffer the better. Thar fort called Cape-paper is found
to be the beft, becaufe upon that the colours beft dif
tribute themfelves. By this method figures may be
drawn in their proper colours as they appear to the eye,
becaufe the colours may be matched with the crayons,
and the crayons being dry, will not alter their colour;
but the colours, when wet, appear deeper than when
they are dry, which is apt to deceive a joung beginner.
Another way to make the necelfary preparations, is
to take fome of the thickeff and fmootheft light blue
or other paper, and get a ftraining-frame from a frame-
maker's or carpenters, on which train fome coarfe
Scorch or Irith cloth, drawing and fattening it with
small tacks round the edges, till it be quite fmooth;
after which, with a fponge and fair water gently wet
the blue paper, and then with a bruth or rag patte the
paper


48
paper all over, and lay it carefully on the cloth, exactly
even with the ftraiming-frame after which take it up.
and laying white paper on the table, place the blue
paper downwards with one hand keep the ftraining-
frame fleady, and with the other rub the cloth clofe to
the paper do this very carefully; and taking it up, lay
it on the table with the blue paper upwards, and a piece
of paper under your hand, and rub it clofe to the
Rraining frame, without touching any other part, then
let it fland to dry. after which, fet it on an eafal,
(which may be had at the colour-fhops) and proceed as
follows:
Make the firft (ketch or rough-draught with char-
coal; then with black, white, or red chalk, correct
what you fee amils. The ourline being thus com-
pleted, rub in your crayons according to their proper
colours, and then with your finger of fitch foften and
blend them together.


2

2

7

CHAP.


49
CHAP. VIII.
OF PAINTING IN WATERCOLOURS.
IYHE maternals necelfary for this art are gum, co-
lours, har-pencils, fitches, a pallet and pen-knife.
1
The colours in general are white, black, brown, red,
yellow, blue, and green.
The feveral species of each are as follow:
Whites.
Tellows.
Cerufe.
Englith Ochre.
Flake White.
Gall-fone.
Spanith White.
Gambodge.
Spodium.
Mafficot, dark and light.
White Lead.
Ochre de Luce.
Conftant White.
Orpinient.
DuichPink, darkandlight
Blacks,
Roman Ochre.
Burnt Cherry-Stones.
Saffron.
Ivory Black.
Lamp-Black.
Blues.
Keating's Black.
Blue Bice.
Blue Verditure.
Browns.
Saunders Blie.
Spanith Brown.
Pruffian Blue, dark and
Spanith Licorice.
light.
Umber.
Indigo.
Biftre.
Litmofe.
Reds.
Smalt.
Burnt Ochre.
Ultramarine.
Carmine.
Terre Blue
Cinnabar-Lake.
Greens.
Minium.
Green Bice.
Indian Lake.
Green Pink.
Indian Red.
Sip Green.
Red Ink.
Verdigrife.
Red Lead.
Green Verditure.
Vermilion.
6
RioR


50
Moft of the preceding colours may be had ready
Prepared in thells, or lumps, as alto the hair-pencils, at
the colour thops. If youufelumps, a grind-ftone and
muller muft be provided, which are to be of pebble, and
may be had at the ftone-cutters, and the colour fhops.,
Directions for making the fellowing mixed Colours.
Tish Colour.
THITE and lamp-black; or indigo and
and black; or cherry-ftone and white,
Ihaded with irory-black.
Bay Colour. Vermilion, with a little Spanith brown and
black.
Bright Red. Indian lake and native cinnabar.
Carnation.
Lake and white, shaded with lake.
Changeable Red lead and water of mafficot, shaded with
Tap-green.
Silk.
Cloud Colour. Whire, light mafficot, or lake and white
shaded with blue verditure or blue ver-
diture alone.
Crimson.
Cinnabar-lake and white, shaded with lake.
Flame Calour
Vermilion and orpiment of red lead and
mafficot, heightened with white.
Fless Colour. White, with a lttle lake, and redlead; add
yellow ochre for a fwarthy complexion.
FrenchGreen Light pink and Dutch bice, shaded with
green pink.
Glass Gray. Cerufe, with a little blue of any Kind.
Hair Colour. Mafficot, umber, yellow ochre, cerufe,
ochre-de-luce, and cherry-(fone black.
Lead Colour. Indigo and white.
Light Blue.
Blue bice, heightened with cerufe of
podium.
Light green.
Pink and (malt, with white, if need require.
LronLowng. Redlead and mafficot, fhaded with umber.
Marrey.
Cinnabar-lake and white lead.
Orange.
Red lead and a litile fine mafficot, shaded
with gall-ftone and lake.
Orange


37
Orange Tawny. Cinnabar, light pink and a little mafficot,
shaded with gall-ftone and lake.
Pearl Colour. Carmine, with a little white, fhaded with
lake.
PopinjayGrien. Green and mafficot; or pink and a little
indigo, thaded with indigo.
Purple.
Indigo, Spanith brown and white or
blue bice with, red and white lead; or blue
bice and lake.
Ruset.
Cherry-ftone black, and white.
Scarlet.
Red lead and lake, with or without ver-
milion; or carmine and Indian lake; or
native cinnabar and red lead shaded with
indian lake.
Sea Green. Bice, pink and white, fhaded with green
pink.
Shy Colour. Light mafficot and white, for the loweft
and lighteit parts; red ink and white for the
next; blue bice and white for a third degree;
and blue bice alone for the higheft part of
all. Thefe are to be all foftened into one
another at the edges, fo as not to appear
harfh.
Sky Colour for Blue bice, and Venice cerufe or ultra-
Drapery.
marine and white, shaded with indigo.
Straw Colour Vellow mafficot, and a very little cinnabar,
haded with dark pink.
Violet Colour. Indigo, white and cinnabar lake, or fine
Dutch bice and lake, shaded with in-
digo; or litmofe, (malt, and blue bice,
the latter molt predominant.
Water.
Blue and white shaded with blue, and
heightened with white.
C2
Directions
11





52
Directions for using the Colours:
7OUR pencils muft be faft in their quills, and fharp
I pointed after you have drawnt em through your
mouth.
Before you begin, have all your colours ready before
you, and a pallet for the conveniency of mixing them;
a paper to lay under your hand, and to keep your work
clean, as well as to try your colours upon; alfo a large
bruth called a fitch, to wipe off the duft when your
colours are dry.
Lay your colours on but thinly at firft, decpening and
mellowing them by degrees as you fee occafion. The
quicker you lay them on, the evener and cleaner your
drawing will appear.
Take care to preferve all your colours from duff;
and before you afe them wipe your shells and pallet
every time with a fitch.
When you have done your work, or would lay it
afide, be careful to wath your pencils clean in warm
Water.
For face painting, mix up a little light carnation
or fieth colour, with gum water, in a shell by ir-
felf. If it be for a fair complexion, mix vermition
and white flake together and for a fwarthy one,
add to the former a little mafficot or Englifh ochre,
of both.
Let your fieth colour be always lighter than the
complexion you would paint: for by working on it
you may bring it to its true colour.
In a large shell, or upon your pallet, lay your dif-
ferent fhades of fleth-colour at a convenient diftance
from each other; and always have ready a fufficient
quantity of white to lighten your fhadows.
For


33
For the checks and lips ufe a mixture of lake and
sed lead, or carmine, as occafion requires; and for
blue tints, (as under the eyes and in veins) indigo of
ultramarine and white.
For gray faint fhadows, afe white, Englith ochre,
fometimes mafficot; for deep Chadows, white, Englifh
ochre, umber; for darker fhadows, lake and pink,
which make a good flethy shadow.
In colouring landlcapes, at firft only lay dead co-
lours fmooth all over the piece, leaving no part un-
covered; and be not over-curious in this part of the
performance, but rather ufe a mafterly freedom; and
the work, though feemingly rough to the eye, will
have a good effect when placed at a diftance.
Let not the roughness of the colour difcourage you;
for it is eafily to be foftened by degrees with the other
Shadows, obferving only to foften and heighten them
according as the light falls.
In some places lay on frong touches, and in thofe
places bring your work up together to an equal round-
nets and lrength, tempering and Tweetening your
colours with a sharper pencil than the firft, that no
lumps or harth edges be left, but that all your fhadows
may hie difperted, foft, and (mooth, gliding gently, as
it were, into one another.
You are not to finith any part before the other, but
work up all the parts gradually alike, till you fee no-
thing wanting to complete your picture.
Having laid your dead colours, begin firft with the
lighteff parts, as the fky, fun-beams, &c. then the
yellowith beams (which are to be done with mafficot
and white); next the blueness of the lky (with ultra-
marine or fmalt alone). For purple clouds only, mix
lake and white, making your colours deeper as they
go upwards from the horizon, except in tempeftuous
tKies. The tops of diftant mountains muft be worked
10


(34
to faint, that they may feem to lofe themfelves in
the 2ir.
Bring your colours forwards, as your diftace de-
creafes painting your firft ground next the horizon
downwards of a blueifh fea-green, and as you advance
forwards, of a reddifh or darker green, till you come
to the fore-ground itfelf, which as it is to be the darkeff
part of all, do with dark green, shaded with a dark
brown or yellow which rule of fhadow will alfo ferve
for the trees on each respective ground.
All diftant objects are to be made imperfect as they
appear to the eye, as has been already obferved under
the article of Light and Shade, page 16.
In colouring trees, boughs, and branches, touch in
all the dark fhades firft, raifing the lighter leaves above
the darker by adding mafficot to the dark green, which
may be made with bice, pink, and indigo, for the
uppermoft of all, which are to be done laft; touch
lightly the extremities of the leaves with a little green,
mafficot, and white, and fet off the darkeff fhadows
with fap green and indigo.
Thefe rules are adapted to general appearances: but
the learner may deviate from them asnature shall dictate.
With regard to drapery, fruit, ffowers, and other
branches of painting, the beft obfervations are to be
taken from the objects themfelves, rather than the moft
curious and exact reprefentations of them.

RECEIPTS FOR THOSE WHO PAINT IN
WATER-COLOURS.
To make Gum-Water.
ISSOL VE one ounce of pure white gum-arabic,
I and half an ounce of double refined fugar, in a
quart of fpring-water; ftrain it through a fine fieve
or a piece of mullin, and bottle it off for ufe, keeping
it free from duft.
Anrther


53
Another Way.
Take fome gum-arabic of the whiteff fort, bruife
it, and te it up in a piece of woollen cloth, and fteep
it in fpring-water in a glats or earthen vellel, till it is
ditfolved. If it be too lliff, add more water; and if
t00 thin, more gum.
With this water you may temper moft of your co-
lours, uling fuch a quantity, that being touched when
dry, the colours will not come off. If the colour
Thines, there is too much gum in it.
To keep the Flies from your Work.
When you have made your gum-water according
to either of the foregoing direction, add thereto a
little coloquinteda, which will preferve your work,
when expofed, from being spoiled by the flies.
To make Liquid Geld for Vellum Painting, Fans, &c.
Grind the fineft leaf-gold with frong gum-water
very fine, adding as you grind it more gim-vaiera jou
fee necellary. When you have ground ii a. as
you can, wath it in a large thell; ther temper a vith
a little mercury fublimate, bind it is the mell with a
little diffolved gum, thake and fpread it equally all
over the shell, and ufe it with fair water only.
To make Liquid Sitver for the same Purpose.
The process for this is the same with that of liquid
gold, only obferving in the uling it to temper it with
glaire of eggs inflead of water.
To make the Glaire of Ezgs.
Take the whices, and beat them with a fpoon till
they rife all in a foam, let them fland all night, and
they will be clarified into good glaire.
50


 56
To recover Liguid Silver that has contracted ruft.
If your filver, by length of time or damp weather,
becomes rufty, cover that part of your work with juice
of garlick, which will effectually recover it.
To keep the Colours from sinking.
Boil four ounces of roche-alum in a pint of spring-
rater, till it is thoroughly diffolved then filter it
through brown paper, and keep it for ufe.
Before you lay on youf colours, take a sponge, and
wet the back of your paper with this water while it
is hot. This will not only prevent the colours from
give them an additional
Linking, but will likewife
beauty and luftre, and preferve them from fadeing.
If your paper is not good, it mult be wathed three or
four times with this water, drying it every time.
If your prints are to be varnifhed, wath them all over
with white ffarch before you begin to lay on your colours.
To make Sizs for painting Scenes, and other Candle-
Ligbt Pieces.
Steep a quarter of a pound of the cuttings of white
glove-leather in water for fome time, then take them
out, and boil them in three quarts of water till it waltes
to 2 pint, and itram it through a cloth into an earthen
pan. When the fize is cold if it feels firm under your
hand, it is ftrong enough. Nou may prepare any
colours in this fize while it is warm, and it will take
off the glare which would appear upon them by candle-
light, it mixed with gum-water.
To recover Colours when decayed.
Take rofemary-water double-diftilled, or pure spirit
of rofemary, and with a few drops of it, temper your
colours, which, however dead and faded, will recover
their bloom and brilliance.
This water or spirit will prevent the bubbles in white
and umber, which are troublefome in grinding.
CHAP.


57
CHAP. IX.
OF PAINTINC ON SILK OR SATIN.
(IRST make an outline according to your fancy,

then lay on a watk of ilinglats, with great care,
which will remove the glare and fleckinets of the filk,
being necellary to make your colours work freely;
hicll the ifinglats in clear water, fo as not to be very
glutinous; otherwife it would spoil your colours and
difcolour your filk. Obferve your lights are to be
made by a snall tint, mixt with flake white, of the
colour of the intended ffower, juft fufficient to make
a degree from the colour of the filk: for instance, it
a blue flower, a very imall quantity of bice or blue
verditure mixt with the white, uling less of the whice
in proportion as the Chades grow darker, indigo may
be ufed alone in the darkelt thades. Take care never
to lay your colours on the filk thick, as then they will
be apt to crack; to prevent which it may be proper
to mix a little white fugar-candy with the guin-water.
If your flower is to deep as not to admit of a pure
white, in any part, lay on a priming of white, which
being thoroughly dry, proceed to the ground colour of
the lower, advancing gradually with the shades, as
before directed.
A LI57
I7


5
 




A LIST OF
NEW DRAWING-BOOKS,
Defigned and Engraved in a very fuperior
Style, by the moft eminent Matters, for
the Ufe and Improvement of Young Gen
tlemen and Ladies in the delightful Art of
Drawing.
Printed for and fold by the Proprictor CARINCTON
EOwLES, of his Map and Print Warehouse, No. 69.
St. Pauls Church Fard, London.

I. DOWL ESs Praftice of Perspetrive or an
D ealy method of reprefenting natural objects
according to the rules of art, applied and exemplified
in all the variety of cales; as landicapes, gardens,
buildings of divers kinds, their appendages, parts, and
furniture; with rules for the proportion and position
of figures both in draught and relievo: alfo the
manner of conducting the fhadows produced either
by natural of artificial luminaries, and practical methods
of drawing after nature, when the process of rules are
not underlfood a work highly necellary for painters,
engravers, architects, embroiderers, Itatuaries, jewellers.
tapeftry-


59
Eapeftry-workers, and others concerned in defigning,
the whole illuftrated with 150 copper-plates, written in
French by a jefint of Paris. Tranflated by E. Cham-
bers, author of Cyclopxdia, or, An Unverfal Dictionary
of Arts and Siences, the fixth edition. & If you would
s proceed immediately to the practice of perspective,
of without engaging in the intricacies of the theory,
33
of the Jefuit's Pertpective will anfver your purpofe.
Wolfius in Element. Mathel. Tom. Il. p. 1048,
quarto, bound. Price 16s.
To this fixth edition is prefixed the theory of per-
spective, in which the reafons and grounds of the
feveral methods made ufe of in the practice, are shown
and demonftrated, by James Lodgfon, fellow of the
Royal Society, and matter of the mathematical fchool
in Chriff's holpital.
II. Bowles's Practical Gesmetry; or, a new and caly
method of treating that art. Whereby the practice of
it is rendered plain and familiar, and the fudert 1s
directed in the moft eafy manner, through the feveral
parts and progreffions of 1t. A work highly neceffary
for painters, engravers, architects, embrorderers, sta-
tuaries, jewellers, tapeftry-workers, and others con-
The whole illuftrated with 82
cerned in defigning.
copper-plates. Wherein, befides the feveral geome-
trical figures, are contained many examples of land-
Icapes, pieces of architecture, perspective, draughts
of figures, ruins, &c. Tranllated from the French
of Monfieur Seb. le Clerc. The fixth edition, 12mg.
bound. Price 5s.
1II. Bowles's Principles of Drowing; forming a com-
plete drawing-book, illuftrated with a curious collec-
tion of examples beginning with an eaty and fimple
method,
H2


60
merhod, calculated to convey inttruction to young
minds, by which they may acquire the art without the
affiftance of a mafter; every branch of drawing is
contained in this book, fuch as the different parts of
the human body, academy, dreffed figures, landfcapes,
birds, cattle, shipping, &ic. &c. elegantly engraved on
60 Jolio pages of copper plates, all from the original
drawings of the moll approved matters. To which
i5 prefixed an introduction to drawing, containing rules
and directions for the choice of inftruments and ma-
terials, and how to apply and manage them, with eafy
and proper leftons for the young fludent, tranllated
from the French of Monfieur Gerard de Laireffe, with
abltiracts from C. A. Du Frefnoy, the feventh edition,
corrected and greatly improved with additions. Folio.
Price 15s.
IV. Bowles's Complete Drawing Book; containing an
extenfive collection of examples in all variety of fub-
jects for the improvement of youth, in the pleafant
and ufeful art of drawing, elegantly engraved on 100
copper-plates, in the following method: r. Leffons
adapted to lead the pupil gradually from the firft prac-
fice on parts of the human body, to the drawing of
the whole academy figures in go plates, by Seballian
Le Clerc. 2. Examples of landicapes fketched in
outlines for the firft attempts of the pupil, and finithed
with fhadings for his after practice. In feveral ori-
ginal plates, by Chatelame, Vivetes, Vanfomer, &c.
3. Defigns in fea pieces; many examples in horfes,
cattle, fowls; and ffowers, after the beft mafters on
each subject. To which are annexed, introductory
rules for the ufe of learners, with an account of
the inftruments and materials ufed in drawing. Quarto.
Price 6s.
2
J. Brtless


61
V. Bowles's Vouths Affiflant in Drawing; contain=
familiar
ing many curious (pecmens on an eaty and
plan, adapted to lead the pupil gradually from the
firtt practice on parts of the human body, to the
drawing of the whole academy figures. Engraved
on go copper plates, enlarged and improved by
Seb. le Clerc, to which are prefixed, proper in-
Rructions to youth for their improvement and en-
tertainment in this art. Quarto. Price 3s.
VI. Bowles's Passions of the Soul, reprefented in
feveral heads, engraved in the manner of drawings
in chalk, from the delfigns of the late celebrated
Monficur Le Brun.
In this fuperior performance the lineaments of the
face, that great mirrour of the foul! are not only
minutely defcribed by letter press, but are admirably
delineated on 20 folio copper plates, in a ftriking and
moft mafterly manner. Price 6s.
Vil. Bowles's Proportions of the Human Rody, mra-
fured from the moft beauuful antique atues, by
Monfieur Audran, engraver to the lateking of France;
done from the originals engraved at Paris, on 27 large
Jolio copper plates. Price 7s. 6d.
VIII. Bowles's new Precepter in Drawing; contitt-
ing of variety of claifes, viz. whole figures in divers
politions, and all the feveral parts of the human body
from head to foot light, arry, loofe landicapes;
perspective views of fea ports, forts, ruins, Cc.
being the clofe ffudy for a feries of years of the
late Mr. Lens, miniature painter and drawing
mafter to Chriff's hospital, on 62 copper plates, en-
graved by himfelf. Defifned chiclly for young be-
ginners, and now publifhed from the author's origi-
juls, very neceffary and ufeful for all drawing, board-
ing


62
ing tchools, esc. To which is prefixed, an introduc-
tion to drawing, containing a defciption of the in-
ftruments and their respective ufes, and the materials
proper for drawing: rules for managing the pencil,
and the bet method for attaining perfection in the
art with insiructions, by which a young practitio-
ner shall be enabled to form a judgment, as well of
his own performances, as thofe of others with caly,
proper, and necellary lefforis for him at his firft en-
trance. Affo, the names of the colours ufed, with
infiructions to temper, mix, and fit them for paint
ing. Likewife colours for wathing land(capes, or
prints of any Kind with plain and eaty rules
for japanning. Tranllated from the French of
Monficur Gerard de Larreffe, and improved with
extracts from C. A. Du Frefnoy, Salmon, (Sc. Folio.
Price 7s. 6d.
IX. Bowles's Fhriff, containing 60 copper plates
of beautiful fowers, regularly dilpofed in their fuc-
ceftion of blowing; to which is added, an accurate
defcription of their colours, with inftructions for
drawing and painting them according to nature, being
a new work intended for the ufe and amufement of
ventlemen and ladies delighting in that art. Octavo.
Price 6s. Coloured 1l. 1s.
X. Bowles's Drowing Book for Ladies, or Complele
Fheriff, being an extenfive and curious collection of
the moft beautiful flowers, all drawn after nature by
A. Heckle, with a thort introduction to drawing,
and directions for mixing and ufing of colours. Allo
feveral proper and ealy examples: The whole adapted
for the improvement of ladies in needle work. En-
graved on 24 Jolio copper plates. Price 6s. Colour-
ed 125.
XI. Brwless


63
XI. Bowles's Pelite Recreation in Drawing, containing
picturefque portraits of fathionable faces that frequent
the genteel watering places, including s2 well known
heads, with the animals they refemble; comprifing
Round
Short
Narrow
Strait
Square
Long
Heads.
Flat
Broad
Curve, Erc.
Engraved on 26 copper plates. Price 1s. 6d.
XII. Bowless Art of Painting in Water Colours,
exemplified in landlcapes, flowers, Coc. together with
instructions for painting on glats and in crayons: ex-
plained in a full and familiar manner, with particular
directions for preparing the colours agreeable to the
practice of the moft emnent mafters. By the author
of Bowles's Artiff’s Affiftant. The ninth edition cor-
rected and greatly improved with additions. Small
OCtavo. Price Is.
XIIl. Bowles's Art of Drowing without a mafter,
from the French of the Sieur P. B. Engraved on 20
copper plates. A polite prefent for youth; equally
wfeful and amuling. Small Octavo. Price 1s.
XIV. Bowles's New and Complete Book of Cyphers, de-
figned and engraved on 24 copper plates, by John
Lockington, including a curious pript of the emperor
Charlemagne's crown, to which is added a print of
the coronets and helmetsuled by the nobility, &ic. The
cyphers in this book are ornamentally dispoted in the mo-
dern talle, more regular than any ever publifhed, ufeful
to artifts in various profeffions, as feal and plate engra-
vers, carvers, coach painters, deligners for medals, tro-
phies, embroiderers, toc. Cuarto. Price gs.
65 Be careful to order BOwLES's Book of Cypbers, by
Lockington.
XV. Agrand


( 64
XV. A grand collection of new and elegant dratwing
books, capitally deligned and engraved confifting of
real views in England, Europe, Asid, and Americx; Chip-
ping, fea pieces, fea engagements, huntings, horfes,
humorous, entertaining, scripture, and moral prints,
fieges and battles, birds, 5c. 72 leaves in a book.
Price 3s. each.
XVI. Arich variety of new and capital drawing
books, well deligned, and finely engraved. 6 Leaves
in a book. Price 1s. 6d. each.
XVIl. An extenfive affortment of new and curious
small drawing books, containing land(capes out-lined
and shaded, landicapes shaded only, shipping, figures
of men and women, heads, horfes, beafts, birds, and
Howers. 6 Leaves in a book. Price 6d. each.
XVIII. Bawles's Now Medium English Allas; or,
complete fet of maps of the counties of England and
Wales: divided into their respective hundreds, wapen-
takes, wards, rapes, lathes, ac. Exhibiting the roads,
rivers, cities borough, market, and fea port towns
principal villages and places of note with their dif-
tances from London, and members fent to parliament;
alfo church livings, feats of the nobility, and a variety
of hifforical extracts relative to natural produce, trade,
manufactures and commerce, compiled and laid down
from the lateff and molt approved authorities. Cuarto,
bound. Price 1l. 16s.
F I N I S.


