BOWLES'S
Principles of Drawing

FORMING
A COMPLETE DRAWING. BOOK;
ILLUSTRATED WITH
A CURIOUS COLLECTION of EXAMPLES,
BEGINNING WITH
An easy and simple Method, calculated to convey Instruction to Young Minds ;
By which they may acquire
The ART without the ASSISTANCE Of a MASTER.
Every BRANCH of DRAWING is contained in this BOOK;
Such as the different Parts of the
BIRDS,
HUMAN BODY,
CATTLE,
ACADEM Y,
SHIPPLNG,
DRESSED FIGURES,
&c. &c.
LANDSCAPES,
Elegantly engraved on SIXTY FOLIO PAGES of COPPER PLATES,
ALL FROM THE
Original DRAWINGS of the most approved MASTERS.
To which is prefixed,
AN INTRODUCTION TO DRAWING;
CONTAINING
Rules and DIRECTioNS for the Choice of INStRUMENts and MATERiALs,
and how to apply and manage them.
With easy and proper Lessons for the YOUNG STUDENT.
Translated from the FRENCH of
Monsieur GERARD DE, LAIRESSE,
With ABSTRACTS from C. A. DU FRESNOY.


THE SEVENTH EDITION,
CORRECTED and greatly IMPROVED; with ADDITIONS.

LONDON;
Printed for and sold by the Proprietor CARINGToN BOwLES, at bis Map and Print Warehouse,
No. 69, in St. Paul Church Yard.










 




DRAWING is the art of representing by lines and shades,
the figure of any object we see, or of any form we conceive
an idea of in the mind.
It is a most ingenious, useful and elegant art; and the study
of it ought to be encouraged in every youth that discovers an
inclination or genius towards the practice thereof, whatever
station of life he may be placed in. Its utility is so very exten-
sive, there are few arts, and few professions in which it is not
serviceable. All designs and models are executed by it. Ma-
thematicians, engineers, architects, mariners, gardiners, em-
broiderers, weavers, and a multitude of other professions, have
frequent occasion to practise it. In most stations it is useful,
from the general who commands an army, to the mechanic
who supports himself by handicraft.
A person who has knowledge in drawing, and a capacity
of performing it, usually sees and remembers the form, shape,
and other circumstances of objects, more minutely and perfect
than one unacquainted with the art; and possesses an accom-
plissiment, exceedingly desirable both for amusement and use :
he is qualified to take on the spot the sketch of a fine building,
of a beautiful prospect, of any curious production of art, or
of uncommon and striking appearances in nature, and to bring
home for future inspection and service, the foris of objects
which yreld entertainment in journies and distant places.

Whether you draw after nature, or the perform-
ances of others, the hand can only express by lines and shades
those forms and ideas which have impressed the mind. Hence
the utility appears of accustoming the mind to a curious and
attentive observation of objects, especially of those intended
for imitation : its imprefsions will hereby be strengthened ; its
conceptions will be more exact and just; and the hand will
delineate with greater ease and correctness, those forms which
are clearly and strongly retained in the memory.
Inform your judgment of the properties and excellencies of
à drawing well executed. In this knowledge the mind wil
make quick improvement, by a frequent attentive inspection,
of the performances of those who have excelled. In viewing
them, contemplate the freedom and boldness of the outline;
the correctness or justness of the proportion of the several
parts ; the character which is peculiar and distinguishing in
every figure, and expressive of the circumstances it is supposed
to be in ; the elegance, or that which gives à kind of delicacy
or certain agreeableness which pleases every one; the perspec-
tive, or representation of the parts according to their situation
with respect to the point of sight. If the judgment be well in-
formed in these particulars, the young practitioner will make
much greater improvement than can possibly be attained if he
proceeds in practice without a due regard to increasing know¬
ledge and judgment.

More to the genius than the hand we owe,
From this the beauties of your art must flow,
The labour of the hand must second and support that of the
brain. To become an able artist, the art must be made habi-
tual. An easy and just expreffion is only to be gained by con-
stant practice. In all aris, the rules are learned in a little
time, but the practice requires a long and severe diiigence.
The hand should be improved in practice, and the mind in
judgment every day.



 


This ingenious art not only affords a very pleasing entertain-
ment to men of leisure and fortune, in a variety of instances,
but enables them to judge the propriety of designs, for such
works as they intend to have executed : to lay down and ex-
hibit their construction, and vary and improve the plan most
to their own liking.
Of all others, this art has the greatest number of admirers,
and no wonder, since in a kind of universal language under-
stood by all men ; it represents to our vicw the forms of innu-
merable. objects we have no other ways of beholding : and
helps us to the knowledge of many of the works in nature or
art, which any other method of describing would be insuffi-
cient to give an idea of- It transmits to our view things long
since past, and preserves the forms of others, that will soon
perisni. It reprefents the deeds of people and actions for many
ages dead; and hands down to us the features and resem-
blances of our ancestors, and of other valuable and renowned
persous of former generations. The esteem of this excellent
art is not confined to adults ; children admire it, and often by
the power of a natural genius, draw a variety of objects ili
such a manner as to excite commendation.
For the instruction of vouth in this useful art, the following
rules are laid down, and a course of proper lessons exhibited
for their practice.
TO BE OBSERVED.
Let your first practice be employed in imitating the most
plain and simple objects: in accustoming your hand to draw
strait lines, perpendicular and horizontal ones; circular and
irregularly curved lines. This method will be useful in bring-
ing the hand to a facility of operation. Moreover, these lines
are the rudiments of all objects that can be expressed; they
bound and circumscribe every figure : all its parts or mem-
bers are composed of them. A little time may be advantage-
ously employed in drawing after plain inanimate figures, which
require strokes of various curvings. After this, draw the par-
ticular seatures of the face, beginning with the eye, the nofe,
the mouth, the ears. Draw them in their different positions.
Persevere in copying several times after the same example, be-
fore vou make the transition to a new one. You cannôt expect
to draw an entire head or face, till you are capable of perform-
ing the parts separatelv: nor of copying with pleasure and
improvement those objects which require more art and time,
till you have acquired a customary exercise of patience, and a
freedom and exactness in copying those that are easier.
Sketch vour outline at first very faint, that the amendment
of it may be performed without its appearing to be re-touch-
ed : endeavour at à graceful freedom, boldness, and just pro-
portion of all its parts; in these the exceliency of a good out-
line consists. It should be drawn with flowing and gliding
strokes, not swelling suddenly, but with gradual risings, such as
might just be felt in statues. Be careful that it loses nothing of
its freedom and boldness, when you correct it by reducing some
purts and swelling others. The outiine on that side nearest the
light must be fainter than the other. The surest and most im-
proving miethod of practice, is to fketch outlines for a consi¬
derable time, without attempting to shade any of them; and to
make numbers of sketches from the same pattern, imitating as
nearly as you ean every stroke, and carefully to compare each
of vour copies with the original, that vou may observe wherein
it is faiilty, and avoid those ercors in vour next sketch. A good
outline is of the greatest importance and extent in the art of
drawing,




drawing, an ability to make it can only be acquired by appli¬
cation and practice.
Proceed slowlv in vour first attempts, making it vour care
to secure every stroke, and rather to produce one good sketch
than in a heedless manner to hurry over a number of bad ones.
View your original with close attention; ponder upon the
length, the breadth, and the form of each part; their propor-
tions to one another and to the whole; the distance from one
part to fhe other; which of them lie parallel, and which un-
derneath the other. In considering what parts are opposite to
each other, you may conceive or occasionally draw a perpen-
dicular line from the top to the bottom, and à strait line from
side to sitle, and notice what parts are marked by these lines,
and in what manner others deviate from them. This obser-
vation may be made by laying vour ruler acrofs the work,
and observing the parts intersected thereby.
Sketch out the general appearance of the whole in very
faint strokes, without regarding the minute particulars and
littie turns, these may be added afterwards. Review your
sketch after it has been laid aside for some time, comparing it
again with the original : faults may then appear which were
indiscovered before. This method of practice tends to make
you more perfect in any particular sketch; and by improving
your knowledge of outlines and proportions, to enable you
for nearer imitation after other patterns.
Proportion, or the just magnitude of the several members
makes one essential article in every good draught. A scheme
of the proportions of a graceful human figure is given in the
fifth lesson, taken from the measures: of antique statues,
estcemed for the highest degrees of proportion. A knowledge
of these will be of great service to the young student, yet it
must not be supposed, that this scheme is the standard of
measurement for all figures. For
Different attitudes make a sensible difference in the limbs
of the same bodv : the muscles shift their appearances, swell-
This the arm, the foot, the knee, &c. are enlarged by bend¬
ing them, and the limbs are also fore shortened.
Moreover, different human bodies of agreeable appear-
ances, have nat the same meafures and exact propoitions in
their features and limbs, therefore the eye must judge of
gracefulness and proportion.
Fitnefs to peculiar characters should always be joined to the
idea of proportion. Brawny muscular limbs are expressive of
strength, and more stender forms of agility for motion. The
legs of chairmen, and the shoulders of watermen, are enlarged
by tleir different occupations. Aukward as such a fioure ap-
pears, yet a thoughtiess country clown is fitly expressed by a
large liead, shoyt neck, high shoulders, flat stomach, thick
knees and thighs, and large feet. Proportion, in these and
other instances, are regulated by fitnefs to peculiar characters,
and no exact dimensions can be given of them.
THE PROPER MATERIALS FOR DRAWING. 
 HE materials for drawing, are black lead pencils, charcoal,
A crayons 'of black, white or red chalk, or other dry co-
lours madle up into crayons ; a portcrayon, Indian ink, hair
pencils, crow-quill pens, à rulerand a pair of compasses.
A black lead pencil is most convenient at the beginning of
practice. Slope your pencil to a fine point : accustom yourself
to hold it further from the point than the nib of a pen in writ-
ing; this is necessary to an easy command of hand, and to the
making your strokes with freedom and holduenrs.
Charcoal of a fine smooth grain, slit into slender pieces fon
the portcrayon, is very proper for sketching, as any strokes
made with it are easisy brushied out with a feather or clean soft
rag, if you thiuk them wrong. Having secured your outline
with charcoal, wipe it slightly over with a feather, to make the
lines fajnt, then go over them with black or red lead, endea-
vouring to make them more correct. These new strokes, when
wrong, may be discharged with India rubber, or the crumbs
of stale white bread. In sketching after plaster, or academy
figures, charcoal is much used, because it is easily discharged.
Chalk, the best sort of it, is free from grittinefs and sand,
is pretty foft; and has a kind of fatness in it. Black chalk is
often used on blue or grey paper, the colour of which serves
for good part of the shading, and the lighis are put in with



white chalk. Red chalk is used on white paper: the shades
made in hatching with it receive a sostness, by rubbing them
in gently in the broad strong parts with a stump made of wasfi
leather, and then hatching upon them again. Chalk is proper
for drawing large figures ; but a little experience will teach
you; to be careful not to make false strokes with it, for they
are very difficult to be discharged from the paper.
Crayons are any colours mixed with tobacco-pipe clayy
which, while soft, and in the consistency of paste, is rolled up
in pieces about the thicknefs of a quill, and two or three inches
in length, and then being dried, are properly called dry co-
lours. They work easiest, and express themselves strongest on
paper of a rough grain, and are used on coloured paper. If
dark, or brownissi, or near the colour of whited-brown paper;
it yields a good relief to the tender parts of the work. In ufing
these colours they are rubbed and wrought one into another,
in such a manner that no strokes appear, but the colours are
mixed as if they were laid in with a brushi. Many pictures after
the life are painted in crayons.
Drawing with these dry colours is quick and expeditious,
and when the crayons are handled with judgment, they give a
delicate softness: but the touch of a rude finger may spoil the
sine work, or a damp place mildew it.
Indian ink does not spread and run like common ink, and
the work performed with it-appears much softer. It is bought
in small cakes, and by mixing it with water may be made to
any degree of strength, and used either with a hair pencil, or
in a pen like common ink. When the young student has made
some progress in drawing with his black lead pencil, and be-
gins to use this ink, let him secure his outline as correct as he
can with the black lead, then he may trace it over with a pen
or hair pencil and Indian ink, and afterwards with India rub-
ber, er the crumb of stale white bread, rub out any remaining
marks of the black lead pencil.
Shading with this ink is sometimes done by hasching with
the pen, or making strokes crossing one anorher; but this is as
well, or better performed with the hair pencil. A more expe-
ditious and customary manner is washing or working the shades
with the ink and hair peneils, in the sanie way as water colours
are used. The shades made by hatching, resemble the siroke
of engraved prints. In wasliing the shades, they appear like
those in mezzotinto prints, in which there is not any lines.
The ruler and compasses are useful in making geometrical
figures and in architecture ; excepting in these instances the
ruler is never to be used, and the compasses but seldom ; oc-
casionally they may be applied in nicely examining the agree-
ment of the copy with the original, but it is best to judge in
most caïes by the eye only.
THE CONDUCT OF THE TEINTS OF LIGHTS
AND SHADOWS.
It is the proper distribution of light and shade which gives

the appearance of substanice, round or flat sliapes, distance,
and relievo or projection, to whatever bodies you represent.
Draw a circle, and according to the manner in which you
shade it, it will either receive a flat, a globular, or a concave
appearance. Fill it up with an even colour, or with a number
of lines of thie same strength, and it will resemble a body with
a round circumference and flat sides. By colouring it strongest
in the middle, the edges are made to retire by the gradating
shiades, and it receives a convex appearance like a globe. By
graduaily weakening the stiades from the edge towards the
centre, the middle part will be made to retire, and a concave
appearance like a bason be given to it.
Those parts of an object which have the greatest vivacity
of colour, catch the sight first, and appear nearest to it. By
gradually weakening thé colour, the other parts are made to
recede from the eye, and appear farther off.
Pure and unmixed white, either brings an object nearer, or
makes it to retire further. If the white be gradual ly weak-
ened, and supported by a fhade, it then advances; but unless
it be thus forced forward, it slies off to the remotest view.
In rounding the parts of any object, thelight and thade must
be gradually softened into oné another, and lose themselves by
slow and almost imperceptible degrees.
The outline must be faiait in those parts which receive the
light, and strong and bold where the shades fall.




Begin vour shading at the top, proceed downward, and go
through the whole of it with a faint shade before you give the
finishiag to any particular part.
Abalance should be preserved between the lights and shades,
they serve for an opposition to onc another; a broad light must
therefore be accompanied with a broad shade ;-a fainter light
with a fainter shade.
Light objects must have a sufficient strength of shadow to
sustain them, and dark bodies must be relieved by a mafs of
light behind. Without this opposition, objects will adhere
to the ground, or stick to one another; but by distributing
lights and shadows to advantage, they are loosened and set
free, and receive a strong relievo.
Those objects or parts of objects which come forwardest to
view, must have strong and smart oppositions, and the highest
finishing: those that are designed to be thrown further off,
must be made still weaker, and less distinct. In nature, objects
appear distinct or confused, according to their nearness or dis-
tance: the features of a face, or folds of a garment, are not
distinguishable the length of a street; and the innumerable
leaves of a distant plantation, look like one confused mafs. A
more accurate, or slighter finissiing, gives to oljects a relative
dominion over each other as to their distances: the heightening
of one, chases another further from the sight which is not so
minutely and strongly penciled.
Give to every object such lights as are most proper to its
supposed situation. In the open air, when the sun shines full
upon objects, the lights must be strong and bold, and the sha¬
dows dark : if the sun is obscured by clouds, the light is more
equal and universal, but not so strong and warm, and the
shiades must be fainter and more sweet. Artificial light
tinges the object with its own colour, and occasions large
shadows with bold extremities. Elementary light is pure, and
more generally diffused, and the shadows it produces are
softer. The projecting parts of objects that are nearest to the
light, catch it first, are brightest, and produce shiades upon the
lower parts. Consider trom what poinf, and in what di-







In all arts and sciences, the learner begins with the most
simple principles. The knowledge of the alphabet is an intro-
duction to the grammar; aud an ability to imitate the forms
of different lines, (it is no matter of what shape, so that they
are cxactly imitated,) is the foundation of drawing aster every
kind of object.
In the first lesson the scholar is presented with many lines of
different kinds for his imitation. Viz. Perpendicular lines
marked A; that is, a line falling directly on another, so as to




rection the light salls upon the object, and place all your lights
and shades according to that direction : if it falls perpendicu-
lar upon a man; the top of the head is then lightest, the
shoulders in the next degree so, and the lower part gradually
darker : the cavities and parts that bend inwards, not receiv-
itg any direct rays, are darkest of all, and the colours are lost
in them. The full force of the principal light is to be only in
one part, and ought not to be crossed or interrupted with littie
shadows. A sudden brightness is seen, and many reflections
and small tints are produced, when the force of light strikes
upon siiks, sattins, vessels of silver, copper, or upon other glit-
tering objects.
The very extremitv of the shadowed side of objects is sel-
dom the darkest of all, because it almost always receives à re-
flection of light from adjacent bodies. Reslexes are scarce
sensible, except in the shadowed parts. All reflected light is
supposed to carry withit part of the colour of the body which
reflects it, so that those places which receive this light have
their own colour mixed or tinged with the other. Much skill
and accuracy is often required in management of the reflexes,
as the same place many times receives them from different ob-
jects differently coloured. Every circumstance of the colour;
light, and position of each figure, and what effect each has
upon the other, is to be considered, and nature pursued in all
the variety of mixtures.
Nature gives a vast variety of appearances in light and shade,
a 'curious observer of them is rewarded with high delight; and
the artist with much improvement. The sky always gradates
one way or another: the rising and setting sun exhibit it with
astonishing beasty and perfection. The variety of forms and
colours reflected in water, from the sky and clouds, from trees,
houses, and other objects, are exceeding beautiful to behold.
Accustom yourself to consider the different effects of light
falling upon objects, its various and delightful softnings and
modulations in the shades, or parts which are more or less
deprived of the rays; your judgment will this way be best in-
formed by your senses, how to represent these pleasing appear-
ances: the proper ianagenient of which makes onc of thé
great divisions or branches of painting.
FIRST LESSON,







make equal angles on each side. C, horizontal lines which
pass srom onc point to another without any deviation. D, ob-
lique lines, converging or approximating one way, and diverg-
ing or continually increasing their distance the other way.
E, parallel lines which are every where equidistant from each
other ; at F, two semicircles are drawn from points assumed
in the lower line, and the upper line being a tangent to both
of them, proves the truth of its being drawn parallel. Ex-
amples are also given of various sorts of curved and twining
lines, &c.















The second lesson consists partly of geometrical figures,
some of them with plain lines, others with their surfaces
formed by light and shade.
Number 1. is a cijcle. 2. The circle appearing with a
flat side, being filled with an equal shade. 3. A convex ap-
pearance given to the circle by light and shade. 4. A con-
cave appearance given to it. 5. Other convex and concave
surfaces. 6. A square of four equal sides. 7. An equilateral




 













 


















The third leslon will be more pleasing to the learner
than the former ones, and practising after the instances


The following leaves exhibit many examples of the fea-
tures of the human face, as the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, &c.
The pupil should practise after the different features in their
various positions, till he is able to draw them well: unless he
can perfoim the parts separately, it will be fruitless to attempt
the whole together.









triangle. 8. A spiral or curve line issuing from a centre, and
continually going off fromit at every turn. 9. A cone. These,
with other figures shewn in this lesson, are useful in different
parts of practice.
By consulting a small treatise of Practical Geometry, by Le
Clerc, the student, in a fhiort time, will gain a knowledge of
the construction of geometrical figures, very advantageous in
drawing multitudes of objects.












Here given, will qualify him to copy more difficult representations.


Several easy examples are also given, of entire faces and
heads, in variots aftitudes. When the student has made a
progress in sketching after those in outline, there are others
which are finisnied for him to shade after. By considering the
plate annexed, he will improve his ideas of a face, and the
method of drawing it, in all the changes and variations which a
are occasioned therein, by different turnings of the head.





THE DIVISIONS AND PROPORTIONS OF THE
HEAD AND FACE.
IN drawing a head and face four equal parts, the length of
the nose, are usually allotted from the top to the bottoi.
1. Froi the crown of the head to the top of the forehead.
2. From thence to the top of the nofe. 3. To the bottom of
the nofe. 4. From thence to the bottom of the chin.
The breadth of the face is divided into five equal parts ;
one of which parts is the length of the eye: the distance
between the eyes is the measure of one part, and from the
corner of the eye to the side of the face is one part. The
width of the mouth is a little more than one of these parts ;
the width of the nose across the nostrils a little less. Thie eve
is divided into three parts, one of which is the measure of the
pupil or sight, with the iris round it. The ear is usually the
length of the nose.
These are approved proportions of a good face viewed in
front, but in different beautiful subjects, the same features
often vary, both in length and shape.
The head in general has nearly the shape of an egg or
oval, as in fig. 1, of the annexed plate. In the middle of
the oval, draw from the top to the bottom a perpendicu-
The features of a front
face, when drawn upon
the cross lines, according
to these directions, will ap-
pear in their proper places,
whatever way the oval or
egg is turned, as is shewn
in fig. 6, 7, 10 and 12.
That the learner may ap-
prehend more perfectly the
ule of these two lines, their
variations in the different
turnings of the head, and
how the features on them
appear when the face is in-
clining to either side, turn-
ing upwards or dotn wards :
let him either conceive of,
or procure a piece of smooti
wooe turned in the form of
an &g. Draw a line length-
ways quite round the egg, as
in sig. 1, and a p-rpendicu-
lar from top to bottom, as in
fig 2. Divide this line into
two equal parts, by another
which reaches from side to
side, as in fig. 3. The fea-
tures being drawn on these
cross lines, produce a front
right face, as in fig. 4. By
turning the egg a small mat¬
ter to the left, or to the
right, the crofs lines appear
more curved, as in fig.
5
and 7, and the features must
be drawn on them, as shiewn
in fig. 6 and 8. The nose
always projects beyond the
perpendicular line, in pro-
portion as the face is more
or less turned aside, and
more of the ear and nearest
side of the face becomes vi-
sible. The first line which
was drawn round the eg2,
is no longer its boundary,
but it gains à new circum-
ierent line, by being turned
into a new position. By in-
ciining the egg downwards,
and a little to the left, the
cross will appear as in fig. 93
if raised upwards, and re-
clining to. the right, the lines
appear as in fig. 11, and the
features in these instances
are shewn in sig. 10 and 12.
A vast variety of faces,
differently inclined, may be
shiewn by this oval or egg.




lar line, as in fig. 2. Through the centre of this line,
draw another directly across, as in fig. 3. On these two
lines the features of the face are to be drawn in their due
proportions.
Divide the perpendicular line into four equal parts. The
first must be allotted to the hair of the head. The second is
from the top of the forehead to the top of the nose. The
third reaches to the bottom of the nose. The fourth division
includies the lips and chin. This perpendicular line divides
the face breadth-ways into two equal parts : it lies exactly in
the middle betwixt the eyes, runs down the midst of the nose
and the gutter underneath. The middle of the mouth must
always be placed on it, and the bottom of it terminates on the
point of the chin.
Divide the cross line, which is the breadth of the face, into
five equal parts, and place the eyes upon it, so as to leave
exactly the lergth of one eye between them. This is to be
understood of a front face, as in fig. 4; for if it turns to either
side, the distance appears lessened on that side which is farthest
from you. The cross line is the boundary for the top of the
ears ; the bottom of them is parallel with the bottom of the
nose. The nostrils should not swell beyond the inner corner
of the eye.






Profiles, or side faces, are to be drawn by means of a per-
pendicular, as in fig. 13, on which the forehead, nofe, mouth,
and chin are to be placed, as in fig. 14. In these figures, the
line from top to bottom is strictly perpendicular ; it would
be so in an oval drawn on paper, or any flat surface ; but the
curvity of an egg turns it out of that form, though for dis¬
tinction sake, it is described by that name in the foregoing
accouint.
yhen vou mark the features in their proper places, touch
them very lightlvat sirst, and afterwards proceed on them with
greater exactness. Then draw the hair, beard, and’ shadows


WHEN the pupil can draw a face and head tolerably
well, he may proceed upon the hands and seet. The hands
are very important articles, and to perform them with ease and
freedom, is not à little difficult; much labour should be be-
stowed in practising aster the examples given of them in their
various actions and foreshortnings. The hand, from the tip
of the fore-singer to the wrist, is the length of a face, that is,
threc quarters of a head ; and this length is equally divided
into two parts, one of which is for the pali of the hand.
The thumb is the length of the nose; the breadth of the palm
is the same as its length, equal to the length of the fore finger.
The nail of the finger is about half the joint it stands upon.
The soot vicwed sideways, is in length the sixth part of tlie
figure, and may be divided into four equal parts : one of
which is for the heel, two others for the sole, and the other
for the toes. The great toe is commonly the length of the
thumb. These proportions usually obtain, and it will be
useful for the pupil to fix an idea of them in his mind, though
there be few opportunities of applying them directly, because
of the foreshortnings in which these parts appear in almost
every graceful action.

he ancients commonly allowed eigat heads to their
figures. The moderns ordinarily divide the figure into ten
faces, the face beginning at the root of the lowest hairs on
the forehead, and ending at tne bettom of the chin.
An human sigure, divided according to this method into
ten equal parts, of the length of a face, each division will
reach as followys :
The first, from the crown of-the head to the nostrils.
The second, tothe hole in the neck between the collar-bones.
The third, to the pit of the stomach.
The fourth, to the navel.
The sisth, to the lower part of the belly.
The sixth and seventh, to the upper part of the knce, the
thigh being the length of two faces.
The kuce contains half a face.
From the lower part of the knee to the ankle, two faces.
From tlic ankie to the sole of the foot, haif a face.
A man with his arms extended, from the extremity of the
longest singer of his right hand, to the longest of his left, mea-
sures as broad as he is-long, viz.
From the tip of tie long singer to the joint of the wrist,
one face.
Thence to the elbow, one sace and one third.



BEGIN with making the oval for the head, and divide it
according to the instructions already given. Agreeable to
tiat uiversal rule in all just designs of comparing and pro-
portioning every part to the first, the rest of your figure must
now be proportioned to the head ; theresore draw a perpen-
dicular srom the top of the oval, and mark on it eight divisions
or lengths of the head sor the heighth of the figure and adjust-
ment of its parts. This line is also of use in placing the figure
upright; and whether it be measurede by eight heads or ten
saces, the sormer leston directs what parts of the body are to
be placed on the several divisions.
Skeich the head sirst, then the shoulders; then draw the
runk of the body, beginning with the arm-pits; (ioaving the
aviie tiil afterwar-ie) and sy doin to the hips on boch sides,


 
bout it. In all faces there are some principal touches which
ive spirit, and are the characteristic thereof; these should be
well considered and caresully expressed. If the face be fat,
the cheeks will seem to swell; if lean, the jaw bones will stick
out, and cheeks fall in. The corners of the mouth, and middle
of the eye-brows, will be elevated in agreeable sensations.
The eye-brows will rise up at tlie ends, and fall in the mid¬
dle; and the corner of the mouth will sink in pain or unea-
siness. The mouth by fhooting forwards, and rising in the
middle, expresses aversion. Every passion of the soul is visible
in the features of the face: the lines and lights which are ex¬
pressed of them, proclaim a particular attention.


Thence to the juncture of the shoulder, one face and one
third.
Thence to the hole of the neck, one face and one third.
In all five faces, which with the five along the other arm to
the tip of the middle finger, gives ten.
In measuring a figure by eight. parts, each part the length
of the head, the divisions allotted to them are, vix. from the
crown of the head to the point of the chin, one: thence to
the bottom of the breasts, one: thence to the navel, one:
thence to the lower part of the belly, one : thence to the mid-
dle of the tligh, one : thence to the lower part of the knee,
one : thence to the small of the leg, one: thence to the bottom
of the foot, one.
The figure with his arms stretched out, measured breadth-
ways by eight parts or heads, is divided as follows, viz. From
the end of the long finger, to the wrist, one: thence to the
bend of the arm, one : thence to the bottom of the shoulder;
one : thence over to the other shoulder, two : thence to the
end of the other long finger, three.
The proportions of a man differ in some respects from those
of a woman; particularly the head of a woman is lessthan that
of a man, and her neck longer: the breasts and belly are
lower : the space from the bottom of the breast to the navel,
is half the length of the nose less than in men, aad the thigh
a third part of the nose shorter. As to the breadth, a wogfian
has her breasts and shoulders narrower, and her haunches
larger: her thighs at the place of articulation are larger: the
tops of their arms and legs are larger than a man’s, but down¬
wards more slender, and their hands and feet are less.
A new born infant is not at most above sour lieads long,
and seldom so much. At sour orfive years old it is about five
heads long, and the length of the body increases with its age,
till it arrives fo tie state of manhood, and attains its ful
proportions.
The thicknefs of the limbs must be adjusted agreeable to
the qualitv and character of the figure. In general it may be
noticed, that the breadth of the thigh at tliè thickest, is double
that of the thickest part of the leg, and treble that of the
smallest: but there is à difference in tlie contours of paris
when put in different postures. Thus when the arm is bent,
it is larger than when straight: the same is true of the foot
and kuee, and other limbs and joints.


baing careful to observe the breadth of the waist. Then draw
that leg which the body rests upon, and asterwards the other
which stands loose. Next draw the arms, and last of all the
hands.. It is somctimes recommended to begin the sketch on
the right side of the figure, that in the proeess of the work, the
performer’s hand may nehiter hide or shade any part of it, as it
may happen in some draughts when begun on the left side.
To ensorce a direction already given in the general rules,
carefully view the original you draw after; the distance of
one feature, limb, joint, mulcle, &c. fromt another; their
length, breadth, and turnings; their proportion to cach other,
and to the whole figure : which of thei are directy unaer the
other, which of them are parallel, and how they stand situated
with regard to any part of the figure.




Preserve a just symmetry and harmonious correspondence
in all the parts of the figure, by forming them in due propor¬
tions to one another ; not one arm bigger or longer than the
other, or of a size ill adapted to any of the other parts. Not
plump and strong limbs, with a shrivelled face or decayed
body, or broad Herculean shoulders with the wasted limbs of
a fribble. Take notice of the bowings and bendings of the
body, and contrast the opposite parts answerable thereto. If
the belly bends in, the body must stick out: if the knee bends







In drawing a naked body, whatever muscles appear, must
be expressed agreeable to the rules of anatomy. They must not
be subdivided into small sections, but kept as entire as possi-
ble, only the principal muscles, and those which are of signi¬
fication to express that action which is represented, should be
The motion or action of the figure, must made to appear.

always be considered in drawing the muscles; for they rise
and sink, and are either less or more apparent, according to
the different motions of th- body. The muscles of the leg
which supports the body, or of an arm that lifts a weight, are
fuller or more swelled than in the leg or arm wllich are not


AN cloathing vour figure, or casting the drapery over them
with elegance and propriety, it shiould be considered, that the
beauty of draperies consist not in the multitude of folds, but
in their natural order and plain simplicity. 1. The drapery
must encompass the parts loosely ; when it sits too strait or
close, it gives a stiffnefs to the figure, and seems obstructive
to its motions. 2. Draw the plaits large, and foliowing the
form of the limbs underneath, that they may be distinguished
srom others, by a due management of the light and shades.
The extremities of the joints, as the fhoulders, elbows, knees,
&c. should be so marked as to be apparent, as far as art and
probability will permit, notwithstanding they are covered.
This is so material a consideration, that many artists first
sketch the naked figure, aud afterwards put the drapery on it.
3. The great folds must be drawn first, and asterwards broke
and divided ints lesser ones; and great care be taken that they
do nut cross one another improperly. 4. Though in general
rhe folds should be large, and as few as possible, vet thev must
be greater or less, according to the quality of the stuff of
which the draperv is supposed to consist; some, as coarse
woollens make their folds abrupt and harshi, and others, as
silks and sine linens more soft and easy: the surface of some
has à lustre, others are dull; some aré pliable and transpa¬
rent, others strong and solid. The quality of the person is
likewise to be considered in the drapery. If they are magi-
strates or dignisied personages, their robes or dvaperies should
be large and ampie ; if ladies and nymphs, thin, sost, and
pliable; if counsy clowns, ordinary people or slaves, they




out, the ham must fall in: and so of every other joint in the
body. Sketch vour outline at sirst very faint, marking the
general appearance and proportion of the most conspicuous
and remarkable particulars with slight touches, and afterwards
introduce the minute parts by tracing it over again, correcting
the first sketch by little and litile, until the whole contour be
finished with admirable exactness. A steady even light is al-
ways to be chosen, that no glare may come on the original, or
on your own work.












so employed. Those of the breast become more or less visibie 1
by lifting up or holding down the arm.
In drawing young persons, the muscles must not ap-
pear so manifestly as in those who are elder and full
grown. The same is to be observed in fat and flesliy peôple,
and in such as are very delicate and beautiful. In women
and children, scarce any muscles at all are to be ex-
pressed, and but faintly when swelled by a forcible action.
In persons of an hardy and robust make, they are most
apparent.


ought to be stout and coarse. 5. Suit the garment and folds
to the posture of the body, and the sway or action of the
limbs, crooked or strait, or bending one way or another, ac-
cording to their various positions, in such manner as will best
express their attitude and motion. Different postures and
motions vary the solds, and bring them into new forms; and
whatever posture the body is supposed to be in, should be ex-
pressed by an artful complication of them; when they are
well imagined, they give much spirit to every action. 6. A
great likeness and motion of the drapery, are ouly proper for
figures in great agitation, or exposed to the wind. The loose
apparel in this case must all sly one way, and that part of the
garment which adheres closest to the body, should be drawn
before the loose part which flies from it, in order to secure the
true position of the figure. 7. The closer the garment sits to
the body, the narrower and sinaller must be the folds. 8. The
draperies which cover those parts that are exposed to great
light, mnust not be so deeply shaded as to seem to pierce them ;
nor should the limbs in that situation of light be crossed by
solds that are too strong, lest the great darkness of the snade
give them the appearance of being broke. 9. Whenever the
drapery is adorned with rich ornaments, they should be intro¬
duced with judgment and propriety, suitable to the character
of the sigure, and in general be used sparingly. It is altoge-
ther improper and debasing to use them in the imaginary re-
presentation of angels, the dignity and grandeur of whose dra¬
peries, ought rather to consist in a noble flow of the folds,
than in rich stuff and the glitter of ornaments.









Always choose a north light, if possible, because it is
stcady and most equally diffused. Darken with the slutters all
the windows of the room but one, and darken the lower
part of thât window. The light contracted in this manner,
and only admitted at an altitude above the position of the
figure, will make the snadows distinct, and snew every part of
it to advantage. If vou are constrained to a window which
has a south aspect, a transparent sasni of oil’d paper will mo¬
derate the light, and take off the glare.
Sit at a distance from the model, in proportion to its size ;
so far that vou may sce the whole of it at onice, which may
be effected at à distance about twice or three times its magni-
tude. Seat yourself in such a manner, as to bring vour eye
upon à level with the sigare.


PLACE vour picture in a good light, by which is meant,
not only an even steady light, as directed in the former arti-
cle, but also the proper light for the picture, that it may fall
thereon cither on the right or left side, agreeable to the lights
and shadows in the painting. Seat yourself at a proper dis-
tance fromn it, to see the whole picture at once. 1. Observe
nicely what object is placed in the middle of the picture ;
mark slightly the middle of vour paper, and give it the same
situation. 2. Observe the principal olyjects on the left and
on the right side, how they are placed and ranged ; sketch
their rough form very slightly in the same disposition and
proportion, till all the principal parts are marked on your
paper in their proper places. 3. The expression or supposed
character and circumstances of every object in the picture,
must be well studied and imprinted on your mind : its atti-
tude, posture and gesture preserved in your copy; and those
parts be particularly noticed, by which the action and senti-
ment are represented in a strong and lively manner. 4. As
the whole composition thould be slightly sketched before you
begin to sinish any part for the snading, vou should oo on
with the whole together with a faint shade, before. you finish
any part. Mauy directions are given in the preceding essay
for thie lights and shades.
A common method of adjusting the distances, the situation
and proportion of every object, agrecable to the picture, is to
divide it into little squares, and then to divide the paper foi


HAVING fixed vour station, and deteriined what ex-
tent of view to delineate, draw the horizontal line faintly,
aud mark it into three divisions, then divide in vour mind the
landscape in three divisions likewise. Sketch the middle divi¬
sion first, then that on the left hand, afterwards tiat on the
right. Observe, 1. What objects fall under one another, and
mark them on your paper accordingly. 2. What objecte range
on a level with each other between the two sides, and place
them parallel in your draugnt. 3. Remnark what ohjects are


The observations heretofore laid down, are applicable ti
this branch of drawing, to urge the most material of them.
1. Copy after good originals. 2. Mark out all the pars
before you begin to shadow. 3. Make the contours in great
pieces, without taking notice of the little muscles and other
breaks. 4. Observe every stroke as to its perpendicular, pa¬
rallel, and distance; and particularly so to compare, and op-
pose the parts that meet upon, and traverse the perpendicu-
lar, as to form a kind of square in the mind, which is the
great and almost the only rule for producing a just and exact
copy.. 5. Carefully regard not only the model vou are copy-
ing after, but also the parts vou have already drawn; therei
being no possibility of perserving strict justness in vour per-
formance, but by comparing and proportioning, every part
to the first.
the copy into the same number of squares, and to draw ini
them what is correspondent to each square. This is a sure-
method to enlarge or reduce a draught with exactness; but ifj
the student accustom hiinself to practise by the help of these
squares, he will certainly stint and confine his judgmenti
let him rather help it by imaginary lines, than cramp it by
real ones. Let him conceive in his mind a perpendicular and
an horizontal line intersecting each other in the middle of thej
picture, and observe what objects are crossed by them; and
then suppose two such lines crossing his paper, in order to
give those objects a similar situation. In like manner the si-
tuation and proportion of all the chief parts throughout the
picture may be considered, by imagining other lines traversing
them, and dividing as it were the several parts of the paintingi
into small squares. The primary qualification in the art off-
drawing, is a readiness of comparing and measuring by the
eye all the parts of a composition, and an ability to exprefs
them with boldness and justness.. This essential accomplissi-
ment is to be acquired by habit and application.
The proportion, form and magnitude of olyjects, their di-
munition in size and lustre, are governed by the rules of per-
spective. A knowledge in the practical part of that sciencen
will greatly advance tlie pupil’s judgment, and facilitate his
practice ; and this knowledge may be attained with surpriz-
ing ease, by consulting that plain and familiar treatise, thei
Jcsuit’s Perspective, translated by Ephraim Chambers.
seen through the intervals of other particular objects, and give
them the same apparent situation. 4. Endieavour to sketch all
the objects in their proporyional magnitudes and distances;
they gradually diminisn as they are farther removed from thei
eye, and it is this dimunition with gradual softenings and in-
distinctness, which gives distant objects their remote appeark
ance. There are certain infallible rules in perspective for the
management of this important article. 5. Make all you
lights and shades fall one way.




