De Arte Graphica,
OR, THE
R
A
0 F
T.
1
1

A 1
TRANSLATED from the
7
ORIGINAL LATI.
0 F
C. A. DUFRESNOT.


With Me LIF E,
By the Rev. Dr. THOMAS BIRCH,
With NOTKS miscellancous and explanatory.


 t a t 
Traltant fabrilia fabri.
HoR.
Dedicated to His Royal Highness the DUKE of CUMEERLAND.

    ed  
L O N D O N:
Printed for D. HOOKHAM, in Great Qucen-Sreet, and D. STEEI, at
the Bible and Crown, King-fireet, Little Tower—Hill, 1765.
Price One Shilling and Six-pence.)


0
Ilis ROVAt IIr GHN E S S.

WILLlAM AUCUSTUS
DURE OF
C U MB E R L. A N D.
And Duke of Bruntwick-Lunenburgh, &cc.
xc. &c. Captain General of all His Ma-
jesty's land Forces, Ec. E&c. Ec.
8 I R.
F the elegant, and not unufeful arts, do
not find favour with the Great, to whofe
 pecular service and pleafure they are de-
voted, where can they hove it ? or even feek a
shelter from the envious infults of brutality
and ignorance?
I might here attempt an encomium on
thefe arts, point out and enumerate the ad-
vantages mankind derive from them, but a re-
cital of things to well known would be pre-
faming on your nighness's moments, to valu-
able to the public.
The


DE D I C A T I O N.
The original of the poem (which, with
your highness's gracious leave, I lay before
you) tho' thort, was yet a work of time, and
contains the long-Itidied precepts of an art
that hath been efteemed by the greateft men
in all ages.
The invaluable rights of Englifhmen, all
that is moft dear to us or our pofterity, you,
Sir, have glonoutly defended and preferved.
Arts now the children, the innocent children of
peace, implore your protection.
I have the honour to be, with the utmoft
respect and veneration,
Sirs
Tour Royal Highness's
Moft bumble, most obedient,
And most devoted Servant,
AMES WILLS.
PRE




As o


of French version of the fellowing Peem having been made
£d by monsiour de Piles, was, as Mr. Graham says in
his dedication of it to lord Burlington, Mr Drydens
guide in the English one, publishd with his name: but as
this firft attempter Mr. Graham observes, & had fre-
quently mistaken the sense of the author and often
& faild of setting him in the most advantageous light,
& his follower alfo, the English translator, had done the
& same, Mr Jarvis, therefore, a very good critic in the
& language as well as in the subject of the piece, was pre-
& vailed on to correct it. Can we therefore doubt that it
came from the press as perfect as possible 2 However
Ver. 24. Tantus ineft divis honor artibus atque poteltas.
is rendered,
So much thefe divine arts have been honour’d, and
such authority they preferve amongtt mankind.
This mistake must certainly have come from Mons. de Piles,
for he has made a long note on this construction: but if Mr.
Dryden had but caft his eyes on the Latin text, would be
have suffered this to have passd, the sense being, if the
inelt means any thing,
So great power and honour is in the divine arts ?
which also is a natural conclusion or inference from what
had been said before, and a commendation of the arts, that
enbances their value; for the respect a person receives may
be only a proof of the regard of the beffower, but what be
deferves





11
PR EFA C E.
deserves is his natural right, and be ought not to be de¬
frauded of it.
1ez Grandia inxqualis.
The inxqualis is taken no notice of, the containing in it-
self one of the most effential principles of composition: see
the note on it,
401. Crandia Ligna volunt (patia ampla.
Rendered,
Large figures muft have room enough.
The true meaning is, That in paintings for great dif-
tances the figures or objects shoud have large lines, not per-
plexd, broken, or interrupted, but full and clear to the
eyes : of the utmost consequence in this art, and what none
but the greateft masters have ever underfiood : see the no-
tions of perfection, line 416.
In many other pafages also, the senfe is mistaken, and
the wbole confused and imperfect : nor is it to be wonder’d
at, for a meer grammatical construction was not sufficient
for a trenflation of this auther; the things necesfary for a
right understanding of him being constant manual practice,
long application, and reflections rising from it, with a
fight of the fine things in Europe, from wbence these rules
were collected : and, whatever may be thought, it is an ar-
duous task to render juftly these comprebenfive frve bundred
and fifty lines, of wbich bowever I may have acquitted
mysely, I am well apprizd, that by some persons 1 shall
rather be biamed for the presumption of exerting the powers
nature and induffry bave supplied me with, than commended
even for deing it with success; and that if in the different
parts I affume of poet, painter, and the little scholarstip
requisite, I have committed no egregious blunder left no very
material thing to cavil and carp at, I shall probably pass
quite unnoticed; or at beft be damn’d with faint praise:
but I have not dured beyond prescription, for
Pictoribus atque poctis,
Quilibet andendi temper fuit aqua poteftas.
2
For



PRE PAC E.
111
For the construction of the Latin original, it is very
ealy to those, who are content to pass over many places with
out understanding them. The copy, I am bold to say, will
afford some light even to persons converfant in the language,
but not the subject of the poem; and such will know alfo, that
this translation could not be done by the intermediation of
an interpreter, and will make some distinction between
barely understanding an author and theroughly feeling
bim.
For the poetry, it is a fort of idleness, to which I bace
been ever addicted, and have often wishd, as ought
many others infected in like manner with the Cacoethes
Leribendi, that it was as eafy to let alone as to make verfes.
But engaged in this work, I often wifh’d it was as casy to
make them, especially on so dry a subject, as to let it alone.
If I acquit myself as a painter I shall be satisfied. I
could indeed have wish’d some of those gentlemen, who are
ever blaming the efforts of beneft men in this art, could cha-
ritably have done us this good office, and green us some
proofs of their own superior abilities, ether as men or
Jcholars, or any thing, or even in their own professions, in-
fead of reprebending our want of them. But want of me-
rit is so univerfal, that methinks it should be no repreach
to one order of men more than enother, and we can only
be blameable for not endecvouring well.
 mnun
 F NIr. Wills here takes leave to recommend to ftu-
4
dents in this art, and others curious of the subject, a
book of Perspective, lately publifhd by MIr. Kirby;
being an explanation of the principles advanced by
Dr. Brock Taylor, by which all planes and lines in
them are render’d as eafy as the horizental, and lights
and shadows more truly adjufted than in any other
tyRlem, that has yet been exhibired.






THE

d
O F
X
2207
1

IOnl. 1
YHARL ES Alphonfo du Frefnoy was born
at Paris in the year 161r. His father, who was
an eminent apothecary in that city, intending
him for the profeffion of phyfic, gave him as
good an education as poffible. During the firft year,
which he spent at the college, he made a very consider-
able progress in his fudies : but as foon as he was raifed
to the higher claffes, and began to contract a tate of
poetry, his genius for it open’d itfelf, and he carried all
the prizes in It, which were propoted to. excite the e-
mulation of his fellow-ffudents. His inclination for it
was heightened by exercife; and his earlieft perfor-
mances thew’d, that he was capable of becoming one
of the greateft poets of his age, if his love of painting,
which equally poffels’d him, had not divided his tune
and application. At laft he laid afide all thoughts of
the Rudy of phyfic, and declared abfolutely for that of
painting, notwithflanding the opposition of his parents,
who
 The reverend and learned Dr. Thomas Birch having favoured the tranf.
lator with this life of the author Mr. du Frefnoy, he takes this opportunity
of making his acknowlegements, not only for this, but many other acts of
Kindness and humanity, which, during the courfe of many years acquain.
tonce, he has received from him, and fands indebted to him for.


V
The L. IF E of Mol. du Fresney.
who, by all kinds of feverity, endeavoured to divert him
from purfuing his paffion for that art, the proteffion of
which they unjuftly confidered in a very contemptible
light But the ftrength of his inclination defeating all
the meafures taken to fuppress it, he took the firft op-
portunity of cultivating his favourite ftudy.
He was nneteen or twenty years of age when he be-
gan to learn to defign under Francis Perier; and having
Ipent two years in the fchool of that painter, and of
Simon Vouet, he thought proper to take a journey into
Italy, where he arrived in the end of 1633, or the be-
ginning of 1634.
As he had, during his fludies, applied himfelf very
much to that of geometry, he began, upon his coming
to Rome, to paint landlkips, buildings, and antient
ruins. But for the firft two years of his refidence in
that city he had the utmoft difficulty to support himself,
being abandoned by his parents, who refented his hav-
ing rejected their advice in the choice of his profeftion;
and the little flock of money, which he had provided
before he left France, proving fcarce fufficient for the
expences of his journey to ltaly. Being deftitute there-
fore of friends and acquaintance at Rome, he was re-
due’d to fuch diftress, that his chief fubfiftence for the
greateft part of that time was bread and a small quantity
of cheefe. But he diverted the fenfe of his unealy cir-
cumftances by an intenfe and indefatigable application to
painting, till the arrival of the celebrated Peter Mignard,
who had been the companion of his fiudies under Vocict,
fet him more at eafe. They immediately engaged in the
Rricteff friendship, living together in the fame houle,
and being commonly known at Rome by the name of
the Inpparables. They were imploy’d by the cardinal
of Lyous in copying all the beft pieces in the Farnefe
Palace. But their principal ftudy was the Works of
Raphael


VI The LIF E of Mont. du Frefney.
Raphael and other great mafters, and the antiques; and
they were conftant in their attendance every evening at
the academy in defigning after models. Mignard had
the superior talents in practice : but du Frefnoy was a
greater mafter of the rules, hiffory, and theory of his
profeffion. They communicated to each other their
remarks and fentiments, du Frefnoy furnishing his friend
with noble and excellent ideas, and the latter instructing
the former to paint with greater expedition and eafe.
Poetry shard with painting the time and thoughts of
du Frefnoy, who, as he penetrated into the secrets of
the latter art, wrote down his observations, and having
at laft acquired a full knowledge of the subject, form’d
a defign of writing a poem upon it, which he did not
finith till many years after, when he had confulted the
beft writers, and examined with the utmoft care the
moft admird pictures in Italy.
While he refided there he painted feveral pictures,
particularly the Rums of the Campo Vaccino, with the
city of Rome in the figure of a woman; a young wo-
man of Athens going to fee the monument of a lover;
SEneas carrying his father to his tomb; Mars finding La.
vinia fleeping on the banks of the Tyber, defcending
from his chariot, and lifting up the veil, which cover’d
her, which is one of his beft pieces; the birth of Venus;
and that of Cupid. He had a peculiar efteem for the
Works of Titian, feveral of which he copied, imi-
tating that excellent painter in his colouring, as he did
Carrache in his defigns.
About the year 1653 he went with Mignard to Ve-
58
nice, and travell’d throughout Lombardy; and during
His
 This is the account of Monl. Felibien, Entretiens fur les vies et fur les
ourrages des plas excellens peintres, tom. 11. ed t. Lend. 1705, p. 333. But the
late author of Abrege de la vie des plus fameux peintres, Part 11. p. 284. edit.
Par. 174s. in 4t0. fays, that Freinoy went to Venice without Mignard,
and that the latter, being importun’d by the letters of the former, made a vifit
to him in that ciry.


THe L. IFE of Monl. du Fresney. vii
his Hay in that city painted a Venus for Signor Mark
Paruca, a noble Venetian, and a Madonna, an half
length.
Thefe pictures thew’d, that he had not
ftudied thofe of Titian without fuccess. Here the two
friends feparated, Mignard returning to Rome, and du
Frefnoy to France. He had read his poem to the beft
painters in all places, thro' which he pass’d, and parti-
cularly to Albano and Guereino then at Bologna; and
he confulted feveral men famous for their skill in polite
literature.
He arrived at Paris in 1656, where he lodged with
Monf. Potel, Greffier of the council, in the street Beau-
treillis, where he painted a small room; afterwards a pic-
ture for the altar of the church of St. Margaret in the fub-
urb St. Antoine. Monl. Bordier, intendant of the finances,
who was then finithing his houfe of Rince, now Livry,
having feen this picture, was to highly pleas’d with it,
that he took du Frefnoy to that houfe, which is but two
leagues from Paris, to paint the falon. In the ceiling was
reprefented the burning of Troy; Venus is flanding by
Paris, who makes her remark how the fire confumes
that great city; in the front is the god of the river, which
runs by it, and other deities : this is one of his beft per-
formances, both for difposition and colouring. He af-
terwards painted a confiderable number of pictures for the
cabinets of the curious, particularly an altar-piece for
the church of Lagni, reprefenting the affumption of the
virgin and the twelve apoftles, all as large as life. At
the hotel d Erval (now d Armenonville) he painted fe
veral pictures, and among them a ceiling of a room with
four beautifullandskins, the figures of which were by vlig
nard. As he underffood architecture very well, he drew
for Monf. de Vilargeic all he defigns of a houfe, which
that gentleman built four leagues from Avignon; as like-
wife those for the hotel de Lyonne, and for that of the
grand


Vin The L.I F E of Monl. du Fresney.
grand prior de Souvre. The high altar of the Filles
Dieu in the Street St. Denis was alfo defign’d by him.
Tho he had finish’d his poem before he had left ltaly,
and communicated it, as has been already mention’d, to
the left judges of that country; yet after his return to
France, he continued ftill to revife it, with a view to
treat more at length of some things, which did not feem
to him fufficiently explain’d. This employment took up
no fnall part of his ume, and was the reafon of his not
having finithed to many pictures as he might otherwife
have done. And tho' he was defirous to fee his work in
print, he thought it improper topublith it without a French
tranflation, which he deferd undertaking from time to
time out of diffidence of his own skill in his native lan-
guage, which he had in some meature loft by his lone
refidence in Italy. Monl. de Piles was therefore at laft
induced, at his defire, and by the merit of the poem, to
tranllate it into French, his verfion being revifed by du
Frefnoy himself. And the latter had begun a commen-
tary upon it, when he was feiz’d with a palfy, and after
languithing four or five months under it, died at the
houfe of one of his brothers at Villiers-le-bel, four leagues
from Paris, in 166g, at the age of fifty-four, and was
interr’d in the parith church there. He had quitted his
lodgings at Monl. Potels upon Mignard's return to Paris
in 1658, and the two friends lived together from that
time till the death of du Frefnoy.
His poem was not publish’d till three years after his
death, when it was printed at Paris in 12mo. with the
French verfion and remarks of Monl. de Piles; and has
been juftly admird for its elegance, and perfpicuity.
De



35
58
26


26
5
1

36

4
gpopap>aopppap>pp p
51 as
4


0 F
4&



L

9

CTIERODUTENOIGHOTOUCAGCOG NOTGMOTGUYT, CUCDGNOGUEG, GUORGOIRSOR
EF
C4)
C19

13
£43
C23 C23
ets Clr els Cl
23
Tri
5 

2
9

 
t 
  5

52
7 7 T f



l te 


        

D E
290
Arie SaDhica LIR..
7
T Pictura Poesis erit, similisque Poefs
Sit Pictura, refert par emide queque sercrem,

sitternantque cices 5 nomine; mutd Poefis
Dicitur bec, Pictura loquens solet illa socarr.
Quod furt auditu gratum cecinere Peeta;
3
Quod pulchrum aspectu Pictores pingere curant
C
Leque Poetarum numeris indigna suere,
Ne
Line s. like each, &c. The appellation of fifters hath been ever given,
by a kind of common confent, to theie two arts; but I mult coterve,
what we often fee in perfons of the fame family happens to them, that is,
altho in fome things they refemble, in others they are very unlike.
Descriptive Poetry, when it paints to our imagination what Painting trings
to fight, is very near it; when defcribing fentiments, of which in many caies
there are little or no appearances, has the advantage; for coull Hamler
be to drawn, as to give any conception of the fente and restoning of his
Cawous folilogay?
But Painting poffefies an advantage her fifter cannot besl, which is, Eazt
the ideas fae gives are preciie and determined, whereas now ichliamury
5
the sumd a prasins of Lerece. a deicrption in verie or profe is verionfy
cinceived, according to the different capacny ani irLerkanding of c:ej
reader; as would fufficiently be proved, if they could draw enough to
make designs of wher they read. This may be observed in Fisures arawn
from the lame fory and the same author by different Painters, unless they
lical from each other, as is ofien the calc.
AP


  l  
    oe e  o   e Mer Me

T II E
h
0

 Arkit
LIV
0
S Painting, Poety, to fimilar
To Poety be Painting; emulous

£  Alike, each to her fifter doth refer,
Alternate change the office and the name;
Mute verfe is this, that speaking picture call’ d.
THiNCs grateful to the ear Poets have fung;
5
Pleafing to fight have been the Painters care;
And what thefe undeferving numbers thought,
Thote
And hence I cannot but conclude, that if faithful reprefentations of
facts, and fuch extraordinary appearances and things, as have happened,
could have been delivered down to us, it must have been the moff neful,
carious and entercaining hillory ever extant. How many valusble inventions
preferved: Whar jutt ground for speculation, and new ancoveries in all
kinds of knowledge:
What we have to be forry for in this cafe is, that fuch a degree of
kill, as would anfiver the purpoie, is not to he attain’d without great dif-
ficulty and long labour; and as it would be rather benefcial to others, that
is to pofterity, than ourfelves, we should treat it accordingly. However, fuch

a derice of imicacion, as might afcertain the dittirent Dearings or lakes at
tea, is cafily acquired. and with the icall attenton; for it is impotible
har great anhakes nul happer, los of time, and farther detriment, from
thofe imperiet things in the books, on which I am rold the mariners
1eiv.
If the arts refembled, as much as is thought, a knowledge of one of
th. 1I ould be fome tep, and enable us at lealt io judre oftie other, or give
us tome fortof iden of it. Faits prove the contrary; for the erdlei. pac-
rifitiser & anotick in the bell moarnwriters, when Erincing is the fatjie,
are very s. vul, and tach as the litletoys, wrom Piry teils of, might well
laughat, ias they did at Tterander.
The


4


De Arte Graphica.
Lon cadem Picttrum operam fudiunque merentur:
Ambe quippe sacros ad relligioms benores
Eyderees suberant igzes, aulamges Loneniis
10
tweriffe, dirum affeitd alloquicque frauntur;
Oragae mogna Deam, 3 ditta cosereata reportant,
Coleflemgue fucrum operum inortalibus ignem.
Inde per bune or bein studiis ccuntibus errant,
Carpenies que digna sur, recolutague luftrant
15
I
Tempord, quarendis confortibes ergumentis.
Denique
The great Mr. Druler, after having (in his compariion of thefe arts,
where every thing that regards poctry is jol:d, and the produce of found
judgment) finely obferved, & that Oriprs is fomewhat arrogant at his firft
of entrance, and is too inquifitive thro' the whole tragedy; yet thefe imper-
s. fections being balanced by great virtues, they hinder not our compallion
of for his miferies; neither yet can they deflroy that horror, which the nature
os of his crimes has excited in us, adds &tuch in Painting are the warts
ie and moles, which giving likeness to the face are not therefore to be omit-
is ted; but thefe produce no loathing in us.
If intlead of mere Face-painters, or fuch who profeffed Hlifiory-painting,
yet feem to have thought exprestion, ortelling a ffory, jufily no part of their
duty, Mr. Dryten had converted with Raphael, Corregio, the Carracbes or their
icholars, Pouffin, Le Seur, or Carle Marat, he would have had other concepti-
ons of the art, or if he had had alfo a proper intelligence of the author,
that lay before him.
However, the love of nature, one common principle, infpires in both
theie arts; and whether the little Painter, impelled by his imitative genins,
fcrawls what he fees, or the infant Poetbreathes his impaffion’d mind in
artless numbers, it is the same object Hill; and if the means were equally
cafy, the purfuit would be alike continued. The mother, the nurfe, the play-
fellow furnish language; but the imitation of objects requires time and in-
itruction. Verfe-making is practiced without a matter, by genius only; but
drawing, even with one, is hard and laborious: this exercites his talent with
facility, the other with pain finds his inability, and at length gives it ip.
Nor is this difference to the young fudent only; even Satsater Rofs
tries our, fenfible of the different difficulties of thefe arts,
Lanno mi wede,
Pinger per gloria, e Peetar per gieco.
A Painter requires alfo the Knowledge (if not in a great degree, as
Carls Marat with a candor infeparable from great abilities has thown
in his Print called the sebcol) of many things, fuch as Oficology, Ann-
Comy,


The Art of Painting.
Thofe have rejected, mentlets of art;
For, facred to religion, both tranfcend
The ftarry fires, and penetrate the dome,
IC
Where drells the thunderer; view the heavenly fors,
Their fovereign dictares hear, and thence bear down
To mortals in their works celeftial fire.
THENCE Oer this orb, with ftudies join d they range.
bearching from nature, and revolving times,
13
Fit argument, and matter for their toils.
WHAT
torny, Proportion, Geometry, Architedure, Perspective, 3o. the leaft of
which are more difficult to attain than all the technieal (if I may be ii.
low’d the phrafe) rules of poety, which meafures founds and words ony,
and bears no proportion to the knowledge of forms, which reducing a:
vitible objects to their firll principles of quantity and the lines that include it,
with their contralls and variations, difeinguish what is beautiful, whatdeform’d;
for as thefe are certain and diffinct properties, ever the reverfe of each other.
to are the caufes which produce them, and thefe the Painter ought to under-
Rand; for, without this knowledge, all the other rules that can be laid down, are
infufficient to produce a fine compofition: Tis true, by what we calla good
eve, without this speculation, a great deal may be done, but without certainy:
this knowledge therefore is neceffary to excell, and is a doctrine, I believe, the
ancients were well acquainted with, as their works fufficiently evince.
As every body pretends to Poerry, to the flatters every body; all are hap-
py in her good graces; the is very loquacious, and will be heard; but Paint.
ing has no tongue; the is a reclute lady, butied in labour, toiling always,
cor and referved : if the condeicends to coquet indeed with a few gaudy
colours for the fake of the ignorant, the knowing despife her for it; in thor:
the has but few friends, and being ushr for the world is treated accord.
ingly.
However, both thefe arts are greatly afeful. No prevailing folly can of
capeone of them unmark’d, or pats without ridicule; for altho the Plaftes and
Fribtles might have food the wit of any poet, yet when they were pointed
out, and made the common jeft, they shrunk from themfelves, and tho' thev
might not be afhamed, were afraid to rypear to contemptinly. Tragedy alius
humanizes thofe, who are to happy as to know no otner mucries than wilct
they fee reprefented on the sage, exercifes thofe pations, which he de:.
mant, and fupinely languith without objects to excite them, and not only
warns them of the inkability of fortune, but prepares them for it.
With Painting and Sculpture almoft all arts are connected. Ly means of
thofe we furvey faft ages, look back on the old world, Eyzgr, Crie 2r.


Rence; their cultoms, modes, even the pertons of their greateffricn 2re LaEi.
to us, with their long train of fabuious wore-out deirics, whono, hewaticil
ar dreaded foeverthey have been, are reducedto the fare, which Efica as weeld
te formerly afsigned them, and
Semotaa nofiris ribus.
110. 


5


De Arte Graphica.
Demque quecung; in cele, terraque, marique
Longias in tempus durare, ut prlchra, merentur
Nobilitate suc, claroque infizma casu,
Drves C8 ampla manet Pittores atque Poetas
20
Materies; inde alta sonant per secula mundo
Nomind, magnemmis bercibus inde superfles
Glorid, perpetucque operum miracula restant:
Tantus mest divis bonor artious atque poteffas.
Non
pofiets their pedestals in peace, and are admired, as gods made with
hands should be, only for their workmanthip.
To Painting we owe that pleating enlargement of ourfelves, by which we
look back to the times preceeding our own, and are almoft prefent in them,
by having to many reprefentations of perfons and things worthy note. Harry
the fourth, or Charkes the firft, are as well known as if living: different, dittant
countries, their modes, inhabitants, and natural productions are brought home
to us; we fee them without danger, fatigue or expence.
All the manufactories, which have theirorigin in defign, owe their exifience
to Painti:g. Flowered filks, which we ated to import; printed linnens
railed in a few years by the beauty of the patterns, of which, I am
told, there is a great export; printed paper for hangings; copper graving,
if some excellent engravers among us meet a due encouragement; all chafed
orls, filver and gold, jewellers works, with many more: now a trade being
forded for ary of thefe commodities, brings allo a demand for other good;
with it, gives them a preference to thofe of other countries, if better
performed, and has many other advantages and beneficial connections to a
tading country.
Per. 24, Each fewer, sucbberours are in arts divine.
If the defire of fame were the fole motive to a value of thefe arts, and
a pretervirion of our names and actions from oblivion the only ufe of
riom, they would hen principally concern thote, whole merits entitle them
to an after remembrance; or who are capable of acting worthily for the
lake of:t. Bur as there are, I fear, few, who defire, and fewer, who deferve
this fsurving character, or value mere glory abtiracied from its immedinie
ultentages, I chins our author has not fufficienly recommended the cite,
or interested us erough in their favour.
Poesy Frit civilized mankind; taught them to reverence the Gods, and
te Ostervant of laws to each other; mitigated the fierce, inforced the gen-
 fasions; painted vice in its true colours, with all its thocking intepa-
otic conse piences; virtue pleafing, lovely, and the fource of Happincts.
Fting and Sculpture, innocent in themfelves, intending 100, perhaps to th
i  aer Art, to promote the same good ends, were yet the means of ido-
nij


The Art of Painting.
WHATEER in heaven, or earth, or fea is fair,
Great in itself, or rendered by ftrange chance
Worthy remembrance, ample fcope shall give,
23
And rich materials unto either art.
Fence names refound for ages oer the world;
To mighty heroes glory hence furtives,
Preferved in deathlets monuments of tkill;
Such powers, fuch honours are in arts divinc.
Rok
Iatry, and men became to cnamoured of bare imititions of nature, as for-
getting the author of nature itfelf, they transferr’d thar worthip to them, which
was due to hm alone; yer is the blame to be laid on the arts, or on the.c
who made this ufe of thein r
Crifty and enthufiaffic men have avail’d themfelves, for their own pur.
potes, in all ages, of a nacural bias to religion inherent in man, and be iii.-
siprcientations of the deity, moved is from is only beis, a right concepsion of
2
1-47129.

him, and mace obedience to his will, the beft human nOrve, InkrEnEx.
to the work and mott inhuman actions, rot only widclary, but evir to
persecution, malicies, c. Cc.
In a puse reigion, tho' I think rone should pretend to repreant the gie:t
objecls of it by fentible images, or that the mind should be incerrupred by
them in places facred to devotion, yer in other places, as Picures are 1a.1
to be the comion people's bible, it reprefentations from it frequenly occurid,
they would have their afe; and as our Saviour appeared in a human fo:rs,
tull of dirne goodnets and charite, feing him daily erercing it in thote
acts of beneficence, which he was always engaged in, would te exemplary,
heip religion, and Rrengthen the authority of iis founder.
ls a humanitt, I venture to aneit, that publick remoriels, and eshibicion:
of great and viituous actions, good in themfelves or ferviceabde to the H.re.
would be afeful; they are lost in books, can be known to fiw, in dead or
foreign linguages; but thus preferved, they inform the ignorant as well as
the learred; we need bur look to underkand; the praite alro they incite,
7.118
:ily found to grateful in our ears, as to aniz ae us to defire and deterve the
lhe; ror would it derogate from the wikiem of a Rate, if they decreed
thefe or tuch other rewards and diffincions. ar ch rying the publck with no
expence, might entail honours on perton- Eols a blue, red or green gaiter,
or plain knighthood. The Rerers, a peazle forard for greatuet., tr. v
inis; for fomething more thin mere pecasi-ry risirds are required to is.
uy generous minds, and more than a mere mercenty sfirit 1. rald be ence
tized even on polrical inctires.
To confirm thete Cok.Vaticks, C.rzr, a wiiter of the qr.2.oR veight, in
his introvuction to the Jageritier war, hes this Pal.gc. Nec: fifice
2 RIRAAUNER. P. ScpUnC. J. al. cs clis rufe f. s
AEetl, tak Rcjos Lrgiwsizatres cFantyEmiscror






3


De Arte Graphica.
Nenmibi Pieridum chorus bic, nec Apolle vecandus, 25
Majus ut lequium numeris, aut gratia fandi
Degmaireis illuffret opus rationibus borrens:
Cam imide tantum Es Jacili digefta loquela,
Ornari preccepta negent, contenta deceri.
NiC mibi mens animusce fuit consiringere nodes
30

Partificum manibus, quos tentum dirigit usus;
Indolis ut siger inde potens obstrictus bebeseat,
Normarum numero immani, geniumque moretur
Sed reruim ut pollens ars cognitione, gradatim
Rature fise infinuct, serique capacem
35
Tranket in genrum, geiusque usu induat artem.
Precifia
ac. S.h it hin ceram itler, reque fizarae, tentem viz i fife balere; sit
nonerid ricem geflaram sois fiammam greziis viris in fectrre crifcere regis
fiirs sedari guam vi tas enrer fuman ciqt geriam edega=erir. & fFor
f have ofien heard, that 2 PIarERs, P Scipis, befides other excellent men of
 ourcity, uted to fay, when they beheid the images of their anceitors, their
if fouls were vehemently inflamed to viriac. Truely it was not the war nor
r the ligure, that had this poweron them, but the memory of the great actions

iscy had done, which kindied this Hame in the briats of theie illuricu.
: men; norwas t to be quenched, before they, by viriue, had arrived at the
 Jame height of tame and giory

At tenter the great hal, and the other apartments of the Drge's palace,
i
whih are afed forfus ar occefions, are covered wish Paintings of the great
actions of that Signicry, animating remembrances of iis power, conduct
ad forcunc. Suggo.2 a hozie of lords or commons in Englant to orna-
uated, or even a lord maver's houfe, do we vant matter for fuch glo-
rwls records? Weald ror iuch nemorial, do as national honour, keep emu-
ltion alire, and chees that foolifn, growing conceip: of our country

which is oten the only acquirerent of warel, and in ported by the ver
rerions, who wale as contempible by theirignorance, folly and extra.

ganer in every cumm;. thro wwhich they pais?
Tuie alt beng to corncited with ochers, that they carnot fublift without
x, 1 12all now ts a rmws extenfive view of it and them, and confider
torther are in general decrimental or advantageous to mankind.
1: vide. therefrre to form :izat judgments, wemult appiy to facts, confider
the crteswten, and the place, where th-(s arts more flouriffed, what per-
 ncoI them. and the confequences.
Tas s.c.st 1c. when the Aian mind, wich all its vaious ever.
4
f where knowledge firfi
:   Alary; the Piaces, Erj
dawned


The Art of Painting.
Nok need 1 the Picrian choir invoke,
Or on Apollo call to swell the strain,
And grace with founding elegance my verfe,
To rules ill-fuiting; clearnels my fole aim.
For ornaments with precepts ill agree,
Their end and purpofe only to be taught.
Nok is it my intent to check, or stay
3
The artiff's hand, which ufe alone directs,
By a huge heap of rules; to bound, perplex’d,
His fancy fails, his native fire is quench’d;
But to aid him with knowledge, by degrees
His mind to ftrengthning, capable of truth,
That fcrence may itfelf with genius blend,
35
Genius with fcience; practice make them one.
FIRST,
D
dawned, then Greece where thofe foundations of fcience were laid, which
extift at this day, Rome continued what the had eftablifhed.
The effects were in Greece, that men of genius mutually affifting each
other, raifed human nature almoff above itfelf. Liberty, philofophy and va-
lour never were more confficuous and that small number of people, fcanty
tract of land, and thort space of time, have yielded more benefit and glory
to mankind, than the mighty Affrian and Perfian monarchies; mere names
to us, while we reap hourly folid advantage and pleature from thofe.
The perfons, who promored thefe arts, or were imployed in them, were
the firft of mankind. The greateft philofopher, Secrates, was a fculptor. The
moftrapid conqueror was a patron of, and had a perfonal friendshipfor Spolles.
The beft men, the moft important of the antients, have left us fuch reffi-
monies in their writings, as fufficiently evince their effimation of it.
How pleafing mull it have been to a people form’d as well to tafe as to
produce fine things, when thofe admirable fculptures, which yet remain.
came warm from the chiffel, and thole celebrated pictures now lolt, and of
which we can form no idea, appeared l What converfation among such statef-
men, generals, philofophers, poets, painters, fculptors, architeds! Every
thing mult have been adequare and refined to the higheft degree of rational
unjoyment.
But now let us change the feene, and tarn oureyes on thofe times and places,
where no arts fournh’d. There immerted in ignorance, unaquainted with the
proper exercife of reafon, forming nothing but abfurd and rude notions of the
deity, ignorant of natural rights; fubmitting, and flaves to the lawlefs will of
one, who governing and governed by fear, becomes cruel for his own fafety,
yer dreading the injured, wathes away his fears with their blood, accu-
mulating


23


0


9


De Arte Graphica.
70
Primum pra-
Precipue imprimis artifque potiffima pars eft,
ceptam de
Noffe quid in rebus naturd crearit ad artem
pulchro.
Pulchrius, idque modum juxta, mentemque vetustam-
40
Qua fine barbaries caca E8 temeraria pulchrum
Negligit, infultans ignote audacior arti
Of curare nequit, que non mode noverit effe;
Hllud apud veteres fuit un de notabile dictum,
Nil Pictore malo fecurius atque Poeta.
Cognita amas, ES amata cupis, sequerifque cupita; 45
Pasfibus affequeris tandem qua fervidus urges:
Illa tamen qua pulchra decent; non omma casus
Qualiacumgue dabunt, etianrve simillima veris.
Nam
mulating wickedness, heaping mifery, luft the entertainment, ambition the
purfuit and violent death the end; the country walte, barren, the people
dejected, retaining the form, bur loff to all the comforts of humanity.
Such is the prefent state of some countries ffored by providence with
vaft natural bleffings; and the same caufes we may infer ever have, and
ever will produce the same effects.
Let us look among the wild trabs, the wandring Tartars, or the fa-
vages of America, a ftraggling vagrant people, who prey, fight and pro-
create in common with other animals, roaming about in small parties,
full of horrible superftitions, bufied in revenges, and delighted with put-
ting their enemies to the moft excrutiating deaths.
Whence that good order fo confpicuous in the great cities of Enrope, par-
ticularly in this, where near a million of people live in perfect harmony
with the moft oppofite interefts, opinions and inclinations. What could effect
this miracle but employment ? What fuftem of government fufficient, were
they idle; or what employ them but things, which regarding our national ne-
ceflities (to good is previdence) might be fpared ? Such are the productions of
art; and they do not only employ men, but divert their paffions. Ambition is
innocent, when it puts men on excelling in an art. Avarice is profitable to
the publick, when it induces men to earn and deferve better, in order to en-
grots cuffom. The pastion moll apt to miflead is fubdued by labour it leaves
either time nor spirits for adventure; marriage is thought of; a healthy race
chriches the publick, and extends it felf to pofterity.
Eivery workshop is a lutle fyftem of government, and renders men more
tibfervient to the greater; mischievous tempers are bound down by carious
kinds of attention; and he, who would fir up a rebellion, propagate a
ralfe religion, or otherwife diffurb the peace of a flate, is perhaps condem-
iod, from Ex to fix, to pore on some curious piece of difficult mechaiim.
12


The Art of Paintine
FiksT, chief, and moft important is, to know
What faireft is created, apt for art,
Waking the antient stile and choice our teft;
Elfe barbarous, blind, and rathly shall we dare;
Beauty neglecting, (purn it's nobleft ain,
And with audacious ignorance offend.
How shall we strive for that we do not know ?
Hence with the antients this fam’d adage rofe,
Than wretched Painters and bad Pects none
Alike cre self-sufficient, prompt and rain.
THE Known thou lovft, deireft shalt obtain,
45
With Keps at length, if fervidly thou urge.
What beauteous yet in all agrees, no chance,
Of fimilarity of truch can give;
D 2
B7
A day or two of Relidays will convince us, how lietle the groffer pair
of mankind are fitted for idleness. What drunkerness, brutalicy and joll;
are to he feen in all places of common refort ?
Nor are arts more neceffery to employ fome, than to amufe other:. anr
render their leifure boch innocent and pleafurable. They allo dignity ti:
human Race, and raife it above all other animals; who indeed poficts iome
things in common with us; for the bird builds, and an Irif cabin may be
raifed by inftinct, but St. Parls is the work of reafon.
I have ventured to give my thoughts on this subject; becaute I am tol.
a quettion has lately been farted in France, whether arts have done more
good or hurt to mankind : What can be faid againl an obvious truch, i
hardly werth attending to; but if in a fare, ignerance be preferrble to know.
ledge, why is not an ignorant man preferable to a man of knowledge? As
it requires fome fenfe to play the fool tolerably, to ir requires fome teferce,
even to abufe it; but vaniry inspires a thouland ridiculous Eingulariic::
and the Epbefia: Temple muff fooner be confumed, than one fool made in
Same be forgor,
Fer. 37, Firff, chief, and eoft iafertnt: to arrs.
This precept, which regards choice, is justly inferced by our ancaer. se
is that, in which the ancients have excelled the modern.; and the modeis
iratiars, affitied by their excellent remains, all their neighiours sad o
EMforarits.


49


I2
The frss f i
ifle of itvice.


12
2. De Spe.
culatione
it
Fidll.
3. de argu.
mento.


De Arte Graphica.
Nam quaimcumque mode servili baud sufficit ipfam
Naturar: exprimere ad vrvum; sed ut arbiter artis,
50
Seliget exilla tantum pulcherrima Pictor
Quodque minus pulchrum, aut mendosum, corriget ipfe
Marte sue, forma Veneres captande sugaces.
rgue manus grandi nil nomine practica dignum
Affeguitur, purum arcane quam deficit artis
55
Lumen, 8 in preceps abiturant caed vagatur;
Sie nibil ars operd manuum privata supremum
Excquitur, sed languet imers uti vincla lacertes;
Dispositumque typum non lingud pinxit Apelles.
Ergolicet totd normam baud posfimus in Arte
60
Penere (cum nequeant que funt pulcherrima dici,
Nilimur bec paucrs, serutati summa magifire
Dogmata nature, artisque exemplaria prima
Aliius intati; fic mens, babilifque facultas
Indolis excolitur, geniumgue scientid complet;
65
Luxuriansque in monstra surer compescitur arte-
Eff Modus in rebus, funt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra ertraque nequit confiftere rectum.
His possers, erit optandum thema nobile, pulchrum,
Quedgue renustatum circa formam atque colorem
70
Spinte cepax, amplam emerite mox prabeat arti
aLateriam, retegens aliquid falis 68 documents.
Tandim


The Art of Painting.
13
Nor shall a servile imitation rife
To express the fire of animated life;
50
judge of his art, the Painter should felect,
From all whats fine, less fo, faulty, correct
By his own skill; and ever inftant fnatch
Thofe tranfient beauties, which are born and dye.
2. Of Specy.
AND as the prectis’d hand does nought worth praife,
lation and
pratice.
If deftitute of the pure lights of art,
But errs precipitate and blindly ftrays;
55
So nothing rules produce, deny’d its aid,
Unlets they die mert, if this be bound;
Apelles made not Pictures with his tongue.
Al THo in all we cannot furnish rules,
60
When what's moft beauteous is indefinite;
Endeavouring yet, a few we may deduce
From nature, forreign miftrefs, fiudious fought,
And works, the great exemplars of this art.
So the minds powers shall we from hence improve;
So genius shall with knowledge be compleat,
6

And wild luxuriant fancy be reftraind;
For there to things are measures, certain bounds,
Ror this side, or beyond them, right subfifts.
Thus fir, and now defirous of a theme,
5. Of 1he or.
„SMERL.
Grand, beautiful, that of itself may give

Sweet eye-delighting forms, colours and hues;
Copious, replete with matter worthy art;
Diicloting too instructive fenfe and wit.
B
18


14
Inventio pri-
ma pictura
Pars.
4. Dispofitio,
five operi
totius Oc-
conomia.
5. Fideliras
argumenti.
C. Inane rejj.
crendum.


De Arte Graphica.
Landem opus aggredior; primeque occurrit in albs
Dispenenda typi, concepta potente Minerve,
Mecbina, que neftris inventio dicitur oris.
15
Illa quidem prius ingenuus instructa sororum
Arribus Aonidum, S Phebi sublimior aftu.
Quarendasque inter pefituras, lumims, umbre,
Atque suturorum jam presentive colorum
Par erat barmoiam, captande ab utrisque renustum. 8o
Sit thematis genuina ac viia expressio, juxta
Textum antiquorum, propries cum tempore formis.
Nee qued mane, mbil facit ad rem, free sidetur
Improprium, minimeque urgens, potiora tenebit
Ornamenta operis; tragice sed lege fororis,
85
Summa ubi res agitur vis summa requiritur artis.
Iftalabore gravi, studio monitifque magiftri
Ardua pars nequit addifci rariffima: namque,
Niprius athereo rapat qued ab axe Prometheus
Sit jubar infusum ments cum flamine vite,
90
Mortali haudcuivis divina bec munera dantur
Non uti Drdaleam licet omnibus ire Corinthum.
TEsrpto
Ver. 76. Of carious actions, lights and shades.
After having read and confidered the ffory attentively, and inform’d our.
felres of all that has any relation to it, or can help us in forming jult con-
ceprions of it, we may endeavour to digeft it in our minds, and begin to
form tome fort of ideas of the future Picture, which we may perfect and
improve by experimental Kketches. If we could attain the very identical
idea of a Fact, as ir realy exifted, I should think it would be preferable to any
other, and that the Painter should confider himfelf to far ty’d to the observ-
ance of truth, as to be only the copiell of fuch an idea, if it could be obtain d.
I will add allo, (that in writing for the fage, if the real prefence of
the Perions to be reprefented could be fupposed, and under thofe various
agitations of mind, which their firuations would naturally produce, and
ri.: author would confider himfelf, rather as transcribing from them, than
dicrating to them, it would prevent what is too frequent, that is, the Poet's
speaking in his own Perfon; a thing Monficur St. Errenord farcaf-
fically reprehends, when he fay:, he was obliged to fuppress a draimstic
piece of his own, on difcovering himfelf to be the hero of it. But conceired
efbtils


The Art of Painting.
Ar length the work auspicious I begin
Survey the canvas ftretch’d, the ground prepar’d,
And image to my mind, to Pallas aid
The future piece; this parts invention call’d.
SHE, of th Aonian fifters, firft in arte,
Glows more fublime with Phoebus, facred fire.
Or various actions, lights, and shades, now fo,
And future colours, thoud we pre-conceive,
That grace and harmony be gaind from all.
GENUINE the ffory, lively too express;
True to the antient text, the place, the time.
THINCs, that unapt, conduce not to the end,
Improper feem; in no wife let affume
The faireft place, where moft the work shoud thine;
85
But of her fifter tragedy this learn,
Where the main action lies, to exert moft art.
NoR this with labour wearilets, or rules,
By mafters given, (oarduous part!) is learnt,
Or rare, unless wich life th etherial fire,
Of which Prometheus fole, be firtt infusd;
90
Not mortal, but the gift of power divine;
Nor all, may to Dedalean Corimth hie.
Is
E 2
egorills are apt to make themfelves fo on all occafions; even in some of
a more folemn nature; for altho' reprefentations of the firtl Being, under
a human form, are fufficiently exploded, yer he is often reprefented with
a human mind, and luch paffions are afcribed to him, as are characteriffic
of the good or bad temper, pride, ignorance and fuperfition of thefe in-
conpetent carvers without chifiels, who prefume to tread on holy ground.
But Mr. Pose fays, that
Fools rush in, where argels fear ts tread.


75
80


I5
Invention the
firft part of
painting.
4. Ofibe pre-
conception and
disposition of
the clork.
5. Fidelity to
the theme or
subject.
6. Things not
to the purpose
to be rejeted.





16


De Arte Graphica.
TEgypto informis quondam Pictura reperta,
Grecorum studiis, 8 mentis acumine crevit.
Egregus tandem illustrata, 6 adulta magifiris,
95
Naturam visu eft miro superare labore.
Quos inter, graphides symnasia prima suere
Portus Athenarum, Sicyon, Rbodes, atque Corinthus,
Disparia inter se, modicum ratione laboris;
It patet ex reteruim statuis, forme atque decoris
100
Ar-
Ver. 93. In Esypr, firft this art, found formless, rude.
That is, perhaps in fuch a ftate as might barely ferve for hieroglyphics.
from the ufe of which it feems to have its origin, for letiers, the figns of
found, being not yet invented, they had no means or way of communicating
ideas than by Pictures, and fuch other forms as had a known fignification.
Ir muft neceffarily therefore have been their care, in order to arord mittakes
in publick records, laws, (Gc. to have had the objects to fartruely delincared,
as that one thing should not be taken for another; a horfe for a dog, a
hand for a tree, Cc. and this was no other way to be effected, than by ap-
plying to the real objects, and comparing the reprefentations with the things
to be reprefented; to correcing them, ifneed were, as to leave nothing im-
perfect that might render the fenfe dubious of what they intended to express.
Hence I think, with great probability we may conceive imitation arofe
and what dexterity prattice might give, and how it would by gradation con-
finue advancing itfelf, till men of reffection and fcience, luch as were the
Greeks, tranfplanting it, made it their fudy, and raifed it to the urmoft degree
of perfection it ever attain’d; for altho' it may be question’d, whether the
antients excelled the moderns in Painting, yet I think it will fcarce admit
2 conteff; for Sculpture and Painting having ever kept an equal pace, as we
muff own their fuperiority in one art, I think, according to this Known truth,
there can be little reafon for denying it in the other. 1t may be alfo allowed
without prejudice to the moderns, or imputasion on them as wancing abiliries;
for let it be considered, that their gods, which were innumerable, all pait
thro the rculptors hands; that their illutrious men and heroes alto fought
2 kind of immortality from them; that fames were decreed as rewards, and
medals ftruck, by publick order, not on great occitions, or to great per-
fons only, but to all fach as remarkably dillinguisked themfelves, or did ary
eminent fervice to the late. The boy plucking the thorn from his foot, the
Knife-grinder, the mother enquiring of her fon what was done in the fenae,
are intlances on what occafions the arts were called in : the itland of Rictes
alone is faid to have had thirty thouland molt rare ftatues in it; what num-
hers mull Rome, olitens, Cerinth, then have contained; or any of thote
places where the arts ffourithed, or were eitcemed ? From hence we
may judge what a prodigious employ there was, and conclude, that
tuch an immenfe prattice would awaken, roufe and put in action, thote
noble faculties, which languith, he dormant in mankind, and are loft for
Want of exercife and occations worthy their exercion.
The


The Art of Paintine
IN Egypt firft, this art, found formless, rude,
The Greeks, with ftudy, nervous fenfe, improv’d,
And to at length matur’d that nature feem’d,
95
By their great mafters wondrous skill furpass’d,
THESE of their (chools were held in moft efteem,
The Athenian, thofe of Sycion, Corinth, Rhodes,
Nor much unequal, or in choice, or file,
As yet from antient ftatues we may judge;
10C
F
Of
The churches abroad are the only props, to what of art can exift a.
mong the moderns; but here, in this country, notwithstanding the wild
walle of expence, and the vaft profution, which for some years palt hath been
laid oar in buildings, Painting, their nobleft ornament, has had no share;
by Painting 1 mean Hillory-Painting. The five orders only have engroffed
all.
Per. 96. By their great mafters wendrous skill, surpass’d.
It is certain, that an elegant choice of objects, a fine disposition of them,
with a judicious handling, the refult of an elevated genius, juft reafoning
and long practice, prefent us with beauties, we were not aware of. Agree-
ments and harmonious affemblages, that firike and furprize us, and fuch as
the dull thoughtlefs mere imitator never dream’d of, but that nature
is then excelled, or can be, no one who has ever fiudied, or been truly at-
rentive to its beauties, I hope will allow. I regard not the affertions of
ignorant enchufiatts, who like thofe in religion ever confound truth with
abturdiries. What Mr. Pope has faid, with respect to poetry, holds alfo
true in this art,
Tis netere all, but nature methodized.
The beft aniques are moff fcrupulous imitations of it; nor can we per-
ceive that the anrients artifls dared to deviate from it, or that they took any
liberties: all was warranted by it; nothing done on their own authorifi, for
that becomes manner, the effect of ignorance, floth, and fuch a felf-fuffi-
cience as deserves contempt.
When people talk of mending nature, they should be confidered as per-
sons who have but a very fuperticial knowledge of it. Thefe nature-menders
are of the same species with thofe, who cat off the ears of dogs, and cats, and
dock hories tails, marring thereby the divine workmanship in the form,
and its goodnets to the animal, by depriving it of that ate the pait was
intended for.


17


18
7. GRAPHIS,
leu politura,
secunda pic-
TurE pars.


De Arte Graphica.
Archetypis; quers pofterior nil protulit etas
Condiznum, E8 non inferrus longe, arte, modeque.
Horum igitur vera ad normam Poltura legetur;
Grandia, inequalis, formesaque partibus amplis
105
Anteriora dabit membra, in contraria motu
Diverso variata, Jue libratague centro.
Nembrorumque finus ignis flammantis ad inftar,
Serpenti undentes flexu; sed levid, plana,
Magnaque signd, quasi fine tubere subdita tactu,
Ex
Fer. 103. By their just maxims be positions chose,
grand and unequal.
Large and fuch as fill the eye; alfo unequal, unlike each other, for dull
repetitions of the same forms feen together, pall, diffult the fight; they mult
therefore be diverfify’d, and limbs, altho' like each other to a degree of exact-
nets should be varied by motion, fo as to fill very different spaces. The leaves
of a rofe tree, except in fize, differ not, but are all of the same shape, yet by the
various turns and direction of them, make very different quantities in
their reprefentations; one is feen full and frenting, another shortened, and-
ther fide-ways; one perks up, another finks, all vary.
Nature is fo fond of variery, that in a pavement of real (quares, not one ap-
pears fo, unless a line from the eye be perpendicular to its centre, and they not
only leave their true form, but every (quare varies in its appearance from
the next to it, and one and all from each other, except a line of any of
them be perpendicular to the eye, and the point of fight be in the centre of
the picture, then one fide only has this variation.
The leffening of objects alfo, as they remove from us, is a thing in
nature that gives vall variety; thus in the profile of a building, all the
lines feemingly tend to the horizon, and give us a graceful diverfity; for
tho the diffant part of the building is as high as the near, yet not appearing
to, the eye is infenfibly relieved from famencls, which otherwife would tire it.
Ver. 10- Of fess the lines, &cc.
in this precept is defcribed whatkind of lines are proper to give that fieff-
ly tefinck, which we admire in fine pictures and ftatues; the proper under-
Handing of which, is a very conflituent part of a good Sculftor and Painter,
and in which Monfieur Borebarden has a peculiar excellence.
11


The Art of Painting.
Of form and grace beft models, and than which
Succeeding ages nothing have producd,
In art and manner not inferior far.
By their just maxims be positions chofe,
Grand and unequal, foremoft to the fight
The parts moft beauteous, fully, amply placd,
105
With motions different, varying contrary,
And every figure on its centre poisd,
Of fleth the lines thou’d bend as yielding flame,
Or the fmakes wary motion, when it glides;
But fmooth, large, plain, and with to mild a fwell,
As fcarce woud be perceptible to touch;
Flowing
F 2
It may not be amits here, if for the entertainment of my readers, who
shall have honour’d me thus far, we look back to thofe famous lines which
Pliny has given us an account of, and in which Apelles and Prefogenes con-
tended for fuperiority.
That they were, as is commonly thought, lines fo small and fine, that,
the difficulty lay only in dividing one with a Hill lefs, who can believe r
Were this the fact, they could not have been feen at any diftance; yet the
large table on which they were done, preferved to pofterity in the Palace
of Cxfar, attracted the eyes and admiration of all, especially of artifts. When
Afelles inatch’d up a Pencil, in order to give fuch a specimen of tranfcendent
Kkill, as might furprize Protegenes, fo great a mafter; was this all he could
do to diftinguith hmfelf; and was it luch a triffe that could make Protogenes
civout Apsiles was arrived : Did two fuch great men amufe themfelves
with such children's play, as making small lines, of no ufe in the an, or
go:y to the performer?
Nor could it be a fimple unmeaning bend, like the letter S. Very well!
An accomplifhment for a graver in capper; being what is called a fire
Rroke, and whar tollerable prints are full of, but of lutle contequence to
the extenfive comprehentive art of Painting.
What it really was is orly to he known by practice; for whoever ha
drawn with any degree of corredners from antique Harue:, or even a

tempis it, mult find a very little remove of a line makes a val diserence.
and that a line cannet be too small to he precife; this fmallret or delicae,
cannot be otherwife or better exprefied, than by the tanr cicts of
Pling, which frem the common ignorance of this art hath becn ifunder-
food; thefe lines therefore muft have expreded tome part ar the whole of
the human figure.
17


19
7. Drawing
the fizure and
its position, the
second part of
Painting.


20


De Arte Graphica.
110
Ex longe deducta fluant, non feet a minutim.
Infertifgue toris fint nota ligaminna, juxta
Compagem anatomes, E8 membrificatio Greco
Deformata mode, paucifque exprefa lacertis,
Qualis apud veteres; totogue Eurythmia partes
115
Componat; genitumque suo generante sequenti

Sit minus, E8 puncro videantur cuncld sub uno.
Regula certalicet nequeat prospectica dier,
Aut complementum graphides; sed in arte juvamen,
Et modus accelerans operandi at corpora falfo
120
Sub visu in muttis reserens, mendoja labascit
Nam Geometralem nunquam funt corpord juxtd
Mensuram depida oculis, sed qualia vifa.
Non
To show the great confequence of this small difference, it is faid, that
Hannibal Carracke, on overhearing a fcholar boaft, that he had been but
little out, shewing his mafter's correction at the fame time on his drawing,
49
cry’d & harkee, young man, I have been thirty years learning that little.
110 Flowing, deduced from lengths, not cut minute.
Notmeeting in tharp points like angles. When lines fow, they seem exten-
fions from diftant unfeen beginnings; when they rife from points they teem to
have their beginning or termination there. An octangle feems eight lines
joined, but a circle teems but one line without beginning or end, for which
reafon, eernity is reprefented by a ferpent in that form.
117. Tho' ave perspective call no perfelt rule.
Being defirous to make this work as ufeful and instructive as poffible,
communicared is not only to learned perfons, but to fuch of our profeftion,
whole judgment and candor I thought I might rely on. Among thefe, to
gentleman of eminent abilities in our art, who has ffudied perspective;
to as to be . aat accurate judge and mafter of the subject, having made
some remas in this pallage, which I thought very jutt, I have, for the
wie of my reaser, obtain’d them, and they are as follow,
I thoc.7 knowledge of the principles, and a habit obtain’d of them in the
prictice o. perfpective will enable a man to draw betterthan he could if he
Hingtha Rrowledge, and habit; and even in cafes where the rules are not
eapioyed; for he who knows previoully, and fcientificatly how all objects
in all tituations, and pofitions ought to appear, will fee more accurately, and
exprefs more precifely how they do appear, when prefented before him.
And


The Art of Painting.
Flowing, deducd from lengths, not cut ininute. 170
Or tuberant mufcles the Known ligaments,
Be inferted anatomically true.
In limbs obferve greek forms, with few expressd,
Such was their choice; and may the whole compofe,
From parts agreeing one (weet fymmetry:
Let that, which by another part's producd,
115
Be less than that, from whence it is producd,
And all concurring ftrike the eye at once.
Tho we perspective call no certain rule
To accomplith drawing, yet it is a help,
A method that facilitates the work:
120
Yet bodies erring oft it reprefents
Falfe to the fight, and leads into a fault;
For geometrical and to their real fize,
As meafurd, objects never can be feen;
They should be painted as they strike the eye.
Net
C
And in this fenfe, perspective may indeed be faid to be an aid to defign-
ing, as this author expreffes it: Nay, is abfolurely an effential, being that,
without which many objects cannot be reprefented ar ail, and is to far from
leading intocirors that it is the orly means to avoid them; for wharever is
drawn by its rules is demonftraely true, and wharfoever will not bear the
application of them is demonthably fulie.
Architedure, and all forms terminated by right lines are exntirely repre-
fented by it. Nor is it poshible to dear them without; and the points, or
beurdaries of all other objects, whether ia.viire.r. mi:ed, or multiform,
may be to determined, tho' the interredace parts be tippiied, and the figures
compleated by hind.— So that :oatrary to his asferion, perspective is a
certain rule, and its precepis perfecily trac.


22



1e Arte Graphica.
22
8. Vitic.ds
Non eadem forme species, non omnibus atas
in figuris.
TEqualis, similisque color crinifque figuris.
Nam rarus velut orta plagis gens dispare vultu eff. 125
9. Figura fit
Singula membra, sue capiti conformia, fiant
und cum
membris & UUnum idemque siml corpus cum vestibus ipps-
vellibus.
Nuterum silens positura imitabitur attus.
10. Mutorum
altiones imi-
Prima figurarum, seu princeps dramatis, uliro
tande.
Presiliat media in tabula, sub lumine primo
130
11. Figura
Princeps.
Pulchrior ante alias, reliquis nec operta figuris.
12. Figura.
Agglomerata simul sint membra, ipfeque fisure
rum globi,
fen cumuli.
Stipentur, circumque globes locus usque vacabit;
Ne, male disperfis dum visus ubique figuris
Dividitur, cunctifque operis fervente tumultu
135
Partibus implicitis, crepitans confusio surgat.
13. Pulitura.
Inque figurarum cumulis cum omnibus idem
lem diverfi-
tasincumulis
Corporis inflexus, motusque; vel artubus omnes
Converfis pariter non connitantur eodem;
Sed quadam in diversa trabant contraria Membra, 140
Transverseque aliis pugnent, C8 catera frangant.
Pluribus adverfis aver fam oppone siguram,
Pectoribusque bumeres, 65 dextra membra smistris,
Seu multis constabit opus, paucifve figuris.
14 Tabuln
Altera Pars tabule vacue ne frigidd campo,
145
Libramentum
Aut deserta fiet, dum pluribus altera formis
Fervide
Ver. 12s, Not the same shapt, or equal age have all.
Amongtt the aftonishing things in nature, it is not the leaft that the hu.
man countenance should vary to little, yet that little be fufficient to identify
every perfon among to many millions.
Ver. 128, And copy actions from th expresfive mute.
A very afeful precept, for such unhappy perfons are very expreffive, and
1
and by action fupply the wantof voice.


23
The Art of Painting.
8. Of dirser.
Nor the same shape, or equal age have all,
fifying the si-
Sures.
Complexion like, or colour of the hair,
125
Mens faces differ as their native climes.
9. Ofconser.
mity of the
LEr fingle Members to their head conform,
parts of the
fizure and the
Drapery and figure all unite, make one,
drapery.
10Of expres-
And copy actions from th expreffive mute.
five aftions
11. Of 160
LEr the chief perfon feize the middle space,
princifal p.
130 gure.
Glow eminent, and in the ftrongeft light,
Unrivald, unconfusd, by thofe around.
LEr objects be connected; yet, twixt groupes
12. Ofgroupes
and spacesfor
Leave pace; left figures, ill dispers'd oer all,
repose.
12
Diftract the fight, and from th entangled parts
35
A tumult rages, clathing and embroil’d.
13. Of diver.
AND in thefe groupes, let not all bodies bend
fifying actions
With like inffections, motions, nor let limbs
in the groupes.
Turn like each other, as they meant the same;
Different and contrary some thoud tend,
140
Others tranfverfe, may crofs, and break the reft.
To figures fronting backs shall be oppos’d;
To shoulders breafts; to the right fide the left;
Or be there many in the piece, or few.
LET not this fide all void and vacant lie,
14.5 14 Ballancing
the sides of the
A defert space, while that enrich’d and full,
Compofition.
G 2
Teems
Fer. 14s, Let not this side all vaid and vacant lir,
A port folio of good prints, will thew how well, and in what manner
great Mafters have observed this precept.


24
25. Numerus
ligurarum.
16 Interno-
dia & podes
exhibendi.
17. Miotus
Mannummo-
tui capitis
jungendis.
18. Onx fu-
gienda in dif-
tributione &
compofitione


De Arte Graphica.
Fervida mole sie safreman exurgit ad oram.
Sed tibi sic positis respendent utraque rebrus,
It si aliqued fursum se parte attelat in und,
Sic aliguid parte ex alid consurgat, 68 ambas
150
TEquiparet, geminas cumulande equaliter oras.
Pluribus implicitum personis drama supremo
In genere ut rarum eft; multis ita densa fizuris
Rarior off tabula excellens; vel adbuc fere milla
Prestitt in multis, quod vix bene prestat in und: 15s
Ruippe solet rerum nimio disperfa tumulin,
Miajesiate carere gravi, requieque decora;
Nee speciefa nitit vacuonifi libera Campo.
Sed si opere in magno, plures thema grande requirat
E sfe figurarum cumules, spectabitur und
160
Machina tota rer; non singda queque scorsim.
Precipua extremis rare internodia membris
Abdita sint : sed summa pedum sefligia minquam.
Gratia nulle manet, motusque, vigorque figuras
Retro alius subter majori ex parte latentes,
16
Ni capitis motum manibus comitentur agende.
Dificitis sugite aspectus, contractaque visu
Nembra sub ingrate, motusque, actusque coactes,
Quodque resert signis, rectes quodammode trattus,
Sive paralleles plures simul, 65 sel acuias,
170
Vel geometrales (ut quadra, triangula) formas:
I2


The Art of Painting.
25
14. Bellanc-
Teems to its utmoft edge, and fartheft bound;
ing the sides of
1c compo-
But to contrive, if ought rife on one part,
sitien.
Iis oppolite with objects correspond,
To ballance it; both filld, thou’d counterpoife.
Perplex’d with many actors, as a play
150 1s. Tbenum.
ber of sigures.
Seldom tranfcends, with numerous figures throng'd,
More rare is yet a Picture excellent;
For none in many have deferv’d our praile,
Who (carcely could perform one figure well;
155
In hurry, if too much oercharg’'d, we lofe
Majeftick grandeur, graceful fweet repofe,
Nor beauty, unlets unembarras’d, fhines.
BUr if your work be large and theme require,
Numbers and groupes together be all feen,
160
Not feparate and confusd, but at one glance.
16. The Es.
THE extremes of joints but rarely are conceal’d,
ting of jein:.
and extremi-
The feet are never; paint them always bare.
tits.
17. The ms-
GRACE, motion, vigour, sill thofe figures want,
tion of the
Farts must a-
Which othersmoftly hide, unlets the hands
gree with 1le
expression of
163
Expreffive motion with the head agree.
the head in
figures bebind.
Fiy aspects difficult, shortenings to fight,
18. Wbat
are to be a.
The limbs contracting hateful, motions forc’d,
roided in vir.
positicr.
Actions conftrain’d, Hraight spaces, equal,
170
Repeated parallels or lines acute,
And geometric, as triangles, (quares;
And
I
Ver. 186. Fly affects difficult, Cc.
Thefe maxims demand confideration; for no composition can be good
 here they are not obferved.


26
19. Katura
SChiO 2C-
Commodan-
da.
20. Signa
antiqua na-
ture modum
confiituunt.


De Arte Graphica
Ingratamque pari signorum ex ordine quandam
Symmetriam: sed precipud in contrarid semper
Signa colunt duer transverfa, ut diximus anti.
Summe igitur ratio signorum babeatur in omni
17
Composito; dat enim reliquis pretium, atque vigorem.
Nonita nature aftants fis curque revinttus,
Hanc prater nibil ut geme sludioque relinquas;
Nee fine tifte vei natura, ertifque magiftra,
Quidlibet ingenio, memor ut tantummode rerum,
183
Pingere posfe putes; errorum eft plurima sytee.
Multiplicesque Vix, bene agendi terminus unus;
Linea recta velut sola eft, E8 mille recuree.
Sed juxta antiques naturam imitabre pulchram,
Qualem forma rei propria, objectumque requirit.
185
Non te igitur lateant antiqua numismata, gemine,
Vasa, typi, statue, calataque marmora signis,
Quodgue resert specie reterum post sacula mentem;
Splendidior quippe ex illis a furgit imago,
Magnaque se rerum facies aperit meditenti;
193
June nestri tenuem fecli miscrebere fortem,
Cum spes milla fiet rediture equalis in erum.
Exquifite
Ver. 18s. To objects giving beauteous proper forms.
Not fatistying ourfelves with fight skerches and hints only, but 
ing at truth, in order to which we shoud know not only whoe object
E

Eur alfo what they ought to be; fo as to choofe fuch as a : wortk
t
tition; and not to lole and mispend time and labour on things not
ing it. Here reafon and good fenfe come in, for without them a t table
hand and eye never will raife any one above a mere sopyifl.


The Art of Painting.
And what makes regular difgufting forims,
Principal lines tranfverfe, as we have faid,
And contrary should tend; this your chief care
Thro all the composition shall deferve,
175
Twill force and value give to every part.
NoR be in all to sirict to nature bound,
You nought to fudy or to genius leave;
Nor forreign miftress think without her tell,
180
That what you lift you can by memory paint;
Errors have many labyrinths, various ways;
Of well performing there is only one,
One fole ftraight line; there are a thouland curves.
As did the antients, nature imitate,
185
To objects giving beauteous proper forms.
Nor to thee therefore be their works unknown,
Their gems, intaglios, vafes, coins, releifs,
Cameos, Statues, all that hath referd
190
To diftant ages their fuperior minds;
Thence more exalted will conceptions rife
To hun, who meditates the face of things,
And then our languid times and fate hell grieve,
Void even of hope that such shall e er return.
IF
HI2
Ver. 13 Their geme, intogtess, vajes, cains, relices.
All which affit; however, I would advile the Audent in this art, sill to
miy the ludy of life with thefe however fine, yet inanimare objects. Peryfin
had, perhaps, pleated as more if narme had been as much dudy’d in his
fgures as in his landicapes. Nor had Corregio or Trran charm’d us to much,
it they had fubmitted to the same reftraint of imitaring the antique Hame.
Rutens form’d a manner that had little regard to them, and good colouring is
ony to be learnt from nature itfelf


27
19. Gozer:
imitation by
knorwledge
knouledge by
imitatin.
20. The an.
tique remains
shen’d direct
our fiudies.


28
De Arte Graphica.
21. Sola F
Exquifita fict formd, dum sola sigura
Gurr quomo-
Cottacianda.
Pingitar; 3 multis variata coloribus effo.
Lain, amplig; finus pannorum, eS nobilis orde
195
22. Evid in Nembra sequens, subter latitantia, lumine t8 umbra
Pariils ob-
Exprimet; ille licet transverfus sape feratur
fervandum.
Et circumfuses pannorum porrigat extra
Membra finus; non contigues, ippisque figure
200
Partibus impreffos, quasi pannus adbereat illis;
Sed modice expreffos cum lumine servet 68 umbris:
Quaque intermiffis paffim sunt diffita vanis,
Copulet, inductis subterve, superce lacernis.
Et membra, ut magnis, paucifque expreffa lacertis,
Majeflate aliis prestant, forma, atque decore:
205
Hand fecus in pannis, ques supra optavimus amplos,
Perpauces finuum flexus, rugasque, striafque,
Membra super versu faciles, inducere prastat.
Natureque rei proprius sit pannus, abundans
Patricius; succincius erit, craffufque bubulcis,
220
Mancipiisque; levis teneris, gracilifque puellis.
inque cavis maculisque umbrarum aliquande tumescet,
Lumen ut excipiens, operis qua masa requirit,
Latius extendat, sublatisque aggreget umbris.
23. Oid Nebilia arma juvant virtutum,
ornantque figuras, 213
multum con-
ferst ad a-Qualia musarum, belli cultusque decrum.
bulx orna-
mentum.
Nec


The Art of Painting.
Ir one fole figures painted, be the form
Well Rudy’d, colours various, rich.
BROaD, ample be of draperies the folds,
In noble order flowing oer the limbs,
Which underneath let light and shade express;
And though tranfyerfe they often may be borne,
And circumfus’d, fill may they ftretch beyond,
Not teem contiguous to impress the parts,
As clofe adhering to the figure bound,
Yet modrate all, with light and (hade preferved,
WHAT every where, void, empty space divides,
Connect with folds, above, beneath, out-pread:
And as the limbs, with mufcles large and few
Others excell in grandeur, form and grace,
So, nor yet diff rent, as above weve with’'d,
Are draperies with a few large bending parts,
Sinkings and plaits, which ply as the limbs turn.
To perfons what are proper be affign’d;
Such as are dignify’d require long robes;
Succinct and coarfe mark flaves and country hinds;
Light, thim and airy fuit the tender maid;
in the receffes and dark blots of shade,
As light receiving, folds may fometimes swell,
The mats expanding if the work requires,
More broad enlarg’d by the diminith’d shades.
THE arms and enfigns of the virtues grace,
And decorate the figures; fuch belong
To war, the mufes, and religious rites.


29
21. Hrre to
treat a single
fizure.
195 22. What to
observe in
draperies.
200
205
210
21
8 23. Things
ornamental.
NoR


De Arte Graphica.
20
24. Orna-
Nee fit opus nimium gemmis aureque resertum;
mentum auri
& gemma-
Rard etenim magno in pretio, sed plurima vili.
Tun.
Qux deinde ex vero nequeant present: videri,
25. Prototy.
pus.
Prototypum prius illorum formare juvabit.
220
26. Con-
Conveniat locus, atque babitus; vitusque decusque
venientia re-
rum cum
Servetur : fit nobilitas, charitumque venustas,
Icena.
27. Charues (Rarum bomini munus, cale, non arte petendum.)
& nobilitas.
Nature sit ubique tenor ratioque sequenda.
28. Res
quxque 1o.
Non vicind pedum tabulata excelfa tonantis
225
cum fuum
teneat.
Aftra domus depitta gerent, nubesque notofque;
Nee mare deprefsum laquearia summa, vel orcum;
Marmoreamque feret cannis vaga pergula molem:
Congrua sed proprid semper statione lecentur.
29. Affec-
Hec preter, motus animorum, 8 corde repostes 230
tus.
Exprimere affectus, paucifque coloribus ipfam
Pingere posse animam, atque oculis prabere videndam,
Hoc opus, hic labor eft. Pauci, quos aquus amavit
Juppiter, aut ardens evexit ad athera virtus,
Dis similes; potuere manu miracula tanta.
235
Hos ege rbetoribus trattandes defere; tantum
Egregir antiqunm memorabe sopbisma magifiri,
Verius affectus animi vigor exprimit ardens,
Solliciti nimium quam fedula cura laboris.
Denique


The Art of Painting.
NoR too replete the work with gold or geins;
Rare things are held of price, the plenty fcorn’d.
WHATEER we cannot prefent have to view,
Drawings, or models of them shall supply.
To countries fuit the modes; cuftoms obferve,
Decorum, noblenels with grace unite,
Rare gift to man, from heaven not art befought.
To nature fo tenacious hold in all,
And reafons dictates, as not near the depth,
The very bottom of the piece, to draw
fove's ftarry frame, or clouds, or winds, or make
High at the top the feas depreffed waves,
Or gloomy Orcus, or the pondrous weight
Of marble place on the light flender reed;
Congrous be all, and in due station fix’d.
AND thefe, befide emotions of the mind,
The hearts infelt affections to express,
And animate few colours, call the foul
Forth vifible to fight, is labour, toil.
Few, righteous Jove, in this hath bounteous bleft,
Or arduous virtue to the Lkies upborne,
Above mortalily with powers divine,
So great, fuch miracles are wrought by hands.
Of thefe to treat, 1 rhetoricians leave,
From the great antients only this shall quote,
Passions more true, from flrong conceptions touch’d,
Than anxious labour or too sedlous care.
12


220
225
230
235

Admit


31
24. How
far jervels
and gold may
be used.
25. To sup-
ply the awant
of real objects.
26. Confif.
tence of man.
Rers with
Countries.
27. Grace
and grandear.
28. Propri-
ety to be ob-
served in all.
29. The paj-
ons.


De Arte Graphica.
32
30. Gotho-
Denique nil sapiat gothorum barbara trite
2.40
Tum Orna-
meia tusi ornamentd mide, faclorum c5 monsira malorum.
Cnda.
Quers ubi bella, famem, 68 peftem, discordia, luxus.
Et Romanorum res grandior intulit orbi,
Ingenue periere artes, periere superbe
Artificum moles; sud tune miraculd vidit
243
Ignibus absumi pictura; latere coacta
Foricibus, fortem E8 reliquam considere cryptis;
Marmoribusque diu sculptura jacere sepultis.
Imperrum intered, scelerum gravitate satiscens,
Herrida nox totum invasit, doneque superni
250
Lumims indignum errerum caligine merfit,
Impraque ignaris damnavit Jacla tenebris.
Unde coloratum grairs buc usque magifiris
255. CHRO.
Nil supereft tantorum bominum, quod mente modeque
MATICE ter-
tia pars pic
Nofirates juvet artifices, doceaique laberem;
255
tira.
Nee qui chromatices nobis, bee tempore, partes
Restituat, quales Zeuxis tractaverat olim,
Jhigus quando maga relut arte equavit Apellem
Pictorum rebigraphum, meruitque coloribus altam
260
Neminis aterm famam, tote orbe sonantem.
Hec quidem ut in tabulis fallax, sed grata venustas,
Et complementum graphides (mirabile visu
Pulchra
Ver. 253. Hence colour’d from the Greeks nothing remains.
How grateful mull it have been to have beheld what wonders that inimi-
table choice, jult proportion, and propriety of expresfion (of which we have
iuch amazing proofs in the remains of antiquity) would have done, accom-
panied with colours, lights, fhades, Coc. for from such scraps of their Paint-
ing as are spard to us we can form no idea adequare to their known excel-
lent


The Art of Painting.
33
240 30. To avoid
Admit no barbarous gothic ornaments,
gothic orna-
Mets.
Chimeras ftrange, brooded in evil times,
But worn out now; thefe famine, difcord, war,
Peftilence, luxury, and of Roman power
Th unweildy weight, brought forth upon the world;
Perith’d ingenuous arts, perith’d proud piles,
245
Iis monuments; Painting then too beheld
Her wonders, wrapt in all-devouring fiames,
Orelfe condemn’d her fmall remains to truft
To vaults and fepulchres; then bury’d long,
And whelm’d in its own ruins, fculpture lay.
IN the mean space, the empire (pent with crimes,
Darkness oerfpreads, horrid, of light, heavns gift, 250
Unworthy, and immers’d in errors fad,
To chearless ignorance doom’d the impious age.
HENCE colourd from the Greeks nothing remains,
Prodigious men, to thew their taffe and style,
And teach our artifts a right way to toil.
255
3
Nor1s, who may to us thofe parts reffore,
31. Colour
in which excelling 2earis fight deceiv’d,
ing the third
fart of Paint-
Mated Apelles, firft in art, and raisd,
1ng.
Nor yet unmerited, a deathlets name.
Colouring with faithless, but yet pleating, charms,
Compleats the work, makes wonderful to light;
Fair
X
lence in thefe points. The Ahiobrandine Marriage has too much of the
baffo releive, no body has imitated it; and many modein Painter's works
are fuperior to it. A sayr's head in the Barberini palace is in a better
Ryle, very mafterly in the execurion: but whether time has injur’d the co-
leurs or not, there is now no knowing; or that it ever had any great merit
of that kind: as to what Hlerestancam has froduced, accounts vary fo much,
we can fay nothing certain.


34


31. Tono
Tini lumi-
num & im
Braruin P2.
510.


De Arte Graphica.
Pulchra vocabatur, sed subdela, lena foreris:
Non tamen bee tenocimum, fucusque, dolusque
Dedecori fuit unquam; illi sed semper honori,
265
Laudibus E8 meritis; bane ergo noffe juvabit.
Lux varium, vivumque dabit, mullum umbra, colorem.
Quo magis adversum eft corpus, lucique propinguum,
Clarius eft lumen; nam debilitatur cundo.
Quo magis eff corpus directum, oculifque propinguum,
Conspicitur melius; nam visus bebescit cundo.
273
Ergo in corporibus, qua visd adversa, rotundis,
Integra sint, extrema abscedant perdita sigis
Confusis, non precipiti labentur in umbram
Clara gradu, nee abumbreta in clard alta repente
275
Prorumpant ; sed erit sensim bine atque inde meatus
Lucis E umbrarum; capitifque unius ad inftar,
Totum opus, ex multis quamquam fit partibus, unies
Lumiis umbrarumque globus tantummode sict,
Sive duas, vel tres ad summum, ubi grandius effet 230
Divisum pegma in partes statione remotas.
Sintque ita discreti inter se, ratione colorum,
Luminis, umbrarumque, antrorsum ut corpora clare
Objcura umbrarum requies spectanda relinquat;
Clareque exiliant umbrata atque aspera campe.
285
126
Ver. 276. Eut leth with gentle, Ec.
Nature, no lets indulgent to fight than to our other fenfes, rarely suffers
violent or harth oppoficions; the cloaths the earth with green, which par-
tikes of the azure, or whatever other colours the ky is of, till it is divided


The Art of Painting.
Fair the is call’d, but wily, as with fraud,
Solicitous to gain her fifter's love;
But yet her fraud alluring, nor her wiles
265
Were shame to her, but ever honour deem’d,
And worthy praife, and this to know shall help.
Light various vivid colour gives, the shade gives none:
An object more oppos’d and near its fource,
1
1 artakes it more; it weakens going off.
270
What is direct, approaching near the eye
Is feen diftinct, lets fo as it removes.
Therefore, of bodies round, oppos’d, and full,
Th extremes receding, should be dim and faint,
Norletclear lights precipitate, on fhade,
Nor let dark shades abruptly rush on light,
275
But both with genile foff tranfition blend;
And as of one fole head let all the piece,
Altho' of many parts compoted, make one,
One only mafs, or two, or three, not more,
280
When large the work, or from a diftance feen.
So feparate be colours, light and shade,
That objects bright be on th obfcure releiv’d,
And (hadow’d objects feen diffinct on light.
235
X2
A5
from it by the horizon; the morning and evening fun gleams over and tine
tures all with its goiden beams; the thadows, which otherwife would be too
apaque, are tempered and enlightened by the furrounding blue of the
heavens; the kins of animals are brautifully Rain’d and variegated by
iiffutions of darker colours; and the feathered kind are luaurioully enrich’d
with beaureous and etherial hues, all tranfides; nothing is abrupt, harth, diffo-
nant, or unpleating.


31. Of the
adjusting the
jones of light
and shade.


35


1
57


32. Cor
pora denta d
opacd cum
franducen-
Libus.


De Arte Graphica.
Ac veluti in speculis convexis, eminet ante
Asperior reipfd vigor t8 vis auda colorum
Partibus adverfis; magis 68 fuga rupta retrorsum
Ilorum eft (ut visa minus vergentibus oris)
Corporibus dabimus formas bee more retundas.
290
Mente modeque igitur plaftes, t8 pittor codem
Dispositum tractabit opus; qua sculptor in orben
Atterit, bec rupto precul abscedente colore
Affequitur pietor, fugrentiague illa retrorsum
Iam fignata minus confusa coloribus aufort:
295
interiora quidem directe adver fu, colore
Integra vizaci, summo cum lumine t8 umbra
Antrorsum distineta refert, relut aspera visu.
Sicque super planum inducit leucoma colores.
Hos velut ex ipfd naturd immotus codem
300
Inturtu circum statuas daret inde retundas.
Denfa figurarum solidis qua corpora formis
Subdita sunt tactu, nen tranftucent, sed opaca
In translacendi spatio ut super aera, nubes,
Lympida stagna undarum, 8 inania cxtera debent 303
Asperiora illis prope circumstantibus effe;
t diffincta magis firme cum lumine 63 umbra,
Et gravicribus ut suftenta coleribus, inter
Acrias species subsjlant semper cpaca:
Sed contra, procul abecdant perlucida, densis
310
Lerperibus leerora; uti ubes, aer, t8 unde.
Non



The Art of Painting
As in a conver glats the part projects
Neareft the light, fhines sharp, with colours ftreng,
While thofe declining, weaken as remov’d,
Grow dim; tis to round bodies we should paint.
290
With like intent Painter and fculptor treat
Their works; that, with his chizel, rounding off
What this, with broken colours, makes recede,
Diftancing faint, on parts projecting near,
295
Heaps glaring colour with firong light and shade,
Brings forward and diffint refers to fight,
And to the whole difpofes on a plane,
So frengthens and releives that duly feen,
300
Figures as ftatues flanding forth seem round.
Denfe bodies, folid forms, apt to the touch,
And not with light impregnate, but opague,
In a tranfparent space of air or clouds,
Of limped ftaghant waters, or ought bright,
More sharp than objects near them be pronounc’d, 305
Be more express’d and firm with light and shade,
And with more heavy colours too fultain’d,
Subfifting, might bright spaces sill opague;
But contrary the lucid and more bright
310
Far shall abfcede, as clouds, the air, and waves.
Wett
L


32. Dark
bodies on light
PPates.


37


38
33. Non
duo ex celo
luminain ta-
Dulam x.
qualia.


De Arte Graphica.
Non poterunt diver sa lecis due lumina eddem
In tabula paria admitti, aut equalia pingi:
Majus at in mediam lumen cadet usque tabellam
Latius insusum, primis qua summa fizuris
315
Res agitur circumque oras minuetur cundo:
Oique in progreffu jubar attenuatur ab orth
Solis ad occasum paulatim, 68 ceffat cundo;
Sic tabulis lumen, tota in compage colorum,
Primo a sente, minus senfim declinat cundo.
320
Majusut in staturs, per compita stantibus urbis,
Lumen babent partes supera, minus inserrores;
Idem erit in tabulis : majorgue nec umbra, vel ater
Membra figurarum intrabit color atque secabit:
Corpora sed circum umbra cavis latitabit oberrans: 323
Atque ita quaretur lix opportuna fizuris,
t late insusum lumen lata umbra sequatur
Unde, nec immerite, fertur Titianus ubique
Lucis S umbrarum normam appellafe Racemum.
Purum
Fer. 32½. But round them, in receffes bid, sboud stray.
This line bears in it the bett principle of force that was ever difcover’d,
and is, whatever may be pretended, very little known; therefore may
deferve reflection. Prints of Corregie, Rubens, Vandike, Coc. will afford fpc.
rimens of its ufe : it alfo regards colours and is the bett means of fetting
them off, and helping the frailly of thefe feeble materials.
I maf here, as appertaining to the fame precept, obferve that our author
has no where mentioned the Chiaro searo in ltalian, or Claro offiure in La-
lin; terms varioully apply’d, but feldom rightly, meaning only what the
wards imply, a clear fhadow, which gives fuch beauty and tenderness to
A.SR.
The


The Art of Painting.
Nor shall two lights from different parts appear
In the same piece painted with equal force,
But let the greater on the middle fall
More broad diffusd, where the chief figures are, 315
And moft important bufinets is in act;
Walting itfelf and weakning to its verge.
But as from its firft caftward dawn, the fun,
Or weft declining, theds a feebler ray,
In pictures fo deriv’d from its prime font,
Light over all should gleam to be dispers’d,
And to infenfibly shoud lofe and fade.
320
As ftatues, which the public ways adorn,
Have their fuperior parts enlighten’d moft,
The inferior left, to pictures thou’d be made.
Nor dark, or ftronger black thou’d interfect,
Or harthly entering objects feem to cut,
But round them, in receffes hid, thou’d stray:
325
And to to figures opportune feek light,
That broad diffus’d, broad hadows may fucceed,
Whence with good reafon Titian, faid, of this
A bunch of claffring grapes shoud be our rule.
12
Pure
The early Painters, who drudg’d after living objects in clofe places, where
no reflections (they being furrounded with darkness; could reneve the opr-
que fide, flavithly followed what they faw and ende vourd. in vain, by
Rrong fhadows, to give force : but in procets of tnc. by obterving objecis
in the open air, where all is clear and peispicuous, the dark as well as the
illumined part they began to emancipate, and help’d by the abors principle
of daks in receffes, gave a greater ferce and finer anc: ic their works
Than had been known; and compolitions, however l2.g. o; Hant from the
cjr. had their due effect and were feen wish proportionable pleafure.


39
33. Tre2 C-
qual lights not
in the fame
Picture.


40
34. Album
E nigrum.
35. Colo-
Tumreffectio.
36. Unio
colorum.
a. Act in.

te politus.


De Arte Graphica.
Purumalbumeffe poteft propiusque magifque remotam: 330
Cum mgre antevenit propius; fugit absque remotum:
Purum autum igrum antrorsum venit usque propinguum.
Lux sucata sue tingit, miscetque colore
Corpora, sicque sus, per quem lux funditur, der.
Corpora juntta fimul, circumfusoque colcres
335
Excrprunt, propriumque aliis radiefa reflectunt.
Pluribus in solidis liquida sub luce propinquis,
Participes, mixtesque simel decet effe colores.
Hanc Normam Veneti Pictores vite sequuti,
(Que suit antiquis corruptie ditta colorum.
340
Cum phires opere in magne pesuere figuras
Ne conjuntla find variorum inimica colorum
Congeries formam implicitam, 8 concifa minutis
Nembra daret pannis, totam unamquamque figuraim
Affinm, aut uno tantum vestive colore,
345
Sunt soliti; variande toms tunicamque togamque
Carbaseosque sinus, vel amicum in lumine E8 umbra
Contiguis circum rebus socrando colorem.
Qua minus eft spacir acrei, aut qua purior der
Cuncta magis diftincta patent, speciefque reservant 330
Quaque magis denjus nebulis, ant plurimus air
Amplum


The Art of Painbins
47
34. White
Pure white may be, or nigh, or elfe remote,
and black.
With black comes onward, but without flies off;
Pure black, will not be diffancd, will be near.
Light, with its hue, does every object tinge,
On which it falls, and with its colours mix,
As doth the air thro' which the light is pourd.
Bodies together join’d, from colours round
5 35. There.
33
ffection of co-
Their tincts receive, reffecting back their own,
Jours.
Many near objects, feen in one clear light,
36. UUnion of
colours.
Colours thoud have participating mix’d;
This rule Venetian Painters have obferv’d,
(A breaking of them by the antients call’d
348
When many figures in large works they placd,
Left various difagreeing colours join’d,
A heap perpley the forms, divide the parts
With portions of small narrow draperies;
And every figure with refembling tincts,
345
Or one fole colour cloath’d, by different tones
Diftinguithing the garments, fine from courfe,
And thofe were outward worn, from thofe within;
Or with foft amicable light and shade,
And focial colour they connected all.
In less acrial space, of air more pure,
37. The IMr.
Things more diftinct appear, their forms preferv’d; 350 dumef air.
If denfe, with clouds more hazy, thick, and gross,

And


42
38. Diftan-
fiarum rela-
ti0.
39. Corpora
proculdifian-
lia.
40. Conti-
gua & diffica
41. Contra-
Tis extrema
fugienda.
42. Tonus
& color varil.
43. Luminis
delectus.
44. OAE.
dam circa
praxim.


De Arte Graphica.
Amplum inter suerit spatium perrettus, in auras
Confundet rerum species, 68 perdet inanes.
Anteriora magis semper finita, remotis
Incertis deminentur t8 abfcedentibus, idque
355
More relative, ut majora minoribus extent.
Cuntta minuta procul maffam denfantur in unam;
Ot folia arboribus sytvarum, 8 in equore fluttus.
Contigua inter se cocant, sed diffita diftent,
Distabuntque tamen grate, t8 discrimine parvo: 360
Extrema extremis contraria jungere noti:
Sed medio sint usque gradu sociata coloris.
Corporum erit tonus atque color variatus ubique;
Querat amicitiam retro; ferus emicet ante.
Supremum in tabulis lumen captare dier,
365
Injanus laber artificum; cum attingere tantum
Non pizmenta queant : auream sed vespere lucem;
Seu modicum mane albentem; five atheris actain
Poft byemem numbis transfuso sole caducam;
Seu nebulis fultam accipient, tonitruque rubentem.
370
Levid que lucent, veluti cryffalla, metalla,
Ligna, ofa, 68 lapides; villofa, ut vellera, pelles,
Barbe, aqueique oculi, crines, beloferica, plume;
Et
Ver. 36s. To aim at the meridian blaze of day.
I would advife a painter, however, whose end is art, altho' he do not
make pictures of them, to try every effect of nature for his fudy : Rubens,
it is obvious, form’d a manner from experiments, partly of the fun's
light, and alfo from others, which he made. It may be impostible
20.





The Art of Painting.
43

And diffantmore, uncertain all appear,
Their forms confounded, faint, imperfect, loft.
38. Of the
Parts neareft finith’d more than the remote,
keeping or dif-
tancing ob-
Shall ever govern them, weak going off,
jels.
But relative as great things do the less.
355
Small things feen far do all compofe one mass,
39. Distant
objects.
s countless leaves on trees in bowring woods,
Or waves that furrow up a diftant fea.
Whats near let join, diftant divide remov’d,
40. Bodies
260 contiguouns and
With gentle difference yet, grateful to fight.
separate.
41. Viclert
Mix not extremes with contrary extremes;
oppositions to
Gradual a medium keep with focial Tincts.
be avoided.
42. Of our
Colours of bodies, tones, vary over all,
colours and
Tones.
Tender they keep behind, glow foremoft flrong.
365 43. Cheice of
To aim at the meridian blaze of day,
Light.
Which colours cannot reach, is frantic toil;
Chufe rather the mild evning's golden beams,
Or the pale morning's grey and modeft light;
Or when allant the heavns, the fform, now oer,
The fun gleams forth; or wrapt in outftretch’d clouds,
Swoln with loud burfting thunder, red it glares.
70
3
Smooth polifh’d furfaces, chyrftal, bones, wood,
42. TEe
Fadling or
Metals and fones, fhaggy, as wool, skins, beards;
ferceling.
Aqueous, as locks, bright eyes, filks, feather’d plumes;
M 2
Tran-
to reach it; but fomething may be attain’d worth, nay overpaying, the trouble.
The chemift finds often, in the purfuit of one fecrer, another perhaps, more
valuable. Cland. Lorraine aim’d even to paint the fun ittelf, which, the
he fail’d of, yet his kies are the brighteff and beft ever painted.


44
45. Campus
Labulx.
46. Color
vividus, non
famen palli
Gis.
47. Embra.
48 Ex una
Patelly fit ta-
buia.
49. Spec-
lam pictorum
magilter.
50. Dimidia
figur2, velin
regiaante 2.
lias.
51. Effigies.


De Arte Graphica.
Et liquida, ut stagnans aqua, reflexaque sub undis
Corporea Species, E8 aquis contermina cuntia,
375
Subter ad extremum liquide sint pirta, superque
Luminibus percuffa surs, signifque repostis.
Area, vel campus tabule vagus effo, levifque
Abscedat latus, liquideque bene unctus amicis
Tota ex mole coloribus, and five patella;
380
Quaque cadunt retre in campum, confinid campo.
Vividus efto color nino non pallidus albo;
Adversifque locis ingeftus plurimus ardens.
Sed learter parceque datus vergentibus oris.
Cunctalabore finnd cocant, velut umbra in eadem. 38s
Tota fiet tabula ex und depieta patella.
Nulta ex naturd speculum preclara decebit;
Queque precul sero Spatus spectantur in amplis.
Diundia effigies, que sold, vel integra phires
Ante alias posita ad lucem, stat proxima visu,
390
Et letis spect anda locis, oculisque remota,
Luminis umbrarumque gradu fit pict a supremo.
Partibus in minius imitatio justa juvabit
Effigiem, alternas referendo tempore codem
Consimiles partes; cum lumims atque coloris
395
Compositis, justifque Toms; tune parta labore
Si facili cs vegeto micat ardens, viva videtur
Visa


The Art of Painting.
45
Tralfparent, as ftill waters, and the forms
Corporeal they reflect; all things like thefe,
375
Liquid and clear till the laft touches paint;
Then Charply ftrike the lights, the lines replace.
The fcene, or back ground, shoud be light and free, 4s. The back
ground.
Receding gradual with foft focial tincts,
380
From all the colours in (weet union wrought;
And objects in it thoud due diftance keep.
46. Forcs
Vivid be colours, nor too pale, or white,
without pale-
222/5.
On objects near, heap’d, bodied, glowing frong;
But thin and (paring, at the goings off.
Let all, as labourd in one fhade, unite.
385
3 47. All a.
greeing.
The whole thoud from one pallet painted feem.
48. From the
same paller.
Much excellent from nature mirrours teach,
49. Tbe
looking-glass
And things feen far in fpacious views at eve.
of use.
If a half figures painted, or a whole,
50. Figures
advanced be-
Before the reft advancd, approach the light.
fore others.
Be next the eye, from places large and wide,
At diftance view’d, the force of light and shade,
390
In this, with its tranfitions be fupreme.
Small parts with imitation juft shall add
S1. Por-
Waits.
To portraits femblance, what are fimilar,
Touching alternately, and at one time,
395
And when of light and colour well ton’d tincts,
The wholes compos’d, your labours ends attain’d;
If then tis painted, facile, lively, bold,
It quits the canvas, animated lives.
Pictures
I


De Arte Graphica.
46
52. Locus
Visa loco angusto tenere pingantur, amice
tabulx.
funtta colore, gradugue; procul que pictd, fereci
Sint S inequali variata colore, toneque.
400
Grandia figna volunt spatic ampla, ferefque colores.
Lumina lata, unetas fimul undique copulet umbras
53. Lumina
latd.
Extremus labor In tabulas demiffa feneftris
54. Quanti
tas luminis
Si fuerit lux parva, color clariffimus efto:
lociin quo
sbulackex-Vividus at contra, obscurusque, in lumine aperto.
405
ponenda.
Qua vacuis divisa cavis, vitare memento;
55. Errores
& vitid pic-
Trite, minuta, fimd que non stipata debiscunt;
RurE.
Barbara, cruda oculis, rugis sucata colorum,
Luminis umbrarumque tonis equalia cuntta;
Fxda, cruenta, cruces, obsccend, ingrata, chimeras, 410
Sordidaque E8 misera, 88 vel acuta, vel aspera tattu;
Queque dabunt formd, temere congesta, rurnam,
Implicitas oliis confundent mixtaque partes.
Dumgue Jugis vitrofa, cave in contraria labi
56. Pruden
Damnamali; vrtium extremis nam semper inberet. 41s
tiz in pittore.
Pulchra gradu summe, graphides stabilita vetuste
57. Elegan.
immidxata- Nobilibus signis, sunt grandia, diffita, pura,
buiarum.
Tersa, velut mimme confusa, labore ligata,
Partibus ex mayms paucifque efficta, colorum
Corporibus diffincta ferrs, sed semper anicis.
420
Di43



The rt of Painting.
47
52. The place
Pictures feen clofely should be painted neat,
of the picture.
Tenderly wrought, with colours that unite;
400
Seen far thor’d glare, with tincts oppos’d and frong;
Diffance requires vaft lines and colours fierce.
53. Bread
Broad lights, melting around, unite with shade,
lighis.
Labour extreme; and where small apertures,
Or windows low, admit but little light;
54. The
light to be
The colours thoud be ffrong, vivacious, clear;
considered
whence the
In open day, the contrary, obfcure.
45 5 ficture is feen.
Things, with vacuities divided, fhun,
55. Things
to be avoided.
The triffing, common, or what not connects,
But leaves a chafm; the barbarous, and fuch
Whofe nature muft offend and thock the fight;
Streight narrow spaces, ftain’d with different tincts,
Or lights, and shades, of one fame equal tene;
The foul, the bloody, cruel and obfcene,
410
Odious, fantaftick, fordid, mean, acute,
Or whofe afperities the touch difpleafe,
In ruins heap’d up, undigefted forms,
All that confounds with mix’d entangled parts.
Whilft faults avoiding, warily take heed:
56. Shanning
one Extreme
On contraries tis evil's curfe to flide.
425
we must be
aware of
Vice still is found inherent in extremes.
anotker.
Supreme perfection, antient mafters held,
57. The an.
trent idea of
Muft have large lines, forms great and unperplex’d,
a fine picture.
Clean, pure, be in no wife confusd, or yet
With labour fliff, refull from few great parts,
Diffinct with colours firong, yet focial all.
420
Who


43
58. Pictor
1770.
59. Ars de-
bet fervire
pictorinon
pictor arti.
60. Oculos
recreant di-
verfitas & o-
peris facili-
tas, qux (pe
Clatim ars
dictfur.
61. Arche
Erpus in
mente, ap0-
graphuni in
Teld.


De Arte Graphica.
Qui bene cxpit, uti facti jam fertur babere
Dimidium; picturam it a nil, sub limine prime
Ingrediens, puer offendit damnesius arti,
Quam varid erverum generd, ignorante magiftro,
Ex pravis libare Typis, mentemque veneno
425
Insicere in toto quod non abftergitur ave.
Nec graphides rudis artis adbuc cite qualiacungue
Corpora viva super, studium meditabitur, ante
Ilorum quam fymmetriam, internodia, formam
Noverit, inspectis, detto evelvente magifire,
430
Archetypis; dulcesque doles presenferit artis.
Plusque manu ante ocules quam voce decebitur usus.
Quare artem quacunque juvant; fuge quag; repugnant
Cerpora diverfæ nature juntta placebunt;
Sic ea qua facili contempta labore videntur
4
435
Tithereus quippe igms meft E8 Spiritus illis;
Mente diu verfata, manu celeranda repenti.
Arsque laborque operis grata fic fraude latebit:
Maxima deinde erit ars, nibil artis inefe videri.
Nee prius inducas tabule pigmenta celorum,
443
Expensa quam signa typi stabilita imtescant,
Et menti presens operis sit pegma futuri.
Pravalent
Ver. 440. Ner on the canvas yet the cohurs spread.
If this precept be not duly obferved in an hifforical composition, it will
very much embarrals the Painter in his procets of the work, and create
many


The Art of Painting.
49
58. The
Who well begins is said to have done half,
eduantage of
So nothing, entring on firft rudiments,
a good, and
detriment of a
The pupil more can hurt or art offend,
bad, mafter.
Than doth of errors all the various kinds,
Which ignrant mafters broach; for to mifled,
So with bad things the tafte corrupt, depraved,
425
Life fcarce shall ferve to wear th infection out.
Nor uninform’d beginners yet thoud draw
From living objects, or thefe meditate,
Ere taught anatomy, proportion, form,
430
Ere with a learned mafter well revolv’d,
And exercis’d from good originals;
And felt the fweet deceptions of the art,
More can the hands explain than words can teach.
59. A rule
Seck what may help your art, repugnant fly.
for conduct in
Bodies of different natures jon’d shall pleafe,
Kidy.
6o. Varia.
If painted freely, as with labour fcorn’d;
435 tiwn and sa-
cility please.
For there in thefe a fire, a fpirst, breathes.
Long practice, and a fwift and ready hand.
Still Hudy, labour hide, with grateful fraud,
Then art is greateft, when it feems not art.
Noron the canvas yet the colours (pread,
440 61. The de-
sizn must be
Fre the defign be weigh’d, and fettled well,
fettled and
the fiudies
And prefent to your mind the future work.
mode before
ave proceed on
Lef
the work it-
felf.
many fuch difficulties as will fruftrate that eafe, chearfulness, and delight,
necefiary to produce what is good or pleafing.


50
62. Circinus
in oculis.
63. Super.
bia pictori
nocet plurj.
mum.
56. 77581
GEdvlev.


De Arte Graphica.
Prevaleat Jensus vationi, que officit arti
Conspicue; inque oculis tantummede circinus effe.
Ofere doctorum monitis, nec sperne superbus
445
Discere, qua de te suerit sententia vulgi.
Eft cacus nam quifque sns in rebus, ts expers
Judicii, protemque suam miratur amaique.
Aft ubi confilium decrit sapientis amici,
1d tempus dabit, atque mora intermifa labori.
450
Non facilis famen ad nutus, 8 inama vulgi
Ditta, levis mutabis opus, gemumque relinques:
Nam qui parte sua sperat bene posfe mereri
Multrvaga de plebe, noeet fibr, nee placet ulli.
Cumgue opere in proprie soleat se pingere pittor, 455
(Prolem adco sibi ferre parem natura saevit)
Proderit imprimis pittori radi ccaules,
Ui data qua gemo colat, abstincatque negatis.
Fructibus utque Juus nunquam eft Japer, atque venustas
Floribus, insucto in sundo, precece sub anni
460
Tempore, ques cultus violentus to ignis adegit:
Sic nunquam, nimie que funt exterta labore,
Et picta invite geis, munquam illa placebunt.
Vera
Ver. 445. Attend the learn’d advifer, nor with scorn.
The eyes of the ignorant are less fallible than we believe them: their
sefl is nature: the trueff, obvious difproportion, or great refemblance,
Arike them. But the fame of a candle, as at Windfor, of which all
(peak


57
The Art of Painting.
62. Thein.
Let fight be pleas’d, tho' reafon shall fubfide;
ly compass the
ejes.
Andlet your eyes your only compats be.
445 63. Pride
Attend the learn’d advifer, nor with fcorn
muft not sbut
Proudly refule to hear the vulgar voice.
our care to ad-
vice.
To what himfelf produces each is blind,
Of judgment void, and likes and loves his own.
Wanting the council of a knowing friend
450
Lay by your work; time shall that want fupply.
Nor, pliant at the beck and fenteless prate
Of the dull vulgar, fickle change thou ought,
Deferting what thy better fenfe had fix’d;
For who in all woud pleafe th inconflant croud,
Self-hurt may toil, obliges, pleafes none.
When in his works a painter paints himfelf,
455 64. Te
Painter sheud
And nature makes all things bring forth their like,
Knew bimfelf.
It well shall profit him to know himself,
That where his talent lies he may indulge,
And from what is deny’d, prudent abstain.
s fruits have never flavour, flowers their hue,
Forth of their native foil, but premature,
460
And out of feafon fore’d with fires to bloom;
So what with pains is done, heavy and llow,
Extorted, spight of nature, shall displeafe.
02
Of
(peak, or the eps, which are manifeftly falfe, charm alike. both inconfider-
able things; they don't know, but they fee, and will, if let alone, per-
haps blunder out fomething you may infer from.


De Arte Graphica.
52
Cs. Ound
Vere super meditando, manus laber improbus adfit.
mente Con-
ceperismann Nec tamen obtundat genium, mentifque vigorem.
comproba.
Optima noftrorum pars matutina dierum,
66. Matuti-
num tempus
Difficili banc igitur potiorem impende laberi.
laboriaptum.
Nulla dies abeat, quin linea ducta superfit.
67. Singu-
lis diebus ali-
Perque vias, vultus bominum, motufque notabis
quid facien
dum.
Libertate sua propries, positasque figuras
68. Affec.
tus inobfer-
Ex fese faicles, ut inobservatus, habebis,
vali & natur-
Mex quodcumque mari, terris, 68 in acre pulchrum
ales.
69 Nonde.
Contigerit, chartis propera mandare paratis,
fint pugilla
IEs.
Dum prasens animo species tibi servet bianti.
Non epulis nimis indulget picturd, meroque
Parcit amicorum nisi cum fermone benigno
Exbaustam reparet mentem recreata; sed inde
Litibus, E8 curis, in cxlibe libera vita,
Seceffus procul a turba, strepituque remotes,
Villarum, rurisque beata silentia quarit.
Namgue recolletto, tota incumbente minerva,
Ingenie, rerum species presentior extat;
Commodiusque operis compagem amplectitur omnem.
Infami tibi non potior sit avara peculi
Cura, aurique James, modied quam forte beato,
Nominis aterm, t8 landis pruritus babende,
Condigne pulcrorum operum mercedis in evum.


465
470
475
480
485
Tudicrum,


The Art of Painting.
53
65. Pradice
Of truth while ftudious, ever let your hand
should accom-
pany Specula-
Strenuoully practife that which is cenceiv’d,
tion.
463
Vet not cerpower with toil the active mind.
66. The
Of day, for us the early morn is beft,
morning beft
for fiudy.
Be it affign’d to things moft difficult.
Let not a day, without a line, depart.
67. Do some-
thing every
In ftrects mens vilages and motions mark,
day.
476 68. Natural
Free, unconftrain’d, hence ealy attitudes
expressions and
And natural turns you unobfery’d acquire.
attifudes.
Quick what in air, or earth, of fea, appears,
69. Nemo-
randums or
To ready paper truft whilft memory ferves,
sketches on all
occasions.
And the impreffions firm and ftrong retain d.
Nortoo much painting thou’d indulge in fealts, 475
Or quaff full bowls; converfe of friends benign
Chears the exhaufted mind and recreates;
Averfe to srife, to Cares, free and alone,
It ffies from crouds, and the worlds noity din,
Pleas’d with the humble villages, and feeks
480
In rural fcenes a heavnly calm repofe.
Here all collected in itfelf, the mind,
Incumbent to its talk, more clear conceives
Species and forms, connections, all the work.
485
Of ill-got wealth let not the meagre care,
Hunger of gold, poffets thee; rather ftrive,
With modrate means fublifting and content,
Inflam’d alone with glory, thirft of praife,
Rewards, worthy great works in evry age.
Judgment


54


De Arte Graphica.
Judicrum, decile ingenium, cor nobile, sensus
Sublimes, firmum corpus, ftorensque guventa;
Commoda res, labor, artis amor, doctusque magifter; 490
Et quamcumque voles occasio porrigat ansam,
Et genius quidam adjuerit, fydusque benignum,
Dotibus his tantis, nec adbuc ars tanta paratur
Distat ab ingenie longe manus. Optima dectis.
Censentur, que prava minus; latet omnibus error; 495
Vitaque tam longie brevior non sufficit artr.
Definimus nam pofe senes, cum seire periti
Incipimus, doctumque manum gravat agra fenettus:
Nec gelidis servet juvenilis in artubus arder.
Quare agite, o juvenes, placide quos sydere natos
500

Pacifere studia allectant tranquilla Minerva:
Quosque suo sovet igne, sibique optavit alumnos!
Lyd agite, atque animis ingentem ingentibus artem
Exercete alacres, dum sirenua corda juventus
Viribus extimulat vegetis, patienfque laborum eft;
505

Dum vacud erverum, nulloque imbuta Japore
Purd
Ver. 300. Therefore rouse youths ? avbe, bern with placid flars!
Our author here speaks with that animating warmth and affection which
jult notions of this art ever will inspire; and tho' I have tranflated it ani.
mared perhaps with warmth enough, yet I know not here how, confiftent
with candor, to advife in this point; for the talents, neceffary to form a good
Painter, will put a man in many better ways in our country, and more
conducive to happiness, than painting, and less liable to difappointment and
Chagrin.
I5


The Art of Painting.
Judgment, a docile mind, a noble heart,
A fenfe exalted, and a body firm,
Vouth ffourithing, fuch fortune as may aid,
490
And affiduity and love of art;
Add too a learned mafter; yet nor thefe,
Nor whatfoer thou with tho' opportune,
If genius not affift, and planets fmile,
Great gifts, shall yet avail in this great art.
The mind better conceives than hands exprets.
What hath leaft faults as beft the learn’d approve; 495
To all are their own imperfections hid,
Life ffeets too faft for this extentive art;
In years we fink when we begin to know,
The mafter hands enfeebl’d with weak age,
And youthful ardour warms not frozen limbs.
Therefore roufe, youthsl who, born with placid ffars, goe
Peace-bearing Pallas doth with ftudies charm,
Tranquill and cherifficth with her own fire
Her favourd offspring! roufe, apply yourfelves;
Strenuoully labour, and with courage great,
Vall as the art, purfue it; youth now boils,
And Rimulates the blood with active powers,
505
Fits you for toil, no errors rooted now,
No prepoffeffions, now the mind is clear,
P2
15
If we had an academy where a proper education might firft fet yourt
right, and when they were fo, properly diffinguith them, we don't want
worthily difposed patrons, or wealth, to encourage it; but as the thing is,
LO:king can be done.


55


65
70. Ordo
Rudjoruim.


De Arte Graphica.
Pura intct mens, 68 verum sitibunda nowarum,
Presentes baurit species, atque bumida servat.
In geometrali prius arte parumper aduitr,
Signa antiqua super Grarorum addifcite forman;
Nee mord, nec requies, nottuque dingue labori,
Alorum menti atque mode, vos donec agendi
Praxis ab affidue jaciles affueverit usu.
Mox, ubi judicium emenfis adoleverit annis,
Singula qua celebrant prime exemplaria claffis,
Romani, Veneti, Parmenses, atque Bononi,
Partibus in cunttis pedetentim, atque ordine recto,
Ot momtum supra eft, wos expendiffe juvabit.
Hos apud invenit Raphael miracula summe
Ducta mode, veneresque baburt quas nems deincess.
Quidguid erat forma scrvit Bonarota potenter
fulius a puere musarum eduttus in antris,
Aomas reseravit opes, graphicaque poesi
Qua non visa prius, sed tantum audita poetis,
Ante ocules spettanda dedit facraria phabi:
Quague coronatis complovit bella triumphis
Heroum fortuna potens, casusque decords,
Nobilius reipfa antiqua prusiffe videtur.
Clarier ante alios Corregius extitit, ampla
Luce superfusa, circum cocuntibus umbris,
Pirgendique mode grandi, 68 trattando colore


5


520
525
539
Corpora.


570



I


The Art of Painting.
5 free; and charm’d with novelty
Imbibes things greedily, preferves them long.
Firft of geonetry be fomething learnt;
To antient ftatues then addict yourfelf;
510
Study their forms, nor ought delay, or reft,
Or intermffion shall afford to toil,
Or day, or night; their choice and ftyle from hence,
Thus ardently purfuing, you attain.
Atlength when judgment shall with years increafe,
Works the firft celebrated you may view.
Singly contemplate, or at Venice, Rome,
515
Bologna, Parma, fludying part by part,
In their juff order by the rules we ve given;
Reffections fforing, shall your conduct guide.
Here Raphael’s miracles, with fovereign skill,
Exhibit grace peculiar and his own.
520
Defign and form beft Bonarota knew.
But Julio, by the mufes fofter’d, fram’d,
Aonian treafure (preads things yet unfeen,
By poets only fung and confecrate
To Phebus, full reveals to fight;
525
Wars he with conqueft ended, triumph crown’d;
The heroes fortunes fill’d with high events,
Great as when acted, to have painted feems.
Advanced before the reft Corregio thines,
Broad lights diffuting on foft rounding shades,
Valt stile of painting, excellent in all.
The
2


5
70. The or-
der of sudy.


58
71. Natura
& experientia
artem perfi-
Ciunt.


De Arte Graphica.
Corpora. Amicitiamque, gradusque, dolosque colorum,
Compagemque ita disposuit Titianus, ut inde
Drvus appellatus, magnis fit bonoribus auttus,
Fortuneque boms: quos jedulus Hannibal omnes
535
In propriam mentem, atque modum mird arte coegit.
Plurimus inde labor Tabulas imitando juvabit
Egregias, operumgue Types; sed plura decebit
Natura ante ocules presens; nam firmat S auget
Vimgeni, ex illaque artem experientia complet.
540
Multa superfilce quee Commentaria dicent.
Hec ego, dum memorer subitura volubilis avi
Cuncta vices, variifque olim persturd ruinis,
Pauca Jophifmata sum graphica immortalibus ausus
Credere pierns, Rome meditatus: ad Alpes,
545
Dum super infanas moles, immmicaque caftra
Bordonidum decus 68 vindex Lodoicus avorum,
Fulminat ardenti dexira, patriaque resurgens
Gallicus Alcides premit bispani or a leonds.
17

I N 1 S.
Ver. 841. Much Iomitting to the comment leave.
It is to be regretted that our author did not accomplith his intentions; and,
after having given us fundamental principles of the art, branched and en
larged on the particulars part by part, especially if he had done it with the
prescription he fets to himfelf, and avoided too great an enumeration of
rules; for maxims not concife enough for the memory produce litle. Very
nice (pecularifts are confounded with their own infignificant ingenuity, and
walte themfelves on triffes: but as Mr. Pope Lays,
Let such teach otbers who themfelves excell.
Let us hear Carlo Morat who, as Luca Jordain faid, & had fick’d honey
 from every fnver:
The print of him, call’d The School, and which is infcribed to young
perfons fiudious of defign, it is faid, is publifhed to undeceive thofe who ima-
gine, that by the knowledge and fudy of many arts, they may become perfect
in the art of painiing, withour, in the firft place, acquiring a maftery in drawing,


The Art of Painting.
The agreement, the gradation, and the fraud,
Of Colours, with their union, Titian Knew
And with fuch art disposd, that hence enrich’d
With wealth, with honours heap’d, hes ftild divine.
Thefe excellencies fedulous Anibale,
535
With wondrous sKill extracting, made his own.
Copying good pictures shall affift and help,
Or prints from thefe, but more shall nature teach,
Prefent before our eyes, for this gives power,
Confirms, enlarges, calls the genius forth,
And hence experienc’d art becomes compleat.
540
Much Iomitting to the comment leave.
Thefe, whilft remembring all muft yield to tune,
And with revolving years in ruins fall,
Few maxims, I have dard to truft,
Study’d at Rome, to the Picrean maids.
543
Thefe, toiling in this much-lov’dart, Ive dard,
Nor by the mufe untouch’d, in native ftrains,
While Peace on Britain finild, rebellion pind,
Condemn’d to its own foil by WILLrAM's arms,
Th affertor of the King's, the peoples rights.
TB0 E ND.
or having anatural gift and a kind of happy inffinct to know, with crace and
facility, equally to animate and dispose the things they are to delineate of
geometry, opties, perspective; a few problems are exhibired with a tanse
the baffa annex’d, that is, to much is enough; as alfo a figure of anaton:v
with the fame motto, fignifying that a too curious knowledge of it will
rather perplex than help us: but to the anrique he has given this mon mar
Caffanza, never enough: a light and trivial application to them will not ferve;
they muft be much drawn after long confidered, beautiful forms. juft proporii-
ons, and a confiffence of character, are their peculiar excellencies. The graces
alfo appear as cxleffial goddeffes looking from clouds on the fcholars below
and feeming to pronounce, fensa di noi egui fatica e vana, without us all your
labour is vain.


59
71. Imitati-
on and experi-
ence form the
Painter.


E R E AT A.
1 Page 13, Verfe 57, for unless, read Useless.
Page 22, Verfe 122, for Geometrical and to there real Sixe,

2
read Geometrick to there real Size.
3 Page 37, Verle 308, for might, read midft.
4 Page 52, Verfe 476, for of, read and
3
5
Verfe 477, for chears, read chear.
Page r2
3
6
Page 1 in the Profe, for faccundia, read facundia.
7 Page 10 in the Profe, for National, read Natural.


