


and

D7


0
I
A
1
I
IV
6
IV I
T H
C
X
A
I

S.
BY
0 H N
R V S S E L.
ASSOCIATE of the ROvAL ACADEMY.

IN TENUI LABOR.
VI R GlL.

The SECOND EDITION, with ADDITIONS.




0
1
0
N
N.
I)
PRINTED FoR J. WIlkIE, 1N ST. PAULs CHURCH-YARD:
J. WALTER, at CHARINC-CRoss; and R. BlSHIOP, NEWPORT-STRERT.
M DCC LKK V I1.


S


C





9



Sloter if 3


257
i
RR

 


.
St F
53
3
123
2

 


3
t is e
hir
38






25
82
23


CIE


FADEI
EVEF.
T.O HIS GR A C E

I12 
42as St 242228  
M
L O R D.
HE excellence at which the Polite
Arts have arrived, in every nation


t  
itt F

h F Ft t    
where they are Known, has been
owing, in a great meafure, to the
encouragement and protection thewn to them by
On this account, my
illuftrious Perfonaoes.
Lord, I prefume to folicit your Grace's Patron-
226


1 0 N.
E D I C A
D
age for the following little Treatife on the Art
of Painting with Crayons; fenfible that your
Grace s Known Benevolence cannot be difpleafed
that I endeavour to render myfelf serviceable to
others.
THE honour you did me, in the early part of
my life, when you condefcended to with I would
direct my ftudies to the Arts of Painting
, Has
2
ever been held in remembrance; and it will af
ford me great fatisfaction, to know that your
Grace accepts this Address as an humble Tribute
of my Gratitude, and, to believe that I am,
with the higheft respect,
Your GRACE s moft obliged,
devoted, humble Servant,
Ntertimer-srces,
Miy A. 1772.
OHIN RUSSEL L.


&N

gou 
3
S
1




VI

3
1
0 F
PAINTING WITH CRAYONS.
 Price 5s. J.


&


I.
C
R OD
I
IN
HE elegant Arts, of which Painting is one of the
moft confiderable, have ever been held in the
higheft eftimation by the Great and Illuftrious of
all Ages, not folely for private amufement, but for their
beneficial influence in Society, in promoting benevolence,
and inspiring delicacy of feeling
THis will not appear paradoxical, if we obferve, that
they are evidently contrived to afford innocent pleafures,
difregarding the inferior fenfes; in this light they may be
confidered as a rational fcience, and when cultivated to an
eminent degree of refinement, they do honour to man-
kind.
EVERV attempt to encourage and improve the elegant
Arts deferves great commendation, fince there is too much
reafon for believing that the interefts of humanity are not
guarded, or fo firmly fecured, as cafily to re-
to Arong
linquith thofe fuccours, or forego thole affiflances which
they adminitter to them.
B
SINCE


11
I N T R O D U C T I O N.
SINCE Painting is an Art in which truth of Out-line is no
less neceffary than juftness of Colouring, I apprehend a few
hints relative to the former will not (even at this period) be
deemed fuperfluous or unneceffary; for, should thefe Ele
menes fall into the hands of the accomplithed Artift, to
whofe judgment I fubmit them with the higheft diffidence,
1 fatter myfelf I shall meet with favour and indulgence,
fince I intend this Work principally for the ufe of thofe
who are juft entering into the world of lmitation.—To fuch,
I hope to make an offering worthy their acceptance, should
inclination lead them to the Study of Painting with Crayons,
by exhibiring the Materials ufed in this Art, with the me
thods of making and preparing them for the execution of
Defign.
WiTH respect to Crayon Painting, the prefent age has
produced an uncommon inftance of excellence in one of
our own Countrymen. I mean the late Mr. Francis Cores,
whofe Method 1 propofe to explain in the following pages
with all poffible perfpicuity: for, it teems to be univerfally
allowed by all good Judges, that, as a Crayon Painter this
cclebrated Artift excelled moft of his Cotemporariest.
The
Reader will, doubtlets, excufe this tribute of graticude to
" In what high eflimation are the Pictures of Refalta helds how happy do
Connoiffeurs think themfelves when they poffess any of her Works! If the
Crayon Pictures left by Mr. Cotes are not held in equal eftimation, pofterity will
not do juftice to his imcrit.
the


I N T R O D U C T I O N.
iii
the memory of an excellent Mafter, who, for fome years,
directed my Studies, and ufed his endeavours to communi-
cate that knowledge to me, which had moft eminently
diftinguished and raifed him to the notice and efteem, not
only of the firft Artifts in the Brisish Nation, but to the
favour of our illuftrious Monarch, who, in the commence-
ment of an aufpicious reign, and even in that early period
of life, when pleafure generally is the fole purfuit, shewed
an elegant tafle for the fine Arts, and has fince been gra-
cioufly pleafed to protect and encourage the cultivation of
them, by the eftablishment of a Royal Academy, which,
from its firft inflitution, has been conducted with fuch pro-
priety and unremitting attention, as to do honour to its
Profeffors, and add a dignity to the character of English-
nen.
THE hopes of rendering fome service to the Art of Paint-
ing with Crayons, of fuggefting some hints which may pot-
fibly give rife to further inquiries respecting this pleating
Htudy, and of explaining its principles for the benefit of
fuch, as in this age of diffipation, may prefer the filent
amufement of a beautiful Art to the delufive enchantments
in the gay circles of unreftrained pleafure, have induced
me to this undertaking, and should it instruet, or even en-
courage a fingle Student, I shall not think my labour ill
beftowed; but happy shall I be if my observations should,
in the leaft degree, awaken the attention of the curious to
thofe new fources of beauty and elegance, which may yet
5
is


iv
I N T R O D V C T 1 O N.
he concealed, for, if they are found to be juft, thofe who
are Mafters of the subject may be tempted to improve and ex-
tend them: be this as it may, my aim by this publication,
is to be ufeful to thofe who want experience, and therefore,
I have not a doubt but I shall fland excuted from any im
putation of vanity with thofe who do not require fuch affift-
ance: to the former 1 with fuccess, and I would foften the
cenfures of the latter by reminding them in the words of
my motto, that
There is labour in the most trifting things.
ELEMENTS


 l s f p    o   afe epes e e ae  e nl a  e        t  









D
IV
S.
0
7
t
1
s
Page 1
INTRODUCTION,


SECTION I. Concerning Tafte,
5
8
SECTToN Il. Of Drawing
SECTioN 1ll. Of the Application of the Crayons, with some

18
previous Dispofitions,

-
26

SECTION IV. Of Drapery,

-
40
SECTION V. Of the Materials,
SECTION VI. Of rolling the Crayons, and dispoting them for

57
painting,
INTRO.


3


 

E
I
E
I
E

5
0 F
PAINTING WITH CRAY ONS.

S E C T I O N
1.
CoN CE R N IN G
T A S T E.
HERE is no disputing about Taffe, becaufe its prin-
ciples are not abfolute, and therefore they cannot
be defined. The opinions of men concerning
beauty and elegance in any of the fine Arts, are as various
as their faces, their difpofitions, or the different climates in
which they live. Nature, it is true, is in every particular
confiftent with herfelf : we are framed with minds capable
of having the higheft relifh for the elegant Arts, and confe-
quently, Nature has framed us with an uniformity of Tafte
to furnish proper objects for that high relifh, without which
the


6
0 F
E L E M E. N T S
the Arts could never have arrived at any degree of perfection;
and this is fufficient to convince us that they are not yet
brought to perfection; fome objects, indeed, of the fine
Arts, make fuch lively impreftions of beauty, grandeur,
and harmony of proportion, as to command a Kind of ge
neral Taffe, but inftances of this fort are very uncommon.
TASTE depends more on experience than on nature.
This is a point which merits peculiar attention, becaufe it
opens to us a fure method of improving our tafte in the
elegant Arts, and is a powerful incitement toward the cul-
tivation and improvement of them, a fiudy which cannot
fail to embellifh Manners and fweeten Society.
ALl, therefore, that can be faid cencerning Tafte, is,
that there are certain principles that conftitute the fenfitive
part of our nature, and which, being common to all, pre-
ferve a kind of uniformity with respect to the emotions and
feelings of different individuals, the same object making
upon every one) the same impreffion, or atleaft, the fame
in Kind if not in degree. This is the only way of account-
ing for a uniformity of Tafte in the polite Arts, and this, in
other words, may juftly be termed the common fenfe of
mankind, which is the only true flandard of Tafle, all
other being equivocal or uncertain, and confequently, will
never be fufficiently ggeneral to become flandards of Tafte;
but, the principles that conflitute the fenfitive part of our
nature,





PAINTING WITH CRAY ONS.
nature, will, undoubtedly, lead us to methods of afcertain-
ing the common fenfe of mankind, or flandard of Tafte,
with great exactnets and accuracy.
THESE will determine, almoft generally, what is either
elegant or beautiful, and hence, when our ideas are regu-
lated and directed by thefe principles, we may be faid to
have formed a good Tafte, and be enabled to difcern what
is natural and proper, and what is not fo.
TRUE it is that inattention, the force of example, pre-
udice, or paffion, may introduce a bad Tafte, and banith
a good one. In Painting, heavy Compofition, incorrect
Drawing, and bad Colouring, may prevail, notwithftanding
the influence of thofe principles that conftitute the fenfitive
part of our nature; inftances of to defective a Tafte will,
however, be very rare, and when they happen, they will
feldom prejudice any but the poffeffors, becaufe they can
carry but little authority with them to impofe on others.—
After all, the remedy againft forming a bad Tafte, is to
Hudy the Works of Men of good Tafte; this will enlarge
the mind, and by obfervation, eftablish a Student in a
ood Tafte of his own.
8
SECTION
B2


8


0 F
5
7
E L E M E N
II.
5 E C T I O N
I N G.
R A W
D
O F
R A WING may be juftly termed the foundation of
 Painting. This should be the firft object of the
Student's attention. The more perfectly this is attained,
the greater is the certainty of acquiring excellence. Genius
is the gift of Nature; but Genius without cultivation can
never arrive at the fummit of perfection.
THE materials neceffary for Drawing are a Port-Crayon,
a Leather Stump, fome ftained Paper, Charcoal, black,
white, and red Chalk, with a Drawing-Board of about
two foot (quare.
SoME Artifts reject the ufe of Drawings or Prints for the
It is, fay they, a fervile method of
Student's imitation;
oc proceeding, becaufe it cramps the ideas, and hence, Ge-
Notwithflanding
of nius fuffers too great a confinement.
this, the ufual practice is to copy after Prints and Drawings
at firft, and I imagine experience has determined the advan-
tages accruing from this method. To fet the Drawings (in
particular) of the moft eminent Artifls before a young be-
ginner, at his firft commencement, muft be highly benefi-
o7
cial,


PAINTING WITH CR ATONS.
9
cial, as it moft undoubtedly will prevent rudeness and in-
accuracy, againft which the moft exact cannot be too much
guarded. How much more then ought the young Student
to obferve this caution f Some Geniufes require reftric-
tion, and when this happens to be the cafe, the placing
of accurate works before them muft hold them in a Kind
of subjection, from which alone Correctness is to be ex-
pected. Exact Copies are abfolutely to be required at firft:
This will imperceptibly produce a Habit of Correctnefe, till,
by degrees, the Student will make himself Mafter of thofe
grand effentials to perfection, Truth, Boldness, and Free-
dom. Truth will be acquired by this accuftomed Correct-
nets, Boldness and Freedom will follow after as the certain
confequence, and on thefe the excellence of the Performance
muft depend.—Copying the Drawings of good Mafters has,
alfo, another confiderable advantage, viz. teaching a good
method of execution, by which many laborious and fruit-
lets efforts will be prevented.
CRAYON PAINTERs should pay a particular attention to
th drawing on ftained paper, with black, or red and
white Chalks, as this kind of Drawing has a bold effect, is
allied to the manner of ufing the Crayons, and imparts a
Knowledge of what is ufually termed the middle Teint.
Indeed, in almoft every respect this method is attended
with confiderable advantages: But the young Student should
always have it in remembrance, that his chief aim ought
t0


0 F
E L E M E N T S
90
to be the making of a correct Drawing, and of attaining a
Truth of Outline, fince this is more effentially necefiary
than a Smartness of Touch, or a pleafing Execution.—
When he has made fome confiderable progress with the
Chalks, he may then attempt the round, or Plaifter Figures;
but here, as in every other cafe, care should be obferved in
making choice of a good subject, for nothing is fo preju-
dicial or dangerous as to copy from imperfect fubjects; on
which account he should be directed in his choice by the
opinion of the moft experienced Artifts, who all recom-
mend the Study of the Antique, and other approved Plaifter
Figures, previous to the drawing after living Models; which
will furnith the Student with great knowledge and correct-
nefs, as has been before obferved, and, without which, there
is great danger of acquiring extravagant and pernicious ha-
bits, which are eafily attained without great care, but they
are not to eafily difmiffed when acquired.
To draw from a living Figure, without having firft fAudied
the Antique, is no less abfurd than to attempt to underfland
the Clafficks without a previous knowledge of the Rules of
Grammar. The human Figure, and especially the Face, is
the moft difficult fludy, but a thorough knowledge of this
particular will give facility of execution in every thing elfe.
WHEN the Student has made himfelf mafter of a good
degree of exactness, by copying after Prints, or Drawings,
let


PAINTING WITH CRAYONS.
11
let him be provided with fome good Head, caft after the
Antique: One, in which the features are ftrongly marked and
boldly determined; fuch as the Hercules, Tupiter or Wiobe;
as he will find the frength of either of thefe more eafy of
imitation than the refinement and delicacy of the Apotlo,
Antinous, or Venus of Medicis; though the latter, after a
time, will be his favourite and moft valuable Study.
AFTER the choice of a Subject, the next confideration will
be to place it in a proper Light and Shadow—If the win-
dow is too near the ground, the effet cannot be pleafing,
becaufe the Shadow will be diftracted into too many parts:
In this cafe, the lower part of the window should be dark-
ened with fomething that will quite obstruet the light, about
the height of fix feet, which will throw the (hades into very
agreeable maffes on the subject for imitation; which being
thus placed, having the Drawing-Board partly refting in
the lap, and partly on the table, (the moft convenient me-
thod) let the Student carefully obferve the particular turn
and action of the head; how much the forehead is inclined
over the right or left shoulder, and how much over the back
or breaft; then, with the Charcoal, let him lightly draw
the general (hapes of the head; after which, the center-line
of the face, from the middle of the forchead to the middle
of the chin, and then the crofs lines, which determine the
fituation of the Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, and Roots of the Hair;
all this being the foundation on which the Student may give
the


12
0 F
E L E M E N T S
the particular fhapes to each feature; and he muft remem-
ber that a good proportioned Face is divided into three equal
parts; the firfl contains the Forchead, the second the Nofe,
and the third the Mouth and Chin. From the Roots of
the Hair to the Crown of the Head is juft the height of
the Forchead.
THE Nofe being the centre, moft Artifts begin their par-
ricular Shapes with that Feature, and from thence proceed
to the Eyes and Mouth; but, let the Student ketch the
Out-line very light, that any miftake may the more eafily
be altered. His greateft attention muft be paid to the pro-
ducing his Drawing correct, and the lines of the Features
parallel to one another, and each at a proper diftance. If the
Student fails here, all his labour in the finifhing will be to
no purpofe; but, when the lines are properly drawn, the
broad Shadows may be laid in with foft Chalk, difregarding
the leffer parts till afterwards; fweetening with the Leather
Stump: Then the demy Shades, and the heightening with
white are added, with which the whole is to be compleated,
preserving an intermediate space of the ftained Paper, which,
as a middle teint, muft be left between the white and black,
otherwife the ufe of drawing on teinted Paper is effectually
deftroyed, and the production will have a heavy, unpleafing
effeet, and be entirely deftitute of that greatness and breadth
which diftinguithes the Productions of a Mafter from the
efforts of inferior abilities.
WHIEN


PAINTING WITH CRATONS.
13
WHEN the Student has made himfelf Mafter of the know-
ledge of the face, he may proceed to the whole figure, ffu-
dying with much affiduity the Cafts after the Antique;
thofe almoft perfect flandards of Grace, Majetty, and
Beguty.
RULks, it is faid, are the Fetters of Genius, but a great
man very judicioufly obferved, lately, that oo they are
fetters only to men of no genius, which is undoubtedly
true; for, when they are properly ufed by men of abilities,
they rather affift genius than impede it. On this account,
I have given the meafures of a fine proportioned human Fi-
gure, with which it is neceffary the Student should make
himfelf acquainted, previous to his fludies after the life;
and, for this reafon, I place this particular before what I
propofe to fay on that important part of Study.
THE beft way to meafure the human figure is by Faces,
ten of which, from the loweft flairs on the Forehead to the
bottom of the Chin, is the beft proportioned height.— The
Face is divided into three equal Parts: Iff, the Forehead;
2d, the Nofe; and 3d, the Mouth and Chin.—From the
Chin to the Collar-bones is twice the length of the Nofe.—
From the Collar-bones to the loweft part of the breaft, the
length of the whole Face.—From the bottom of the Breaft
to the Navel, one Face and half a Nofc.—From the Navel
to the Secrets, one Face.—From the Secrets to the Knee-pan,
C
t1v0


E L E M E N T S 0 F
14

rom the Knee-pan to the Ancle, two Faces.
two Faces.—F
From the Ancle to the Sole of the Foot, a Nofe and an half.
—When the Arms are extended horizontally, their length,
from the extremity of the longeft Finger on one hand to the
other, should meafure the fame as the height of the Figure
from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot.—
From the Shoulder to the Elbow, the length of two Faces.—
From the Root of the Little Finger to the Elbow, two Faces.
From the box of the Shoulder-blade to the Pit of the
Collar, one Face.—The Foot is the fixth part of a Man's
height, and the hand should meafure as much in length as
the Face.—The Thumb is the third part of a Face in length.
The Shoulder that the Face is moft turned over is raifed
higher than the other.— The Shoulder bearing a heavy bur-
then will be raifed confiderably higher than the other.—
The Ilip on which the Body chiefly refts will be raifed
higher than the other.
THE Knowledge of Anatomy, to far as relates to the
Structure of the Bones, and Difposition of the Mufcles, with
their origin and infertion, will enable the Scudent to draw the
human Figure in great perfection. This may be acquired
by Rudying some good treatife on the subject, and by draw-
ing the Bones and Mufcles in different views. The attend-
ing fome Diffections, if he has an opportunity, will improve
the Student much fooner than any other method poffibly can.
Le Bruns Lectures on the Paftions of the Soul, read before
the


15
PAINTINC WITH CR A YONS.
the Academy in France, will impart great knowledge in the
exprestion of the Mufcles of the Face, which should be
strictly attended to: And alfo the knowledge of Light and
Shadow, as this, in particular, will inftruct him how to
preferve harmony in his pictures, and a proper exprestion of
the different projections. Thefe things being acquired, Ge-
nius will improve by Study, and Perfection and Fame re-
ward the labours of clofe application.
WHEN the Student draws from living models, great care
is required to place the figure in a proper action, after
which, particular attention should be paid to its general
careful to preferve what is termed the Center
Tway, being
of Gravity; which is, that line always perpendicular from
the pit between the Collar-bones to the Foot on which
the Figure reftst — The firft sketch muft be touched
very lightly, in a square manner, defcribing the large forms
by which the action of the figure is expreffed. The second
time of drawing over the Out-lines, notice should be taken
of thofe leffer parts, which, in the former flight sketch, were
neglected. In each sketch the Student muft begin at the

Head, which muft be carefully placed in its proper inclina-
tion, or elfe (however in other respects juftly drawn) the
figure will have an ungraceful appearance.
It muft be remarked that moll graceful Figures fland on one Foot only,
7
ufing the other as an auxiliary.
WIEN
C 2


0 F
16
E L E M E N T S
WHEN the Out-line is correct and in good proportion
the principal difficulty is overcome. The next slep is to
proceed to the Shadows, which muft be made broad and
firm, and not diftracted into too many parts, which would
perplex the Student; as all the inferior diftinctions in the
feveral degrees of (hadow, ought to be a second confideration,
and are, therefore, to be avoided when the whole care should
be to preferve the maffes of light and fhade, broad and maf-
terly. Care should be obferved where the principal mats
of light falls (as in every well-fet figure there will be a prin-
cipal mass of light) to preferve it broad, not too much
divided, confidering the whole together before the parts in
particular.
Ir a hadow is produced by any Mufcle, &cc. near the
grand body of light, it will, at the firft view be apt to mif-
lead the Student, and incline him to think it much darker
than it really is; but, if compared with the principal hadow,
the true degree may be afcertained. Sometimes on the rifing
of a Mufcle, or the projection of a Bone, the light may
catch near the mass of thadow, which, if not drawn ten-
der, will have an unpleafing, harth effect, which can only
be regulared by comparing it with the frongeft lights; this
method of comparing one degree of light and fhadow with
another will be the only certain rule of preferving the tone
and confiftency of the whole together, as the comparing of
lengths



PAINTING WITH CR A TONS.
17
lengths and breadths with each other is the only rule to
produce the juft forms of Figures.
WHILE the Figure is refting, the Student will have an
opportunity of placing his Drawing at a diftance, by which
means the eye will more eafily difcover how much he has
erred from this rule, which he may foften with a linen rag,
or rub out with bread at pleafure.—As it cannot be fuppofed
the figure can, for any length of time, have the fame Mufcles
of his body in continual action, the opportunity should be
embraced, while they are moft properly exerted, to draw
each Limb, and defcribe each particular Mufcle, the great
variety of which will give liberty to the Student to exercife
his Genius in producing his Drawing in an elegant tafle.
S EC TION


18


E L E M E N T S
0 F
S E C T I O N
III.
OF THE APPLICATION OF THE CRAYONS, WITH
SOME PREVIOUS DISPOSITIONS.
YHETHER the Painter works with Oil-colours, Wa-
ter-colours, or Crayons, the grand object of his
purfuit, is ftill the fame: a juft imitation of nature. But
each species has its peculiar rules and methods.—Painting
with Crayons requires, in many respects, a treatment diffe-
rent from Painting in Oil-colours; becaufe all Colours ufed
dry are, in their nature, of a much warmer complection than
when wet with Oils, or any other binding fluid. Let this
be proved by matter of fact:—Mr. Cotes painted a Portrait
of Sir William Chambers, which is in Lord Besborough's
Collection. An ingenious Foreigner had difcovered a Me-
thod of fixing Crayon Pictures, to that they would not
rub or receive an injury if any accident happened to the
glats. The Society for the Encouragement of Arts had
before offered a Premium to any one who should difcover
to valuable a fecret, for which Premium he made appli-
cation. Mr. Cotes being eminent in his Profeffion, was
defired to lend a Picture for the trial, and give his judg-
ment, which was made on this Portrait of Sir William
Chambers.


PAINTINC WITH CR AYONS.
19
Chambers. The Crayons he indeed to perfectly fixed as to
refift any rub or bruth without the leaft injury, which
before would have entirely defaced or spoiled it: But the
Picture, which before had a particularly warm, brilliant,
and agreeable effect, in comparifon became cold and
purple; and though in one fenfe the attempt fucceeded to
the defigned intention of fixing the colours, yet the bind-
ing quality of whatever fluid was made ufe of in the
process, changed the complexion of the colours, rendering
the cold teints too predominant. For this reafon, in order
to produce a rich Picture, a much greater portion of what
Painters term Cooling Teints muft be applied in Crayon
Painting, than would be judicious to ufe in Oils. With
our any danger of a miftake, it is to be fuppofed, the not
being acquainted with this observation is one great caufe
why to many Oil-Painters have no better fuccess when
they attempt Crayon Painting. On the contrary, Crayon
Painters being to much ufed to thofe Teints, which are of
a cold nature when ufed wet, are apt to introduce them
too much when they paint with Oils, which is feldom pro-
ductive of a good effect.
ANOTHER Observation I would make, which requires
particular notice from the Student who has been con-
verfant with Oil Painting, prior to his attempts with
Crayons; Oil Painters begin their Pictures much lighter and
fainter than they intend to finith them, which prefents the
future


0 F
E L E M E N T 5
20
fature colouring clear and brilliant, the light underneath
greatly affitting the tranfparent glazing and fcumbling
Colours, which if they were laid over any part already too
dark, would but increafe its heavy effect. On the contrary,
Crayons being made of dry Colours, are difficult to procure
fufficiently dark, the Grayon Painter therefore will find an
abfolute neceffity to begin his Picture as dark and rich as
poftible, except in the ftrongeft lights; for if once the
grey and light teints become predominant, it will be next
to impoftible for him (in the deep fhadows especially) to
reffore depth and brilliancy, having no opportunity of glaz
ing or fcumbling to give the effect, as the grey teints being
mixtures with whiting underneath, will continually work
up, and render the attempt abortive.
I SHALL now endeavour to give the Student fome Direc-
tions towards the attainment of excellence in this Art.
THE Student muft provide himfelf with fome ftrong
blue paper, the thicker the better, if the grain is not too
courfe and Knotty, though it is almoft impoffible to get any
intirely free from Knots. The Knots should be levelled with
a penknife or razor, otherwife they will prove exceedingly
troublefome. After this is done, the paper muft be pafted
H
very finooth on a linen cloth, previoutly ftrained on a deal
& That fide of the paper should be pafted which has the Rrokes from the
wires moft evident, that the Painting may be on the fmootheft fide, otherwife
the lines, which thefe wires have left in the paper will prove troublefome and
look unpicafant.
franle


PAINTING WITH CRATONS.
28
frame, the fize according to the Artiff's pleafure: On this
the Picture is to be executed; but it is moft eligible not to
palte the paper on till the whole subject is firft dead-coloured.
The method of doing this is very eafy, by laying the paper
with the dead-colour on its face, upon a finooth board or
table, when, by means of a brush, the backfide of the
paper muft be covered with pafte; the frame, with the
Itrained cloth, muft then be laid on the pafted fide of the
paper, after which turn the painted fide uppermoft, and
lay a piece of clean paper upon it, to prevent finearing;
this being done, it may be ftroked gently over with the
hand, by which means all the air between the cloth and
the paper will be forced out.
WHEN the pafte is perfectly dry, the Student may pro-
ceed with the Painting.
The advantages arifing from
pafting the paper & in the frame, according to this method,
 Some Crayon Pictures are painted on vellum; but the animal falts in the
Ikin very often caufe them to mildew. It muft be confelfed the vellum gives
the Picture a foft effect; but its ufe cannot be recommended in our unfavourable
climate. Others make ufe of finalt grounds; Le Tour, lately a Painter of note
in Paris, often ufed them with great fuccels. The method to prepare them is to
bruth over the paper with guin water, which directly drew with finalt moderately
fine, the luperfluous part of which should be fwept off, with a painter's bruth
when the gum water is perfectly dry. On this the picture is to be painted; but
we have paper now in England to be procured of fo excellent a lexture, as to
render this preparation perhaps unnecellary. It may be doing the young prac-
itioner a pleature to inform him, that Mr. Bishop, Stationer, in Newport-preet,
Long Acre, has made it his bufincts to provide himfelf with paper made on pur.
poic for Crayon-Painting, Drowing, &c. where the Student may be fupplied
with the belt fort of paper for his purpoic.
D
after


0 F
E L E M E N T S
22
after the Picture is begun, are very great, as the Crayons
will adhere much better than any other way, which will
enable the Student to finith the Picture with a firmer body
of colour, and greater luftre. The late Mr. Cotes dif
covered this method by accident, and efteemed it a valuable
acquifition: And, I remember, on a particular occafion,
he removed a fine Crayon Picture of Rozalba's,r and placed
it on another ftrained cloth, without the leaft injury, by
foaking the canvas with a wet spange, till the pafte be-
tween the cloth and paper was fufficiently wet to admit of
Teparation.
WHEN Painters want to make a very correct copy of a pic-
ture they generally make ufe of a Tiffany, or black Gauze,
frained tight on a frame, which they lay flat on the fub-
ject to be imitated, and with a piece of fketching chalk,
trace all the out-lines on the Tiffany. They then lay the
canvas to be painted on, flat upon the floor, placing the
Tiffany with the chalked lines upon it, and with an Hland-
Kerchief bruth the whole over : this prefents the exact
out-lines of the picture on the Canvas. The Crayon-
Painter may alfo make ufe of this method, when the fub-
ject of his imitation is in Oils, but in copying a Crayon
Picture, he muft have recourfe to the following method on
account of the glafs.
 The head of Califid, in the collection of Dr. Chauncg.
THE


PAINTINC WITH CRATONS.
23
THE Picture being placed upon the Efel, let the out-lines
be drawn on the glats with a small camel's-hair pencil
dipped in Lake, ground thin with oils, which muft be
done with great exactness; after this is accomplished, take
a sheet of Paper of the Lame fize, and place it on the glass,
roking over all the lines with the hand, by which means
the colours will adhere to the paper, which muft be pierced
with pin-holes pretty clofe to each other. The paper in-
tended to be ufed for the Painting muft next be laid upon a
table and the pierced paper placed upon it; then with
fome fine pounded charcoal, tied up in a piece of lawn,
rub over the perforated firokes, which will give an exact out-
line. Great care muft he taken not to bruth this off till
the whole is drawn over with fketching chalk, which is a
compofition made of whiting and tobacco-pipe clay, rolled
like Crayons, and pointed at each end.
WHEN the Student paints immediately from the life, it
will be moft prudent to make a correct Drawing of the
out-lines on another paper, the fize of the Picture he is
going to paint, which he may trace by the preceeding me-
thod, becaufe erroneous ftrokes of the ketching chalk
which are not to be avoided without great expertnets) will
prevent the Crayons from adhering to the paper, owing
to a certain greaty quality in the composition.
THE
D 2


E L E M E N T S 0 F
24
THE Student will find the fitting pofture, with the box
of Crayons in his lap, the moft convenient method for
him to paint. The part of the Picture he is immediately
painting should be rather below his face, for, if it is placed
too high, the arm will be fatigued. Let the windows of
the room where he paints be darkened at leaft to the
height of fix feet from the ground, as before directed, and
the subject to be painted should be fituated in fuch a man
ner, that the light may fall with every advantage on the
face; avoiding too much (hadow, which feldom has a good
effect in Portrait Painting, especially if the face he paints
has any degree of delicacy. Before he begins to paint,
let him be attentive to his subject, and appropriate the ac
tion or attitude proper to the age of the subject: If a Child,
let it be childith; if a young Lady, express more vivacity
than in the majeftic beauty of a middle aged Woman,
who alfo should not be expreffed with the fame gravity as
a perfon far advanced in years. Let the embellifhments of
the Picture, and introduction of Birds, Animals, Ec. be
regulated by the rules of propriety and confiftency.
THE Features of the face being carefully drawn with
Chalk, let the Student take a Crayon of pure Carmine,
and carefully draw the Noftril and Edge of the Nofe,
next the fhadow, then, with the fainteft Carmine teintlay
in the rongeft light upon the Nofe and Forchead, which
muft be executed broad. He is then to proceed gradually
with


PAINTING WITH CR AYONS.
25
with the fecond Teint, and the fucceeding ones, till he ar-
rives at the fhadows, which muft be covered brilliant, en-
riched with much Lake, Carmine, a little broken, with
Brilliant-green. This method will, at firft, offenfively
Hrike the Eye, from its crude appearance, but, in finithing,
it will be a good foundation to produce a pleafing effect,
colours being much more eafily fullied when too bright,
than when the firft colouring is dull, to raife the Picture
into a brilliant flate. The feveral pearly Teints, difcernable
in fine complections, muft be imitated with blue Verditer
and white, which anfwers to the Ultramarine Teints ufed
in Oils. But if the parts of the Face where thefe Teints
appear are in fhadow, the Grayons compofed of black and
white muft be fubfticuted in their place.
THovcH all the Face when firft coloured should be laid
in as brilliant as poffible, yet each part should be kept in
its proper tone, by which means the rotundity of the face
will be preferved
LEr the Student be careful when he begins the Eyes to
draw them with a Grayon inclined to the Carmine Teint,
of whatever colour the Iris are of; he muft lay them in
brilliant, and at firft, not loaded with colour, but executed
lightly : No notice is to be taken of the Pupil yet. The
Student muft let the light of the Eye incline very much to
the blue calt, cautioufly avoiding a ftaring, white appear-
AnCC,


0 F
26
E L E M E N T 5
ance; (which, when once introduced, is feldom overcome)
preferving a broad fhadow thrown on its upper part, by
the Eyc-lath. A black and heavy Teint is alfo to be avoided
in the Eyc-brows; it is therefore, beft to execute them like
a broad, glowing hadow at firft, on which, in the finith-
, the hairs of the brow are to be painted, by which me-
inc
thod of proceeding, the former Teints will thew themfelves
through, and produce the moft pleafing effect.
THE Student should begin the Lips with pure Carmine
and Lake, and in the fhadow ufe fome Carmine and Black;
the ftrong Vermillion Teints should be laid on afterwards.
He muft beware of executing them with fliff, harth lines,
gently intermixing each with the neighbouring colours,
making the fhadow beneath broad, and enriched with bril-
liant Crayons. He mult form the corner of the mouth with
Carmine, Brown Oker, and Greens, varioufly intermixed.
If the Hair is dark, he should preferve much of the Lake
and deep Carmine Teints therein; this may be eafily over-
powered by the warmer Hair Teints, which, as obferved in
painting the Eye-brows, will produce a richer effect when
the Picture is finithed ; on the contrary, if this method is
unknown or neglected, a poverty of colouring will be dit-
cernable.
A PTER


27
ITH CRATONS.
PAINTINC V
AFTER the Student has covered over, or as Artifts term
it, has dead-coloured the Head, he is to fweeten the whole
together by rubbing it over with his finger, beginning at
the strongeft light upon the Forehead, paffing his finger
very lightly, and uniting it with the next Teint, which he
muft continue till the whole is fweetened together, often
wiping his finger on a towel to prevent the colours being
fullied. He muft be cautious not to fmooth or fweeten his
Picture too often, becaufe it will give rife to a thin and
fcanty effect, and have more the appearance of a Draw-
ing than a folid Painting, as nothing but a body of rich
colours can conflitute a rich effect. To avoid this, (as
the Student finds it neceffary to fweeten with the Finger
he muft continually replenith the Picture with more Crayon.
WHEN the Hlead is brought to fome degree of forward-
ness, let the Back-ground be laid in, which muft be treated
in a different manner, covering it as thin as poftible, and
rubbing it into the paper with a Leather-Stump. Near the
Face the paper should be almoft free from colour, for this
will do great fervice to the Hlead, and by its thinness, give
both a foft and folid appearance. In the Back-ground
alfo, Crayons which have Whiting in their compofition
should be ufed, but feldom or never without caution; but
chiefly fuch as are the moft brilliant and the leaft adultc-
rated. The ground being painted thin next the Hlair, will
give the Student an opportunity of painting the edges of the
Flair


0 F
E L E M E N T S
28
Hair over in a light and free manner when he gives the
finithing touches.
THE Student having proceeded thus far, the Face, Hlair,
and Back-ground being entirely covered, he muft carefully
view the whole at fome diftance, remarking in what respect
it is out of keeping, that is, what parts are too light, and
what too dark, being particularly attentive to the white or
chalky appearances, which muft be fubdued with Lake
and Carmine. The above method being properly put into
execution will produce the appearance of a Painting princi-
pally compofed of three colours, viz. Carmine, Black, and
White, which is the beft preparation a Painter can make for
the producing a fine Crayon Picture.
THE next Hep, is to compleat the Back-ground and the
Hair, as the duft, in painting thefe, will fallon the Face,
and would much injure it if that was compleated firft.
From thence proceed to the Forehead, finithing downward
till the whole Picture is compleated.
Back grounds may be of various colours; but it requires
great Tafte and Judgment to fuit them properly to differ-
ent complexions: In general a flrong coloured head should
have a weak and tender teinted ground, and on the con-
trary a delicate complexion should be oppoted with
Rrong and powerful Teints; by which proper contraft be-
Weci


PAINTING
II
CR ATONS.
29
tween the Figure and the Back-ground the Picture will re-
ceive great force, and strike the Spectator much more than
it could poffibly do was this circumftance of contraft not
attended to.
TOUNC Painters often treat the Back-grounds of Pictures
as a matter of very little or no confequence, when
it is moft certain great part of the beauty and brilliancy of the
Picture, especially the face, depends upon the Teints being
well fuited, the darks kept in their proper places, and the
whole being perfectly in fubordination to the face. Thus
a fimple back-ground requires attention, but the difficulty
is Hill greater when a variety of objects are introduced,
tuch as hills, trees, buildings, ecc. in thefe cafes one rule
muft be strictly attended to, that each grand object be dif-
pofed fo as to contraft each other; this is not meant mere-
ly respecting their forms, but their colour, their light,
Shade, &cc. For inftance, we will fuppofe the Figure receiv-
ing the ftrongeft light; behind the Figure, and very near
at hand, are the ftems of fome large trees, thefe muft have
shade thrown over them, either from a driving cloud or
fome other interpofing circumstance; behind thefe ftems
of trees, and at a diftance are feen trees on a rifing ground,
thefe should receive the light as a contraft to the former,
Etc. If an architedural back-ground be chofen, the fame
rule muft be applied; fuppofe a building at a moderate

diftance



E L E M E N T S
0 F
30
diftance is placed behind the Figure receiving the light, a
column, or fome other object in (hadow should intervene
to preferve proper decorum in the piece, or what will have
the fame effect, a fhadow muft be thrown over the lower
part of the building, which will give equal fatisfaction
or repofe to the eyc. It muft be remembered, the light
muft be always placed againft the dark, and the weak
againft the ftrong, in order to produce force and effect, and
vice versa.
IN painting over the Forehead the laft time, begin the
higheft-light with the molt faint Vermillion Teint, in the
fame place where the faint Carmine was firft laid, keeping
it broad in the fame manner. In the next fhade fucceeding
the lighteff, the Student muft work in some light blue Teints,
compoted of Verditer and White, intermixing with them
tome of the deeper Vermillion Teints, sweetening them to-
gether with great caution, infenfibly melting them into
one another, increafing the proportion of each colour as
his judgment shall direct. Some brilliant Fellows may alfo
be ufed, but paringly; and towards the roots of the Hlair,
Rrong Verditer Teints, intermixed with Greens, will be of
Lingular fervice. Cooling Crayons, compoted of black
and white, should fucceed thefe, and melt into the Hair.
 This direction is for the finell complections, but the Student mull vary
his colouring according to his fubjecl.
Deneath


37
PAINTINC WITH CR A TONS.
Beneath the Eyes, the pleafing, pearly Teints are to be per-
terved, compofed of Verditer and White, and under the
Nofe, and on the Temples, the fame may be ufed; be-
heath the Lips Teints of this Kind alfo are proper, mix-
ing them with the light Greens and some Vermillion.
THE introduction of Greens and Blues into the Face, in
Painting, has often given furprize to thofe who are unac-
quainted with the art, but there is reafon fufficient for their
introduction (tho it may appear ftrange at firft) in order to
break and correct the other colours.
THE Carmine predominating in the dead Colour, is, as
has been obferved, the beft preparation for the fucceeding
Teints; the crudeness of this preparation muft be corrected
by varioutly intermixing Greens, Blues, and Vellows, which
of thefe are to be ufed is to be determined by the degree
of Carmine in the dead Colour, and the complexion in-
tended. The Blue and Vellow are of a nature diametri-
cally oppofite, and ferve to correct the Reds, and oppoie
one another; the Greens being compounded of both thefe
colours, is of peculiar ufe in many cafes where the tranfi-
tion is not to be to violent.
THE Student attentively confidering Nature, will dif-
cover a pleafing variety of colours on the furface, and dif-
E 2
cernible


0 F
E L E M E N T S
32
cernible through a clear and tranfparent Skin; this variety
will be sill encreated by the effect of light and (hade; he
will perceive one part inclining to the Vermilion Red, an-
other to the Carmine or Lake, one to the Blue, this to the
Green, and that to the Vellow, ecc. In order to produce
thefe different effects he will apply thofe Colours to which
the Teints are moft inclined; yet in Crayon Painting it is
often beft to compound the mixed colours upon the Pic-
ture, fuch as Blue and Fellow inftead of Green; Blue and
Carmine inflead of Purple; Red and Vellow instead of
Orange; in other circumftances the Compounds already
mixt should be ufed: But in this cafe there can be no ab-
folute rule given, it muft be left to the experience and
difcretion of the Painter, though the Student may be great-
ly affifted in the commencement of his Studies, by an able
Mafter to direct and point out the beft method to treat
circummftances of this nature, as they occur in practice, which
may at firft appear obicure and myfterious, but will foon, to
a good capacity, become demonftrably clear upon certain
and fure principles; the circumftances that require different
treatment are fo various and to many, as to render it im-
postible for me here to defcend to every particular.
Iw finithing the Checks, let the pure Lake clear them
from any duit contracted from the other Crayons; then,
with the Lake may be intermixed the bright Vermillion;
and laft of all, (if the futycel should require it) a few touches
Of


PAINTING WITH CR ATONS.
33
of the orange coloured Crayon, but with extreme caution;
after this, fweeten that part with the finger as little as
poftible, for fear of producing a heavy, difagreeable effect
on the Cheeks: As the beauty of a Crayon Picture con-
fifts in one colour thewing itfelf through, or rather between
another; this the Student cannot too often remark, it be-
ing the only method of imitating beautiful complections.
THE Eye is the moft difficult feature to execute in
Crayons, as every part muft be expreffed with the utmoft
nicety, to appear finithed; at the same that the Painter
muft preferve its breadth and folidity while he is particu-
larizing the parts. To accomplith this, it will be a good
general rule for the Student to ufe his Crayon in fweetening
as much, and his finger as little as poffible. When he
ants a point to touch a fmall part with, he may break
off of a little of his Crayon againft the box, which will
produce a corner fit to work with in the minuteft parts.
If the Eyc-lathes are dark, he muft ufe fome of the Car-
mine and brown Oker, and the Crayon of Carmine and
Black; and with thefe he may alfo touch the Iris of the
Kye (if brown or hazel), making a broad fhadow, caufed
by the Ryc-lath. Red Teints of Vermillion, Carmine, and
Lake, will execute the corners of the Eye properly, but it
the Eyc-lids are too red, they will have a difagrecable
fore appearance. The Pupil of the Eye muft be made of
pure Lamp-black; between this and the lower part of the
Iris


0 F
E L E M E N T S
34
Iris, the light will catch very firong, but it muft not be
made too fudden, but be gently diffuted round the Pupil
till it is loft in shade. When the Eye-balls are fufficiently
prepared, the fhining speck muft be made with a purc
white Crayon, which should be firft broken to a point, and
then laid on firm ; but as it is poffible they may be defec-
tive in neatnels, they should be corrected with a pin, taking
off the redundant parts, by which means they may be
formed as neat as can be required.
THE difficulty, with respect to the Nofe, is to preferve
the lines properly determined, and at the fame time to art-
fully blended into the Cheek, as to express it's projection,
and yet no real line to be perceptible upon a clofe exami-
nation; in fome circumftances it should be quite blended
with the check, which appears behind it, and determined
entirely with a flight touch of red chalk. The fhadow
caufed by the Nofe is generally the darkeft in the whole
Face, partaking of no reflection from it's furrounding parts.
Carmine and brown Oker, Carmine and black, and fuch
brilliant Crayons will compofe it beft.
8
TE Student having before prepared the Lips with the
frongeft Lake and Carmine, Cc. muft, with thefe colours,
make them compleatly correct, and, when finifhing, intro-
duce the ftrong Vermillions, but with great caution, as they
IfC


PAINTING WITH CRATONS.
35
are extremely predominant. This, if properly touched,
will give the lips an appearance equal, if not superior, to
thofe executed in Oils, notwithflanding the feeming fupe-
4
riority the latter has, by means of Glazing, of which the
former is entirely deftitute.
WHEN the Student paints the Neck, he should avoid ex-
prefting the Mufcles too ftrong in the ftem, nor should the
Bones appear too evident on the cheft, as both have an un-
pleafing effect, denoting a violent agitation of the body, a
circumftance feldom neceffary to express in Portrait Painting.
The moft neceffary part to be exprefted, and which should
ever be obferved, (even in the moft delicate fubjects) is a
jult above the place where the Collar Bones
Hrong marking
unite, and if the Head is much thrown over the Shoulders,
tome notice should be taken of the large Mufcle that rifes
from behind the Ear, and is inferted into the Pit between
the Collar Bones. All inferior Mufcles should be, in ge-
neral, quite avoided. The Student will find this caution
neceffary, as moft fubjects, especially thin perfons, have the
Muicles of the Neck much more evident than would be ju-
dicious to imitate. As few Necks are too long, it may be
nccellary to give fome addition to the ftem, a fault on the

The method with which Painters in Oils exprets tranfparency in the lips is,
by painting them firll with light Vermillion Teints, and, when dry, touching
them over with pure Lakc.
Other





0 F
E L E M E N T S
36
3
other fide being quite unpardonable, nothing being more
ungraceful than a fhort Neck. In colouring the Neck, let
the Student preferve the ftem of a pearly hue, and the light
not fo ftrong as on the cheft. If any part of the Breaft ap-
pears, it's tranfparency muft alfo be expreffed by pearly
Teints, but the upper part of the cheft should be coloured
with beautiful Vermillions delicately blended with the
other.
T 1 0 N
S E C
IV.
O P
D
R A P E R V.
AINTING the Drapery is commonly thought to be a
A very inferior branch of the Art; this is, moft certainly,
a miftake. A very great Painter being afked what part of
the Picture he thought moft difficult to execute I antwered,
the Drapery. Whether we allow this to be abfolutely true
or not, we may venture to affirm, that it is a very difficult
part to execute with tafte; merely to give the effeet of Silk,
Sattin, or Cloth, Coc. is not the point; this, the fervile Co-
pyift, by the mere dint of labour, may effect, and may even
deceive


PAINTINC WITH CR AYONS.
37
deceive the vulgar eye, to that the imitation may be taken
for reality; but to make the folds give grace and dignity
to the figure, to cloath it uninfiuenced by prejudice, fathion,
or caprice, fo as to bear the teft of ages, requires the fulleft
exertion of true genius, and the frudy of a man's life: but it
is not my defign to fay much on this copious subject, there-
fore I shall difmiss it with a few observations concerning the
colouring and execution.
DARk blue, purple, black, pink, and all Kind of red
Draperies alfo, should be firft tinged with Carmine, which
will render the colours much more brilliant than any other
method; over this should be laid on the paper, the middle
Teint, (a medium between the light and dark Teints, of
which the Drapery is to be painted) except the dark maffes
of Chadow, which should be laid on at firft as deep as poffi-
ble; thefe, sweetened with the Finger, being deftitute of
the smaller folds, will exhibit a mafterly breadth, which the
lefter folds, when added, ought by no means to deftroy. With
the light and dark Teints, the smaller parts are next to be
made with freedom, executing as much with the Crayon
and as little with the finger as poftible, in each fold touching
the laft flroke with the Crayon, which ftroke the Finger
muft never touch. In the cafe of reflections, the fimple
touch of the Crayon will be too harfh, therefore, fingering
will be neceffary afterwards, as reflected lights are always.
more tender than thofe which are direct. With respect to
F
reficelions


E L E M E N T S 0 F
38
reflections in general, they muft always partake of the fame
colour as the object reflecting, but in the cafe of fingle
figures, it may be ufeful to make fome particular obferva-
tions.
IN a blue Drapery, let the reffections be of a greenith
call; in green Draperies, make them of a yellow teint; in
yellow, of an orange; in orange, reffeet a reddith caft; in
all reds, fomething of their own nature, but inclined to the
yellow ; Black should have a reddith reflection; the re-
flection of a reddith Teint will alfo prefent purples to the
beft advantage.
Or whatever colour the Drapery is, its reflection on the
Face muft partake thereof, otherwife the Picture will
have but a gaudy effect.
LINEN, Lace, Fur, 8c. should be touched spiritedly
with the Crayon, fingering very little, except the latter;
and the laft touches, even of this, like all other parts,
should be executed by the Grayon, without fweetening with
the Finger.
I HavE contented myfelf with treating on the firft prin-
ciples of the Art of Painting only, which I hope will prove
not altogether ufeless, becaufe many judicious writers on
the subject have not been to explicit concerning the Ele-
ments


PAINTING WITH CRAYONS.
39
ments of the Art, whofe works, notwithftanding, merit the
higheft attention, and to whom I muft recommend the Stu-
dent for farther knowledge and instruction. The methods
I have recommended, have been practifed by the moft cele-
brated Crayon Painters, whofe Works have been held in
public eftimation; but the Knowledge of, and ability to
exxecute each feparate part with brilliancy and truth, will
be found very infufficient to conftitute a compleat Painter,
without his judgment enables him to unite them with each
other, by correctness of drawing, propriety of light and
Thadow, and harmony of colouring. In order to accom-
plish this, the Student should carefully avoid finishing one
part in particular, till he has properly confidered the con-
nection it is to have with the reft. The neglect of this is
the principal reafon why the Performances of indifferent
Painters are fo deftitute of what is termed Breadth, fo con-
spicuoutly beautiful in the Works of great Mafters. It
muft be granted, that this obfervation relates more particu-
larly to large compofitions, where a diverfity of figures re-
quires fuch a judicious difpofition, that each may affitt in
the combination of a Kind of univerfal harmony; yet,
even in Portrait Painting, the Student should be particu-
larly attentive to observe this idea of Breadth, if he is de-
firous of acquiring that importance and dignity which con-
Stitutes excellence in Painting.
SE CT TON
F 2


0 F
T 5
E L E M E
S E C T I ON V.
OF THE MATERIAL S.
7
HI E perfection of the Crayons confifts, in a great
meafure, in their foftness, for it is impoflible. to
execute a brilliant Picture with them if they are otherwife,
on which account great care should be obferved in the pre-
paring them, to prevent their being hard.—In all compo-
fitions, Flake-white, and White-lead should be wholly re-
jected, becaufe the flighteft touch with either of thefe will
unavoidably turn black.
THE ufual objection to Crayon Paintings is, that they are
subject to change, but whenever this happens, it is intirely
owing to an injudicious ufe of the above-mentioned whites,
which will fland only in Oils. To obviate the bad effects
arifing from the ufe of fuch Grayons, let the Student
make ufe of common Whiting prepared in the following
Manhner:
TAKE a large veffel of water, put the Whiting into it,
and mix them well together; let this fland about half a mi-
nute, then pour off the top into another veffel, and throw
the


40


PAINTINC WITH CRAYONS
41
the gritty fediment away
; let what is prepared reft about a
minute, and then pour it off as before, which will purify
the Whiting and render it free from all dirt and grittinets.—
When this is done, let the Whiting fettle, and then pour
the water from it; afterwhich, lay it on the Chalk to dry,
and keep it for ufe, either for white Crayons, or the pur-
pofe of preparing Teints with other colours, for with this,
all other Teints may be fafely prepared. If the Student
chufes to make Crayons of the Whiting immediately after
it is wathed, it is not neceffary to dry it on the Chalk, for
it may be mixed inftantly with any other colour, which will
fave confiderable trouble. All Colours of a heavy, or gritty
nature, especially blue Verditer, muft be purified by wath-
ing after this method.
THE Student muft be provided with a large, fexible
Pallet-knife, a large Stone and Muller to levigate the Colours,
two or three large Pieces of Chalk to abforb the moifture
from the Colours after they are levigated, a Piece of flat
Glass to prevent the moifture from being abforbed too much,
till the Colours are rolled into form, and Veffels for Water,
Spirits, Ec. as neceffity and convenience thi direct.
R EDS.


42


E L E M E N T S 0 F
D S.
E
R
C A R MINE AND L A K E.
Ir is rather difficult to procure either good Carmine or
good Lake. Good Carmine is inclined to the Vermillion
Teint, and should be an impalpable powder, and good Lake
to the Carmine Teint. The Carmine Crayons are prepared
in the following manner.
As their texture is inclinable to hardness, inflead of grind-
ing and rolling them, take a fufficient quantity of Carmine,
lay it upon the Grinding-ftone, mix it with a levigating
Knife with Spirits of Wine, till it becomes fmooth and
even; yet the lets friction produced by the Knife the better.
The Chalk-ftone being ready, lay the Colour upon it to
abforb the Spirit, but be careful that it is laid on in a pro-
per (hape for Painting. If it is levigated too thin, the
Grayons will be too flat, and if too thick, it will occafion
a wafte of colour, by their adhering to the Pallet-knife;
but practice will render the proper degree of confiftency
familiar.
When thus made, if the Carmine Crayons should prove
too hard, they muft be reduced to an impalpable powder in
a Mortar, and again mixed in the same manner till foft
chough


PAINTING WITH CR A YONS.
43
enough for ufe, which will not be if the Carmine be ground
by the Muller with any fluid.
THE Limple Colour being prepared, the next slept is to
compofe the different Teints by a mixture with Whiting;
the proportion to be obferved confifting of twenty grada-
tions to one, which may be clearly underffood by the fol-
lowing directions. Take fome of the fimple Colour, and
levigate it with Spirits of Wine, adding about one part of
wathed Whiting to three parts of Carmine, of which, when
properly incorporated, make two parcels. The next grada-
tion should be compoted of equal quantities of Carmine and
Whiting, of which four Crayons may be made. The third
compofition should have one fourth Carmine, and three
fourths Whiting, of this make fix Crayons, which will be
a good proportion with the reft. The laft Teint should be
made of Whiting, very faintly tinged with Carmine, of
which make about eight Crayons, which will compleat the
abovementioned proportion. As thefe compound Teints
are levigated, they are to be laid immediately upon the
Chalk that the moifture may be abforbed to the proper de-
gree of drynels for forming into Crayons, which may be
Known by its lofing the greateft part of its adhefive quality
when taken into the hand : If the confiftency is found to be
right, it may be then laid upon the Glass, which having
no pores will prevent the moifture from becoming too dry
before it is convenient to form it into Crayons, otherwife
the


0 F
E L E M E N T S
44
the Grayons would be full of cracks and very brittle, which
will be a great inconvenience when they are ufed in
Painting.
V. B. Though thefe Teints made with Whiting may be
rolled, yet the pure Carmine will not bear it, but muft be
left on the Chalk-ftone till perfectly dry.
E
I
A E
Is a Colour very apt to be hard; to prevent which the
Student muft obferve the following particulars:
TAKE about half the quantity of Lake intended for the
Grayons, and grind it very fine with Spirits of Wine; let it
dry, and then pulverize it, which is eafily done if the Lake
is good; then take the other half, and grind it with Spirits,
after which mix it with the pulverifed Lake, and lay it out
directly in Crayons on the Chalk. The Colour will not bear
rolling. The fimple Colour being thus prepared, proceed
with the compound Grayons, as directed before, and in the
same degrees of gradation as the Carmine Teints. If thefe
should prove too hard when made, let them be again pul-
verized and treated as the Carmine.
VER.


PAINTING ITH CRAYONS
45
VERMILLION, OR NATIVE CINABAR.
To prepare
THE beft is inclined to the Carmine Teint.
this Colour mix it on the Stone with foft Water or Spirits,
after which it may be rolled into Crayons. It is fome-
times, indeed, inclined to be fo very foft as to return again
to Powder, and cannot be held in the Fingers, which may
be remedied by mixing it up with thin Water-gruel well
frained, which will give fufficient cohefion. The diffe-
rent Teints are produced by a mixture of the fimple Co-
lour with Whiting, according to the proportions already
given.

0
B
I
E S.
P R V S S 1 A N B L V E
Is a Colour very apt to bind, and is rendered foft with
more difficulty than Carmine and Lake. The fame method
of preparation is to be followed with this as directed with
respect to Lake, only it is neceffary to grind a larger quan-
tity of the pure Colour, as it is chiefly ufed for painting Dra-
peries. The different Teints may be made according to
neceffity, or the fancy of the Painter.
B L V E
V E R D I T E R
Is a colour naturally gritty, and therefore it is neceffary
to wath it well. Its particles are fo coarfe as to require fome
G
binding


0 F
E. L E M E N T S
46
binding matter to unite them, otherwife the Crayons will
never adhere together. To accomplith this, take a quan-
tity fufficient to form two or three Crayons, to which add
a piece of flacked Plaifter of Paris about the fize of a pea;
mix thefe well together, and form the Crayons upon the
Chalk. This Blue is extremely brilliant, and will be of
great ufe in heightening Draperies, Ec. The Teints muft
be formed with Whiting as directed in the former inftances,
and are highly ferviceable for painting fleth, to produce
thofe pearly Teints to beautiful in Crayon Pictures. It is
not necefiary to mix the compounds with fpirits, as clear
water will be fufficient.
N 3.
E
G R E
BRILLTANT GREENs are produced with great difficulty,
which may be procured of thofe who make it their bufiness
to prepare them, yet the following compositions will be

Take yellow Oker, and after grinding it
found ufeful 2
4 Thefe brilliant Crayons will be necelfary for the Student to compleat his
fet with, of which he will find great want both in the browns and deep reds, as
well as in the greens; but in general he should be careful what white or light
Crayons he ufes, that they are not compounded, by the Maker, with Flake-
white, a trial may be made of one of them thus: Bruife the Crayon to a powder
between the finger and thumb, and mix it with an equal quantity of charcoul-
dull, put this into a crucible, which muft be placed in a fierce fire, till the char-
coal duft is confumed, and if the Crayon be made with Flake-white the lead will
return to its original metallic flate, confequently thefe light Crayons are not fit for
ufe in this limate, as the leall damp will make them turn black, yet notwithlland-
ing the dark colours will be perfectly good, and may be ufed without danger.
with


PAINTING WITH CR A YONS.
47
with spirits, mix it with the powder of Pruffian blue, then
temper it with a Knife, and lay the Crayons on the Chalk,
without rolling them : Befides this, ufe King's yellow

mixed with Pruffian blue, brown Oker and Pruflian blue
The Crayons made of thefe laft may be rolled. Various
Teints may be produed by thefe colours, according to fancy
or neceflity; fome to partake more of the blue, and others
of the yellow.
X E L L 0 W S.
K I N G s- F E L L 0 w
Is the moft ufeful and the moft brilliant, levigated with
Spirits of Wine, and compofe the different Teints as before
directed. Yellow Oker and Naples yellow ground with
Spirits will make ufeful Crayons.
R A N G E
0
Is produced with King's-yellow and Vermillion ground
together with spirits, and the Teints formed as in other
cafes, but no great quantity of them is required.
B R 0 W N S.
C VL L E N S E A R T II
Is a fine dark brown. After fix or eight of the fimple
Crayons are prepared, feveral rich compound Teints may be
H
Roman Oker and Pruffian Blue mixed in different proportions will be
ufcful.
produced


0F
E L E M E N T S
48
produced from it, by a mixture with Carmine, in various
degrees; Black, Carmine, and this colour, mixed together,
make ufeful Teints for painting Hair; feveral gradations
may be produced from each of thefe by a mixture with
Whiting. Roman, and brown Oker are excellent colours,
either fimple or compounded with Carmine. Whiting
tinged, in feveral degrees, with either of thefe, will prove
very ferviceable in painting; common Sea-coal ground and
mixed with Carmine is a fine brown.
3
R
B E
M
May be treated in juft the fame manner, only it is ne-
ceftary to levigate it with Spirits of Wine.
P V R P L E S.
PRUSSIAN ELUE ground with spirits, and mixed with pul-
verized Lake, will produce a good Purple. Carmine thus
mixed with Pruffian blue will produce a purple fomething
different from the former. Various Teints may be
made from either of thefe compounds by a mixture with
Whiting.
B L A C K.


PAINTING WITH CRAYONS.
B
L A C
E.
I

M P- B

I
C
A
X.
Is the only full black that can be ufed with fafety, as all
others are fubject to mildew; but as good lamp-black is very
fcarce, the Student will, perhaps, find it moft expedient to
make it himself, the process of which is as follows:
PROVIDE a tin cone, fix it over a lamp at fuch a height
that the flame may juft reach the cone for the foot to ga-
ther within it. When a fufficient quantity is collected, take
it out, and burn all the greafe from it in a crucible. It
muft then be ground with fpirits and laid on the chalk to
abforb the moifture. Various grey Teints may be formed
from this by a mixture with Whiting, as mentioned in for
mer inftances. Black Chalk, ground, is a very good blue
Black.
CINABAR mixed with Carmine.—This is a compofition
of great ufe, and Teints made from this with Whiting will
be found very ferviceable.
CARMINE and black is another good compound, of which
five or fix gradations should be made, fome partaking more
of the black, and others having the Carmine moft predomi-
nant, befides feveral Teints by a mixture with Whitng.
CINABAR


49


0 F
E L E M E N T S
50.
CINABAR and black is alfo a very ufeful compound, from
which feveral different Teints should be made.
PAUSSIAN ELUE and black is another good compound,
and will be found of fingular fervice in painting Draperies.
Ir is impoftible to lay down rules for the forming every
Teint neceffary in compofing a fet of Crayons, there being
many accidental compofitions, entirely dependant on fancy
and opinion.—The Student should make it a rule to fave the
leavings of his colours, for of thefe he may form various
Teints, which will occafionally be ufeful.
N. B. THE Cologn or Cullen's-earth, yellow Oker,
brown Oker, Roman Oker, Naples Vellow, Umber, Black
Chalk, and Sea-Coal Duft, are all subject to throw out a
white kind of falt, which will injure the Picture, if the
following method of treating them be not ftrictly obferved:
Grind them extremely fine with water, and feparately
put them into a large glazed veffel, filled with BolLiNc
Water.. After the colour has been well ftirred, leave it
to precipitate; then pour off the water, which will take
away the falts, and leave the colour excellently prepared for
making Grayons, after it has been dried on the Chalk-ftone,
and pulverifed.
S E C T I ON


PAINTING WITH CR AYOE S.
57
S E C
T 1 0 N
VI.
OF ROLLING THE CRAYONS, AND DISPOSINC
THEM FOR PAINTINNG.

HE different compositions of colours muft be cut into
A a proper magnitude after they are prepared, in or-
der to be rolled into Paftils for the convenience of ufing.
them. Each Crayon should be formed in the left hand with
the ball of the right, firft formed cylindrically, and then ta-
pered at each end.—If the compofition is too dry, dip the
Finger in water, if too wet the compofition muft be laid
upon the Chalk again to abforb more of the moifture. The
Crayons should be rolled as quick as poffible; and when fi-
nithed, muft be laid upon the Chalk again, to abforb all re-

maining moitture. After the gradation of Teints from one
colour are formed, the Chalk and the Grinding-ftone should
be well fcraped and cleanfed with water before it is ufed
for another colour.
WHIEN the fet of Grayons is compleated according to the
rules prescribed, they should be arranged in claffes for the
convenience of painting with them.—Some thin drawers,
divided into a number of partitions is the moft convenient
method of difpoling them properly. The Crayons should
be depofited according to the feveral gradations of light. The
bottom of the partitions muft be covered with bran, as a
bed


0 F
E L E M E N T S
52
bed for the colours, becaufe it not only preferves them
clean, but prevents their breaking.
THE box made ufe of when the Student paints, should be
about a foot (quare, with nine partitions. In the upper
corner, on the left hand, (fuppofing the box to be in the
lap when he paints) let him place the black and grey Crayons,
thofe being the moft feldom ufed; in the second partition,
the blues; in the third, the greens and browns; in the firft
partition on the left hand of the second row, the Carmines,
Lakes, Vermillions, and all deep reds; the yellows and
orange in the middle, and the pearly Teints next; and as
thefe laft are of a very delicate nature, they muft be kept
very clean, that the gradations of colour may be eafily dif-
tinguithed : In the loweft row, let the firft partition con-
tain a piece of fine lnen rag to wipe the Crayons with while
the second, all the pure Lake and Ver-
they are ufing
million Teints; and the other partition may contain thofe
Teints, which, from their complex nature, cannot be
claffed with any of the former.
F
S.
N


2
FITTS
1




Af 4 
 bii
S B 
it f

13V1
Taitt M. 11


