


For the CURIOUS YOUNG GENTLEMEN and LADIES,
That study and practise the noble and commendable ARTof DRAWING

COLOURING and JAPANNING,
A NEW and COMPLEAT
D R A W I N G -B O O K;

Consisting of Variety of CLASSES, viz.
Whole Figures in divers Positions, and all the several Parts of the Human Body from Head to
Foot; light, airy, loose Landskips; Perspective Views of Sea-Ports, Forts, Ruins, &c.
Being the close Study, for a Serics of Years, of
The
late Mr. L E N S,
MINIATURE-PAINTER, and DRAWING-MASTER to CHRIST'S-HOSPITAL.
In Sixty-two COPPER-PLATES, engraved by himself.
Designed chiefly for young Beginners, and now published from the Author’s Originals, very necessary and useful for all Drawing-Scheel:,

Boarding-Schools, &c. &e.
TO WHIICH IS PREFIXED
An INTRODUCTION to DRAWING;
Containing a Description of the Instruments and their respective Uses, and the Materials proper for Drawing; Rules for managing the Pencil, and the best Me
thod for attaining Perfection in the ART; with Instructions by which a young Practitioner shall be enabled to form a Judgment as well of his own Perform

ances as those of others; with easy, proper, and necessary Lessons for him at his first Entrance. Also, the Names of the Colours ufed, wich Instructions to tem
per and mix them, and fit them for Painting. Likewife, Colours for washing Landskips, or Prints of any Kind; with plain and easy Rules for the Ladies Japanning.
Translated from the FRENCH of Monsieur GERRARD DE LAIRESSE,
And improved with Extracts from C. A. DU FRESNOY, SALMON, &c.

LONDON: Printed for CARINGTON BOWLES, next che Chapter-house, in St. Paul’s Church-yard. MDCCLXVI.


THE INTRODUCTION.
None of the Arts which have been invented for the Use or Amusement
of Mankind, can boast so great a Number of Admirers as that of
DRAWING; and very justly, for it gives such an agreeable Representation of.
Things, that we are apt to fancy we see Objects which have no real Existence,
and that the Imagery before us, which is no more than a painted Cloth actu
ally breathes. The whole Creation, wich all its Works and Wonders, comes
within the Power of its Imitation. It lets before us Things long since buried
in Oblivion, exhibits to perfect View the most noted Actions of People who
have been long in their Graves, and shews us our Ancestors, in a per
fect Resemblance of their Features, thro’ several successive Generations. There
is scare any Art or Profession which receives not some Assistante from DRAW
ING; without her Help no Designs or Models can be well executed; to
her the Mathematician, Architect, and Navigator is continually indebted;
no Station of Life is exempted from the Practice of it. from ihe General at
the Hend of an Army, to the Mechanic, who subsists by his Handicraft.
This excellent Art seems inculcated by Nature herself, for we see it not only
practised by grown Proficients, but even Children frequently drawing various
Figures, and that fo curiously, as even to astonish us wich their Produc
tions.
That therefore Youth may be instructed how to attain to a good Degree of
Perfection in the Art, we shall prescribe the best Rules we are able, at least
such, as we apprehend, are ablolutely necessary for their Information; after
which, we shall give them fome very ufeful and pertinent Instructions for their
better understanding of this Art.
Ruurs for the Direction of the young Practitioner in the Art of
DRAWING.
DARAWING may be defined, a Representation, by Lines and Shades, of
any Object in Nature or Art; the Imitation of another Draught, or the
expressing the Likeness of something conceived in our own Mind. In Imita
tions of Nature, or copying from any Draught, the Form and Shape of the
Figures is the first Thing that makes an Impression on the Mind, which is after


wards reduced into Form by manual Operation, which draws the Liges; hence
appears the Necessity of frequently employing the Mind in curioudy observing
whatever Objects are proposed to it, by which means it will be more capabie of
conceiving truly and exactly of Objects, and the Hand will more easily and
justly delineate that which is so strongly fixed in the Memory.
It is highly necessary for him who would draw well, to understand what is
truly good and beautiful in a Draught: in order to which, the most expedi
tious Method will be, to compare Prints and Draughts together. Many
Painters have grievously miscarried, by satisfying themlelves only wich imitat
ing bad Pieces, without giving any Scope to their own Genius, or improving
their Knowledge in judging of the Brauties and Defects of a Picture. The
Ideas in our Minds may in a great Measure serve us for a Model, and to im
prove these, we should frequently examine the Performances of others, and
our Observations on Pieces that are esteemed correctly done, qhould be nice
and critical; we should attentively consider every Print and Draught we see,
and every Beauty we find in it, endeavour to fix on our Memory, particularly
the Freedom and Boldness of the Out-lines, and the Proportion of the several
Parts, Above all Things it is necessary thart the Judgment be rightly informed,
for then the young Practitioner will make the greater and quicker Progress
in his Improvement, than if he goes on in Practice without encreasing his
Knowledge; for his Success will be more owing-to his Genius than his
Hand.
The Labour of the Hand must indeed aid and assist that of the Brain; for
whoever would be an able Artist, must, by continual Practice, make the Art
habitual. The Rules of all Arts are soon learned, bur to attain Perfection in
any of them, a long Practice and strict Attention are ablolutely requisite. It
is a true Maxim, that Laziness was never the Parent of any Thing excellent.
Drawing is not attainable but by a Length of Time, nor Perfection in it ac
quirable, unless the Hand be frequently employed in the Pradtice, and the
Mind in judging; every Day should produce something, and the Hand give
frequent Proofs of the Speculations of the Head.
As some Part of every Day should be spent in the Practice of this Art, we
would recommend the Morning as fittest for that Purpofe; which therefore
should be employed in perfecting yourfelves both in Judgment and Practice.
He who proposes to gain an Entrance into Minerva’s Cabinet, must make
his Approaches gradually; thus in the Art of Drawing, tho’ the Represen















tation of the human Figure, or many Figures in a Piece be the principal
Object which every Practitioner has chiefly in View; yet he must not make
this his first Essay, but proceed to that by proper and regular Steps. Let
the first Part of his Study be to draw streight and curved Lines, square,
round, regular, irregular and inanimate Figures ; also Parts of human Fi
gures, as the Eye, the Ear, the Hand, Feet, &c. This will be a good Foun
dation whereon to erect his future Structure; for by this Means he will acquire
a Readiness of Hand, a Freedom and Exactness in drawing Lines, and accus
tom himself to the Exercise of his Patience; Qualifiications absolutely neces
sary for one who would be esteemed an exact Copier of Nature, especially in
Pieces thait require a length of Time, and more than ordinary Skill in the Per
formance: He who begins well, has more than half perform’d his Work.
The Out-lines are the circumferent Strokes of a Figure; the Perfection of
a good Out-line consists in the Freedom and Boldness of the Stroke, and the
due Proportion of all its Parts: To attain which, the Scholar is admonished
to reject all mean and trifling Practices, such as tracing che Originals thro'
oil'd Paper, or making use of the Paper for the same Purpose, or taking
Advantage of an artificial Light. The Use of such Deceptions will certainly
prevent all Progress and Improvements in Drawing. Neither should the
Rule and Compasses be used, except in Architecture, or to raise a Perpendi
cular, in order to form a Square, or some oher Figure to draw in; or, when
an Artist has finished his Draught, he takes this Method to compare it with
the Original, to see whether there is an Agreement between them; however,
the bare Eye, if used to it, will be suficient for such a Discernment.
For some Time at first, be satisfied wich practising upon a good Out-line,
without aiming at a finished Piece, nor is it necessary that you should, as yet,
hatch or shade your own Draught; your Out-line at first must be sketch'd
wich flight and faint Touches, that you may have an Opportunity to amend
it where proper, which so will have the leis Appearance of being retouched.
In every Stroke endeavour an exact Imitation, and whenever you mend the
Out-line, either by taking away a little of its Parts, or by swelling the others,
be sure to lose nothing of the Freedom and Boldness of it. Mind frequently
to compare your Copy wich the Original, take particular Notice of what is
amiss, and let not the least Fault escape uncorrected, that so in the Draught,
which you may afterwards make of the same Original, those Errors may be
avoided; for you must not pass from one Original to another, 'till you are
in a good Degree Master of the first. The bess and surest Method of Prac


rice is, to make a great Number of Sketches of the fame Figure, in each of
which endeavour to excel what you did in the former.
In your first Operations proceed slowly, for hasty Productions are seldom
beautiful or correct and a Design is often thus spoiled in the first Attempt;
it is no easy Matter to amend bad Habits; Expedition in Performance is
acquired by a Constancy in Practice. As the young Beginner will have fre
quent Occasion for the Exercise of his Patience, he must be careful to subdue
his Passions; in his first Attempts he must procced deliberately and slowly,
and use his urmoft Endeavours to perform well, secure every Stroke, and try
all his Skill to make one good Draught, rather than to hurry over, in a negli
gent Manner, a great Number of bad ones.
When you fit down to work, and all the Time you are at it, take a strict
and close View of your Original, and in your Mind divide it into several Parts;
take due Notice of the Length, Breadth, and Similitude of each Part; ob
serve the Proportion of each to the ocher, and to the Whole, the Distances
between the Parts, and the Parts that lie parallel, or are exactly opposite to
each other.
When you have finished your Copy, and laid aside both the Example and
Draught, let your Mind be employ'd for some Time on other Affairs, then
return to it again, and view your Work afresh and very probably you vill
discover Faults which did not appear to you before. 'Tis easy to imagine,
that when the Eyes have been engaged a considerable Time on the same Ob
ject, the Form and Shape of it become familiar to him, and that on a Revi
sal his Mind may entertain different Notions of it than in the Light it appeard
before; and assure yourself, whatever Pains you bestow in reviewing and com
paring your Copy wich the original Draught, in order to discover and amend
your Faults, will not be useless; but you will find this Advantage in it, that
ir will be a Means of perfecting you in that particular Draught, and improve
you in the Knowledge of Lines, Draughts and Proportions, and by continu
ing to practise this Method, you will in a little Time find yourself qualified
for the exactest Imitations.
Let your Out-lines be large and smooth, and drawn in a flowing gliding
Manner; for if they are too streight they will carry a disagreable Stiffness,
but if drawn according to this Direction, they will have the Resemblance of
Life and Motion, and appear wich an easy Grace.
In all your Draughts let there be a perfect Relation between the Parts and
the Whole, and Uniformity run thro’ the whole Piece, that is, let every




Member be made for its own Head, and agree with it; you must not put
strong Limbs to a Body that is consumptive, or to old Age in its Decay; nor
mult you be less exact in pairing the Eyes, Hands, Legs and Feet, for the
least Disproportion will be a Blemish; or when any of the Limbs are not
proportionate to the rest. In the Instructions which we shall presently give,
the Learner will find Directions to avoid any such Mistakes and Solecism.
When yon draw the Muscles, take Care to insert them according to the
Rules of Anatomy; they must not be crouded into small Sections, but kept as
entire as possible, and only the principal Musces expressed; in a Member
which is to express any particular Force, they must be shewn large, as in the
Leg when it supports the Body, or in the Arm when it lifts a Weight, &c.
and be more swell'd than in any other Members.
Thus when the Limbs and Members are drawn wich few and large Muscles,
they shew themselves wich Majesty and Beauty; so in Draperies, the Beauty
of which consists not in a Multiplicity of Folds, but in their plain Simplicity
and natural Order. The Drapery must seem to cover the Part loosely, for if
it be too close and streight, the Piece will appear too stiff; the Plasts must be
large, folding naturally over the Parts which are to be seen underneath, which
is done by placing properly the Lights and Shades. In covering both the
Extremities of the Joints, such as che Shoulders, Elbows, Knees, &c. Care
must be taken to mark them in such a Manner as to distinguilh their Shape.
And in Fact, Drapery is no tristing or insignificant Part of this Art; for, if
well done, it adds a new Grace to the Picture gives an enlivening Air to its
other Beauties, and never fails of pleasing the Eyes of the Spectator.
The MATERIALS proper for Drawing.
THE Materials necessary for this Purpose, are either Pencils of Black
Lead, or Black Lead Lead in a Porcrayon, Charcoal, Chalk black, red

and white, Pastils or Crayons, Pens, Hair-Pencils, and Indian Ink.
Nothing is more proper for Beginners to practise with than Black Lead, in
drawing plain Lines, &c. especially as this makes a smoother Stroke than can
be done by Charcoal or Crayons. Cut your Lead with a Penknife ’till you
have brought it to a fine Point, that it may give a neat small Stroke. Or
you may fix a Piece of the same Lead in a Porcrayon. But whatever it is you
sketch with, use yourself to hold it long-ways in your Hand, and let your
Fingers be much farther from the Point, than the Nip of a Pen is when you


write, and let your Strokes be formes with light gentle Touches ; thus will
you gradually acquire a ready Command of Hand, and you will with Ease
make yout Out-line free and bold.
In practising after Limbs and Figuresi wil be proper, at first to draw the
rough Sketch wich Charcoal, which is mere easily discharged from Paper than
Black Lead, Slit pour Charcoal in small slender Pieces, one of which fix in
a Porcrayon the better to hold it; then sharpen it to a Point, and lightly.
but correctly, sketch out pour Original. When vou have so done, if there
is any Thing you mislike in che Performance, you may easily wipe it out by
brushing ie with a Feather or ciean Rag. When vou have secured vour Out
lines wich Charcoal, proced thus: take a Feather and wipe them slightly
over wich it that they may appear faint, then go over the Lines wich Black or
Red-Lead, and correct them wherever you can. If after all this vou still see
any Errors to amend, take a Bit of Crumb of a stale white Loaf, with which
vou may discharge any Part of it you please, by rubbing it therewith.
Yeu may use Red-Lead, or Red or Black Chalk in the fame Manner as
Black-Lead.
If in Heightnings, or when you would give strong Lights, or draw on
colour’d Paper, use white Chalk and Tobacco-pipe Clay.
Pistils and Crayons are Terms which perhaps the Learner may not readily
understand; they are Colours mixed up with Tobacco-pipe Clay, which must
be worked into a Paste, and rolled up into the Thickneis of a Quill two or
three Inches long, and then dried; when fit for Use, the Artist works them
on colour'd Paper, but not in Hatchings, as Black and Red-Lead commonly
are; the Colours are rubbed and worked together, so thar there is no single
Stroke, but the whole appears as if only a Brush had been used.
The Crayons is a very expeditious Manner of Drawing, and when skilfully
handled, always produce a delicate Softness and fine Expression; however, it
must be observed, that the careless or rude Touch of a Finger may at once
blot out all the Beauties of this fine Work; to prevent which, let it be pre
served in Bock, or in a Frame under a Glass. The Crayons will be work'd
more easily if the Grain of the Paper be a litte rough, and be expressed more
strongly than when the Paper is quite smooth; or if the Paper be somewhat
dark or brownich, or whar they call a whited-brown, it will give a Relief to
the tender Parts of the Work, by shewing the light Strokes of it.
In shading Draughts sometimes Pens are used for hatching the cross Strokes;
however, the Hair Pencil and Indian Ink serve much better for this Use,




which are not only proper for hatching by Strokes, but for shading by a Me
thol much more expeditious, that is, by Waching, which is the fame Way
of working as with Hair Pencils and Water Colours. In Hatching the
Shades are produced by Lines, not unlike ihe Strokes which shade a Print
engraved; lnnt in Washing no Lincs appear, but the Shades shew themselves
like those in a Metzotinto Print.
Of the Tints of Lights and Shadows.
LIGHTS and Shades, when judiciously disposed, give the Appearance of
Subslance, Nature and Distance to such Bodies as the Pencil represents.
Suppose, for Instance, a Circie drawn on a Piece of Paper; imagine you see

it fill'd up with any even Colour, you can conceive of it no otherwise than
as a round, flat equal Body; but if you put the strongest of the Colour in
the Middle, and weaken it gradually towards the Extremities, you will per
ceive an agreeable Deception, and instead of a flat even Body, it will have
the Resemblance of a Ball or Globe.
Wherever the Colour appears the most lively, there the Object catches the
Eye first, and seems nearest to it; but where the Colour weakens and goes
off, it grows faint, and at length seems to fly off and break away from the
Sight. Thus the Painter, by breaking and diminishing his Colours, throws that
behind which he has a Mind shall be less visible.
When you round the Parts of an Object, it requires the nicest Touch of the
Pencil to draw the Extremities so, as that in turning they shall lose themselves
insensibly and confusedly, without too sudden a Transition of the Light into
the Shadows, or of the Shadows into the Light, but let the one pass into the
other as it were reciprocally and imperceptibly, that is, by Degrees of Light
into Shadow, and Shadow into Light.
When your Objects are to be painted light, you must allow a due Breadth
of Shadow to sustain them; if dark, a sudden Light must rise behind them,
to separate them from the Ground, or from other Objects that are placed
behind them, or else they will appear as if they were sticking upon each
other in a confused Manner; whereas by a just Opposition of Light to Shade
and Shade to Light, a Projection is given, which makes a Separation of the
Objects.
You must keep a proper Ballance between Light and Shadows, and intro
ducing a broad Light into your Draught, you mult give it a large Shadow.





You must make your Light serve as a Repose to the Darks, and che Darks
the Lights; thus a Drapery, which is coloured red or yellow in some Place,
in others will take a brown wich a good Effect
The Eye sees an Object the more strongly and plainly the nearer it is; Dif
tance weakens the Sight the farther off an Object is, the more impersectly
it is perceived; those Objects therefore which stand nearect to View, should
be better finish’d than thofe which are thrown behind; but obserse, that the,
must have a reciprocal Dominion over each other, so that as one Object by it.
Heighthtenings forces others to appear at a Distance, so the same Object must
be thrown farther from the Sight, than others which are illuminated more
strongly.
It should be farther observed in regard to Lights and Shades, that it is no:
enough that remote Objects be coloured in a more faint and languid Manner,
but the more or less distant they are, the Parts should appear more or less
confused; the Eye cannot minutely discriminate an Object which is at a Dis
tance from it. We can see human Figures at a Street’s Length, but cannot
discern the Features of their Faces or the Plasts in their Cloaths; so the
innumerable Leaves of a distant Grove appear to the Sight but as one
Mass.
White, pure and unmixed, has two different Properties, it draws an Object
nearer to it, and it carries it off to a farther Distance. When it is placed
wich Black, che Opposition of Light and Dark brings che Object more into
View, and renders it more sensible but pure White, as it is the lightest of
Colours, will fly off to the remotest View, unless forced forwards, and sup
ported by Black. On the other Hand, pure Black is deemed the heaviest,
most earthy and most sensible of all Colours, and presents Objects nearer to
the Sight; you must cast it into Masses confuse is insensibly, and give it its
proper Reposes.
In the Representations of Bodies, you must always give them such Lights
as are most proper and convenient for their supposed Situations. Suppose the
Objects before you be in the Fields or open Air, and the Sun obscured with
Clouds, your Business is to introduce an universal Light, tho' not vivid or
strong, your Shades too must be faint. But when the Sun appears in all its
Glory, your Lights must then be very strong and bold, and the Shadows
exceeding dark.
Suppole again, that the Object you represent is in a Room, a little though
not very much illuminated, and to survey it you take your Station without,



and stand level wich the Light that strikes upon ir; that Figure must have
very soft Shadows, which will shew it very beautifully, and tho' the Shadow
be so soft, yet the Figure will seem as if it were embossed, and have a very
bold Appearance.
When a small Light illuminates a Body, the Shadows on the dark Side
appear large, and their Extremities very bold: whereas a large Light renders
the Shadows on the darker Side more distinct and much softer than their Li
mitations.
Useful Instructions for the young Practitioner.
WHOEVER would make any Proficiency in the Art of Drawing, must
first understand Geometry; for it is by this, and the Help of Lines, that
we are i structed to take the Length and Largeness of Bodies, and know
whether they be streight or curve, round, oval, and square, or any other
imaginary Figure. But as it is not our Business here to treat of Geometry, or
give those Geometrical Rules which are used in the Art of Drawing, we shall
refer the Learned to Le Clerc’s Practical Geometry.
He that would be a perfect Master in the Art of Drawing, must learn to
sketch well, to which therefore he ought to give the greatest Attention. In
copying a Statue, some Persons begin wich the Head, which they entirely
finish before they proceed any farther; by which means it frequently happens,
that they either make the Head too little or too big, and the other Part so
disproportionate, that there is but small Resemblance of the Original, occa
sioned chiefly thro’ a Want of duly observing Distances. When therefore
you have any Thing to draw, let your first Care be to divide it into its differ
ent Parts, then measure the Distances in the Original with your Eye, mark
the Distances and Length of each Division with a faint Line on your Paper,
and make a Sketch of the while Figure before you proceed to finish any Part
of it; so will yon secure the Proportions in the exactest Manner.
The Learner will find among these Examples several Draughts of the Parts
of the Face, as the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, &c. viewed in different Positions,
all which he should practise upon before he attempts a whole Face; for which
Purpose we shall lay down such Leffons and Instrucions concerning an Oval,
wich its several Changes and Variations, and of the Cross in the fame, as will
enable him to flgure all Bowings and Returnings, Reclinations and Incli
nations of all Sorts of Faces,





The Head, you are to observe, has the Shape and Form of an Egg, or
Oval; this Head has Eyes, Eye-brows, Nose and Ears, which must be
placed in their proper Situations, by running a Cross thro’ the Oval. By this
Means you will divide ihe Perpendicular in the Oval into four equal Parts,
which will make the Head to measure four Noses in Height, the Face three
only; the Diameter crossing the Perpendicular, divide into live Parts, each
being the Breadth or Wideness of one Eye; this Diameter is called the ocular
Line, or that whereon the Eyes are to be placed; you must therefore draw a
streight Line from the Top of the right Ear through boch Eyes to the Top
of the lest Ear; and the Line drawn from the Top of the Head down thro'
the Nose, Mouth and Chin, is called the Perpendicular, crossing the Diame
ter or Ocular line at right Angles; these Lines together we call the Cross of
the Oval; upon which Cross (whatever Situation the Face is in) you must
place the Eyes, Nose, Mouth and Ears in proper Places.
When you understand this thoroughly, and hive fixed it in your Mind,
von will soon be able to draw good Faces out of your own Fancy and Inven
tion; and execute them in a masterly Manner: But if you accustom yourself
to draw only after a Print, Draught or Picture, without knowing the Use
of the Cross-lines, and the Proportion of a Face wich its Parts, you take a
wrong Method, don't know what yon are about, and will never attain to any
Degree of Perfection.
Having thus instructed you in the several Methods of drawing a Face, we
come now to give you the Dimenlions and Proportions of the several Parts of
the Body.
It was customary wich the Autients to allow eight Heads to their Figures,
though some of them have only seven. The Moderns usually divide a Figure
into ten Faces, taking it at the Crown of the Head, and ending at the Sole of
the Foor, thus:
From the Crown of the Head to the Forehead, is the third Part of the
Face.
The Face takes its Beginning at the Root of the lowest Hairs on the Fore
head, and its End is at the Bottom of the Chin.
Painters divide the Face into three proportional Parts; namely, the Force
head, the Nose, the Mouth and Chin.
The Distance from the Chin to the Pit betwixt the Collar-bones, measures
two Lengths of a Nose.
From the same Pit to the Bottom of the Breast, one Face.



From thence to the Navel, one Face.
From the Navel to che Privities, one Face.
The Distance from the Genitals to the upper Part of the Knee, two Faces.
The Knee itself measures half a Face.

Meafure from the lower Part of the Knee to the Ancle, and you will find
it two Faces.
From the Ancle to the Sole of the Foot, is half a Face.

When a Man stretches out his Arms as wide as he can, a Line drawn from
the Top of the longest Finger of the right Hand to the Top of the longest
Singer on the left, will meafure the Length of his whole Body, or he will
find himfelf as broad as he is long.
Thee Distance from Side to Side of the Breasts, two Faces.
The Bone of the Arm called Humerus, from the Shoulder to the Elbow,
measures twp Faces.
The Bone called Cubitus wich Part of the Hand, measuring from the Tip
of the Elbow to the Root of the little Finger contains two Faces.
From che Box of the Shoulder-blade to che Pit betwixt che Collar-bones, is
one Face.
In taking the Measurement of the Breadth, from the Extremity of one
Finger to the other, to see if it be equal to the Length of the Body, you are
to observe that the Boxes of the Elbows wich the Humerus, and of the Humerus
wich che Shoulder-blade, bear the Proportion of half the Face, when the
Arms are stretched out.
The Sole of the Foot measures the sixth Part of the Figure.
The Hand is the Length of the Face,
The Thumb, of the Nose.
From the Place where che Pectoral Muscle, or that Muscle which makes
The Breast, disappears, to the Middle of the Arm, measures four Noses.
Carry your Measure from the Middle of the Arm to the Beginning of the
Hand, you will find it five Noses.
Tour longest Toe is the Length of your Nose.
The Tops of the two Nipples, and the Pit betwixt the two Collar-bones,
make an equilateral Triangle.
No certain Measures can be given for the Breadth of che Limbs; because
even the Measures are changeable according to the different Quality of the
Persons, and Movement of the Muscles.





These farther Rules are to be observed in drawing a Head, viz.
You must set the Eyes at such Distance from one another that you may
place one between them.
The Mouth, when shut, hasthe Dimensions of an Eye.
The Ears are always on a Level with the Eyes a top and below with the
Nose, whether it be short or long.
The Nostril should be placed exactly against the Corner ot the Eye.
In a face that is flat, the Cheeks swell out, and one that is lean, the Checks
fall in, and the Jaw-bones stand out.
Having finished our Instructions for the drawing of the Face, let us now
proceed to draw a Man at full Length.
In the first Piace you must make pour Oval, then divide as before directed;
you then draw a perpendicular Line from the Top of the Head to the sole
of the Foot, which you must divide into eight Lengths. This will be good
Direction in placing your Figure upricht, or in whatever Action the Posture
requires, where it either falls in or swells out. You must make the Length of
une Head between the Chin and the Breasts, the third Measure must reach to
the Navel, the fourth from thence to the Genitals, the fifth to the Middle of
the Thigh, the sixth comes to the lower Part of the Knee, the seventh to the
lower Part of the Leg, and the last reaches to the Heel or Sole of the
Foot.
In every Measure or Division you must take particular Notice what Touches
there are of the Muscles.
The Leg must be first drawn on which the Body stands, then the other.
after which draw the Arms and Hands, You must first draw all the Parts
very lightly only with a Coal, because that will give you the least Troubie in
rubbing out or altering.
The Hands, you must observe, are twice as long as broad, and each of
their Parts has its particular Length, Breadth and Thickness.
The Nail of the Finger makes about half the Joint it is upon.
The Length of the Foot measures a sixth Part or Height of a Man, or
five Eighths more in Length than in Breadth.
Take Notice, that the Length of the Face and Hands are exactly equal,
and is just the tenth Part of a Person’s Height.
Having thus instructed you to draw a complete Man, we shall in the next
Place lay down some Rules for the drawing of Children.




Some will have the Length of a Child to contain five Measures of the
Head as thus: From the Top of the Head they make three, and the Thighs
and Legs two morc; the Breadth between the Shouldlers is the Length of a
Head and a half; ihe Breadth of the Body above the Navel, the Length of
one Head; and the Breadth of the thickest Part of the Thigh is one Third
of two Lengths of the Head; the Breadth of che Knee measures exactly the
Distance between the Eyes and the Chin; ehe Brawn of che Arm and Small
of the Leg are just the Thickness of the Neck.
If you take the Proportion of a Child standing backward, you will find it
of the fame Meadure as the former.
If you are desirous of drawing a Piece well proportioned, you must be
very careful and attentive to copy all the several Parts singly, as the Eyes,
Ears, &c.
RULES for filling up empty Figures.
Thus far we have treated of Colours and Out-lines; we come now to
instruct the Learner, how to fill up the empty Figures, and to mark

the Hatchings to as to produce the best Effect.
In the first Place observe that your Hatchings must consist but of two
Strokes, crossing each other, or at most three, to make the strongest Shades.
Where the Cavities are such as require the whole Force of your Lead or
Crayon, you must rub it upon your Paper as you see Occasion; for it would
be a needless Trouble to employ more than three Hatchings one upon another.
When with your Charcoal you have drawn the Out-lines, you must re
touch them wich your Red-lead Crayon, and then with a Feather brudh away
the Dirtiness of the Charcoal. When you have done that; you must retouch
wich a gentle Hand such Places as have been fouled in the rubbing, as the
Hair, Eyes, Nose; Mouth; Fingers, Toes, Out-lines, &c. Let me also
caution you, that in those Out-lines which are open to Day, you make your
Strokes very light, but stronger in those which are darkened. Thus will the
Out-lines appear in a natural Manner, and add a wonderful Beauty and Grace
to human Figures and all other Objects. When this is done, you must begin
the Shades with a single Hatching, but pretty strong; yon begin it at the
Top, proceeding insensibly to the Bottom, as evenly in the Distances as you
possibly can. You then go on to the Roundings, which you must also ex
press by single Strokes, with such a Light as the Object before you requires;



 


be cautious not to make your Shadows too hard or dark at first If you
would present the Perspective in the best Manner, begin the Shadows lightly
and faintly and heighten them afterwards; and you will soon be pleased with
the agreeable Effect.
Instrustions how to draw after a Picture, a Model, of the Life.
HAVING given you the neccessary Instructions for drawing Prints and

Draughts, we shall, in the last Place, direct you how to draw after a
Picture, a Model or the Life, and in what Manner you are to place them.
When you have got a Picture to draw after, be sure to place it in a good
Light, so that the Sight of your Eye and the Light of the Day may fall
together on the Picture. Place yourself at a moderate Distance, according to
the Largeness or Smallness of the Picture, at least no farther off than that
you may, with a Glance of your Eye, see the whole Picture at once; for the
larger the Picture is, at the greater Distance you must sit to draw it. Be
careful likewise to place your Print exactly right before you, and let it not lie
down flat; for if it be laid flat, you will quickly see the Figures in it fore
shorten'd. The Paper you draw upon you must lay five or six Times double
upon a Pannel Board set in your Lap, and raised as high as yon can wich your
Knees, or let it be rested on a Form or stooping Desk, fo that your Work
may stand upon one End before you. Thus will you be enabled to judge of
the Similitude between your Draught and the Original, which it will be im
possible for you to do if it lies flat before you. The next Thing vou have to
do is, to guess as near as you can at the Middle of the Thing you have to
draw, whether a Picture or any other Matter; then mark it on your Paper
wich the Point of your Coal; when you have done this, look for the largest.
Figures (if there happens to be more than one) and touch them lightly in
proper Places, and so all that is in the Picture, you will then presently discover
whether your Guessing and Sketching be true or not: But besides the, before
you draw a Stroke, be sure you do it wich good Reaon and Observation,
and be very careful about the great and general Parts, and middle not with
the small Breakings 'till the next Sketching, and by constantly practising in
this Manner, you will insensibly acquire a Facility and Judgment in your
Work. Another Rule you are to observe is, always to begin on the right
Side of the Figure, for so you have the first Strokes constantly in your Eye,
and the rest will naturally follow and give less Trouble: But if you begin on






the left Side, your Hand covers the Object from your Sight. Having thus
made a rough Sketch, you should carefully review and examine it, and see if
it be done according to Ait, and if the Action of the Figure or Figures in it
be answerable to the Original; now, as Actions are the Life of a Picture,
they must shew themselves in the first Draught, however rude it be, or you
can never expect it will be happily finished. You must then correct your
Sketch and improve it in Neatness and Air, by adding and diminishing as you
see proper, as you may easily do with your Charcoal. But in doing this, be
mindful that you don't spoil the first good Actions in it, which may easily be
done, if you don't well observe ihe Movements of several Parts.
You must be careful to admit nothing into your Work that is improper or
foreign to the Subject of it, and to let nothing trifling have the chief Place
in it.
If you can, always make chooce of a North Light for your Situation, be
cause it is less variable than any other. Should yon lit at a South Window,
yon will find it proper to place a Sash of oil’d Paper before ir, which will
break the Intenseness of the Sun's Rays, and diffuse them more equally with
out any sensible Variation. In drawing after the Life, you are to confider the
Bigness or Size of the Object you have vo represent, and remove from it to
the Dislance of three Times its Magnitude, and be seated in fuch a Manner as
that your Eye may be on a Level wich it, and at every Stroke you draw be
curious to observe what Parts of your Object lie under the Perpendicular or
principal Line.
The next Thing you have to do is, to put your Figure, whether it be the
Life or a Model, in a proper Position: the best Light is that which is high and
equally diffused not too strong nor glaring; when Objects are so disposed
you see all their Beauties, and the minutest Parts shew themselves to Advan
tage. But this you are to observe that in drawing from the Life, that your
Light should come from such an Altitude, as that the Shadows of Bodies pro
jected on the Plane, be equal, and in proportion to their Height. So that ihe
Light does not strike upon or enlighten all the Parts, some of which are shel
tered by the Protuberance of others; the Eye-brows over-shade the Hollow
of the Eye, the Nose hides some Part of the Mouth, and the Throat is obs
cur'd bythe Chin. For this Reason Portrait Painters blind all the Windows
of the Room they work in, except one, yhe lower Part whereof they clode
up, and let yhe Light in from yhe upper only, which strikes upon the Object
they are printng after, while themselves are beneach the Light.





Particular Directions for the young Painter.
THE Instructions we have hitherto given the young Beginner, have
been pretty much in the general: we shall now introduce him into every

Part of his Work, by such particular Directions, as, by strictly observing
them, will make him a compleat Draughtsman.
For drawing the Face.
WHEN you have drawn the Circle of the Face (which you must do at
first with a plain circular Line, without making any Bending or In

dentures in or out) make a Stroke from that Place of the Forchead which is
even with the Chin, down the Place where you intend to fix the Middle of
the Nose, and the Middle of the Mouth; this Stroke, you must observe,
must be struck that Way which the Face should turn, either to one Side, or
strait down, which Stroke will be a great Help to you in placing the Features
rightly, so that they may not stand all awry but directly one under another.
Now if the Face turn downward, the Stroke must be struck in such a Manner
that the Eyes may turn answerable with the Face downwards; when you have
done that, make another Stroke for the Length of the Nose where the End of
it should come, and another Stroke for the Mouth, that it be not made
crooked, still observing to make all che Strokes to turn one Way, up or
down, according as the Face turns, that is, if the Face turns up or down,
the Eyes, Nose and Mouth, must turn wich it; when you have made these
Strokes exactly, proveed to place the Features according to the preceding Rules.
In the Face is usually observed this threefold Propertion. 1. From the
Top of the Forehead to the Eye-brows. 2. From che Eye-brows to the
Bottom of the Nose 3. From thence to the Bottom of the Chin. This
Proportion however is not constantly the same; for in some Persons the
Forehead is lower than in others, the Nose of some longer, and of some
shorter than others; and therefore this Rule can only be observ’d in a well
proportioned Face. The Distance between the two Eyes is just the Length
of one Eye, if in a full Face: but if it turn any thing aside, then that
Distance is lessened accordingly; the Nostril ought not to come out farther
than the Corner of the Eye in any Face, and the Mouth must be always
placed between the Eyes and the Chin, just under che Nofe.



As the greatest Difficulty, and principal Part of ihe Art lies in the lively
drawing of the Facc, I fhall add thefe farther Directions to perfect you in this
particular Branch of your Art.
Fins, If you would draw a Face exactly, fo as to reiemble the Original
you draw it from, you must in the first Place take Notice of the Physiogno
my or Circumference of the Face, whether it be long or round, fat or lean,
big or little, that so you may be sure to draw the Physiognomy, or Bigneiss of
the Face right; if it be a fat Face, you will perceive the Cheeks to make the
Side of the Face swell out, and so make the Face look as it were square; if
it be a lean Face, the Jaw-bone will stick out, and che Cheeks fall in, and the
Face will look long and slender; if it be neither too fat nor too lean, the
Face will for the most part be round.
When you draw the utmost Circumference of a Face, you must take in the
Head and all wich it, otherwise you may be deceived in drawing the true Big
ness of the Face.
Secondly, You must carefully and judiciously observe and discern all the
Master Touches, which give Life to a Face, or discover the Grace or Dispo
sition of the Mind, in which lies the whole Grace of the Work, and the
Credit of the Workman; thus a smiling Countenance is easily discern'd in
the Mouth, when the Corners of it are a little turn'd up; a frowning Coun
tenance in the Forehead, Eye-brows bending, and the Top of the Nose be
tween the Eyes somewhat wrinkled; a sober and staid Countenance is best dis
cerned in the Eye, when the upper Eye-lid comes somewhat over the Ball of
the Eye; a laughing Countenance is easily discerned all over the Face, and so
is an angry wrathful Countenance, by extraordinary Frownings; there are
also some Touches about the Eyes and Mouth, which give Life and Spirit to
a Face, which you will by Degrees find out by frequently observing and imi
tating the Works of the best Masters.
Further Rules for the young Practitioner in Drawing.
I. YOUR Charcoal being neatly sharpen'd, you must, in the drawing of a
Face, first lightly draw the Out-stroke, or Circumference of the Face
exactly, according to the Bigness of the Pattern, making it to stand fore-right,
or to turn upwards or downwards according to your Pattern; then make some
little Touches, where che Features, namely, the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin,
should be placed, not drawing them exactly at the first; when you have thus


lightly pointed out the Features, then begin to draw them more exactly, and
so proceed 'till che Face be finished; which being done, then add the Beard,
and other Things about it. In drawing a Side face, you need not at first
draw the Nose, Mouth, and Chin, that stand in ihe outmost Line, but only
make it first but a bare Circumference, turning this Way or that Way, accor
ding to the Pattern, and then make the Mouth, Nose, and Chin in their
Places and just Proportion.
2. You must be sure to place the Muscles in the right and proper Places;
by the Muscles I mean all the Shadows that are caused by some Dents or
Swellings in the Face, and be able to find out the Reason of every Muscle,
that so you may proceed to work with the more Judgment; the Muscles will
be mofs visible in an old wither'd Face, and you must first draw the most prin
cipal of them, and then you may draw the more ealily the lesser within; be
sure to be very exact in the plaring of them, or you will spoil your Draught
be it ever so good.
3. Observe to make the Shadows rightly, and be careful not to make them.
too dark where they should be faint; or if you do, you can never recover it
to make it light again, and so the whole Face will be marr’d, and appear un
handsome; the Shadows are generally sainter and lighter in a fair Face than
in a Swarthy Complexion. When your Draught is finished, you will do
well to give fome hard Touches with your Pen where the Shadows are
darkest, which will add a great Life and Grace to your Drawing.
When your Face is finished, you come next to the Ears and Hair, wherein
you must observe this Rule: Having drawn the Out-line of it, you must first
draw the principal Curl, or Master Stroke in the Hair, which will guide you
wich Ease to do the lesser Curls which depend on them; always make your
Curl to bend, and turn exactly according to the Pattern, that they may lie
loose and fast, and not appear stiff stubborn and unpliable. When you have
drawn your Curls exactly, you must in the last Place strike in the loose Hairs
which hang carelessly out of the Curls.
The Face being drawn (which is the principal Thing in the Art) then
proceed to the Hands and Arms, Legs and Feer, and so to full Bodies of
Men and Women, which are the most difficult Things, which if you can
attain to perform, with a well grounded Celerity, nothing will be difficult to
you, but most easy, as Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Ships, or any other Thing
that is to be drawn by Hand.





Of drawing the Hands and Feet.
WE come now to speak particularly of the IHands and Feet, which you
oughe to spend some Time about, before you come to whole Bodies;
because they will be too dilficult for you to enter upon, till you have pretty
well practised your Hand in the drawing of other Things, more especially
Hands and Feet, which are the most difficult Members of the Body to draw,
except the Face; by learning of which you will attain the rest wich less Diffi
culty and greater Perfection; and undoubtedly it is a Thing highly commen
dable to draw a Hand lively and exactly, which hath such a Variety of Pos
tures and Action, and you will find it no easy Matter to imitate it in every
one of them, wich Spirit and Life, or without some Lameness or Imper
fection.
The Actions and Postures of the Hand are so various, that no certain
Rule can be given for drawing of them, only this in general; when you first
draw it with Charcoal, you are not to do it exactly, that is, you must not
make all the Joints or Veins, or other Things, to appear more than lightly or
saintly, and to touch out the Bigness of the Hand, and the Manner of turn
ing it with saint Touches, and not wich hard Strokes; if you have done
that right, then you part the Fingers afunder, or clofe, according to your
Pattern, wich the like saint Strokes; then mark that Place where any of the
Fingers stand out from the others, and make a faint Resemblance of it;
having so donc, if you perceive your Draught to be right, procecd to draw it
more perfectly, and make the Bending of the Joint, the Wrist-bone, and
other principal Things somewhat exactly. And, lastly, go over it again,
and draw every small Bending, or Swelling of the Fingers, and make the
Nails, Knuckles, and Veins, so many of them as appear, and every Thing
else that you can discern.
The Proportion of a Hand you have sufficiently described in the Print,
whlich shews how many Equalities or equal Measures there be in it, which you
should endeavour to be acquainted wich, that so you may know when a
Hand is well proportionned wich just and equal Distances. But you are to
observe this Rule, or Exception, that according as the Hand turns one Way
or other, the Proportions must be shortned according as they appear to the
Eye, as you may see by the fore-shortning of the Hand in the Print; so
much as the Hand turns away from our Sight, lo much it loses of its ordi





nary Proportion, and is made so shorten unto that Proportion that the Eye
judges of it, nay, sometimes a whole Finger, sometimes two or three, or
more, are lost to our Sight, by the turning of the Hand another Way from
us, and so they must be wholly left out, and not made. As to the Feet, it
is not so difficult to draw them as it is the Hands, and you must procced in
the same Method in the one as in the other. When you can draw Hands and
Feet pretty well, then procced to Arms and Legs, wherein is little Dillicul
ty; after which you may procecd to whole Bodies.
RULES to be obsersed in drawing tbe whole Body. 
1. IN the drawing of a Body, you must begin with the Head, to whith you
must give just Proportion and Bigness, because all the Body must be pro
portioned according to the Head.
2. When you have drawn the Head, proceed to the Shoulders, and go
on to che Trunk of the Body, beginning at the Arm-pits (leaving the Arms
till afterwards) and so draw down to the Hips on both Sides, and be sure you
observe the exact Breadth of the Waist: When you have done thus, draw
first that Leg on which the Body stands, and afterwards that which stands
loose, or from the Body, and last of all the Arms, and then the Hands,
either joined tothe Body, or separated from it, agreable to your Pattern.
2. Observe in your drawing to place the parallel Joints, Sinews and Muscles,
directly opposite in a strait even Line one against the other, as the Shoulders,
Arm-pits, Waist, Hips, Knees, and so every Thing else, that one may nor
be higher or lower than the other, that the Body may not seem crooked or
deformed, but every parallel Joint, Bend, &c. may directly answer the other
that is opposite to it; to which End you may strike a strait Stroke directly
cross the Shoulders, to direct you to place them even and strait onc against
the other, which you may likewise do in other Places, as the Arms, Waist,
Hips, Thighs, or any orher Parts that are opposite ; where you should place
the one even with the other; but you must have the fame Care in all Parts of
the Body, as you have in one Place, where any Bendings or Members of the
Body have or do require a direct Opposition one to the other, you make use
of this Help and Direction.
4. Observe, that if the Body turn one Way or other, then this Stroke
must be so struck, that it may answer the Bowing of the Body; thus, if the
Body sloop a little downwards, you must strike the Stroke sloping or side



ways, in which Case you must make the Shoulders and other Things which
should be strait against one another, to be somewhat higher than one another,
fo that the Side which the Body turns upon, the Shoulders and other Things
that otherwise should be placed even against the other, must be made some
what lower than the other Side, more or less according to the stooping of the
Body.
5. As you are to be careful in the placing rightly all level or parallel Joints,
Bendings, Sinews and Muscles, so you must be very exact in all perpendicular
Joints, Muscles, &c. that is, when you have drawn the Out-Iines of your
Piece, and are come to draw che Joints and Muscles that are wichin the Body,
you must be as exact in placing them, that is, directly one against another,
as you are in placing those even that are opposite to one another. To the End
that you may place Things exactly perpendicular, that is, in a strait Line one
under another, you may strike a strait perpendicular Line from the Pit of the
Throat down to the Privities, just in the Middle or Seam of the Body, where
you discern the parting of the Ribs, and from thence strait down to the Feet;
which Line will direct you to place Things perpendicularly even, that the
Body may isand strait upright, and not appear crooked or awry.
6. Take Notice of the Bowings and Bendings that are in the Body, to
make that Part which is opposite to that which bends, to answer to it in bend
ing with it; thus, if one Side of the Body is bent in, the other Side must
sland out answerable to the bending in of the other Sice; if the Back bend
out, the Belly must bend in; if the Belly come in, the Back must stick out; if
the Breech stick out, the Thigh that answers to it in Opposition, must come
in; so also in any other Part of the Body; as when the Knee bends out, the
Hams that answer to it must come in; and the same Rule must strictly be ob
served in all other Joints of the Body, otherwise the Body will be made grosly
and absurdly, and without any Proportion.
7. Be careful to make all Things of an equal Proportion and Bigness, that
one Arm, or Leg, be not bigger than the other, or one Breast larger than
the other, or any Part of the Body in an unjust Proportion; but as every
Thing in a Face must answer to the Bigness of the Face, so one Member must
answer to another in Bigness, that so there may be a perfect Harmony in all the
Parts of the Body; that it may not have broad Shoulders and a thin slender Waist,
a raw-bone Arm and a thick gouty Leg, or any Part dilproportionable from the
other, unless it be so that any Part of the Body doth turn awry from our Eye;






thus, if one Arm should be other side-ways, and the other fore-right, then the
one Arm must be made fo much less than the other by how much it turns
away from our Sight, and appears less to our Eye, and if one Leg be seen full
or fore-right, and the other Leg be seen side-ways, then it must be made so much
lefs than the other, by how much it turns away from vour Sight.
8. As a just Proportion must be observ’d in the Bigness of your Draught,
fo likewise in the Length, that one Thing may not be too long for the other,
the Body not too long for the Legs, nor the Legs too short for the Body, that
neither Leg, nor Arm, be disproportion'd in their Lengths, but that every
Thing have its due Proportion both for Length and Bigness; unless when the
Body shortens away in any Part from your Sight; as thus, if one Leg sland
behind the other, it must be made so much shorter than the other, according,
to the Distance it is removed from your Eye; so likewise if one Arm remove
itself ever so little out of your Sight, that which comes first to the Eye, and
stands nearest to the Sight, must be made longer than the other, and the
other be made so much the shorter, by how much it turns away from your
Sight. So, again, if any Part of the Body be fore-shortned, that is, if it
appears fo to your Eye, as to hinder the full Light of the Latitude of that
Part of the Body, then the Body, or thar Part of the Body muft be made
to shorten, according to that Proportion that the Eye judges of it.
9. Observe the due Distance of one Thing frem another, that you may be
exact in your Draught, and perfectly imitate your Pattern.
10. Observe how much one Part of the Body sticks out beyond the other,
or falls in within the other, or whether it stands even with the other; to
which End, you may strike a small Stroke down from the Top of the Shoul
der along by the Outside of the Body strait down to the Feet; and this will
direct you how far one Part of the Body should stand out beyond the other,
and how far other Parts should come in; let nothing be done without Rule
and Judgment.
11. Let nothing be done, hard, sharp, or cutty, that is, let not the Bend
ings that are in the Body or in the Joints, be made as if they were Dents or
Cuts in the Flesh wich sharp corner Strokes, but finaly round and floping,
like Bendings, and not like Cuts in the Body; this is a common Fault among
Learners, who should therefore be the more careful to avoid it by imitating
their Pattern exactly, in the Manner of making every Stroke and Touch that
is given; for nothing should be done without Judgment.






Of Perspective Proportion
PERSPECTIVE Proportion differs luch from that we have been hitherto
describing ; and may be defined, The Judgment of the Eye of the Proportion
of a Thing by its Distance from it ; as thus, if one Part of the Body
come nearer to the eye than the other, it is made so muche bigger than the
other Part of the Body, which turns away from the Eye; thus it one Leg
stand behind another, the foremost Leg that stand first in Sight, must be made
somewhat bigger and longer than the other, because the Eye so judges of it;
it is the same with regard to any other Part of the Body, the Proportion must
be lessen'f according to the Distance of the Object from the Eye.
The next Thing to be observ'd in good Draughts, is graceful Posture and
proper Action; that is, that the true natural Motion of every Thing be ex
pressed in the Life and Spirit of it; that is, the Life mult be quicken'd by
Art; as to express the Majesty of a King, you must put him in such a grace
ful Posture, as may move the Spectators with Reverence to behold him; so
to make a Soldier, you must draw him in such a Posture, as may betoken
Courage, Boldness, and Intrepidity; so to make a Clown, he must be seen
in the most detectable and clownish Posture; so in every other Instance, the
inward Affection and Disposition of the Mind must be expressed in the most
lively Manner in the outward Action and Gestures of the Body. Now to at
tain a Competent Skill herein, my Advice is, diligently to observe the Works
of our great Master:, of those especially who delight in describing a Fight at
Handi cuffs; to observe the Eyes of private Assassins, the Courage of Wrest
lers, the Actions of Stage-Players, the enticing Allurements of Courtesans,
such as are led to Execution, to mark the contracting of their Brows, the
Motions of their Eyes, and the Carriage of their whole Body, to the End
you may express them to the Life in your Drawings and Works.
Another Thing to be observed in good Draughts, is Looseness or Air; that
is, that the Body be not made stff in any Part, but that every Joint may have
its proper and natural Bending, so as it may with the greatest Life express
your Intention, that the Picture may not seem lame or the Joints stiff as if
they were not pliable or capable of bending, but every Joint or Limb must
have its proper and natural Posture according as it may best suit with and be
come the Posture in which the Figure is set.
Another Thing to be noted in Drawing is, what the Painters call Fore-short
ening, which is, to take Things as they appear to the Eye, and not to draw


the full length and Proportion of every Part, but to make is shorter, by
Reason the full length and Bigness is hid from our SIght ; so, if I would draw
a Ship standing fore-right, there can appear only her Fore-partn the rest is hid
from our Side, and therefore cannot be express'd. Again, if I would draw
a Horse standing fore-right, looking full in my Face, I must necessarily fore
shorten him behind, because his Sides and Flanks are hid from my Eye,
Observe therefore this Rule, That you ought rather to imitate the visible
Proportion of Things, than the proper and natural Proportion of them; for
the Eye and the Understanding together being directed in the perspective
Art, ought to be the Guide, Measure, and Judge of Drawing and Painting.
The last Thing to be regarded in good Drawing, is, That every Thing be
done by the Guidance of Nature, that is, that nothing be express'd but what
accords and agrees with Nature in every Point: As thus, when I would make
a Man turning his Head over his Shoulder, I must not make him turn more
than Nature will permit, nor must any Thing be forced beyond the Limits of
Nature, or be made to come short of it; but tho' Nature must not be stretch'd
beyond its Centre, yet it must be quickened to the highest Pitch of it: Thus,
if I would express a King, I must express him in the most Majestick Posture
I can invent; and if I would draw a Clown, I must represent him in the most
clownish Action I can imagine; yet must neither the one nor the other be
drawn in such a Posture as will not agree wich the Motion of Nature, that is,
in such a Posture which Man cannot imitate wich his natural Body; so in all
other Things, Nature must be the Pattern of all Kinds of Draughts.
RULES for drawing Landskips.
LANDSKIP is the expressing a Tract of Land by Hills, Woods, Castles
Seas, Valleys, Ruins, Rocks, &c. in which there is not so much
Difficulty as in drawing Figures; and therefore the following Rules will be
sufficient.
1. The best Way of making Landskips, is to represent them shooting
away, one Part lower than another, as hath been practised by cur best Ar
tists; but others have run into a contrary Error, by making the Landskip
mount up higher and higher, till it reach to such a Height, that it seems as if
it touch'd the Clouds, as if the Drawer had stood at the Bottom of a Steeple,,
when he took the Prospect, which is altogether incongruous; for we can dis
cern no Prospect at che Bottom of a Hill; but the most proper Way of mak
ing a Landskip, is to make thie nearest Hill higheqt, and so to make the rest










that are at a greater Distance, to shoot away under that, that the Landskip
may appear as if taken from the Top of a Hill.
2. Be careful to lessen every Thing in Proportion to its Distance, express
ing it bigger or less according to the Dislance it is from the Eye.
3. You must make all your Lights fall one Way, both upon the Ground
and Trees, and all Things else, and all the Shadows must be cast one
Way.
4.
You must give every Thing its proper Motion; as Trees when they are
shaken with the Wind, their smaller and more pliable Boughs must be shewn
in such an Action, as if they struck one against another, by yielding and de
clining from that Part whence the Wind blows; the stiffer Boughs have
less Bending and Motion; you must likewise observe the Bending of a Twig
when a Bird fits upon it, so likewise if it be forced or pressed wich any other
Thing.
Clouds in the Air must be shewn wich Motions now gathered together with
the Winds, now violently condenied into Hail, Thunder-bolts, Lightning,
Rain, and such like. Finally, you can make nothing but what requires a
Motion peculiar to itfelf, according to which it ought to be represented:
But this Rule you must always observe, namely, thar all your Motions which
are caused by the Wind, must be feen to move one Way, because the Wind can
blow but one Way at once.
Always express a fair Horizon, shewing the Heavens cloudy or clear, more
or less according to the Occasion; and if you express the Sun, let it be either
Rising or Setting, and as it were behind or over fome Hill or Mountain.
The Moon and Stars are seldom or never depicted, unless it be in Repre
sentation of Twilight, because all Things are supposed to be seen by Day.
If you express the Sun, make his Light to reflect upon all ihe Trees,
Hills, Mountains, Rocks, or Buildings; shading the contrary Side; after
which Manner allo shadow Clouds, Mists, and the like, making the Shadows
to fall all one Way.
In expressing Things at large Distances, as ten, twenty or thirty Miles
off; where the Object is hard to be discerned, as whether it be Temple,
Castle, House, or the like, shew no particular Signs thereof, or any eminent
Distinction; but rather as weakly, faintly, and confusedly as the Eye judg
eth of it.
If Landskips be laid in Colours, the farther you go, the more you must
lighten it with a thin and airy Blue, to make it seem as if it were afar off, be









ginning first with a dark Green, so driving it by Degrees into a Blue accord
ing tothe Distance.
In Rivers, observe the general Current, and dashing of the Waves against
the Boat Sides. In the Sea, observe the Waves and other proper Agitations,
the Rowling of the Billows, che Tumbling of Vessels up and down; Ships
floating, some dipt, some half drowned, fome standing almost an End, some
hid almost wich the Waves, thro' the Uncertainty of ihe Surges, others
striving to live. In the Motion of Waters falling from an high Place, but
especially when they fall upon Rocks or Stones, you must make it leaping up.
in the Air, and sprinkling all about.
Let your Work imitate the Season you intend it for. Thus, if you intend it
for a Winter Piece, represent selling of Timber; fleding upon the lce; fowl
ing by Night; hunting of Bears or Foxes in the Snow; making the Trees
every where naked or laden with a Hoar Frost; the Earth bare without
Greenness, Flowers or Cattle; the Air thick; Water frozen, with Carts pass
ing over ir, and Boys upon it, &c.
Lastly, let every Site have its proper Works, Adjuncts, or additional
Graces, as the Farm-house, Windmill, Woods, Flocks of Sheep, Herds of
Cattle, Pilgrims, Ruins of Temples, Castles, Monuments; wich a thousand
such other Things, only proper to particular Subjects.
To take tbe perfect Draught of any Picture.
TAKE a Sheet of fine Venice Paper, wet it all over wich Linseed Oil on
one Side thereof, which then wipe off as clean as you can; let the

Paper dry, and lay it to any painied or printed Picture, then wich a black
Lead Pencil you may draw it over with Ease; put this oiled Paper upon a
Sheer of clean white Paper, and wich a little pointed Stick or Feather out of
a Swallow’s Wing, draw over the Stroke which you draw upon the oiled
Paper; so shall you have the exact Form upon the white Paper, which may be
set out wich Colours wich pleasure.
Or thus: The Picture being drawn as before in the oiled Paper, put it
upon a Sheet of white Paper, and prick over che Drawing with a Pen; then
take some Small-coal, powder it fine, and wrap it in a Piece of fine Linnen,
and bind it up therein loosely, and clap it over the pricked Line by little and
little, and then draw it over again once or twice, wich Pen or Pencil.


















Or Thus: Rub a Sheet of white Paper all over on one Side wich Black
lead, or else wich Vermilion mixed wich fresh Butter; lay the coloured Side
upon a Sheet of white Paper; then lay che Picture you would copy out upon
the other Side of the coloured Paper, or with a small pointed Stick, or Swal
low's Qulll, go over all che Strokes of your Picture, and it will be exact on
the white Paper.
Or thus: Take an oiled Sheet (as before) rub one Side of it with Lamb
black or Lake; lay it upon a Sheet of fair Paper, with the coloured Side
downward, and upon it lay the Picture you would copy out, and trace it
over with your Swallow’s Frather.
Or Thur: Take fine Lake mixed wich Linfeed Oil, and draw with it over
all the Out-strokes, and other material Parts of a Picture; then wer the con
trary Side of the Picture, and press it hard upon a Sheet of Paper, and it will
leave behind it all that which you drew over.
To take the Shape of a Leaf, Herb, or Plant.
HOLD a whole Leaf or Sprig (as of Nettle, Plantane, &c.) in the
Smoak of Gum Sandrack, Rosin, a Link, or Wax Candle, 'till it is

well black'd, which place between the Leaves of a Sheet of White Paper,
and carefully press upon the Leaf wich fome smooth Thing; so shall you
have in a Moment the Print on the Paper, especially the Backside thereof, with
the very Ramifications of the Fibres dispersed thro' it. This may be of good
Use in Travelling, wiien we meet wich strange Plants.
To take the Picture of an Herb from an old Picture.
TAKE Venice Soap, dip it in Water, and rub or moisten the old Pic
ture all over very well with it, then put upon it a Piece of white Paper,

wich other Paper over it, and rub hard thereupon, or press them strongly to
gether, and the old Picture will come off exactly upon the white Paper.
Of Colours for Landskips.
1. FOR a Ligte Green, use Pink, and Masticot heightened with White;
for a Sad Green, Indico, and Pink, heightened wich Masticot.
2. For some Trees, take Lake, Umber and White, for others Charcoal


and White, for others Black and White, with some Green; adding some Lake,
or Vermilion, with other Colours.
3. For Wood, take Lake, Umber and White, mixing sometimes a little
Green withal
4 For Fire, lay Red Lead and Vermilion tempered together where it is
reddest; where it is Blue, lay Oil, Smalt and White Lead; wherc it is Yel
low, take Masticot, and work it over in certain Places; where you would
have it shine most, with Vermilion.
6. For an Azure Sky, which seems afar off, take Oil, Smalt, or Bice, and
temper them with Linseed Oil, but grind them not; for Smalt or Bice utterly
lose their Colour in grinding.
6. For a Red Sky, take Lake and White; and for Sun-Beams, or Yellow
Clouds at Sun-rising or setting, take Maiticot and White.
7. For a Night Sky, or Clouds in a Storm, take Indico deepened with Black,
and heightened wich White.
8. For Wood Colours, they are compounded either of Umber and White.
Charcoal and White, Seacoal and White, Umber black and white, or with
some Green added; to which you may adjoin sometimes, as in the Barks of
Trees, a little Lake or Vermilion.
How to cleanse any old Painting.
TAKE Wood Ashes, and scarce them, or else fome Smalt, or Powder
blue, and wich a Spunge and fair Water, gencty wash the Picture you

would cleanse (taking great Care of the Shadows) which done, dry it very
well wich a clean Cloth.
Then varnish it over again wich good Varnish, but such as may be washed
off again wich Water if need be.
Or, take either common Varnish (made wich Gum Sandrick dissolved in
Linfeed Oil by boiling) or Glair of Eggs, and wich your Pencil go over the
Picture once, twice, or more therewith, as need requires.
Of Fresco, or Painting of Walls.
In painting upon Walls, to make it endure the Weather, you must grind
your Colours wich Lime-water, Milk, or Whey, mixt in Size Colour in
Pots.






The Paste or Plaister must be made of well-wash’d Lime, mixt wich fine
Powder of old Rubbilh Stones; the Lime must be so ofren walh’d, ’till all
its Salt be castrated; and all your Work must be dond in clear and dry Wea
ther.
To make the Work endure, strike into the Wall Stumps of headed Nails,
about five or six Inches asunder, and by this Means you may preserve the
Plaister from peeling.
Then wich this Paste, plaister the Wall a pretty Thickness, letting it dry,
being dry, plaister it over again about the Thickness of half a Barley-corn,
very fine and smooth, then your Colours being ready prepared, work this last
Plaistering over while it is wet, so will your Painting unite and join fast to the
Plaister, and dry together as a perfect Compost.
In Painting be nimble and free, let your Work be bold and strong, but be
sure to be exact, for there can be no Alteration of the first Painting, and
therefore heighten your Paint enough at first, yon may deepen it at plea
fure.
All Earthy Colours are best; as the Oker, Spanish-white, Spanslh-brown,
Terrae-vert, and the like; Mineral Colours are naught.
Lastly, let your Pencils and Brushes be long and soft, ocherwise your Work
will not be smooth; let your Colours be full, and flow freely from the Pen
cil or Brush; and let your Design be perfect at first, for in this there is no
after Alteration to be made.
Of Washing, and other Materials thereof.
BY Washing here we intend nothing more, but either to fet out Maps, or
printed Pictures in proper Colours, or else to varnish them.
The Instruments and Materials of Washing are six, viz. 1. Alum-water.
2. Size, or Gum-water. 3. Liquid Gold. 4. Pencils. 5. Colours. 6. Var
nish.
To make Alum-water: Take Alum, eight Ounces ; fair Water, a Quart ;
boil chem till the Alum is dissolved.
Or thus: Take Spring, or Well-water, a Gallon; Rock Alum, a Pound,
beat it to Powder, and dissolve it in Water by boiling; filter it thro’ a brown
Paper, and keep it for Use: Wich this Water wet your Paper before you lay
on your Colours, it will keep them from sinking in, and withal, add a Lustre
and Beauty to the Coloors laid on: But this you must note, that if your Paper





is not good, you must wash it over four or five Times, which may be done


wich a large Pencil Brush: Moreover, Alum generally raiseth staining Colours,

and preserve them from fading.
To make Size: Take Glew, which steep all Night in Water, then melt it
over the Fire, to fee that it be neicher too strong nor too weak; then let a little
of it ccol; if it be too stiff when it is cold, put more Water to ir, if too
weak more Glew, using it luke-warm.
To make Gum-water: Take pure Spring Water, a Quart; put it into a Jar
Glass, and hang therein a sufficient Quantity of pure, white and clean Gum
Arabick, bruised and tied up in a Rag; let it hang till the Gum is dissolved,
then put your Fingers into the Water, and if you find them stick together as
if they were glewed, your Warer is too stiff, or full of the Gum, which you
must remedy by putting thereto more fair Water; and if you find it too weak,
you may help it by adding more Gum: Wich this Water, or the former Size,
most Colours are to be tempered, and with so much of ihe Gum-water, as
being touched when dry, the Colour will not come off: Where note, that if
the Colour glisten, there is too much Gum in it.
Liquid Gold and Silver: Take five or six Leaves of Gold and Silver, which
grind (with a stiff Gum-lake Water, and a good Quantity of Salt) as small as
yon can ; then put it into a Vial, or glazed Vessel; add so much fair Water
as may dissolve the Gum-water; then let it stand four Hours, that the Gold
may settle; decant the Water, and put in more till the Gold is clean washed:
To the Gold put more fair Water, a little Sal-Armoniac, and common Salt,
digesting it close for four Days: Then put all into a Piece of thin Glovers
Leather (whose Grain is peeled off) and hang it up, so will the Sal Armoniac
fret away and the Gold remain behind, which keep.
Or thus: Grind fine Leaf Gold wich strong or thick Gum-water very fine;
and as you grind add more thick Gum-water being very fine, wash it in a
great Shell as you do Bice; then temper it wich a little Quantity of Mercury
Sublimate, and a little dissolved Gum to bind it in the Shell; shake it, and
spread the Gold about the Sides thereof, that it may be all of one Colour and
Fineness, which use with fair Water, as you do other Colours. The same ob
serve in liquid Silver; wich this Observation, That if your Silver, by Length
of Time or Humidity of the Air, become rusted; then cover the Place with
Juice of Garlick before you lay on the Silver, which will preserve it.
When you use it, temper it with Glair of Eggs, and so use it with Pen or
Pencil. Glair of Eggs is thus made: Take the Whites and beat them with a




Spoon, till they rise all in a Foam; then let them stand all Night, and by
Morning they will be turned into a clear Water, which is good Glair.
Of Colours simple for washing of Maps, &c.
ALOES: Ler it be dissolved in a weak Gum-water; it makes a deep or
sad Kind of Yellow Colour, according to the Goodness of the Yel
low.
Brazil: To some Ground Brazil put small Beer and Vinegar, of each a
sufficient Quantity; let it boil gently a good while, then put therein Alum
in Powder to heighten the Colour, and some Gum Arabick to bind it; boil
it till it raste strong on the Tongue, and make a good Red, Pink Colour, or
light Violet.
Logwood: Ground Logwood boiled as Brazil, makes a very fair, transparent
Violet, or Purple Colour.
Cochenel : Steeped as Brasil was boiled, makes a fair, transparent Purple:
As thus, fake Cochencle, and put it into the strongest Soap-lees to steep, and
it will be a fair Purple, which you may lighten and deepen at Pleasure infused
in srong Vinegar, it makes a transparent Purple.
Madder: Take Madder, four Drams; Ground Brazil, onceOuncc; Rain
water, à Quart; boil away a Third Part; then add Alum, half an Ounce,
boil it to a Pint ; then Gum Arabick, one Ounce ; which boil till it is dis
solved, cool it, stirring it often, and strain it for Use: It is a good Scarlet Die
for Leather.
Verdigrise : Take Verdigrise ground finely one Ounce, put to it a good
Quantity of common Varnish, and so much Oil of Turpentine, as will make
it thin enough to work withal; it is a good Green. Fine Verdigrise, dissolved
in Rhenish Wine or Vinegar, makes a transparent Green inclining to Blue;
ground with Juice of Rue and Gum-water, it is a pure Green; without the
Juice, it makes a glorious Emerald; mixed wich Crystal of Tartar in White
Wine Vinegar, in which Gum Arabick has been dissolved, makes a pure
Green. And Verdigrise, Alum, of each one Dram; Logwood, three Drams;
boiled in Vinegar, make a good Murry.
Gambogia: Dissolve it in fair Spring-water, and it will make a beautiful
and transparent Fellow; if you would have it stronger, to dissolve some Alum
therein; it is good for Silk, Linen, White-Leather, Parchment, Vellum, Pa
per, Quills, &c. This Colour delights in no Mixture.


To make Verdigrise and Ceruse, according to Glauber.
THESE Colours made with Vinegar in Earthen Pots set hot into Horse
Dung; bur if you dissolve your Venus and Saturn with Spirit of Nitte,

and precipitate Venus with a Lye made of the Salt of Tartar, and your Sa
turn wich Sale Water, edulcorating and drying them, the Venus will yield an
excellent Verdigrise, which will not corrode other Colours as the common
Verdigrise does; and the Saturn yields a Ceruse whiter and purer than the or
dinary, and is much better for Painting and Chirurgery.
Yellow Fustick-berry: Boil it in Water, or steep them in Alum-water, it
makes a good and transparent Yellow for the same Purpose.
Turnsole. Put it into a sharp Vinegar over a gentle Fire till the Vinegar
boil and is coloured; then take out the Turnsole and squeeze it into the Vine
gar, in which dissolve a little Gum Arabick; it shadows very well on a Car
nation or Yellow.
Litmose. Cut it into small Pieces, and steep it a Day or two in Gum-lake
Water, and you will have a transparent Blue Water to wash wich.
Flory Blue. Grind it wich Glair of Eggs, if you then add a little Roffel
it makes a light violet Blue; mixed wich White and Red-Iead, it makes a
Crane-feather Colour.
Saffron. Steeped in Vinegar and mixed wich a Gum-water is a good
Yellow. In White Wine or Sack, it makes also a good Yellow; but more
glorious if you mix it wich equal Parts of Cochenele; you may also steep it
with Glair of Egg, or grind it wich Vermilion.
Indian Lake. Ground wich Gum-Arabick Water, makes a glorious Mur
ry; in grinding it, add a little Sugar-Candy; some say it makes a deep
Pink of a Bloom Colour.
Vermilion. Being ground with Glair of Eggs and Honey or Gum-Water,
it makes a deep Red, or Scarlet Colour.
Red-lead. Grind it wich a sliff Gum-Lake Water; if you add Saffron, it
makes an Orient, and of a Marigold Colour; of itself it is between a Red
and an Orange Colour.
Rossel. Washed and tempered with Gum-water, differs not much from In
dian-Lake; but it will soon fade and grow lighter; but being tempered wich
Brazil-water, ’twill be more deep.



Indian-Lakes. Use them as you do Turnsole; they make a good transpa
rent Red Colour; into the Liquor put some Gum to bind it.
Masticott. Ground and tempered wich Gum-water, makes a good Yel
low, but not transparent.
Orpiment. Washed and coloured with Gum-water, makes an orient or
Gold Colour; there are several Degrees of it, some more red, others more
yellow.
Verditure. Washed and tempered with Gum-water, it is a good Blue, but
not transparent, or inclining to Green.
Indico. Ground and tempered with Gum-water, makes a deep Blue, and
is fit to shadow all other Blues.
Blue Bice. Washed and tempered with Gum-water, it is an excellent Blue.
There are several Sorts of it, some lighter, some fadder. Blue Bice, Verdi
ture, and Smalt, ground fingly with Gum water (or together) make a good
Blue.
Smalt. Ground with a little fine Rossel, makes a deep Violet.
Ultramarine. If you would have it deep, grind it wich Litmose-water; it
is the best and dearest of all Blues.
Sap-green. Steep it in sharp Vinegar all Night, to which add a little
Alom to raise its Colour. In Alom-water it makes a good Green to shadow
wich.
Green Bice.
Washed and tempered wich Gum-water, makes a good, but
no transparent Green.
Lamp Black, or Printers Black. Burnt, ground, or tempered with Gum
water, makes a good Black.
Ivory Black. Burnt, ground, and tempered wich Gum-water, makes a
good Black.
Fake-lead. Ground and tempered wich Gum-water, is an excellent
White.
Spanish White. Ground and tempered in like Manner with Gum-water,
makes the best of all Whites.
Spanish Brown. Burnt, ground, and tempered with Gum-water, makes a
reddilh Brown, or Liver-Colour.
Umber. Burnt, and ground, and tempered with Gum-water, makes a
good Haw-colour; and is very good to shadow with upon Gold.
Green of Walnuts. Boiled in Water, and strained, and Gum Arabick dis
solved in the Liquor to bind it, makes an excellent Colour to express High
ways, Lanes, &c.






 





Wood-Soot. Prepared in all Respects as the former, serves to the same In
tentions; and is much the better Colour.
Native Cinnabar. Grind it as Red-Lead; it is a glorious Red Colour,
much exceeding the artificial.
Of. Compounded Colours for washing of Maps, &c.
ORange Colour. Red-lead and Yellow-berries make a good Orange Co
lour: Thus, take Arnotto half an Ounce, Pot-ashes one Drachm, Wa
ter one Pound, boil it half away, then strain it, and use it hot.
It is good for White-Leather, Paper, Vellum, Quills, Parchment, &c.
Green. Take distilled Vinegar, Filings of Copper, digest till the Vinegar
is blue, which let stand in the Sun or a flow Fire till it is thick enough, and it
will be a good Green.
Or thus: Take Cedar Green (which is best of all) or instead thereof green
Bice, steep it in Vinegar and strain it; then grind it well wich fair Water, and
put to it a little Honey, and dry it well; when you use it, mix it wich Gum
water.
To make fine Indico. Take che Blossoms of Oad ihree Ounces, Amylum
one Ounce, grind them with Urine and strong Vinegar, of which make a
Cake, then dry it in the Sun, and so keep it for Use.
A Blue to wash upon Paper. Take of the best Azure an Ounce, Kermes
two Ounces, mix them, which temper wich clear Gum-water, and it will be a
glorious Colour.
To make a Venice Blue. Take quick Lime, make it into Paste with strong
Vinegar, half an Hour after put thereto more Vinegar to soften it; then add
Indico in fine Powder one Ounce, mix them, and digest it in Horse-dung for
30 or 40 Days.
Another and excellent Blue. Mix fine white Chalk with Juice of Elder-berries
full ripe, to which put a little Alom-water.
To make blue Smalt. Take fluxible Sand, Sal-nitre and Cobalt, mix them
together.
A lively Yellow. Diffolve Orpiment in Gum-water, to which put a little
ground Vermillion, grind them together, and you shall have a very lively
Colour.
 A light Green. Take Juice of Rue, Verdigrise and Saffron, grind them
well together and use them wich Gum-water.









Or thus: Take Sap-green, Flower-de-luce, or Tawny Green, which
steep in Water. Verditure and Ceruse, mixed wich a little Copper Green,
make a good light Colour.
Blue. Ultramarine, blue Bice, Smalt, and Verditure, ground singly with
Gum-water, or together, make a good Blue.
Brown. Ceruse, Red lead, English Oker, and Pink, make a good
Brown.
Spanish-Brown. To colour any Horse, Dog, or the like, you must not
calcine it; (yet not calcined it is a dirty Colour.) but to shadow Vermillion, or
lay upon any dark Ground, behind a Picture, to shade Berries in rhe darkest
Places, or to colour wooden Posts, Wainscot, Bodies of Trees and the like,
it is very good, (being burnt).
Flesh Colour. Mix White, Indian Lake, and Red-lead (according as you
would have it light or deep) and to distinguish a Man’s Flesh from a Woman’s,
mingle with ic a little Oker.
Colours of Stones. Verdigrise with Varnish makes an Emerald; with Flo
rence Lake, a Ruby; wich Ultramarine, a Sapphire.
A never-fading Green. Take Juice of Flowers of Flower-de-luce, put into
Gum-water and dry it in the Sun.
Of mixing Colours and Shadowing.
IN mixing be carrful not to make the Colour too fad, nor take the Pencils
out of one Colour and put them into another.
In mixing Colours, stir them well about the Water severally till they are
well mixed; then put them together, making the Colour fadder or lighter at
pleasure.
Green is shadowed with Indico and Yellow-berries.
Blue is shadowed with Indico, Litmose and Flory; or any of them being
steeped in Soap-ashes, and used wich Gum-water.
Garments are shadowed wich their own proper Colours; or you may mingle
the Colour with white (for che Light) and shadow it with the same Colour un
mingled; or you may take the thinnest of the Colour for the Light, and
shadow wich the thickest or Bottom of the fame.
Sap-green is only used to shadow other Greens with, and not to be laid for a
Ground in any Garment.



Lake ought not to be shadowed with any Colour, for it is a dark Red; but
for a Variety you may shadow it with Bice, or blue Verditure, which wil
make it like changeable Taffata.
The Shadow for Yellow-berries is Umber; but for Beauty’s Sake with Red
lead, and che darkest Touches with Spanish Brown; and for Variety wich
Copper-green, blue Bice or Verditure.
White sets off Blues and Blacks very well; Red sets off well with Yellow;
Yellows with Reds; fad Blucs, Browns, Greens, and Porples.
Blues set off well wich Yellows, Reds, Whites, Browns, and Blacks; and
Green sets off well wich Purples, and Reds.
More especially, all light Colours are shadowed wich Colours of the same
Nature, bur more fad; as fer Example; Vermilion is shadowed wich Lake,
or Spanish Brown: Verditer and Bice are shadowed wich Indico: Camboge and
Yellow-berries are shadowed wich Umber, wich Red-lead, or Vermillion: Red
lead is shadowed wich Lake, or Spanish Brown: Masticote is shadowed with
red Orpiment: Spanish Brown is shadowed with burnt Umber, wich Brasil.
water: Umber is shadowed with Umber burnt: Rosset and Brasil are shadowed
with Spanish Brown mixed wich Brasil-water: Verdigrise is shadowed with In
dico mixed with Yellow-berry Water: Wood Soot and Walnut Shells are she
dowed with Umber.
From the Mixtures of the forementioned Colours, infinite Varieries almost
may arise, even whatsoever one pleases: But for our Purpose of washing
Maps, Gloves, Pictures, Landskips, &c. the most transparent Colours are
principal; of which these are chief, viz. Brasil, Logwood, Indian Cake, Turn
sole, Cambogie, Saffron, Yellow-berries, Litmose, Sap green, Verdigrise, Wood¬
soot, Walnut-shells; of these you may by Mixture make several Compounds;
as,
A Compound Green: Mix Verdigrise Water wich Yellow-berry Water; it
will be transparent, and you may make it deeper or lighter accordling to the
Proportion that you take of either.
A Compound Blue Colour: Mix Litmose Water with Yellow-berry Water,
and you will have a transparent fad Blue, which you may heighten or deepen
as the former at Pleasure.
A Compound Orange Colour: It is made by mixing Brasil Water wich Yel
low-berry Water of a transparent Colour.



Of Colours for washing Landskips.
GREEN mixed with White, Pink, Bice, Masticot, Smalt, Indico, or
Ceruse; or Blue Verditure mix’d with a few Yellow-berries makes a
good Green for Landskips.
For the Saddest Hills, use Umber burnt; for the lightest Places, put Yellow
to the burnt Umber; for other Hills, lay Copper-green thickened on the
Fire, or in the Sun; for the next Hills Farther off, mix Yellow-berries with
Copper-green; let the fourth Part be done wich green Verditure; and the
farthest and Faintest Places wich blue Bice, or blue Verditure, mingled with
White, and shadowed wich blue Verditure, in the Shadows indifferent
thick.
Let the Highways be done with white and red Lead, and for Variety yel
low Oker; shadow it wich burnt Umber, which you may use for sandy
Rocks and Hills.
Rocks may be done wich several Colours, in some Places black and white
in other Places red and white, and others blue and white, and the like as you
see convenient.
The Water must be black Verditure and white, shadowed with green and
blue Verditure, when the Banks cast a green Shadow upon the Water, and
Water is black shadowed, then shade it with Indico, Green thickened, and
blue Verditure.
Colour Buildings wich as much Variety of pleasant Colours as may be ima
ginable, yer let Reason be your Rule in mixing your Colours: You may
sometimes use White and Black for the Wall, Conduits, or other Things.
For Brick Houses and the like, red Lead and white; if many Houses stand to
gether, set them off wich Variety of Colours, as Umber and White; Lake
and White; Red Lead and White, and the like.
Lastly for the Sky, use Masticot or Yellow-berries, and White for the
lightest and lowest Places; red Rosset, and white for the next Degree; blue Bice, 
and white for the other; blue Bice, or Blue for the highest.
These Degrees and Colours must be so wrought together, that the Edge of
each Colour may not receive any Sharpness; that is, so as that you cannot
perceive where you began to lay them, being io drowned one in another.


Of the Practise of Washing.
WITH the Alom-water wet over the Picture to be coloured, for that
keeps che Colours from sinking into the Paper, and will add a Lustre
unto them, make them shew fairer and keep them from fading.
Then let the Paper dry of itself (being washed with Alom-water) before vou
lay on the Colours; or before you wet it again, for some Paper will necd wet
ting four or five Times.
The Washing of the Paper must be done with a large Pencil Brush.
But If you intend to varnish your Pictures after you have coloured them,
of wafhing rhein wich Alom-water, firit fize chem with new Size made
instead good white Starch, with a very fine Brush; and this you must be sure to
do all over, for else the Varnish will sink through.
Having thus prepared your Work, go to laying on your Colours according
to your former Directions, sulting them as near as may be, to the Life of every
Thing.
But before you lay on your Colours, you must know how to temper them;
which you may do in this Manner. 1. Such Colours as are ground with fair
Water; take a small Quantity of them, put it into a Horse Mussle-shell,
putting thereto some Gum-water, and the Colour in a little Time will be
softened; then wich your Finger, being very clean, bruise the Colour against
the Shell, till you find no Knot undissolved; after wich a clean Pencil stroke
down the Colour to the Bottom of the Shell, and it is fit for Use; if it be too
thick, add more Gum-water to it. 2. Such Colours as are washed you must
temper in a Shell with Gum-water, in the same Manner as the former. 3.
Such Colours as are steeped, the Liquor only of them is to be used without
any other Preparation.
The Picture being painted, you may wich Size paste your Maps or Pictures
upon Cloth, thus: Wet the Sheet or Cloch therein, wring it out, and strain
it upon a Frame, or nail it upon a Wall or Board, and so paste your Maps or
Pictures thereon.
Lastly, if the Picture be to be varnished, having thus fixed it into its proper
Frame, then varnish it with a proper Varnish (by the following Rules) and the
Work will be fully finished.


 








How to lay on your Colours.
FIRST provide yourself of Pencils of several Sizes, and if you will be cu
rious, you ought to have a great and a small to each respective Colour;
it not, you must always have by you a Dish of fair Water, in which you
must wash and cleanse your Pencil, wiping it wich a clean Linen Cloth, be
fore you put into another Colour.
For your Pencils chuse those that are good, thus: See that they be fullest
next the Quili, descending or lessening into a small Room or sharp Point,
which you may fee by putting the Hair into your Mouth, and drawing it thro
your Lips once or twice, then you will fee what it is, and if you find any
straggling Hairs, singe them off with the Flame of a Candle.
Being thus provided with Colours and Pencils, if you design to lay any
Colour about the Edges of any Map, Part, Piece, or Division of Ground,
in a Plat; as suppose you would inclose a particular Field, or Close in a Mea
dow, with Yellow; with your Pencil take Camboge, or Yellow-berry Water
a very small Quantity, and on the Inside of the Black Lead Line draw the
Colour along of an equal Breadth (as near as you can) from the Line, broader
or narrower as your Field is in Bigness; not daubing the Field or Close all
over with the Colour, which would be but an Abuls to your Map or
Plat.
Then having gone round the Close or Field in this Manner, with your
Colour, wet your Pencil in your Mouth, or have by you a small Quantity of
Water to dip it in, and strike along the Inside of the coloured Line, bring
ing it more down towards the Center of the Field; and this will sweeten your
Colour, and make it shew as if it lost itself by Degrees, to the very Colour of
your Paper or Parchment. This Course is to be taken not only fer Yellows,
but for all other Colours. Lastly, with a Pen (if you cannot do it hand
somely with a Pencil) take some of the Colour which shadows the Colour
vou have already used about the Field, and go over your Black-lead only, so
shall your Field be finished.
Lastly after the same Manner you may adorn all the Parts in your Plat or
Map, of divers Colours; observing this, that you colour not two Fields ad
joining to one another both of the same Colour; and therefore it behoves you
to know what Colours do fet off one another best; and as near as you can, to
lay Closes or Fields, adjoining to one another, of two such Colours, that one
Shadow may serve both.


Of the making of Varnishes.
VARNISH for painting in Oil. Take Mastick, two Ounces; Oil of Tur
pentine, one Ounce; put the Mastick in Powder into Oil, and melt it
over the Fire, letting it boil littlie or nothing, left it be clammy; when it is
enough you may know by putting in a Hen’s Feather, for then it will burn it.
Varnish for painted Pictures. Take white Rosin, one Pound; Plum-tree
Gum (or Gum-arabick) Venice Turpentine, Linfeed Oil, of each two
Ounces; first melt the Rosin and strain it very hot; steep the Gum in Oil
Olive (Oil of Ben is better) till it is dissolved, and strain it, to which put
the Turpentine and Rolin, and over a flow Fire mingle them all till they are
well dissolved: When you use it, use it hot.
Anotber for the same. Take Olibanum and Gum Sandrick in Powder,
which mingle wich Venice Turpentine, melting and incorporating them still
over a gentie Fire, then strain it hot.
When you use it let it be hot, and your Varnish will shew well; it dries im
mediately.
Another for the same. Take Oil of Linseed, which distil in a Glass Retort,
one Ounce; fair Amber dissolved, three Ounces; mix them over a slow Fire,
and it is done.
A very good Varnish for Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Stone, Wood, Vellum, or
Paper. Take Benjamin (made into a fine Powder between two Papers) put
it into a Vial, and cover it with Spirit of Wine four Fingers above it, and
let it stand three or four Days; then strain it, and it will be bright and shining,
drying immediately, and retaining its Brightness many Years.
If you varnish Gold, or any Thing gilded before the Straining, yon should
put in a few Blades of Saffron for Colour-fake; but if Silver, or any Thing
white, you ought to use the white Part of Benjamin only.
A Varnish particularly for Gold, Silver, Tin, or Copper. Take Linseeed Oil
six Ounces, Mastick, Aloes, Epatick, of each one Ounce; put the Gums in
Powder into the Oil, into a glazed Earthen Pot, which cover with another
boiling them together, in the Bottom of which let be a Hole, whereinto put
a small Stick wich a broad End to stir withal; cover them all over with Clay,
except the Hole, set it over the Fire, and stir it as often as it feetheth for a little
while, then strain it for Use. First let the Metal be polished, then strike it
over wich this Varnish.





