For the Curious PoUNC GEN
TLEMEN and LADIES,
py
That Rudy and practife the noble and commendable ART of DR AWINC,
CoLOURING and JAPANNING,
Ki
A New and Compleat

l


3

D8

R A


1
Ke
2


Confifting of Variety of C. A S S Es, viz.
Whole Fisures in divers Pofitions, and all the feveral Parts of the Human Body
from Head to Foot; light, ary, loofe Landlkips; Pertpective Views of Sea-
5C
Ports, Forts, Ruins, C
 the clofe Study, for a Series of Vears, of
Being
ring of
3.
ARe Iate IVII. a as 4V
6
Miniature- Painter, and Drawing-Mafter to Chriff's-Hiofpital.
In Sixty-two Copper-Plates, engraved by himself,
Delign’d chiefly for young Beginners, and now firft publifhed from the Author'’s Originals, very neceffary and ufeful
for all Drawing-Schools, Boarding-Schools, (Cc. Cc.
T0
WHICH IS
PR E FIK E D.
R A W I N Gs
F ROD
10 L
C T1 O

An I
Rules
Containing a Description of the Inftruments and their respective IIfes, and the Materials proper for Drawing;
for managing the Pencil, and the beft Method for artaining Perfection in the Axr; with Iaftructions by which a young Practi-
tioner shall be enabled to form a Judgment as well of his own Performances as thote of ochers; with ealy, proper, and neceffury
Leffons for him at his firft Entrance. Allo, the Names of the Colours uted, with fairiations to temper and mix them, and fit
them for Painting. Likewife, Colours for wathing Landikips, or Prines of any Kind; wish plain and eaty Rules for the Ladies
Japanning.
Tranflared from the French of Monficur G E RRAR D DE L AT RE S S E, and
improved with Extrads from C. A. DU FR F S No v.
 

S,
5.

I
S,
with h tmaaasAhsDaManmMaRe ymmknssnsmkmDmM RmGMhmn Mae
23
1.
L 0 NDO N. Printed for B. DI CK I NSON, at the Corner of R.it-Lavage-fon, on Lusgore 14½.





ti

 in b



1.3
 e e me
F

whofe Names
E
2fC
hereunto
sublcribed,
carefully
having
peruted the feveral Sheets
herein contained, recommend them as very
proper


Pieiw to Mulate Vouth in the Art of DRA
WING,
68
T. Faber, in Bloomsbu
Square;
1
S. F. Ravenet, in Fora-Building
55

rect;
G. Scotin, in Newpor
L. P. Bortard, in Lambeth- Marsh;
8
S. Wale, in Lon
A6re 2
S. and N. Buck, in the Temple.


f

I
IN.
T R O I
LN
C T
Ihe
&
ONE of the Arts, which have been invented for the Ufe or Amufement of Mankind, can boaft
to great a Number of Admirers as that of DRAwINC; and very juftly, for it gives fuch an agree-

able Reprefentation of Things, that we are apt to fancy we fee Objects which have no real Exifience,
and that the Imagery before us, which is no more than a painted Cloth, actually breathes. The whole
Creation, with all its Works and Wonders, comes within the Power of its imitation. 1t fets before us
Things long fince buried in Oblivion, exhibits to perfect View the moft noted Actions of People who
have been long in their Graves, and thews as our Anceffors, in a perfect Refemblance of their Fearures,
thro' feveral fucceffive Generations. There is fcarce any Art or Profettion which receives not fome
Affiftance from DRAwINC; without her Help, no Defigns or Mcdels can be well executed; to her
the Mathematician, Archifect and Navigator is continually indebted; no Station of Life is exempted
from the Practice of it, from the General at the Head of an Army, to the Mechanic, who fubfifts by his
Handicraft. This excellent Art feems inculcated by Nature herfelf, for we fee it not only practifed by
grown Proficients, but even Children frequently drawing various Figures, and that to curioully, as even
to aftonith us with their Productums.
That therefore Fouth may be inftructed how to attain to a good Degree of Perfection in the Art, we
shall prefcribe the beft Rules we are able, at leaft fuch, as we apprehend, are abfolutely neceftary
for their Information; after which, we shall give them fome very ufeful and pertinent Inftructions for
their betrer underftanding of this Art.
R v 1 E s for the Direction of the young Practitioner in the Art of DEAW IN C.

RAWING may be defined, a Reprefentacion, by Lines and Shades, of any Object in Nature or
D Art; the imitation of another Draught, or the exprefting the Likeness of fomething conceived in

our own Mind. In lmitations of Nature, or copying from any Draught, the Form and Shape of the
Figures is the firtt Thing that makes an Impreftion on the Mind, which is afterwards reduced into
Form by manual Operation, which draws the Lines; hence appears the Neceflity of frequently employ-
111E
B


2
ing the Mind in curioutly obferving whatever Objects are propoted to it, by which Wleans it will be
more capable of conceiving rruly and exactly of Objects, and the Hland will more eafily and juftly de-
lineate that which is to ftrongly fixed in the Memory.
I: is highly neceilary for him who would draw well, to underfland what is truly good and beauti-
ful in a Draught : In order to which, the moft expeditious Method will be, to compare Prints and
Draughts together. Many Painters have grievoully mifcarried, by fatisfying themfelves only with imitat-
ing had Pieces, without giving any Scope to their own Genins, of improving their Knowledge in judg-
ing of the Beauties and Defects of a Picture. The Ideas in our own Minds may in a great Meafure
ferve us for a Model, and to improve thefe, we should frequently examine the Performances of others,
and our Obfervations on Pieces that are efteemed correctly done, should be nice and critical; we should
attentively confider every Print and Draught we fee, and every Beauty we find in it, endeavour to fix on
our Memory, particularly the Freedom and Boldness of the Out-lines, and the Proportion
of the feveral Parts. Above all Things it is neceffary that the Judgment be rightly informed, for then
the voung Practitioner will make the greater and quicker Progress in his Improvement, than if he goes
on in Practice without encreafing his Knowledge; for his Succets will be more owing to his Genins
thin his Hand.
The Labour of the Hand muft indeed aid and affift that of the Brain; for whoever would be an able
Arrift, muft, by continual Practice, make the Art habitual. The Rules of all Arts are foon learned,
but to attain Perfection in any of them, a long Pradice and striet Attention are abfolutely requifite. It
is a true Mexim, that Laziness was never the Parent of any Thing excellent. Drawing is not attain-
able har by a Length of Time, nor Perfection in it acquirable, unless the Iland be frequently employed
in the Pultice, and the Mind in judging; every Day should produce fomething, and the Hand give
frequent Proofs of the Speculations of the Head.
Ac some Part of every Day should be spent in the Practice of this Art, we would recommerd the
Murning as fitteft for that Purpofe; which therefore should be employed in perfecting yourfeives
both in Judgment and Practice.
He


 

f 


371
11

Fe
J. 


3J
He who propofes to gain an Entrance into Minerva’s Cabinct, muft make his Approaches gradually;
thus in the Art of Drawing, tho' the Reprefentation of the human Figure, or many Figures in a Piece,
be the principal Object which every Practitioner has chieffy in View; yet he muft not make this his firft
Effay, but proceed to that by proper and regular Steps. Let the firft Part of his Study be to draw Rreight
and curved Lines, (quare, round, regular, irregular and inanimate Figures; allo Parts of human Figures,
as the Rye, the Ear, the Hland, Feet, oc. This will be a good Foundation whereon to erect his future
Structure; for by this Means he will acquire a Readiness of Hand, a Freedom and Exactnets in drawing
Lines, and accuffom himself to the Exercife of his Patience; Qualifications abfolutely necellary for one
who would be eftcemed an exact Copier of Nature, especially in Pieces that require a Length of Time,
and more than ordinary Skill in the Performance: He who begins well, has more than half perform’d his
Work.
The Out-lines are the circumferent Strokes of a Figure; the Perfection of a good Out-line confifts in
the Freedom and Boldness of the Stroke, and the due Proportion of all its Parts: To attain which, the
Scholar is admonithed to reject all mean and trifling Practices, fuch as tracing the Originals thro' oil’d
Paper, or making ufe of thin Paper for the fame Purpofe, or taking Advantage of an artificial Light.
The fe of fuch Deceptions will certainly prevent all Progress and Improvements in Drawing. Neither
should the Rule and Compaffes be ufed, except in Arcbitetfure, or to raife a Perpendicular, in order to
form a Square, or fome other Figure to draw in; or, when an Artift has finithed his Draught, he takes
this Method to compare it with the Original, to fee whether there is an Agreement between them; how-
ever, the bare Eye, if ufed to it, will be fufficient for fuch a Difcernment.
For forme Tune at firft, be fatisfied with practifing upon a good Out-line, without aiming at a
finithed Piece, nor is it neceffary that you should, as yet, hatch or fhade your own Draught; your
Out-line at firft maft be sketch’d with flight and faint Touches, that you may have an Opportunity
to amend it where proper, which fo will have the less Appearance of being retouched. In every Stroke
endeavour an exact Imitation, and whenever you mend the Out-line, either by taking away a little of
its Parte, or by swelling the others, be fure to lofe nothing of the Freedom and Boldness of it. Mind
frequently to compare your Copy with the Original, take particular Notice of what is amiss, and let not
the


4
the leaft Fault efcape uncorrected, that fo in the Draught, which you may afterwards make of the
fame Original, thofe Errors may be avoided; for you muft not pass from one Original to another, tiil
you are in a good Degree Mafter of the firft. The beft and jureft Method of Practice is, to make a
great Number of Sketches of the fame Figure, in each of which endeavour to excel what you did in
the former.
In your firtt Operations proceed flowly, for hafty Productions are feldom beautiful or correct, and a
Defign is often thus spoiled in the firft Attempt; it is no eafy Matter to amend had Habits; Expedition
in Performance is acquired by a Conftancy in Practice. As the young Beginner will have frequent Occa-
tion for the Exercife of his Patience, he muft be careful to fubdue his Paftions; in his firfl Attempts he
mutt proceed deliberately and flowly, and ufe his utmoft Endeavours to perform well, fecure every Stroke,
and try all his Skill to make one good Draught, rather than to hurry over, in a negligent Manner, a great
Number of bad ones.
When you fit down to work, and all the Time you are at it, rake a srict and clofe View of your
Original, and in your Mind divide it into feveral Parts; take due Notice of the Length, Breadch, and
Similitude of each Purt; observe the Proportion of each to the other, and to the Whole, the Diltances
between the Parrs, and the Parts that lie parallel, or are exactly oppolite to each other.
When you have finithed your Copy, and laid afide both the Example and Draught, let your Mind
be employ’d for fome Time on other Affairs, then return to it again, and view your Work afreth, and
177
very probably you will difcover Faults which did not appear to you before. 1is eafy to imagine, that
when the Eves have been engaged a confiderable Time on the fame Object, the Form and Shape of it
become familiar to him, and that on a Revifal his Mind may entertain different Notions of it than in
the Light it appear’d before; and affure yourfelf, whatever Pains you beflow in reviewing and com-
paring your Copy with the original Draught, in order to difcover and amend your Faults, will vot
be ufelets; but you will find this Advantage in it, that it will be a Means of perfecting you in that
particular Draught, and improve you in the Knowledge of Lines, Draughts and Proportions, and by
continuing to practite this Method, you will in a litde Time find yourfelf qualified for the exacteft
Imitations.
Let


3I
Let your Out-lines be large and finooth, and drawn in a flowing gliding Manner; for if they are too
streight they will carry a difagreeable Stiffness, but if drawn according to this Direction, they will have
the Refemblance of Life and Motion, and appear with an eaty Grace.
In all your Draughts let there be a perfect Relation between the Parts and the Whole, and Uniformity
run thro' the whole Piece, that is, let every Member be made for its own Hlead, and agree with it; you
muft not put firong Limbs to a Body that is confumptive, or to old Age in its Decay; nor muft you be
lets exact in pairing the Eyes, Ilands, Legs and Feet, for the leaft Dilproportion will be a Blemith; or
when any of the Limbs are not proportionate to the reft. In the Inftructions which we shall prefently
give, the Learner will find Directions to avoid any fuch Miltakes and Solecifins.
When you draw the Mufcles, take Care to infert them according to the Rules of Anaromy; they muft
not be crouded into fmall Sections, but kept as entire as poffible, and only the principal Mufcles ex-
preffed; in a Member which is to express any particular Force, they muft be thewn large, as in the Leg
when it fupports the Body, or in the Arm when it lifts a Weight, Oc. and be more (well’d than in any
other Members.
Thus when the Limbs and Members are drawn with few and large Mufcles, they thew themfelves
with Majetty and Beauty; fo in Draperies, the Beauty of which confifts not in a Multiplicity of Folds,
but in their plain Simplicity and natural Order. The Drapery muft feem to cover the Part loofely, for if
it be too clofe and Hreight, the Piece will appear too fiff; the Plaits muft be large, folding naturally
over the Parts which are to be feen underneath, which is done by placing properly the Lights and Shades.
In covering both the Extremities of the Joints, fuch as the Shoulders, Elbows, Knees, Oc. Care muft
be taken to mark them in fuch a Manner as to diftinguith their Shape. And in Fact, Drapery is no
trifling or intignificant Part of this Art; for, if well done, it adds a new Grace to the Picture, gives an
enlivening Air to its other Beauties, and never fails of pleafing the Eyes of the Spectator,
760
B


6

The MATERIALS proper for Drawing

HE Materials neceffary for this Purpofe, are either Pencils of Black Lead, or Black Lead fixed in
a Porcrayon, Charcoal, Chalk black, red and white, Paftils or Crayons, Pens, Hair-Pencils, and
Indian Ink.
Nothing is more proper for Beginners to practife with than Black Lead, in drawing plain Lines, Coc.
eSpecially as this makes a fmoother Stroke than can be done by Charcoal or Crayons. Cut your Lead
with a Penknife till you have brought it to a fine Point, that it may give a neat fnall Stroke. Or you
may fix a Piece of the same Lead in a Porcrayon. But whatever it is you fketch with, ute yourfelf to
hold it long-ways in your Hand, and let your Fingers be much farther from the Point than the Nip of
a Pen is when you write, and let your Strokes be formed with light gentle Touches; ihus will you gra-
dually acquire a ready Command of Hland, and you will with Eafe make your Our-line free and bold.
In practifing after Limbs and Figures it will be proper, at firfl, to draw the rough Skerch with Char-
coal, which is more eafily discharged from Paper than Slack Lead. Slir your Charcoul in Imall flender
Pieces, one of which fix in a Porcrayon the better to hold it; then tharpen it to a Point, and lightly,
but correctly, fketch out your Original. When you have to done, if there is any Thing you miflike in
the Performance, you may eafily wipe it out by bruthing it with a Feather or clean Rag. When you
have fecured your Out-lines with Charcoal, proceed thus; take a Feather and wipe them flightly over
with it that they may appear faint, then go over the Lines with Black or Red-Lead, and correct them
wherever you can. If after all this you slill fee any Errors to amend, take a Bit of Crumb of a Htale
white Loaf, with which you may difcharge any Part of it you pleafe, by rubbing it therewich.
You may afe Red-Lead, or Red or Black Chalk in the fame Manner as Blick-Lead.
If in Heightnings, or when you would give ftrong Lights, or draw on colour’d Puper, ufe white Chalk
and Tobacco-pipe Clay.
Piffils


7
Piffils and Crayons are Terms which perhaps the Learner may not readily underfland; they are Colours
mixed up with Tobacco-pipe Clay, which muft be worked into a Pafte, and rolled up into the Thicknels
of a Cuill two or three Inches long, and then dried; when fit for Ufe, the Artiff works with them on
colour’d Paper, but not in Hlatchings, as Black and Red-Lead commonly are; the Colours are rubbed
and worked together, to that there is no fingle Stroke, but the whole appears as if only a Brush had been
ufed.
The Crayons is a very expeditious Manner of Drawing, and when skilfully handled, always produce a
delicate Softness and fine Expreftion; however, it muft be obferved, that the careless or rude Touch of a
Finger may at once blot out all the Beauties of this fine Work; to prevent which, let it be preferved in
Books, or in a Frame under a Glafs. The Crayons will be work’d more eafily if the Grain of the Paper
be a little rough, and be express’d more flrongly than when the Paper is quite finooth; or if the Paper
be fomewhat dark or brownith, or what they call a whiced-brown, it will give a Relief to the tender
Parts of the Work, by shewing the light Strokes of it.
In Chading Draughts fometimes Pens are afed for harching the cross Strokes; however, the Hair Pencil
and Indian Ink ferve much better for this Ofe, which are not only proper for hatching by Strokes, but for
thading by a Method much more expeditious, that is, by Wathing, which is the fame Way of working
as with Hair Pencils and Water Colours. In Hatching, the Shades are produced by Lines, not unlike
the Strokes which fhade a Print engraved; but in Washing, no Lines appear, but the Shades thew them-
selves like thofe in a Metsitinto Print.
Of the Tints of Lights and Shadores.
8
IGHTS and Shades, when judiciouly difpoted, give the Appearance of Subftance, Nature and
Diftance to fuch Bodies as the Pencil repretents. Suppofe, for Iaftance, a Circle drawn on a Piece

of Paper; imagine you fee it fill’d up with any even Colour, you can conceive of it no otherwife than
as a round, flat equal Body; but if you put the Hrongeft of the Colour in the Middle, and weaken it
r
312


gradually towards the Extremities, you will perceive an agreeable Deception, and inslead of a flat even
Body, it will have the Refemblence of a Ball or Globe.
Wherever the Colour appears the moft lively, there the Object catches the Eye firft, and teems neareft
to ir; but where the Colour weakens and goes off, it grows faint, and at length feems to tly off and
break away from the Sight. Thus the Painter, by breaking and diminithing his Colours, throws that
behind which he has a Mind shall be lefs vifible.
When you round the Parts of an Object, it requires the niceft Touch of the Pencil to draw the Ex-
tremities to, as that in tarning they shall lofe themfelves infensibly and confafedly, without too fudden a
o7
Irantition of the Light into the Shadows, or of the Shadows into the Light, but let the one pass into
the other as it were reciprocally and imperceptibly, that is, by Degrees of Light inmo Sh:dow and Shadow
into Light.
When your Objects are to be painted light, you muft allow a due Breadth of Shadow to fustain them;
if dark, a fudden Light muft rife behind them, to feparate them from the Ground, or from other Objects
that are placed behind them, or elfe they will appear as if they were sticking upon each orher in 2 con-
fated Manner; whereas by a juft Opposition of Light to Shade and Shade to Light, a Projection is given,
which makes a Separation of the Objects.
Vou muft keep a proper Ballance between Light and Shadows, and in introducing a broad Light into
your Draught, you muft give it a large Shadow. You muft make your Lights ferve as a Repote to the
Darks, and the Darks to the Lights; thus a Drapery, which is coloured red or yellow in some Places, in
others will take a brown with a good Effect,
The hye fees an Objet the more frongly and plainly the nearer it is; Diftance werkens the Sight;
the farther off an Object is, the more imperfectly it is perceived; thofe Objects therefore which fland
neareft to View should be better finith’d than thofe which are thrown bekind; but obferve, that they
muft have a reciprocal Dominion over each other, to that as one Object by its Heightenings forces others
to appear at a Dillance, to the fame Object maft be thrown farther from the Sight, than others which
are illuminated more krongly.
It


9
It should be farther obferved in regard to Lights and Shades, that it is not enough that remote Ob-
jects be coloured in a more faint and langaid Manner, but the more or less diffant they are, the Parts
should appear more or lefs confufed; the Eye cannot minutely difcriminate an Object which is at a
Diffance from it. We can fee human Figures at a Streer's Length, but cannot difcern the Features of
their Faces or the Plaits in their Cloarns; to the innumerable Leaves of a diftant Grove appear to the
Sight but as one MMass.
White, pure and unmixed, has two different Properties, it draws an Object nearer to it, and it car-

ries it off to a farrher Diftance.
When it is placed with Black, the Opposition of Light and
Dark brings the Object more into View, and renders it more fenfible; but pure White, as it is the
lighteft of Colours, will fy off to the remoteft View, unless forced forwards, and fupported by Black.
On the other Hand, pure Black is deemed the heavieff, moft earthy and moft fenfible of all Colours,
and prefents Objects nearer to the Sight; you muft caft it into Maffes, confufe it infenfibly, and give it
its proper Repofes.
In the Reprefentations of Bodies, you muft always give them fuch Lights as are moft proper and con-
venient for their fppofed Situations. Suppofe the Objects before you be in the Fields or open ffir, and
the Sun obicured with Clouds, your Bufiness is to introduce an univerfal Light, tho' not vivid or frong,
your Shades too muft be faint. But when the Sun appears in all its Glory, your Lights muft then be
very flrong and bold, and the Shadows exceeding dark.
Suppofe again, that the Object you reprefent is in a Room, a little, tho' not very much illuminated,
and to furvey it you take your Station without, and ftand level with the Light that ftrikes upon it,
that Figure muft have very foff Shadows, which will thew it very beautifully, and tho' the Shadow be
to foft, yet the Figure will feem as if it were emboffed, and have a very hold Appearance.
When a fmall Light illuminates a Body, the Shadows on the dark side appear large, and their Ex-
tremities very bold; whereas a large Light renders the Shadows on the darker Side more diftinct and
much fofter in their Limitations.
feseil
C


10
Ufeful Instructions for the young Prattitioner.
HOEVER would make any Proficiency in the Art of Drawing, muft firft underftand Geome-
try; for it is by this, and the Help of Lines, that we are instructed to take the Length and
Largeness of Bodies, and know whether they be streight or curve, round, oval, square, or any other
imaginable Figure. But as it is not our Bufinets here to treat of Geometry, or give thofe Geometri-
cal Rules which are ufed in the Art of Drawing, we shall refer the Learner to Le Clerc'’s Practical Geo-
metry.
He that would be a perfect Mafter in the Art of Drawing, muft learn to (Ketch well, to which
therefore he ought to give the greatelt Attention. In copying a Statue, fome Perfons begin with the
Head, which they entirely finith before they proceed any farther; by which means it frequently hap-
pens, that they either make the Head too little or too big, and the other part to difproportionate, that
there is but small Refemblance of the Original, occafioned chiefly thro' a Want of duly obferving Di-
fances. When therefore you have any Thing to draw, let your firft Care be to divide it into its diffe-
rent Parts, then meafure the Diftances in the Original with your Eye, mark the Diftances and Length
of each Divifion with a faint Line on your Paper, and make a Sketch of the whole Figure before you
proceed to finith any Part of it; fo will you fecure the Proportions in the exacteft Manner.
The Learner will find among thefe Examples feveral Draughts of the Parts of the Face, as the Eyes,
Nofe, Mouth, 8c. viewed in different Pofitions, all which he should practife upon before he attempts a
whole Face; for which Purpofe we shall lay down fuch Leffons and Inftructions concerning an Oval,
with its feveral Changes and Variations, and of the Cross in the fame, as will enable him to figure all
Bowings and Returnings, Reclinations and Inclinations of all Sorts of Faces.
The Head, you are to obterve, has the Shape and Form of an Egg, or Oval; this Head has Eyes,
Eye-brows, Nofe and Ears, which must be placed in their proper Situations, by running a. Cross thro'
the Oval. By this Means you will divide the Perpendicular in the Oval into four equal Parts, which
will make the Head to meafure four Nofes in Height, the Face three only; the Diamerer crofting the
Perpendicular, divide into five Parts, each being the Breadth or Wideness of one Eye; this Diameter
is called the ocular Line, or that whereon the Lyes are to be placed; you muft therefore draw a Rreight
Line


II.
Line from the Top of the right Ear thro' both Eyes to the Top of the left Ear; and the Line drawn
from the Top of the Head down thro' the Nofe, Mouth and Chin, is called the Perpendicular, cross-
ing the Diameter or Ocular-line at right Angles; thefe Lines together we call the Cross of the Oval;
upon which Crots (whatever Situation the Face is in) you muft place the Eyes, Nofe, Mouth and Ears
in proper Places.
When you underfland this thoroughly, and have fixed it in your Mind, you will foon be able to
draw good Faces out of your own Fancy and Invention, and execute them in a mafterly Manner: But
if you accuftom yourfelf to draw only after a Print, Draught or Picture, without knowing the fe of
the Crots-lines; and the Proportion of a Face with its Parts, you take a wrong Method, don't Know
what you are about, and will never attain to any Degree of Perfection.
Having thus inftracted you in the feveral Methods of drawing a Face, we come now to give you
the Dimenfions and Proportions of the feveral Parts of the Body.
It was cuftormary with the Antrents to allow eight Hleads to their Figures, tho' fome of them have
only feven. The Moderns ufually divide a Figure into ten Faces, taking if at the Crown of the Head,
and ending at the Sole of the Foot, thus:
From the Crown of the Head to the Forehead, is the third Part of the Face.
The Face takes it Beginning at the Root of the loweft Ifairs on the Forehead, and its End is at the
Bottom of the Chin.
Painters divide the Face into three proportional Parts; namely, the Forehead, the Nofe, the Mouth
and Chin.

The Diftance from the Chin to the Pit betwixt the Collar-bones, meafures two Lengths of a Nofe.
From the fame Pit to the Bottom of the Breaft, one Face.
From thence to the Navel, one Face.
From the Navel to the Privities, one Face.
The Diffance from the Genitals to the upper Part of the Knee, two Faces.
The Knee itfelf meafures half a Face.
Meafure from the lower Part of the Knce to the Ancle, and you will find it two Faces.
From the Ancle to the Sole of the Foot, is half a Face.
When


8


12
When a Man firetches out his Arms as wide as he can, a line drawn from the Top of the longeft
4
Finger of the right Hland to the Top of the longeft Finger on the left, will meafure the Length of his
whole Body, or he will find himself as broad as he is long.
The Diftance from Side to side of the Breafts, two Faces.
The Bone of the Arm called Humerus, from the Shoulder to the Elbow, meafures two Faces.
The Bone called Cubirus, with part of the Hland, meafuring from the Tip of the Elbow to the
Root of the little Finger contains two Faces.
From the Box of the Shoulder-blade to the Pit betwixt the Collar-bones, is one Face.
In taking the Meafurement of the Breadth, from the Extremity of one Finger to the other, to fee
if it be equal to the Length of the Body, you are to obferve that the Boxes of the Elbows with the
Humerus, and of the Humerys with the Shoulder-blade, bear the Proportion of half the Face, when the
rms are fretched out.
The Sole of the Foot meafures the fixth Part of the Figure.
The Hand is the Length of the Face.
The Thumb, of the Nofe.
From the Place where the Pectoral Mufcle, or that Mufcle which makes the Breaft, difappears, to
the Middle of the Arm, meafures four Nofes.
Carry your Meafure from the Middle of the Arm to the Begining of the Hand, you will find
it five Nofes.
Your longeft Toe is the length of your Nofe.
The Tops of the two Nipples, and the Pit betwixt the two Collar-bones, make an equilateral Triangle.
No certain Meafures can be given for the Breadth of the Limbs; becaufe even the Meafures are
changeable according to the different Quality of the Perfons, and Movement of the Mufcles.
Thefe farther Rules are to be observed in drawing a Head, viz.
You muft fet the Eyes at fuch a Diftance from one another, that you may place one between them.
5
The Mouth, when thut, has the Dimenfions of an Eyc.
The Ears are always on a Level with the Eyes, a-top and below with the Nofe, whether it be short
or long.
The


I
3
The Noltril should be placed exactly againft the Corner of the Eyc.
In a Face that is flat, the Cheeks fwell out, and in one that is lean, the Checks fall in, and the Jaw-
bones fland out.
Having finifhed our Inftructions for the drawing of the Face, let us now proceed to draw a Man at
full Length.
In the firft Place you muft make your Oval, then divide it as before directed; you then draw a Per-
pendicular Line from the Top of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, which you muft divide into eight
Lengths. This will be a good Direction in placing your Figure upright, or in whatever Action the
Pofture requires, where it either falls in or fwells out. You muft make the Length of one Head be-
tween the Chin and the Breafts, the third Meafure muft reach to the Navel, the fourth from thence to
the Genitals, the fifth to the Middle of the Thigh, the fixth comes to the lower Part of the Knee, the
feventh to the lower Part of the Leg, and the laft reaches to the Heel or Sole of the Foot.
In every Meafure or Divifion you muft take particular Notice what Touches there are of the Mufcles.
The Leg muft be firft drawn on which the Body slands, then the other, after which draw the
Arms and Hands. You muft at firft draw all the Parts very lightly only with a Coal, becaufe that
will give you the leaft Trouble in rubbing out or altering.
The Hlands you muft observe, are twice as long as broad, and each of their Parts has its particular
Length, Breadth and Thickness.
The Nail of the Finger makes about half the Joint it is upon.
The Leagth of the Foot meafures a fixth Part or Ileight of a Man, or five Righths more in
Length than in Breadth.
Take Noice, that the Length of the Face and Hlands are exactly equal, and is juft the tenth Part
of a Perton's Height.
Having thus indructed you to draw a complete Man, we shall in the next Place lay down fome
Rules for the drawing of Children.
Some will have the Length of a Child to contain five Meafures of the Head, as thus: From the
Top of the Head they make three, and the Thighs and Legs two more; the Breadth between the
Shoulders is the Leagth of a Head and a half; the Breadth of the Body above the Navel, the Length
Of
D


14
of one Head; and the Breadth of the thickeff Part of the Thigh is one Third of two Lengths of the
Head; the Breadth of the Knee meafures exactly the Diftance between the Eyes and the Chin; the
Brawn of the Arm and Small of the Leg are jutt the Thickness of the Neck.
If you take the Proportion of a Child ftanding backward, you will find it of the fame Meafure as
the former.
If you are defirous of drawing a Piece well proportioned, you muft be very careful and attentive to
copy all the feveral Parts fingly, as the Eyes, Ears, Cc.
R.VL Es for silling
up empty Figures.
HU S far we have treated of Colours and Out-lines; we come now to infiruct the Learner, how
to fill up the empty Figures, and to mark the Hlatchings to as to produce the beft Effect.
D
In the firft Place obferve that your Hlatchings muft confift but of two Strokes, croffing each other,
or at moft three, to make the ftrongeft Shades. Where the Cavities are fuch as require the whole Force
of your Lead or Crayon, you muft rub it upon your Paper as you fee Occafion; for it would be a need-
lets Trouble to employ more than three Hatchings one upon another.
When with your Charcoal you have drawn the Out-lines, you muft retouch them with your Red-
lead Crayon, and then with a Feather bruth away the Dirtinets of the Charcoal. When you have done
that, you muft retouch with a gentle Hand fuch Places as have been fouled in the rubbing, as the
Hair, Eyes, Nofe, Mouth, Fingers, Toes, Out-lines, 6c. Let me alfo caution you, that in those Outs
lines which are open to Day, you make your Strokes very light, but Aronger in thofe which are darkened.
Thus will the Out-lines appear in a natural Manner, and add a wonderful Beauty and Grace to human
Figures and all other Objects. When this is done, you muft begin the Shades with a fingle Hatching,
but pretty flrong; you begin it at the Top, proceeding infenfibly to the Bottom, as evenly in the Di-
stances as you poffibly can. You then go on to the Roundings, which you muft allo express by fingle
Strokes, with fuch a Light as the Object before you requires; be cautious not to make your Shadows too
hard or dark at firft. If you would preferve the Perspective in the beft Manner, begin the Shadows
lightly and faintly, and heighten them afterwards; and you will foon be pleafed with the agreeable Effect.
Instructions


15I

Instructions how to draw after a Picture, a Model, or the Life.

AVIN G given you the neceffary Instructions for drawing Prints and Draughts, we shall, in the

A  latt Place, direct you how to draw after a Picture, a Model or the Life, and in what Manner you
are to place them.
When you have got a Picture to draw after, be fure to place it in a good Light, to that the Sight
of your Eye and the Light of the Day may fall together on the Picture. Place yourfelf at a moderate
Diftance, according to the Largeness or Smallnets of the Picture, at lealt no farther off than that you
may, with a Glance of your Eye, fee the whole Picture at once; for the larger the Picture is, at the
greater Diftance you muft fit to draw it. Be careful likewife to place your Print exactly right before
you, and let it not he down flat; for if it be laid flat, you will quickly fee the Figures in it fore-
shorten’d. The Paper you draw upon you muft lay five or fix Times double upon a Pannel Board fet
in your Lap, and raifed as high as you can with your Knees, or let it be refted on a Form or flooping
Defk, to that your Work may fland upon one End before you. Thus will you be enabled to judge
of the Similitude between your Draught and the Original, which it will be impoftible for you to do if
it lies flat before you. The next Thing you have to do is, to guets as near as you can at the Middle of
the Thing you have to draw, whether a Picture or any other Matter; then mark it on your Paper
with the Point of your Coal; when you have done this, look for the largeft Figures (if there happens to
be more than one) and touch them lightly in proper Places, and to all that is in the Picture, you will
then prefently difcover whether your Gueffing and Sketching be true or not : But befides this, before
you draw a Stroke, be fure you do it with good Reafon and Obfervation, and be very careful about the
great and general Parts, and meddle not with the small Breakings till the next Sketching, and by con-
stantly practifing in this Manner, you will infenfibly acquire a Facility and Judgment in your Work.
Another Rule you are to obferve is, always to begin on the right side of the Figure, for to you have
the firft Strokes conflantly in your Eye, and the reft will naturally follow and give less Trouble: But
if you begin on the left Side, your Hand covers the Object from your Sight. Having thus made a
rough Skeich, you should carefully review and examine it, and fee if it be done according to Art, and
if


16
if the Action of the Figure or Figures in it be antwerable to the Original; now, as Actions are the
Life of a Picture, they muft thew themfelves in the firft Draught however rude it be, or you can never
expect it will be happily finithed. You muft then correct your Sketch and improve it in Neatness and
Air, by adding and diminithing as you fee proper, as you may eafily do with your Charcoal. But in do-
ing this, be mindful that you don't fpoil the firft good Actions in 1i, which may eafily be done, if you
don't well obferve the Movements of the feveral Parts
You muft be careful to admit nothing into your Work that is improper or foreign to the Subject of
it, and to let nothing trifling have the chief Place in it.
If you can, always make choice of a North Ligbt for your Situation, becaufe it is less variable than
any other. Should you fit at a South Window, you will find it proper to place a Safh of oil’d Paper
before it, which will break the Intenfeness of the Sun's Rays, and diffufe them more equally without
any fenfible Variation. In drawing after the Life, you are to confider the Bigness or Size of the Object
you have to reprefent, and remove from it to the Diftance of three Times its Magnitude, and be feared
in fuch a Manner as that your Eye may be on a Level with it, and at every Stroke you draw be cu-
ricus to obferve what Parts of your Object lie under the Perpendicular or principal Line.
The next Thing you have to do is, to put your Figure, whether it be the Life or a Model, in a
proper Polition; the beft Light is that which is high and equally diffated, not too frong nor glaring;
when Objects are to dispoted you fee all their Beauties, and the minuteft Parts thew themfelves to Ad-
vantage. But this you are to obfervg, that in drawing from the Life, that your Light should come
from such an Altitude, as that the Shadows of Bodies projected on the Plane, be equal, and in propor-
tion to their Height. So that the Ligbt does not firike upon or enlighten all the Parts, fome of which
are theltered by the Protuberance of others; the Eyc-brows over-(hade the Hollow of the Eyc, the
Nofe hides fome Part of the Mouth, and the Throat is obfcur’d by the Chin. For this Reafon Pour-
trait Painters blind all the Windows of the Room they work in, except one, the lower Part whereof
they clofe up, and let the Light in from the upper only, which Irikes upon the Object they are
painting after, while themfelves are beneath the Light.


17
Particular Directions for the young Painter.

THE Instructions we have hitherto given the young Beginner, have been pretty much in the gene-
ral; we shall now introduce him into every Part of his Work, by fuch particular Directions, 2s,

by Arictly observing them, will make him a compleat Draughtfiman.
For drawing the Face.
HEN you have drawn the Circle of the Face (which you muft do at firft with a plain circular
y Line, w thout making any Bending or Indentures in or out) make a Stroke from that Place of the
Forehead which is even with the Chin, Town the Place where you intend to fix the Middle of the Nofe,
and the Middle of the Mouth; this Stroke, you muft obferve, muft be ftruck that Way which the Face
should turn, either to one Side, or ftrait down, which Stroke will be a great Help to you in plaring the
Features rightly, to that they may not fland all awry, but directly one under another. Now if the Face
turn downward, the Stroke muft be ftruck in fuch a Manner that the Eyes may tarn anfwerable with the
Face downwards; when you have done that, make another Stroke for the Length of the Nofe where the
End of it should come, and another Stroke for the Mouth, that it be not made crooked, ftill obferving
to make all the Strokes to turn one Way, up or down, according as the Pace turns, that is, if the Face
turns up or down, the Eyes, Nofe and Mouth muft turn with it; when you have made thefe Strokes
exactly, proceed to plice the Features according to the preceding Rules.
In the Face is ufually obferved this threefold Proportion. 1. From the Top of the Forehead to the
Eye-brows. 2. From the Eye-brows to the Bottom of the Nofe. 2. From thence to the Bottom of the
Chin. This Proportion however is not conflantly the fame; for in fome Perfons the Forehead is lower
than in others, the Nofe of fome longer, and of fome fhorter than others; and therefore this Rule can
only be obferv’d in a well proportion’d Facc. The Diffance between the two Eyes is juft the Length of
one Eye, if in a full Face; but if it turn any thing afide, then that Diftance is leffened accordingly; the
Woliil
13


18
Noftril ought not to come out farther than the Corner of the Eye in any Face, and the Mouth muft be
always placed between the Eyes and the Chin, juft under the Nofe.
As the greateft Difficulty, and principal Part of this Art lies in the lively drawing of the Face, I shall
add thefe farther Directions to perfect you in this particular Branch of your Prt.
Firft, if you would draw a Face exactly, to as to refemble the Original you draw it from; you mutt in
the firft Place take Notice of the Phyfiognomy or Circumference of the Face, whether it be long or round,
fat or lean, big or little, that to you may be fure to draw the Phyfiognomy, or Bigness of the Face right;
if it be a fat Face, you will perceive the Cheeks to make the Side of the Face fwell out, and to make the
Face look as if it were square; if it be a lean Face, the Jaw-bone will stick out, and the Checks fall in,
and the Face will look long and flender; if it be neither too fat nor too lean, the Face will for the moft
part be round.
When you draw the utmoft Circumference of a Face, you muft take in the Head and all with it, other-
wife you may be deceived in drawing the true Bigness of a Face.
Secondly, you muft carefully and judicioufly obferve and difcern all the Mafter Touches, which give
Life to a Face, or difcover the Grace or Difpofition of the Mind, in which lies the whole Grace of the
Work, and the Credit of the Workman; thus a fmiling Countenance is eafily difcern’d in the Mouth,
when the Corners of it are a little turn’d up; a frowning Countenance in the Forehead, Eye-brows bend-
ing, and the Top of the Nofe between the Eyes fomewhat wrinkled; a fober and staid Countenance is
beft difcerned in the Eye, when the upper Eyc-lid comes fomewhat over the Ball of the Eye; a laughing
Countenance is eafily difcerned all over the Face, and to is an angry wrathful Countenance, by extraordi-
nary Frownings; there are allo some Touches about the Eyes and Mouth, which give Life and Spirit to
a Face, which you will by Degrees find out by frequently obferving and imitating the Works of the beft
MaRers,
Further


19

Further Rules for the young Practitioner in Drawing.
1. &7 OUR Charcoal being neatly Charpen’d, you muft, in the drawing of a Face, firft lightly draw the
Out-Rroke, or Circumference of the Face exactly, according to the Bigness of the Pattern, making
H
it to fland fore-right, or to turn upwards or downwards according to your Pattern; then make some little
Touches, where the Features, namely, the Eyes, Nofe, Blouth, Chin, should be placed, not drawing them
exactly at the firtt; when you have thus lightly pointed out the Features, then begin to draw them more
exactly, and to proceed till the Face be finished; which being done, then add the Beard, and other Things
about it. In drawing a Side-face, you need not at firtt draw the Nofe, Mouth, and Chin, that fland in
the outmoft Line, but only make it firft but a bare Circumference, turning this Way or that Way, ac-
cording to the Pattern, and then make the Mouth, Nofe, and Chin, in their Places and jutt Proportion.
2. Vou muft be fure to place the Mufcles in the right and proper Places; by the Mufcles I mean all
the Shadows that are caufed by fome Dents or Swellings in the Face, and be able to find out the Reafon
of every Mufcle, that to you may proceed to work with the more Judgment; the Mutcles will be moft
vifible in an old wither’d Face, and you muft firft draw the moft principal of them, and then you may
draw the more eafily the leffer within; be fure to be very exact in the placing of them, or you will spoil
your Draught be it ever to good.
2. Obferve to make the Shadows rightly, and be careful not to make them too dark where they should
be faint; for if you do, you can never recover it to make it light again, and to the whole Face will be
marr’d, and appear unhandsome; the Shadows are generally fainter and lighter in a fair Face than in 2
Twarthy Complexion. When your Draught is finished, you will do well to give some hard Touches with
your Pen where the Shadows are darkeft, which will add a great Life and Grace to your Drawing.
When your Face is finithed, you come next to the Ears and Hair, wherein you muft obferve this Rule:
Having drawn the Out-line of it, you muft firft draw the principal Curl, or Mafter Stroke in the Hair,
which will guide you with eafe to do the leffer Curls which depend on them; always make your Curl
to bend, and turn exactly according to the Pattern, that they may hie loofe and faft, and not appear fliff,
Rubborn


20
Aubborn and unpliable. When you have drawn your Curls exactly, you muft in the laft Place ftrike in
the loofe flairs which hang carelessly out of the Curls.
The Face being drawn (which is the principal Thing in the Art) then proceed to the Ilands and Arms,
Legs and Feet, and to to full Bodies of Men and Women, which are the moft difficult Things, which if
you can attain to perform, with a well grounded Celerity, nothing will be difficult to you, but moft eafy,
as Flowers, Birds, Beafts, Ships, or any other Thing that is to be drawn by Hand.
Of drawing the Hlands and Feet.
7E come now to speak particularly of the Hlands and Feet, which you ought to spend some Time
& about, before you come to whole Bodies; becaufe they will be too difficult for you to enter up-
on, till you have pretty well practifed your Iland in the drawing of other Things, more especially Hlands
and Feet, which are the moft difficult Members of the Body to draw, except the Face; by learning of
which you will attain the reft with less Difficulty and greater Perfection; and undoubtedly it is a Thing
highly commendable to draw a Hland lively and exactly, which hath fuch a Variety of Poftures and Action,
and you will find it no eafy Matter to imitate it in every one of them, with Spirit and Life, or without
some Lameness or Imperfection.
The Actions and Poftures of the Hland are fo various, that no certain Rule can be given for drawing of
them, only this in general; when you firft draw it with Charcoal, you are not to do it exactly, that is, you
muft not make all the Joints or Veins, or other Things, to appear more than lightly or faintly, and to
touch out the Bigness of the Hland, and the Manner of turning it with faint Touches, and not with hard
Strokes; if you have done that right, then you part the Fingers afunder, or clofe, according to your Pattern,
with the like faint Strokes; then mark that Place where any of the Fingers fland out from the others, and
make a faint Refemblance of it; having fodone, if you perceive your Draught to be right, proceed to draw
it more perfectly, and make the Bending of the Joint, the Wriff-bone, and other principal Things some-
what exactly. And, laftly, go over it again, and draw every fmall Bending, or Swelling of the Fingers,
and make the Nails, Knuckles, and Veins, to many of them as appear, and every Thing elfe that you can
Lifcern.
The


21
The Proportion of a Hand you have fufficiently defcribed in the Print, which thews how many Equa-
lities or equal Meafures there be in it, which you should endeavour to be acquainted with, that to you
may know when a Hland is well proportion’d with juft and equal Diftances. But you are to obferve this
Rule, or Exception, that according as the Hand turns one Way or other, the Proportions muft be thortned,
according as they appear to the Eye, as you may fee by the fore-thortning of the Hand in the Print; to
much as the Hand turns away from our Sight, to much it lofes of its ordinary Proportion, and is made to
thorten unto that Proportion that the Eye judges of it, nay, fometimes a whole Finger, fometimes two or
three, or more, are loft to our Sight, by the turning of the Hand another Way from us, and to they muft
be wholly left out, and not made. As to the Feet, it is not to difficult to draw them as it is the Hands,
and you muft proceed in the fame Method in the one as in the other.
When you can draw Llands and
Feet pretty well, then proceed to Arms and Legs, wherein is little Difficulty; after which you may pro-
ceed to whole Bodies.
RULEs to be observed in drawing the whole Body.
1. WN the drawing of a Body, you muft begin with the Head, to which you muft give juft Proportion
and Bigness, becaufe all the Body muft be proportioned according to the Head.

2. When you have drawn the Head, proceed to the Shoulders, and go on to the Trunk of the Body,
beginning at the Arm-pits (leaving the Arms till afterwards) and to draw down to the Hips on both Sides,
and be fure you obferve the exact Breadth of the Naift: When you have done thus, draw firft that Leg
on which the Body slands, and afterwards that which flands loofe, or from the Body, and laft of all the
Arms, and then the Hlands, either joined to the Body, or feparated from it, agreeable to your Pattern.
2. Observe in your drawing to place the parallel Joints, Sinews and Mufcles, directly oppofite in a strait
even Line one againft the other, as the Shoulders, Arm-pits, Waift, Hips, Knees, and to every Thing
elfe, that one may not be higher or lower than the other, that the Body may not feem crooked or de-
formed, but every parallel Jont, Bend, Coc. may directly anfwer the other that is oppofite to it; to which
End you may flrike a ftrait Stroke directly cross the Shoulders, to direct you to place them even and frait
one againft the other, which you may likewife do in other Places, as the Arms, Waift, Hips, Thighs, or
any


22
any other Parts that are oppofite; where you should place the one even with the other; but you muft have
the fame Care in all Parts of the Body, as you have in one Place, where any Bendings or Members of the
Body have or do require a direct Opposition one to the other, you make ufe of this Help and Direction.
4. Obterve, that if the Body turn one Way or other, then this Stroke muft be to sruck, that it may
anfiver the Bowing of the Body; thus, if the Body ficop a little downwards, you muft firike the Stroke
Rloping or fide-ways, in which Cafe you muft make the Shoulders and other Things which should be ftrait
againt one another, to be formewhat higher than one another, to that the Side which the Body turns upon,
the Shoulders and other Things that otherwife should be placed evehn againft the other, muft be made
formewhat lower than the other side, more or less according to the Stooping of the Body.
5. As you are to be careful in the placing rightly all level or parallel Joints, Bendings, Sinews and Muf-
cles, to you muft be very exact in all perpendicular Joints, Mufcles, 8c. that is, when you have drawn
the Out-lines of your Piece, and are come to draw the Joints and Mufcles that are within the Body, you
muft be as exact in placing them, that is, directly one againft another, as you are in placing thofe even that
are oppofite to one another.. To the End that you may place Things exactly perpendicular, that is, in a
Rrait Line one under another, you may ftrike a ftrait perpendicular Line from the Pit of the Throat down
where you difcern the parting of the Ribs, and
to the Privities, juft in the Middle or Seam of the Body
from thence strait down to the Feet; which Line will direct you to place Things perpendicularly even,
that the Body may fland frait upright, and not appear crooked or awty.
6. Take Notice of the Bowings and Bendings that are in the Body, to make that Part which is oppoi
Tite to that which bends, to anfwer to it in bending with it; thus, if one Side of the Body is bent in, the
other side muft fland out antwerable to the kending in of the other side; if the Back bend out the Belly
must bend in; if the Belly- come in the Back muft stick our; if the Breech flick our, the Thigh that an-
fivers to it in Opposition, muft come in; to alfo in any other Part of the Body; as when the Knee bends
out, the Hams that antwer to it muft come in; and the fame Rule muft firictly be obferved in all other
Joints of the Body, otherwife the Body will be made grotly and abfurdly, and without any Proportion.
7. Be careful to make all Things of an equal Proportion and Bigness, that one Arm, or Leg, be not big-
ger than the other, or one Breaft larger than the other, or any Part of the Body in an unjutt Propottion;
but as every Thing in a Face moff anfiwer to the Bigness of the Face, to one Member muft anfwer to
another


23
another in Bigness, that to there may be a perfect Harmony in all the Parts of the Body; that it may not
have broad Shoulders and a thin flender Waift, a raw-bone Arm and a thick gouty Leg, or any Part dif-
proportionable from the other, unless it be fo that any Part of the Body doth turn awry from our Eye;
thas, if one Arm should be feen fide-ways, and the other fore-right, then the one Arm muft be made fo
much less than the other by how much it turns away from our Sight, and appears less to our Eye, and if
one Leg be feen full or fore-right, and the other Leg be feen fide-ways, then it muft be made to much less
than the other, by how much it turns away from your Sight.
8. As a juft Proportion muft be obfery’d in the Bigness of your Draught, to likewife in the Length,
that one Thing may not be too long for the other, the Body not too long for the Legs, nor the Legs too
short for the Body, that neither Leg, nor Arm, be disproportion’d in their Lengths, but that every Thing
have its due Proportion both for Length and Bigness; unless when the Body Chortens away in any Part
from your Sight; as thus, if one Leg fland behind the other, it muft be made to much thorter than the
other, according to the Diftance it is removed from your Eye; to likewife if one Arm remove itfelf ever
to little out of your Sight, that which comes firft to the Eye, and flands neareft to the Sight, muft be
made longer than the other, and the other be made to much the shorter, by how much it turns away from
your Sight. So, again, if any Part of the Body be fore-shortned, that is, if it appears fo to your Eye, as
to hinder the full Light of the Latitude of that Part of the Body, then the Body, or that Part of the Body
muft be made to thorten, according to that Proportion that the Eye judges of it.
9. Observe the due Diftance of one Thing from another, that you may be exact in your Draught, and
perfectly imitate your Pattern.
10. Obferve how much one Part of the Body slicks out beyond the other, or falls in within the other,
or whether it flands even with the other; to which End, you may ftrike a finall Stroke down from the
Top of the Shoulder along by the Outfide of the Body ftrait down to the Feet; and this will direct you
how far one Part of the Body should fland out beyond the other, and how far other Parts should come
in; let nothing be done without Rule and Judgment.
11. Let nothing be done, hard, Charp, or curty, that is, let not the Bendings that are in the Body or in
the Joints, be made as if they were Dents or Cuts in the Fleth with Charp corner Strokes, but finely round
and floping, like Bendings, and not like Cuts in the Body; this is a common Fault among Learners, who
should


24
should therefore be the more careful to avoid it by imitating their Pattern exactly, in the Manner of mak-
ing every Stroke and Touch that is given; for nothing should be done without Judgment.
Of Perspective Proportion.
DERSPECT IVE Proportion differs much from that we have been hitherto defcribing; and may be
defined, The Judgment of the Eye of the Proportion of a Thing by its Diftance from it; as thus, if

one Part of the Body come nearer to the Eye than the other, it is made to much bigger than the other

Part of the Body, which turns away from the Eye; thus if one Leg fland behind another, the foremoft
Leg that flands firft in Sight, muft be made fomewhat bigger and longer than the other, becaufe the Eye
to judges of it; it is the fame with regard to any other Part of the Body, the Proportion muft be leffend,
according to the Diftance of the Object from the Eyc.
The next Thing to be obferv’d in good Draughts, is graceful Pofture and proper Action; that is, that
the true natural Motion of every Thing be exprefted in the Life and Spirit of it; that is, the Life muft be
quicken’d by Art; as to express the Majefty of a King, you muft put him in fuch a graceful Pofture, as
may move the Spectators with Reverence to behold him; to to make a Soldier, you muft draw him in
fuch a Pofture, as may betoken Courage, Boldness, and Intrepidity; fo to make a Clown, he muft be seen
in the moft deteftable and clownith Pofture; to in every other Inftance, the inward Affection and Dispo-
fition of the Mind muft be expreffed in the moft lively Manner in the outward Action and Gefture of the
Body. Now to attain a competent Skill herein, my Advice is, diligently to observe the Works of our
great Mafters, of thofe especially who delight in defcribing a Fight at Handi-cuffs; to obferve the Eyes
of private Affaffins, the Courage of Wreftlers, the Actions of Stage-Players, the enticing Allurements of
Courtefans, fuch as are led to Execution, to mark the contracting of their Brows, the Motions of their
Eyes, and the Carriage of their whole Body, to the End you may exprets them to the Life in your Draw-
ings and Works.
Another Thing to be obferved in good Draughts, is, Loofeness or Air; that is, that the Body be not
made ffiff in any Part, but that every Joint may have its proper and natural Bending, to as it may with
the greateft Life express your Intention, that the Picture may not feem lame or the Joints fliff, as if they
Were


25
were not pliable or capable of bending, but every Joint or Limb muft have its proper and natural Pofture,
according as it may beft fuit with and become the Pofture in which the Figure is fet.
Another Thing to be noted in Drawing is, what the Painters call Fore-Chortening, which is, to take
Things as they appear to the Eye, and not to draw the full Length and Proportion of every Part, but to
make it shorter, by Reafon the full Length and Bigness is hid from our Sight; fo, if I would draw a Ship
standing fore-right, there can appear only her Fore-part, the reft is hid from our Sight, and therefore can-
not be express’d. Again, if I would draw a Horfe flanding fore-right, looking full in my Face, I muft
neceffarily fore-Chorten him behind, becaufe his Sides and Flanks are hid from my Eyc. Obferve there-
fore this Rule, That you ought rather to imitate the vifible Proportion of Things, than the proper and
natural Proportion of them; for the Eye and the Underftanding together being directed in the perspective
Art, ought to be the Guide, Meafure, and Judge of Drawing and Painting.
The latt Thing to be regarded in good Drawing, is, That every Thing be done by the Guidance of
Nature, that is, that nothing be express’d but what accords and agrees with Nature in every Point: As
thus, when I would make a Man turning his Head over his Shoulder, I muft not make him turn more
than Nature will permit, nor muft any thing be forc’d beyond the Limits of Nature, or be made to come
short of it; but tho' Nature muft not be firetch’d beyond its Centre, yet it muft be quickened to the high-
eft Pitch of it: Thus, if I would express a King, I muft express him in the moft Majeftick Poffure I can
invent; and if I would draw a Clown, I muft reprefent him in the moft clownith Action I can imagine;
yet muft neither the one nor the other be drawn in fuch a Pofture as will not agree with the Motion of
Nature, that is, in fuch a Pofture which Man cannot imitate with his natural Body; fo in all other Things,
Nature muft be the Pattern of all Kinds of Draughts.
RULES for drawing Landships.
ANDSKIP is the exprefting a Tract of Land by Hills, Woods, Caffles, Seas, Valleys, Ruins,
Rocks, 8c. in which there is not to much Difficulty as in drawing Figures; and therefore the fol-

lowing Rules will he fufficient.
20
6


26
1. The belt Way of making Landlkips, is to reprefent them thooting away, one Part lower than ano-
ther, as hath been practifed by our beft Artifts; but others have run into a contrary Error, by making
the Landlkip mount up higher and higher, till it reach to fuch a Height, that it feems as if it touch’d the
Clouds, as if the Drawer had ffood at the Bottony of a Steeple, when he took the Prospect, which is alto-
gether incongruous; for we can difcern no Profpect at the Bottom of a Hill, but the moft proper Way
of making a Landlkip, is to make the neareft Hfill higheft, and fo to make the reft that are at a greater
Diftance, to thoot away under that, that the Landlkip may appear as if taken from the Top of an Hill.
2. Be careful to leffen every Thing in proportion to its Diftance, exprefting it bigger or less according to
the Diftance it is from the Eyc.
2. Vou muft make all your Lights fall one Way, both upon the Ground and Trees, and all Things
olfe, and all the Shadows muft be caft one Way.
4. Vou muft give every Thing its proper Motion; as Trees when they are thaken with the Wind, their
finaller: and more pliable Boughs muft be thewn in fuch an Action, as if they struck one againft another,
by yielding and declining from that Paft whence the Wind blows; the stiffer Boughs have less Bending
and Motion; you muft likewife obferve the Bending of a Twig when a Birdfirs upon it, fo likewife if it

be forced or preffed with any otfer Thing,
Clouds in the Air maft be thewn with Motions now gathered together with the Winds, now violently
58
you carl make nothing
condented into Hall; Thunder bolls, Lighthing; Rain, and fuch like. Finally
but what requires a Motion pechliar to itfelf; according to which it ought to be reprefented: But this
Rule you muft always obferve; natmely; that all your Motions which are cauled by the Wind, muft be
seen to move one Way, becaufe the Wind can blow but one Way at once.
Always express a fair Horizon, fhewing the Heavens cloudy or clear, more or less according to the Oc-
cation; and if you express the Sun, let it be cittler as Rifing or Setting; and as it were behind or over fome
Hill or Mountain.
The Moon and Starsare feldonr or never depicted, unlets it be in Reprefentation of Twilight, becaufe all

Things are supposed to be feen by Day.
If ye
on express the Sun, make his Light to reflect upon all the Trees, Hills, Mountains, Rocks, or
Buildinge; thading the contrary side; after which Manner alfo fhadow Clouds, Mifts, and the like, mak-
In
ing the Shanows to fall all one Way.


27
in exprefting Things at large Diftances, as ten, twenty or thirty Miles off; where the Object is hard to
be difcerned, as whether it be Temple, Caftle, Houfe, or the like, thew no particular Signs thereof, or
any eminent Diftinction; but rather as weakly, faintly, and confafedly as the Eye judgeth of it.
If Landlkips be laid in Colours, the farther you go, the more you muft lighten it with a thin and airy
Blue, to make it feem as if it were afar off, beginning firft with a dark Green, to driving it by Degrees into
a Blue according to the Diftance.
In Rivers, obferve the general Current, and Dathing of the Waves againft the Boat Sides. In the Sea,
observe the Waves and other proper Agitations, the Rowling of the Billows, the Tumbling of Veffels up
and down; Ships floating, fome dipt, fome half drowned, fome flanding almoft an End, some hid almoft
with the Waves, thro' the Uncertainty of the Surges, others riving to live. In the Motion of Waters
falling from an high Place, but especially when they fall upon Rocks or Stones, you muft make it leaping
up in the Air, and fprinkling all about.
Let your Work imitate the Seafon you intend it for. Thus, if you intend it for a Winter Piece, re-
prefent felling of Timber; fliding upon the lee; fowling by Night; hunting of Bears or Foxes in the
Snow; making the Trees every where naked or laden with a floar Froft; the Earth bare without Green-
ness, Flowers or Cattle; the Air thick; Water frozen, with Carts paffing over it, and Boys upon it, Oc.
Laftly, let every Site have its proper Works, Adjuncts, or additional Graces, as the Farm-houfe, Wind-
mill, Woods, Flocks of Sheep, Herds of Cattle, Pilgrims, Ruins of Temples, Caflles, Monuments; with
a thouland fuch other Things, only proper to particular Subjects.
To take the perfect Draught of any Picture.
1
LAKE a Sheet of fine Venice Paper, wet it all over with Linfeed Oil on one Side thereof, which
I then wipe off as clean as you can; let the Paper dry, and lay it to any painted or printed Picture,
then with a black Lead Pencil you may draw it over with Eafe; put this oiled Paper upon a Sheet of clean
white Paper, and with a little pointed Stick or Feather out of a Swallow’s Wing, draw over the Stroke
which you draw upon the oiled Paper; to shall you have the exact Form upon the white Paper, which
may be fet out with Colours with pleafure.
Or


28
Or thas: The Picture being drawn as before in the oiled Paper, put it upon a Sheet of white Paper,
and prick over the Drawing with a Pen; then take fome Small-coal, powder it fine, and wrap it if a
Piece of fine Linnen, and bind it up therein loofely, and clap it over the pricked Line by little and little,
and then draw it over again once or twice, with Pen or Pencil.
Or thus: Rub a Sheet of white Paper all over on one Side with Black-lead, or elfe with Vermilion mix-
ed with freth Butter; lay the coloured Side upon a Sheet of white Paper; then lay the Picture you would
copy out upon the other Side of the coloured Paper, or with a snall pointed Stick, or Swallow's Quill, go
over all the Strokes of your Picture, and it will be exact on the white Paper.
Or thus: Take an oiled Sheet (as before) rub one Side of it with Lamb-black or Lake; lay it upon a
Sheet of fair Paper, with the coloured Side downward, and upon it lay the Picture you would copy out,
and trace it over with your Swallow’s Feather.
Or thus: Take fine Lake mixed with Linfeed Oil, and draw with it over all the Out-frokes, and other
material Parts of a Picture; then wet the contrary side of the Picture, and prefs it hard upon a Sheet of
Paper, and it will leave behind it all that which you drew over.
To take the Shape of a Leas, Herb, or Plant.
f OLD a whole Leaf or Sprig (as of Nettle, Plantane, Gc.) in the Smoak of Gum Sandrack, Rofin,
7
a Link, or Wax Candle, till it is well black’d, which place between the Leaves of a Sheet of

Whice Paper, and carefully press upon the Leaf with fome fmooth Thing; to shall you have in a Mo-
ment the Print on the Paper, especially the Backfide thereof, with the very Ramifications of the Fibres
disperted thro' it. This may be of good Ufe in Travelling, when we meet with ftrange Plants.
To take the Picture of an Herb. from an old Picture.


AK E Venice Soap, dip it in Water, and rub or moiften the old Picture all over very well with it;
then put upon it a Piece of white Paper, with other Paper over it, and rub hard thereupon, or press

them rongly together, and the old Picture will come off exactly upon the white Paper.
Of


29
Of Colours for Landskips.

OR a Light Creen, afe Pink, and Mafticot heightened with Whice; for a Sad Green, Indico, and
2.

Pink, heightened with Naflicot.
B
2. For Come Trees, take Lake, Umber and White, for others Charcoal and White; for others Black
and White, with fome Green; adding fome Lake, or Vermilion, with other Colours.
3. For Wood, take Lake, Umber and White, mixing fometimes a little Green withal.
3
4. For Fire, lay Red Lead and Vermilion tempered together where it is reddeft; where it is Blue, lay
Oil, Smale and White Lead; where it is Yellow, take Mafticot, and work it over in certain Places; where
you would have it thins moft, with Vermilion.
5. For an Azure Sky, which feems afar off, take Oil, Smalt, or Bice, and temper them with L infeed
Oil, bui grind them not; for Small, or Bice utterly lofe their Calour in grinding.
6. For a Red Cky, take Lake and White; and for Sun-Beams, or Fellow Clouds at Sun-rifing or fet-
ting, take Matticor and White.
7
. For a Hight Sky, or Clouds in a Storm, take Indico decpned with Black, and heightened with White.
3. For Wood Colours, they are compounded either of Umber and Whire, Charcoal and White, Sea-
cral and White, Umber black and white, or with fome Green added; to which you may adjoin fome.
times, as in Bark of Trees, a little Lake or Vermilion.
How to cleanse any old Painting.

AKE wood Afhes, and fcarce them, or elfe some Smalt, or Powder-blue, and with a Spunge and
fair Water, gently wath the Picture you would cleanfe (taking great Care of the Shadows) which

done, dry it very well with a clean Clorh.
Then varnish it over again with good Varnith, but fuch as may be wathed off again with Water if
need be.
Or
II


0
3
Or, take either common Varnith (made with Gum Sandrick diffolved in Linfeed Oil by boiling) or
TITTC
Glair of Kres, and with your Pencil go over the Picture once, twice, or more therewith, as need requires.

Of Fresce, or Painting of Walls.
N painting upon Walls, to make it endure the Weather, you muft grind your Colours with Lime-
water, Milk, or Whey, mixt in Size Colour in Pots.
I
The Palte or Plaifter muft be made of well-wath’d Lime, mist with fine Powder of old Rubbich
Stones; the Lime muft be to often wath’d, till all its Salt be caftrated; and all your Work muft be done
in clear and dry Weather.
To make the Work endure, ftrike into the Wall Stumps of headed Nails, about five or fix Inches
afunder, and by this Means you may preferve the Plaifter from peelirg.
Then with this Pafte, plaifier the Wall a pretty Thickness, letting it dry, being dry, plaifter it over
again about the Thickness of half a Barley-corn, very fine and fmooth, then your Colours being ready
prepared, work this laft Plaiftering over while it is wet, to will your Painting unite and join faft to the
Plaifter, and dry together as a perfect Compoft.
In Painting be nimble and free, let your Work be bold and flrong, but be fure to be exact, for there
can be no Alteration of the firtt Painting, and therefore heighten your Paint enough at firft, you may
deepen it at pleafure.

All Earchy Colours are beft; as the Oker, Spanish-white, Spanish-brown, Terrx-vert, and the like;
Mineral Colours are naughht.
Laftly, let your Pencils and Bruthes be long and foft, otherwife your Work will not be fmooth; let
your Colours be full, and flow freely from the Pencil or Bruth; and let your Defign be perfect at firft,
for in this there is no after Alteration to be made.
C7


1
3

Of Wasking, and other Materials thereof.
V Wathing here we intend nothing more, but either to fet out Maps, or printed Pictures in proper

AD Colours, or elfe to varnith them.
The Inftruments and Materials of Wathing are fix, viz. 7. lum-water. 2. Size, of Gum-water.
3. Liquid Gold. a. Pencils. 5. Colours. 6. Varnish.
To make Alum-water : Take Alum, eight Ounces; fair Water, a Quart; boil them till the Alum is
diffolved.
Or thus: Take Spring, or Well-water, a Gallon; Rock Alum, a Pound, beat it to Powder, and dif-
folve it in Water by boiling; filter it thro' a brown Paper, and keep it for Ule. With this Water wet
your Paper before you lay on your Colours, it will keep them from finking in, and withal, add a Luftre
and Beauty to the Colours laid on: But this you muft note, that if your Paper is not good, you muft
wath it over four or five Times, which may be done with a large Pencil Bruth: Morcover, Alum gene-
fally raifeth ftaining Colours, and preferves them from fading.
To make Size: Take Glew, which fleep all Night in Water, then mell it over the Fire, to fee that it
be neither too ftrong nor too weak; then let a little of it cool, if it be too fiff when it is cold, put more
Water to it, if too weak more Glew, ufing it lake-warm.
To make Gum-water: Take pure Spring Water, a Quart; put it into a Jar Glass, and hang therein a
fufficient Quantity of pure, white and clean Gum-Arabick, bruifed and tied up in a Rag; let it hang till
the Gum is diffolved, then put your Fingers into the Water, and if you find them flick together as if they
were glewed; your Water is too ftiff, or full of the Gum, which you muft remedy by putting thereto
more fair Water; and if you find it too weak, you may help it by adding more Gum. With this Water,
or the former Size, moft Colours are to be tempered, and with to much of the Gum-water, as being
touch’d when dry, the Colour will not come off: Where note, that if the Colour gliften, there is too
much Gum in it.
Liquid Gold and Sitver: Take five or fix Leaves of Gold or Silver, which grind (with a fiff Gum-
lake Water, and a good Quantity of Salt) as fmall as you can; then put it into a Vial, or glazed Veffel;
add to much fair Water as may diffolve the Gum-water; then let it fland four Hours, that the Gold may
Settle;


32
fettle; decant the Water, and put in more till the Gold is clean wathed: To the Gold put more fair Wa-
ter, a little Sal-Armoniac, and common Salt, digefting it clofe for four Days: Then put all into a Piece
of thin Glovers Leather (whofe Grain is peeled off) and hang it up, to will the Sal Armoniac fret away,
and the Gold remain behind, which keep.
Or thus: Grind fine Leaf Gold with flrong or thick Gum-water very fine; and as you grind add
more thick Gum-water being very fine, wath it in a great Shell as you do Bice; then temper it with a
litle Quantity of Mercury fublimate, and a little diffolved Gum to bind it in the Shell, shake it, and
pread the Gold about the Sides thereof, that it may be all of one Colour and Fineness, which ufe with
fair Water as you do other Colours. The fame obterve in liquid Silver; with this Obfervation, That if
your Silver by Length of Time, or Humidity of the Air become rufty; then cover the Place with Juice
of Garlick before you lay on the Silver, which will preferve it.
When you ufe it, temper it with Glair of Eggs, and fo ufe it with Pen or Pencil. Glair of Eggs is
thus made: Take the Whites and beat them with a Spoon, till they rife all in a Foam; then let them
fland all Night, and by Morning they will be turned into a clear Water, which is good Glair.
Of Colours simple for washing of Maps, &c.
gL0ES: Let it be diffolved in a weak Gum-water; it makes a deep or fad Kind of Vellow Colour,
1
L
according to the Goodness of the Vellow.
Brazib: To fome Ground Brazil put fmall Beer and Vinegar, of each a fufficient Quantity, let it boil
gently a good while, then put therein Alum in Powder to heighten the Colour, and fome Gum Arabick
to bind it, boil it till it tafte firong on the Tongue, and make a good Red, Pink Colour, or light Violet.
Logoood: Ground Logwood boiled as Brazil, makes a very fair, tranfparent Violet, or Purple Colour.
Cochenele: Steeped as Brazil was boiled, makes a fair, tranfparent Purple: As thus, take Cochenele,
and put it into the frongeft Soap-lees to feep, and it will be a fair Purple, which you may lighten and
deepen at pleafure; infufed in flrong Vinegar, it makes a tranfparent Purple.
Madder: Take Madder, four Drams; Ground Brazil, one Ounce; Rain-water, a Quart; boil away a
Third Part; then add Alam half an Ounce, boil it to a Pint; then Gum Arabick, one Ounce; which
60il


33)
boil till it is diffolved, cool it flirring it often, and ftrain it for Ufe: It is a good Scarlet Die for Leather.
Verdigrife: Take Verdigrife ground finely one Ounce, put to it a good Quantity of common Varnith,
and to much Oil of Turpentine, as will make it thin enough to work wahal; it is a good Green. Fine
Verdigrife, diffoived in Rhenith Wine or Vinegar, makes a tranfparent Green inclining to Blue; ground
with Juice of Rue and Sum-water, it is a pure Green; without the Juice, it makes a glorious Emerald;
mixed with Cryftal of Tartar in White Wine Vinegar, in which Gum Arabick has been diffolved, makes
a pure Green. And Verdigrife, Alum, of each one Dram; Logwood, three Drams; boiled in Vinegar,
make a good Murry.
Cambogiz: Disfolve it in fair Spring-water, and it will make a beautiful and tranparent Vellow; if you
would have it fronger, to diffolve some Alum therein; it is good for Silk, Linen, White-Leather, Parch-
ment, Vellum, Paper, Quills, 8c. This Colour delights in no Mixture.
To make Verdigrife and Ceruse, according to Clauber.

HESE Colours made with Vinegar in Earthen Pots fet hot into Horfe-Dung; but if you diffolve
your Venus and Saturn with Spirit of Nitre, and precipitate Venus with a Lye made of the Salt of

Tartar, and your Saturn with Salt Water, edulcorating and drying them, the Venus will vield an excel-
lent Verdigrife, which will not corrode other Colours as the common Verdigrife does; and the Saturn yields
a Cerufe whicer and purer than the ordinary, and is much better for Painting and Chirurgery.
Vellow Fuftick berry: Boil ir in Water, or fleep them in Alam-water, it makes a good and tranfparent
Fellow for the same Purpofe.
Turnsole. Pur it into a Charp Vinegar over a gentle Fire till the Vinegar boil and is coloured; then
take out the Turnfole and fqueeze it into the Vinegar, in which diffolve a little Gum-Arabick; it fha-
dows very well on a Carnation or Vellow.
Litmose. Cut it into finall Pieces, and steep it a Day or two in weak Gum-lake Water, and you will
have a tranfparent blue Water to wath with.
Flory


34
Flory Bice. Grind it with Glair of Eggs, if you then add a little Roffel it makes a light violet Blue;
mixed with Whice and Red-lead, it makes a Crane-feather Colour.
Saffron. Sreeped in Vinegar andtmixed with a Cum-water is a good Fellow. In Whice Wine or
Sack, it makes alfo a good Vellow; but more glorious if you mix it with equal Parts of Cochencle, you
may alto fteep it with Glair of Eggs, or grind it with Vermilion.
Indian Lake. Ground with Gum-Arabick Water, makes a glorious Murry; in grinding it, add a
littie Sugar-Candy; fome fay it makes a deep Pink of a Bloom Colour.
Vermition. Being ground with Clair of Eggs and Honey or Gum-Water, it makes a deep Red, or
Scarlet Colour.
Red-lead. Grind it with a fiff Gum-lake Warer; if you add Satiron, it makes it Orient, and of a
Marigold Colour; of irfelf it is berween a Red and an Orange Colonr.
Refel. Wathed and tempered with Gum-water, differs not much from Indian-Lake; but it will foon
fade and grow lighter; but being tempered with Brazil-water, twill be more deep.
Indian-Lakes. Ufe them as you do Turnfole; they make a good tranfparent Red Colour; into the
Liquor put some Gum to bind it.
Mascott. Ground and tempered with Gum-water, makes a good Vellow, but not tranfparent.
Orpiment.
Wathed and coloured with Gum-water, makes an orient or Gold Colour; there are fe-
veral Degrees of it, fome more red, others more yellow.

Verditure.
Walhed and tempered with Gum-water, it is a good Blue, but not tranfparent, or in-
clining to Green.
Indico. Ground and tempered with Gum-water, makes a deep Blue, and is fit to (hadow all other
Blues.
Blue Bice.
Wathed and tempered with Gum-water, it is an excellent Blue. There are feveral Sorts
of it, some lighter, fome fadder. Blue Bice, Verditure, and Smalt, ground fingly with Gum-water (or
together) make a good Blue.
Small. Ground with a little fine Roffel, makes a deep Violet.
Tttramarine. If you would have it deep, grind it with Litmofe-water; it is the beft and dearell of
all Blues.
S. D..


35)
Sap-green. Steep it in tharp Vinegar all Night, to which add a little Alom to raife its Colour. In
Alom-water it makes a good Green to (hadow with.
Walhed and tempered with Gum-water, makes a good, but no tranfparent Green.
Green Bice.
Lamp Black, or Printers Black. Burnt, ground, or tempered with Gum-water, makes a good Black.
Ivery Black. Burnt, ground, and tempered with Gum-water, makes a good Black.
Flake-Lead. Ground and tempered with Gum-water, is an excellent White.
Ground and tempered in like Manner with Gum-water, makes the beft of all Whites.
Spanish White.
Spaness Brown. Burnt, ground, and tempered with Gum-water, makes a reddith Brown, or Liver-
Colour.
Umber. Burnt, and ground, and temper’d with Gum-water, makes a good Haw-colour; and is ve-
ry good to (hadow with upon Gold.
Green of Walnests. Boiled in Water, and ftrained, and Gum-Arabick diffolved in the Liquor to bind
it, makes an excellent Colour to express Highways, Lanes, Coc.
Wood-Soot. Prepared in all Respects as the former, ferves to the fame intentions; and is much the
better Colour.
Native Cinnabar. Grind it as Red-Lead; it is a glorious Red Colour, much exceeding the artificial.
Of Compounded Colours for washing of Maps, &c.
Range-Colour. Red-lead and Vellow-berries make a good Orange Colour : Thus, take Arnotto half
an Ounce, Pot-athes one Drachm, Water one Pound, boil it half away, then ftrain it, and ufe
it hot.
It is good for White-Leather, Paper, Vellum, Quills, Parchment, &cc.
Green. Take diftilled Vinegar, Filings of Copper, digelt till the Vinegar is blue, which let fland in
the Sun or a flow Fire till it is thick enough, and it will be a good Green.
Or thus: Take Cedar Green (which is beft of all) or inftead thereof green Bice, fleep it in Vinegar
and frain it; then grind it well with fair Water, and put to it a little Iloney, and dry it well; when
you ufe it, mix it with Gum-water.

20


To make fine Indico.. Take the Blofforms of Oad three Ounces, Amylum one Ounce, grind them with
Urine and Grong Vinegar, of which make a Cake, then dry it in the Sun, and to keep it for Ufc.
A Blue to eash upon Paper. Take of the beft Azure an Ounce, Kermes two Ounces, mix them,
which temper with clear Gum-water, and it will be a glorious Colour.
To make a Venice Blue. Take quick Lime, make it into Pafte with ftrong Vinegar, half an Hour
after put thereto more Vinegar to foften it; then add Indico in fine Powder one Ounce, mix them, and
digeft it in Hforfe-dung for 30 or 40 Days.
Another and excellent Blue. Mix fine white Chalk with Juice of Elder-berries full ripe, to which put
a little Alom-water.
To make bhee Smalt. Take fluxible Sand, Sal-nitre and Cobalt, mix them together.
Alively Fellow. Diffolve Orpiment in Gum-water, to which put a litile ground Vermilion,
grind
8
them together, and you shall have a very lively Colour.
Alight Green. Take Juice of Rue, Verdigrife and Saffron, grind them well together and ufe them
with Gum-water.
Or thus: Take Sap-green, Flower-de-luce, or Tawny Green, which fteep in Water. Verditure and
Cerufe mix’d with a little Copper Green, make a good light Colour.
Bhee. Ultramarine, blue Bice, Smalt, and Verditure, ground fingly with Gum-water, or together,
make a good Blue.
Brown. Cerufe, Red-lead, English Oker, and Pink, make a good Brown.
Spanith-brown. To colour any Horfe, Dog, or the like, you muft not calcine it; (yet not calcined it
is a dirty Colour) but to fhadow Vermilion, or lay upon any dark Ground, behind a Picture, to hade
Berries in the darkeff Places, or to colour wooden Pofts, Wainfcot, Bodies of Trees and the like, it is
very good, (being burnt.)
Flesss Colour. Mix White, Indian Lake, and Red-lead (according as you would have it light or deep)
and to diftinguith a Man's Fleth from a Woman's, mingle with it a little Oker.
Colours of Stones. Verdigrife with Varnith makes an Emerald; with Florence Lake, a Ruby; with
Ultramarine, a Sapphire.
14


37I
A never-fading Green: Take Juice of Flowers of Flower-de-luce, put into Gum-water and dry it in
the Sun.
Of mixing Colours and Shadowing
N. mixing be careful not to make the Colour too fad, nor take the Pencils out of one Colour and put
them into another.

In mixing Colours, ffir them well about the Water feverally till they are well mixed; then put them
together, making the Colour fadder or lighter at pleafure.
Green is hadowed with Indico and Vellow-berries.
Blce is thadowed with Indico, Litmofe and Flory; of any of them being freeped in Soap-afhes, and
uted with Gum-water.
Garments are fhadowed with their own proper Colours; or you may mingle the Colour with white
for the Light) and (hadow it with the fame colour unmingled; or you may take the thinneft of the
Colour for the Light, and (hadow with the thickeff or Bottom of the fame.
Sap-green is only ufed to fhadow other Greens with, and not to be laid for a Ground in any Garment.
Lake ought not to be fhadowed with any Colour, for it is a dark Red; but for a Variery you may
Shadow it with Bice, or blue Verditure, which will make it like changeable Taffata.
The Shadow for Vellow-berries is Umber; but for Beauty's Sake with Red-lead, and the darkeft
Touches with Spanish Brown; and for Variety with Copper-green, blue Bice or Verditure.
White fets off Blues and Blacks very well; Red fets off well with Vellow; Vellows with Reds; fad
Blues, Browns, Greens, and Purples.
Bhies fet off well with Vellows, Reds, Whites, Browns, and Blacks; and Green fets off well with Pur-
ples, and Reds.
More especially, all light Colours are (hadowed with Colours of the fame Nature, but more fad; as for
Example: Vermillion is Chadowed with Lake, or Spanish Brown: Verditer and Bice are (hadowed with
Indico: Camboge and Fellow-berries. are fhadowed with Umber, with Red-lead, or Vermillion: Red-lead
is thadowed with Lake, or Spanish Brown: Mafficote is (hadowed with red Orpiment: Spanis Brown is
X
hadowed


38
shadowed with burnt Umber, with Brafil-water: Umber is hadowed with Umber burnt: Reffer and Brapt,
are (hadowed with Spanish Brown mixed with Brafil-warer: Verdigrise is (hadowed with Indico mixed
with Vellew-berry WVater: Wood Soot and Walnut Shells are (hadowed with Umber.
From the Mixtures of the forementioned Colours, infinite Varieties almoll may arife, even whatfoever
one pleafes: But for our Purpole of wathing Maps, Gloves, Pictures, Landskips, &cc. the moft tranfparent
Colours are principal; of which thele are chief, viz. Brasil, Logreged, Indian Cake, Turn-fole, Cambogie,
Saffron, Vellow-berries, Litmose, Sup-green, Verdigrife, Wood-foot, Green Walnut-(bells; of thefe you may
by Mixture make feveral Compounds; as,
A Compound Green: Mix Verdigrife Water with Vellow-berry Water; it will be tranfparent, and you
may make it deeper or lighter according to the Proportion that you take of either.
A Compound Bhue Colour: Mix Lirmofe-water with Vellow-berry Water, and you will have a tranfpa-
rent fad Blue, which you may heighten or deepen as the former at pleafure.
A Compound Orange Colour: It is made by mixing Brafil Water with Vellow-berry Water of a tranipa-
rent Colour.
Of Colours for washing Landskips.
YREEN mixed with White, Pink, Bice, Mafficot, Small, Indico, or Cerufe; or Blue Verditure
 mix’d with a few Vellow-berries makes a good Green for Landships.

For the faddeft Hills, ufe Umber burnt; for the ligbteff Places, put fellow to the burnt Umber; for
other Hills, lay Copper-green thickened on the Fire, or in the Sun; for the next Hills farther of
f, mix
Fellow-berries with Copper-green; let the fourth Part be done with green Verditure; and the farthest
and jaintess Places with blus Bice, or blue Verditure, mingled with Whice, and thadowed with blue Ver-
diture, in the Shalows indifferent thick.
Let the Higbways be done with white and red Lead, and for Variety yellow Oker; fhadow it with
burnt Umber, which you may ufe for fandy Rocks and Hills.
Rocks may be done with feveral Colours, in some Places black and white, in other Places red and
white, and others blue and white, and the like as you fee convenient.
2130


39
The Water muft be black Verditure and white, fhadowed with greeh and blae Verditure,; when the
Banks caft a green Shadow upon the Water, and the Water is black: (hadowed, then shade it with Indi-

fit
co, Green thickened, and blue Verditure.
wl well i
Colour Buildings with as much Variety of pleafant Colours as may be imaginable, yet let Reafon be
your Rule in mixing your Colours: Yon: may fometimes ufe- White, and Black for the Wall, Conduits; or
other Things. For Brick Houses and the like, red Lead and white; if many Heufes fland together, fet
them off with Variety of Colours, as Umber and White; Lake: and White; Red Lead and Whits, and

1
the like.
Laftly, for the Sky, ufe Mafticot, or Vellow-berries, and White for the ligbteff and loweft Places; red
Roffct, and white for the next Degree; blue Bice, and white for the other; blue Bice, or Blue for tbe
bigheft.

Thefe Degrees and Colours muft be to wrought together, that the Edge of each Colour may not receive
any Sharpnets; that is, fo as that you cannot perceive where you began to lay them,, being to drowned
one in another.
Of the Practice of Wasking.
I7 II the Alom-water wet over the Picture to be coloured, for that keeps the Colours from fink-
ing into the Paper, and will add a Luffre unto them, make them thew fairer, and keep them
from fading.
Then let the Paper dry of itfelf (being wathed with Alomseater) before you lay on the Colours; or
before you wet it again, for some Paper will need wetting four or five Times.
The Wathing of the Paper muft be done with a large Pencill Boush.
But if you intend to varnith your Pictures after you have coloured them, inflead of wathing them with
Alom-water, firft fize them with new Size made of good white Starch, with a very fine Bruth; and this
13
you muft be fure to do all over, for elfe the Varniff will fink, through.
Having thus prepared your Work, go to laying on your Colours according to your former Directions,
s
fuiting them as near as may be, to the Life of every Thing.
But


40
But before you lay on your Colours, you muft know how to temper them; which you may do in this
Manner: r. Such Colours as are ground with fair Water; take a fmall Quantity of them, put it into a
Horfe Muffle-shell, purting thereto fome Gum-water, and the Colour in a little Time will be foftened;
then with your Finger being very clean, bruife the Colour againft the Shell, till you find no Knot undif-
folved; after with a clean Pencil stroke down the Colour to the Bottom of the Shell, and it is fit for Ufe;
if it be too thick, add more Gum-water to it. 2. Such Colours as are wathed you muft temper in a Shell
with Gum-water, in the fame Manner as the former. 3. Such Colours as are fteeped, the Liquor only
of them is to be ufed without any other Preparation.
The Picture being painted, you may with Size pafte your Maps or Pictures upon Cloth, thus: Wet the
Sheet or Cloth therein, wring it out, and ftrain it upon a Frame, or nail it upon a Wall or Board, and to
pafte your Maps or Pictures thereon.
Laftly, if the Picture be to be varniffed, having thus fixed it into its proper Frame, then varnith it with
a proper Varnish (by the following Rules) and the Work will be fully finithed.
How to lay on your Colours.
IRST provide yourfelf of Pencils of feveral Sizes, and if you will be curious, you ought to have a

great and a small to each respective Colour; if not, you muft always have by you a Dith of fair

Water, in which you muft wath and cleanfe your Pencil, wiping it with a clean Linen Cloth, before you
put it into another Colour.
For your Pencils, chufe thofe that are good, thus: See that they be fulleft next the Quill, descending
or leffening into a small Room or Charp Point, which you may fee by putting the Hair into your Mouth,
and drawing it thro' your Lips once or twice, then you will fee what it is, and if you find any ftragling
Hairs,, finge them off with the Flame of a Candle.
Being thus provided with Colours and Pencils, if you defign to lay any Colour about the Edges of any
Map, Part, Piece, or Divifion of Ground, in a Plat; as fuppofe you would inclofe a particular Field, or
Clofe in a Meadow, with fellow; with your Pencil take Camboge, or Vellow-berry Water a very small
Quantity, and on the Infide of the Black Lead Line draw the Colour along of an equal Breadth (as near
25


47
as you can) from the Line, broader or narrower as your Field is in Bigness; not daubing the Field or
Clofe all over with the Colour, which would be but an Abufe to your Map or Plat.
Then having gone round the Clofe or Field in this Manner, with your Colour, wet your Pencil in your
Mouth, or have by you a fmall Quantity of Water to dip it in, and ftrike along the Infide of the coloured
Line, bringing it more down towards the Center of the Field; and this will fweeten your Colour, and
make it thew as if it loft itfelf by Degrees, to the very Colour of your Paper or Parchment. This Courfe
is to be taken not only for Vellows, but for all other Colours. Laftly, with a Pen (if you cannot do it
handfomely with a Pencil) take fome of the Colour which fhadows the Colour you have already ufed
about the Field, and go over your Black-lead only, to shall your Field be finished.
Laftly, after the fame Manner you may adorn all the Parts in your Plat or Map, of divers Colours; obferv-
ing this, that you colour not two Fields adjoining to one another both of the fame Colour; and therefore
it behoves you to know what Colours do fet off one another beft; and as near as you can, to lay Clofes
or Fields, adjoining to one another, of two fuch Colours, that one Shadow may ferve both.
Of the making of Varnisbes.
7
ARNISH for painting in Oil. Take Maftick, two Ounces; Oil of Turpentine, one Ounce; put
the Maftick in Powder into Oil, and melt it over the Fire, letting it boil little or nothing, left it be
clammy; when it is enough you may know by putting in a Hen's Feather, for then it will burn it.
Varnish for painted Pictures. Take White Rofin, one Pound; Plum-tree Gum (or Gum-arabick)
Venice Turpentine, Linfeed Oil, of each two Ounces; firft melt the Rofin and train it very hot; kleep
the Gum in Oil Olive (Oil of Ben is better) till it is diffolved, and ftrain it, to which put the Purpentine
and Rolin, and over a flow Fire mingle them all till they are well diffolved: When you afe it, ufe it hor.
Knotber for the same. Take Olibanum and Gum Sandrick in Powder, which mingle with Venice Tur-
pentine, melting and incorporating them sill over a gentle Fire, then ftrain it hot.
When you ufe it let it be hot, and your Varnish will thew well; it dries immediately.
Anorber for the same. Take Oil of Linfeed, which diftil in a Glass Retort, one Ounce; fair Amber
diffolved, three Ounces; mix them over a flow Fire, and it is done.
A very good Parnisss for Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Stone, Wood, Vellum, or Paper. Take Benjamin
(made


42
made into a fine Powder between two Papers) put it into a Vial, and cover it with Spirit of Wine four
Fingers above it, and let it fland three or four Days; then flrain it, and it will be bright and fhining, dry-
ing immediately, and retaining its Brightness many Vears.
If you varnith Gold, or any thing gilded before the Straining, you should put in a few Blades of Saffron
for Colour-fake; but if Silver or any thing white, you ought to ufe the white Part of Benjamin only.
A Varmiss particularly for Gold, Silver, Tin, or Copper. Take Linfeed Oil fix Ounces, Mastick, loes,
Epatick, of each one Ounce; put the Gums in Powder into the Oil, into a glazed Earthen Pot, which
cover with another boiling them together, in the Bottom of which let be a Hole, whereinto put a fmall
Stick with a broad End to fir withal; cover them all over with Clay, except the Hole, fet it over the
Fire, and fir it as often as it feetheth for a little while, then ftrain it for Ufc. Firft let the Meral be
polifhed, then ftrike it over with this Varnith.
A Varnist for Wood and Leather.
Take Tincture of Saffron, or Turmerick in Spirit of Wine a Pint,
prepared Gum-lake a fufficient Quantity; diffolve the Gum in the Tincture and it is done.
This is a Varnish of great Ufe to lay over Gold, and Silver, or any thing which is expoted to the Air.
To make the Common Varniss. Take Spirit of Wine a Quart, Rofin one Ounce, Gum-lake a fufficient
Quantity; diffolve the Gum in a gentle Hleat, (being clofe covered) and let them fettle; then gently de-
cant off the Clear, which keep in a clofe Glass-bottle for Ufe.
Directions for making the Ladies WaITE JaraN.
T8 IAKE Whicing, the Quantity of three or four Balls; flake it with Water in a large Pot; let it fland
a Quarter of an Hour; then fir it, and pour the Top off into another Veffel, and to repeat it till
it becomes very fine; then take fome Parchment Size and mix with it, and lay it on the Cabinet with a
Camel-Flair Tool; let it dry well, and to repeat it three or four Times; then rub it with Indian Reed
till it is fnooth; then take some Pearl white, or Flake white, mix them with your Gum-water, and work
them on a Stone till it is very fine; then lay it on as before, once or twice as Occafions require. Your
Ground being thus prepard, take the White of an Egg and dip it according to the Form of your Print,
and lay it fmooth on your Cabinet; then dry it exceeding well, and do all your Prints over with Gum-
water; and when they have ffood one Day, then varnish it with a Camels Flair Tool, which you muft
repeat three or four Times before a Fire.
i

29
39
37215

FF
5
9295
13
30
 
1

H
15
1


