GENER AL RURE S
FOR
A ID
C
ID

I N
OlL and WATERCOLOURS;
Walking PR IN TS, MAPS.
3
 ND
M E 22 I T I N T O E S.
V I T H
The whole Akr of J A PA NIN G.


By GEORGE BICKHAM, Junior, Engraver.





L 0 N D O N:
Printed for G. BI C XH A M, in May’s-Buildings,
Covent-Garden. MDCC KLVil.







ng

5
57
Seoro
159

3
588
62
6

8


106


00
8
I

5
C
OF
1 11IV1 l. 5 In 11.
aga II E cerious Art of Painting in Oil
and Water-Colours has ever been
22



5

C
7
onderfully admired and approved, as
254
the Mafterpiece of other Arts and

Sciences, wherein Art fo exactly imi-

tates Nature, that Motion only feems
to be wanting; and many fuch rare Pieces have been
painted in both Ways, Oil and Water-Colours, that
they have at the firft Blush deceived the Eyes of the
Curious, who have taken them for real living Beings.
And tho' the Eye and Hafnd are mainly required
herein, the one to direct, and the other to operate
yet the Mind or Imaginatiopn muft furnifh cut a great
3
Part of the Curiofity, having Ideas, or the true
Shape of Things, always in a Readinets. This cannot
be dene haftily; but muft be done by a fteady Prac
tice, and curious Obfervations; and, in this Under.
taking for Painting in Oil, is, to prepare yourfelf with
fuirable Materials. In the firft Place, you muft take
care to get good Pencils, of all Sizes preportionable
to your Work; a Pallet or Board to lay your Colcurs
on, whilft you are ufing them; an Eafle to place yeur
Cloth fain’d upon a Frame, on, or againft; a Mcll-
Rick or Stay made of Weod, not subject to hend,

5
E 2
2tCut
153
CAPIT
6


4
Of PAIN TIN C.
about a Fard long: At one End tye a Ball of Cottofs
with Leather over it, fo that with your Left Hand,
holding it againf the Work, you may fupport your
Right Arm with it, whilft you are working.
The next thing to be confidered to the Cloth, and
the Outlihe drawn thereon, is the preparing your
Colours, which in Oil-Painting muft be with Linfeed-
Oil, unless for Linen, and then Walnut-Oil is a great
deal better; for it will not turn yellow, as the other
in time will, when mixed with curious Whites. You
muft grind your Colours on a Stone with a Muller,
ill they are as fine as Butter; or you may have them
in Bladders at the Colour-Shops, atid fome you mix
an your Pallet with your Pallet-Knife Never put on
your Pallet more than you think you shall ufe; for
they will Ikin over and (poil, which might be pre-
vented by putting them under Water. To clean your
Pencils, dip them in Oil of Turpentine, and fqueeze
them between your Fingers in a Tin Pan made for
that purpofe, where you generally lay them, and
your Colours that are in Bladders. The Colours
are in Number Seven, viz. Whire, Black, Red,
Green, Fellow, Blue, and Brown; the Whites,
White Lead, and Flake White; the Blacks, Sea-
Cole Black, Ivory Elack, Lamp-Black, and Eorth
of Collen; the Reds, Red Lead, Vermilion, Lake,
Indian Red, and Ornatto; the Greens, Terveret,

Verditer, and Verdegrife; the Yellows, apruce Oaker,

Pink or Fiment, and Mallicot; the Blucs, Shmait, 11s,
indico, and Ultramarine; the Erowns, Umber, Spa-
ish Brown, Burnt Oker. Thefe are the Chief to
be laid in Oil; but lvory, Spruce Oker, and Umber,
muft be burnt before they are ground; and, as fir
Malticor, Vermilion, Ultrantarine, Stialt, Erpiment,
you may temper them on your Pallet without Grind
ing. Bur, for the mixing and tempering your Co-
lours; To make a Violet, take Iudico, Whice Lead,
and Lake; mix them well, and thhe more or lets of
each Quantity will make the Colour deeper or lighter.

To make a Lead Colour, aac of White and Indico:
70


Of PAIN TIN G.
To make a Scarlet, take Lake, Red Lead, and a fmall
Quantity of Vermilion: To make a Flame Colour,
take Red Lead and Mafticot heightened with White:
To make a Light Green, take Pink and Smalt; as you
fee Occafion, lighten it with White: To make a Pur-
ple, take Spanmh Brown, Indico, and White. To
make a Bay Colour, mix Spanish Brown and White:
To make a Murry Colour, mix Lake and White. And
fo, by often tempering Colours, and Practice, you
may find out a thouland Tints.
But, in the ufing them, be cautious of taking too
much Oil; for which Reafon, thofe who would have
their Pieces keep freth, make ufe of as little Oil 2s
they can, and keep their Colours the firmer, by mix
ing with them a little Oil of Spike, which foon eva
porates, but ferve to make them run the berter, and
renders them the more pliable in Working. Ano
ther Caufe of Colours lofing their Beauty is, when
the Painter works them too much in mixing them;
for, being jumbled together, they change and corrupt
one another, and take away the Vivacity. Therefore
you muft be careful to ufe them properly, and lay the
Colours each in its Place, without mingling them too
much with the Pencil or Bruth; alfo not to temper
adverfe Colours together, as Blacks with others, par-
ticularly Smoke-Blacks; but to ufe them apart as
much as poffible; and, when you would give the
more Force to your Work you should stay till it. is
dry, to touch it over again with Colours that will not
Kill the firft laid on. In the mean time they ought to
learn, and qualify themfelves with the Proportions
and Connection of the Part of Drawing, as well as the
Colouring, and how to fix the Sketches or Out-lines,
and often to view and examine exquifite Originals,
and all the Infenfibilities and Sweetneffes of the Art,
which you will artain by viewing the Works of the
Kilful Mafters, rather than by Practice alone: After
you have done some Part of your Piece, fet it by for
fome time without looking on it; then view it again;
by which means you may chance to difcover fome
Faults,



Of PAIN TI.. G.
6
Faults, Errors, or Excellencies of your Work, which
you may either mend, avoid, or advance, according
to your Skill and Difcretion. It will be in vain for
you concinually to pore over your Work, and dull
your Genius, in fpite of Nature, and your prefent
Inclination.
General Rules for Painting in WA T E R-
COL OUR S.
O choofe thofe Subjects that are Noble and Beau-
A tiful, even in the atmoff Degree of Perfection,
that have fomething of Magnanimity and Greatness
in them, is the true Characteriffick of a Painter, and
whofe Sketches or Out-lines are noble, which will be
diftinguith’d pure, and without Alteration, clean, and
united together, compos’d of great Parts; yet thofe
but few in Number, and diftinguithd by bold Co-
fours, and fuch as are related, and are harmonious,
to each other. To fucceed well in your Attempts
this way, you should know how to draw very well:
The Colours us’d in Water are Carmine, Ultramarine;
Lakes of all Sorts,
Vermilion, Brewn Red, Mafticot
Fellow and Pale,
Indico, Ivory Black, Lamp-Black,
Spanise Brown, Umber, Gall-Stene Brown, French
Pink, Orpiment, Gamboge, Neples Vellow, Bladder-
GGreen, Verditer, Sea-Green, Flake-White: Thefe
Colours are tempered in Sea-Shells, or in (mall lvory
Cups made on purpofe, with Water, in which hath
been before diffolv’d Cum hrabick, and Sugar-
Candy: For Example, In a Gill of Water put the
Quantity of the Top of yeur 1 humb, of Gum-Ara-
bick, and half that Quanticy of Sugar-Candy; this
faft prevents the Colours from fealing when dry, which
they commonly do without it; and, when the Vellum,
Paper, (5c. are greaty, mix a little of the Gall of an
Ox, Carp, or Eel, especially of this laft; it will give
them a Lutre and Vivaciry not natural to them: If
yeu ufe Sea-shells, you muft firff foak them for twis
C5
t.


Of PA IN T IN G.
or three Days in Water; then clean them well in hor
Water, to clear them of a certain Salt which poils
the Colours When you have done this, pour Cum-
Water into the Shell, together with the Colour you
ufe, and temper them with your Finger till the Whole
be very fine: If you find your Colour too hard, leave
it to foften in the Shell before you mix it. Then,
when mix’d, fet it to dry; and to do by all, except the
Iris-Green, and Sap-Green, and Gamboge, which
muft be tempered with Water only; but Ultramarine,
Lake, and Spanish Brown, muft be more gummed
than other Colours. To underfland when your Co-
lours are fufficiently gummed, you need only make
a Stroke with your tempered Colours upon your
Hand, which will immediately dry. If they break
and fcale, they are too much gumm’d; and, if
they rub off by paffing your Finger acrots them, they
are not gumm’d enough. Take care alfo, that you
put not in too much; for it will have an hard and 2

dry Effect; your Colours will be glutinous and stick
ing. Good Pencils are of great Importance to the
Work To choofe which, wet them a little, and twirl
them on your Finger: If they keep their Point, they
are good; but, if they break into many Points of dif-
ferent Lengths, they are good for nothing: When
tey are too tharp-pointed, with only Four or Five
Hairs sticking out beyend the reft, you may blunt
them carefully with a Pair of Sciffers, or lighted
Candle: It will be proper to have Variety of Sizes.
Having (poken of Colours and Pencils, I shall next
shew how they are to be ufed. Firft of all, if you
would paint Flethor Drapery, or aught elfe, you muft
begin by Skerching or Drawing with large, bold, yet
clear Strokes: Endeavour alfo to drown your Colours
into each other, that no Line of Separation may be
feen between them; and foften your Strokes with the
Colour on each Hand of them, fo as to be equally
blended with, and confounded into each other. Some
Plices are touch’d all over alike; yet foas, when it is
finished, you may perceive the Vellum, Paper, Coc.
in



8
F PA IN T. IN G.
in feveral Places quite through the Work; which is
indeed too flight a way, and should rather be called
Wathing than Painting: The beft way is as follows:
Lay a full flat Ground all over, where your Fleth or
Drapery, Gc. are to be, of the Colour you defign it;
which, being done, you will find much eafier to be
wrought upon, and may be either heightened or
deepened at Pleafure: Take a special Care, that when
you temper or mix your Colours with pure Water,
and when you perceive they have loft their Gum by
often putting Water therein, you temper with Gum
Water, till you find they are in good Order again,
for either a Complexion or Garment; that you mix
them well with your Finger, and not let them be too
aterith; likewife preferve all your Colours from
Duft. In Landlkips it is impoftible to exprets the
Various Examples; they are innumerable, being as
many as there are Painters and Fancies, therefore
not to be comprifed within Rules. But, for the gene-
ral, obferve thefe which follow:
Always begin with the Sky, Sunbeams, or lighteff
I
Parts, firft; next, thofe Beams that are yellowith;
next, the Blueness of the Sky. Work your Sky
downwards towards the Horizon, fainter and fainter,
as it draws nearer and nearer the Earth, except in
the tempeftuous Skies. Work the Tops of Moun-
tains, far remote, to faint that they may appear loft
in the Air: Makelow Places, and fuch as are near
the round, of the Colour of the Earth, of a dark-
yellowith Brown, or Green; the next to them, of a
light Green; and fo fucceffively as they lofe in Di-
ftance, make them abate in Colour Do not make
any thing that appears at a Diftance perfect, by ex-
preffing any particular Signs or Tokens that it has;
but express it as weakly and faintly, as it appears to

the Eye. Always place Light againft Dark, and Dark
againt Light; by which means you may extend the
Prospect, as if very far off: Let all the Shadowslofe
their Force, as they remove from the Eye; always
making the Grongeff Shadows neareft to hand. You
need


Of PAINT INC.
need not be over-curious in the firft Working; but
rather ain at a good, free, and bold lmitation of
Nature, than an extreme neat, fet, or silf Way:
Be not difecuraged it the Roughness of your Colour;
for you may work that down, and touch it by de-
grees with the other Shadows, tho' you do not do it
at the Firft: After this, (weeten and heighten your
Shadows by degrees, according as the Light falls.
Then touch it in fome Places with Arong Touches,
and bring your Werk up together in thefe Places io
equal Roundness and Strength, not finifhing any Part
before the others; but viewing and working all the
Parts curioutly a. ke, as if all the Picture was painted
at once: Take notice, that Skies, Water, Trees,
Plants, Flowers, and Ground, are all to be finithd
before the Fizures. Thefe Inftructions laid down
may be of particular Efe when you work after Frints,
where you have nothing before you but Black and
White; but there is this Difference between Painting
in Water and in Oil, that in the laft the Colours are
taken off from the Pallet juft as they appear to you,
to that in this Cafe you have nothing to confult, but
tuch a Light and fuch a Chade. Now it is fer from
being the fame in Water-Colours, where often it hap-
pens, thit the laft Colcuring you lay on does not pre-
ferve iis Colour, but partakes of the Colour beneath,
or rather the one and the other compofe a new one,
to form the Efleit you aim at; for alino it be
White, Green, Carmine, Blue, Orpinent, Befter,
and the like, which form yeaur Colouring, they nevers

thelefs would not produce it, if you mix them toge
ther; for it is by proceeding from one to ine other
that you can fuccced; and wheti you copy a Picture
of this kind, you muft take your own Tate to pro-
duce the Effect; without having feen how it is done.
you muft be a Conjurer, at leaft, to quets at the Order
and Method it was done in : And take this Obfervy-
tion by the way, that Water-Colours always dry
lighter than when laid on, and Oil darker. In fome
ways of Painting in Water, you have no lfe of a
white


To OTMEE2ITINTO PRINTS.
white Colour, but make the Ground of the Vellum,
or Paper, oc. ferve to raife their Figures; in which
Cafe the Lights appear bright in proportion to the
Depth and Strength of the Colours of the Figures; or
you may, before you go to Werk, give the Vellum,
Paper, Coc. a light Wath with White Lead weil pre-
pared and purified; which has a pretty Effect, by
reafon of the White's running up in Working, which
foftens the Shadows, and makes them look pleafing.
To lay on MEZTITINTO PRINTS On GLASs.
N undertaking this curioutly, lay the Prints Hat-
1
ways in warm Water, of the fineft and thineff
Paper; for that which is rough and thick will not do
near to well, if at all; let them foak well, and your
Glats the beft White Flint; go over it with Venice
Turpentine, (pread thin with a pliable Knife, and
dab it over with your Finger, that the Turpentine
may feem rough. This done, take the foaked Print
and lay it on a clean Cloth even; then press it with
another, to take out the Warer; then lay it on the
Glats, the Print next it, beginning at one End,
Stroaking outwards the Part already fixed on the
Glass that neither Wind nor Water may be retained
between, to wrinkle it; then with a little Spunge, or
your Finger, wet the Back-fide, and lightly, by
Alegrees, roll off the Paper carefully in the Lights,
which are the tenderest; and, when the Print ap-
pears very tranfparent on the Back-fide, let it dry
about two Hours, then varnish it over with Tur-
pentine, or Matick Warnifls, till you can fee through
it; and a Night's drying will prepare it to be work’d
oir with Colours.
If you would have all the Paper off, to that nothing
but the ink of the Print should remain, lay it as before,
with (1il of Matick, and a little Turpentine, and a
Lruth will ferch off all the Paper.
ht




F JA PANN IN E.
TX
0
In Painting you muff ufe Oil Colours, and on
the Back-fide of the Print as above prepar’d, and ac-
cording to the Directions in Oil Painting, viz. Where
there are deep Shadows, glaze and touch them thinly
with brown Pink, Lack, and Varnifh; alfo the
black Ball, and white Speck of Lye, as you will be
directed by the Print; the round white Ball muft
likewife be of a convenient Colour. If the Lips are
to be of a curious Red, glaze them with Lake, or
Carmine, and then begin with the dark Side of the
Face, and paint the Shadows with the Colour more
red than ufual; to do this, Fellow, Pink, Vermillion,
and White, are the moft proper. And, Note, No
Varnith muft be ufed in Painting Fleth Colours, ex-
cept in glazing the Shadows; for the Varnish drys
to faft that you cannot (weeten the Shadows of the
Fleth. Then with a fine clean Pencil, that has been
wore alittle, harch and sweeten the Fleth Colours and
Seadows fweetly together, taking care to cleafe your
Pencil as often as it is requifite; fo that whilft the
Piece is moift and wet, you may regulate Cheeks to
pall, or any other Defect; and by this means you
may paint Landlkips, Beafts, Coc. always being care-
ful that your Pencil be freadily guided, for the leaft
Slip mars the whole, and trespafting on the Our Lines
and the Features, fpoils the Drawing and makes it
quite difagrecable.
General RUL Es for that curious Art of
Japanning with Prints, Coc.
O be a Proficient in this Art, feveral Matters are

required, and thefe you muft confider as filitable
not only in Property, but Goodnets, that your Cofl
may not prove in vain; Therefore get the beft Tools:
for without them this Art wotuld be infignificant: And
therefore, to furnith yourfelf with them, you muft
have Pencils according to the Greatness or Smalnets
of the things you intend to work on. Thofe for Var-
Rifh
C 2
8.




i




Of
A P A NN IN G.
12
nith mull be made of Camels Tlair, very foff; and
are of various Prices as to the Largeness or Fineness:
You muft have in Readiness a confiderable Number
of Mutcle-thells to mix your Colours and Minerals in,
as the Occafion shall require: Glats Botcles and Phials,
small and great, muft be in a Readinets, as to fuit with
the Quantities of Varnith your Bulinets requires you
to ufe; and Gally-Pots to put it in, when you defign
to work; as allo to mix your Colours for your
Grounds toftick your Prints upon. Tripoli is proper
to polith this Work with when varnifhed, being re-
duced into fine Powder, and fifted: As for Linen
Rass, you muft be provided with them, both fine and
coarte, to clear and polifh this Work; alfo Olive-Oil
for a Clearing; as many of thefe as shall be directed
hereafter, as they occur in due Place in the Work.
To begin this Work; Of the Whice Varnifh, take as
much common Plifterers Size, and mix Whiting, or
fine Chalk, or Flake-Whire, as will make it of a rea-
fonable Thicknels, as, when dipping your Pencil into
it, it will with a Stroke whiten the Board, 6oc. or
whatfoever you japan, by pafting over with a Brush;
but let it be in neither of the Extremes, too thick or
too thin; and, when dry, repeat the fame, keeping
it from all manner of Duft; it muft be whited Three
times before you stick your Prints on, which may be
dene with common Pafte In the next Place, take
white Starch boil’d in fair Water till it come to be
tomewhatthick; and, when it is lukewarm, wath over
your Werk with it once or twice, drying berween
whiles Then take the fineft of the white Varniffi,
and wath or anoint your Work Six or Seven times;
and, if done with a dextrous Hland, a better (lots will
be fet on it than it it had been polifhed; but, if it
mits of that, you muft polith it; and, in order thereto,
yeu muft accommedate it with three or four Waflies
of Varnish mere thes the former; and it muft con-

rinuc to lems well abour a Day or two, before you
polithir Your Hand moft he carried light and gentle,
having your Cloth neitlicr toodry, nor too wet; and
CIERT


Of JA PANN IN G
13
clear it up with fine Flour and Oil. Of Black Varnith;
Provide for this Imitation of Japan, a clofe grain’d
Wood, well planed: Take common Size, and as
much Lamp-Black as will at the firft colour the
Wood. Do it Three times, permitting it to dry well
between every Doing: Then with a little Turpentine
put in more Lamp-Biack, not too thick to hinder it
from flowing; give it Three Wathesmore; then stick
your Prints neatly colour’d according to your own
Taffe; and, when dry, do it over with Starch; then
take, when dry, Seed Lac; varnifh, and do it over
two of three times, letting it dry between every time
after, and let it remain two or three Days before you
Polish ir. Of Red Japan; Vermilion mix’'d with
ordinary Size, and to on as in the White and Black;
and in this manner you may do all colour’d Grounds.
Keep your Work ever warm, but not fo hot to raife
Bliffers, or crack it, which nothing but fcraping off
all the Varnifh can amend. After every diftinct Wath,
let your Work be thoroughly dry; for Neglect in this
Point introduces theFault of Roughness. After it is
Varnished, let it lie by, as long as your Conveniency
will permit, and it will be the better Ever take care
to begin your Varnish-Strokes in the Middle of the
Table, or what you do it on, not from one End to
the other; and, your Bruth being planted in the Mid-
die, ftrike it to one, and then take it off, and fix it to
the Place you began at. So draw or extend it to the
other End, and to continue till the whole Plane is
Varnish’d over; and beware you over-lap not the
Edges, which is, when the Varnish hangs in Splathes,
or drops on them. Therefore, to prevent it, draw
your Bruth gently once or twice againft your Crally-
pot Side. It you have a mind to (peckle your ja-
pan’d Work for the adorning it, mix to many Speckles
as you have Occafion for with ordinary Lac-Gum
Varnifh, to much as, when they are put into a Gally-
pot, will fit them for working with a convenient
Pencil; keep them flirring very well with a Brush,
and generally warm by the Fire, till yeu perceive the
Speckles


C
A PANNIN C.

14
Speckles he thick and even to your Mind: When laid
on fo, beautify them with three or four Wathes of
Warnifh mix’d with Turpentine; and this, unlets you
intend to polifh, will be fufficient; and in this man-
bist
er you may lay on all coloured Speckles;
Silver requires Seed Lac Varnifh, and the beft White
Varnith ere it can be brought to a good Polifh; but,
if not to be polifh’d, you may pare your Varnish,
as the Prints that you japan with are generally Black
and White, unlefs bought colour’d: But, in order
to prepare the Prints, if they will not bear the Colour,
do them over with fome thin Starch, which will take
off the Greafinets of the Printing, and make the
Colours run fmooth.
In Colouring you muft be sure to leave the Lights;
which has Two Advantages; viz. If the Lights be
left on this Occafion, the Whiteness of the Paper
ferves inflead of the fe of white Paint, which is a
very heavy Colour, and, if not finely prepar’d, will
turn black, and would rather confound thote that have
been prescribed to be laid on, than do them any Ser-
vice; but the Colours, as will be directed, where
there is no White laid on, will thine agreeably into
the Whice of the Paper.
I am more particular in this, becaufe fome Perfons
will lay ablue Flower all over with one Colour, tho'
it be thick enough to hide both the Light and the
Shades of the Print; and then it will look like a Peny
Picture, where there is nothing but a Jumble of Reds,
Blues, and Greens; but this avoid, and be fure you
leave your Lights broad, and frumble the Lights
into the Shades of every Colour; but leave the middle
of the Lights open on the Papers; for as the Paper
is white of itfelf, it makes a beautiful Hleightening and
Roundness.
In painting the Leaves of Trees, Plants and Iferbs,
Regard muft be had to the Colour of the Greens, that
fomerimes being the chief distinguishing Character to
Know them by. If the Centre of Flowers is rifing;
you muft teuch the Edges of the Lights with a thin
Tincline


A P ANN IN G.
Of
15
Tincture of Gamboge, and lay on some Durch Pink,
or Gall-Stone over the Shades, fo as to run into the
Lights a very little: This is to be done, becaute the
Thrums in the Middle of Flowers are generally
yellow; but if of any other Colour, as fometimes
blue, Coc. fometimes ligater, and fomerimes darker,
then touch the Verges of the Lights with a little
Ultramarine Blue, and over the Shades, either fome
London Blue, to run a little into the Ultramarine, or
elfe shade with Indico; and fome of the White of
the Print being left void of Colours, will then give

Life and Spirit to the Colours fo difpos’d. All
Flowers, 6oc. should be tenderly touch’d in the
Lights, juft to give a little Glare into the light Parts of
the Colour of the Print; and on the Shadow-fide
you multlay on a ftronger Colour, that will force the
reft to appear forward; but do not daub over the
Shades with too heavy a Colour; let it be fuch as
may be tranfparent, it poffible, and foften into it the
light Colour that was laid on before; on this Occa-
fion, the Pencil muft be us’d but lightly, with a very
little Gum-water in it, and it muft be us’d before the
Colours are quite dry. In Greens, Verdegrife is the
lighteft; therefore that Colour should be touch’d
into the lighteft Parts of all Greens, from the Place
where the lighteft Part of the Shade ends; and then
on the fhadyParts lay on fome Sap-Green, fo as to
unite with the Verdegrife-Green; and, if the natural
Leaf should be of a darkifh Colour, touch the lighter
Sides of the Leaves with a liftle Verdegrife-Green, and
Durch yellow Pink, mix’d together, or with a Tineture
of French Berries, but to as to let the Verdegrife fhirne
more than the Pink, becaufe it is an eafy Matter to
darken a light Colour, but difficult to lighten a deep
one: And for the Mixture, and Compofition of Con
lours, the following Articles will be of great Help:
For a bright Red, temper Indian Lake with native
Cinnabar. A Scarlet, mix Carmine, and deepen it with
Indian Lake; or temper native Cinnabar, and a little
Red Lead, and fhadow it with Indienlake: A Carna-
tiopn,


45
Sin



VAR N I S H.
Of
16
sion, mix Lake and White, and fhadow with Lake.
A Crimfon, mix Cinnaber, Lake, and White, and
deepen with Lake. A Peach-Colour, mix Carmine,
and a little White, and fhadow or deepen it with
Lake: A Violet, temper fine Dutch Bice with Lake,
and deepen with Indico; An Orange, mix the beft
Red Lead, and a little fine yellow Mafficot, and
Thadow it with Gall-Stone and Lake. A Straw-Co-
four, mix yellow Mafticot with a very little Cinna-
bar, and deepen it with dark Pink For a Sky, mix
Ultramarine with a little White, and deepen with In-
dico: A Sea-Green, mix Bice, Pink, and White; and
deepen with Green Pink.
For a Popinjay, temper Pink, and a little Indico;
and deepen with Indico For an Aff-Colour, mix
Black and White; and deepen with Brown. For a
Tawny, mix Red Lead and Mafficot; and deepen
with Umber. Take a special Care, That, when you
mix or temper any of thefe Colours, you mix them
well with your Finger, and not too waterish: Alfo
be fure to preferve all your Colours from Duft, and,
before you temper them, to bruth it off with a large
Pencil, or Hare'’s Foot, or blow it off And, in ex-
actly observing thefe Rules, you will prove an expert
Artifl.
General RULES for making the Beft Varnith
for Japanning; and to Preferve Paintings
from Decay.
F Spirits of Wine: This is of main Ufe in Var
X nithing; and, if it be not properly qualified, it
will spoil the Varnish, and not be capable, for want of
Strength, to diffolve your Gums, or make them
pread, and fo confequently he uneven upon the
Work: And, to know when this Spirit is fufficiently.
rectified, put fome of it in a Spoon, and put a little
unpowder in; and, if it burns out, blows up the
Gunpowder, and leaves the Spoon dry, then it is a.
go0d


F VA R N I S H:
C
I
good Spirit; but, failing in this, and leaving the Spoon
moift where the Flame extinguithes, it is not fir for
your Ofe.
Of Gums: To chufe thefe well, as Gum Anime,
Takethe moft transparent cleareft and whiteft; Gum-
Leed-Lac, free from Drofs, Sticks or Dust; large-
grained and bright: Gum-Sandarack, white, large, and
free from Duft and Drofs; Shell-Lactranfparent, that
will eafily melt and draw out with your Figures as fine
as a Hair; White Rofin; whiteff and cleareft. Venies
Turpentine; and Bole Armoniack free from Grittinels
or Gravel, and of a blackish red Colour, commonly
call’d French Bole; Gum Elemi freeft from Duft and
Drofs; Gum-Arabick. Chufe the second white and
tranfparent; Cum-Capel, that free from Drofs, and
the thick dark Stuff incorporated with it; Gum
Bogium, the beft is that of a bright fellow free from
dirty Thickness and Drofs: Hing-Glats, the cleareft
and whiteft, free from Yellownets. Benjamin, that
of a bright red Colour much like to clarified Black
Refin; Dragon's Blood, the beft is of a bright Red,
free from Dross; it may be had as the other above, at
the Druggiffs; but the Prices I fet not down, be-
caufe they generally rife and fall.
How to make Seed-LacVarnifh: Your Ground work
is good rectified Spirits, of which you may take
Ten Gallons, put into a wide-necked Bottle; put 2
Pound and a half of the beft Seed-Lac; let it mace
fate Twenty-four Hours, or till the Gums are well
diffolved, with often Shaking, to keep them from
clogging together; then, with Flannel Strainers, Straiff


it into a Lin Tunnel, placed in the Mouth of an-
other empty Bortle, till it rifes thick, and no longer;
then ftrain the thick Part, and fettle that again, and
keep the fine Varnifh for your Ule: This way is as
well without the Danger of attempting to boil it,
which endangers firing the Houfe, and the Perton's
Lifc.
How to make White Varnifh: Take an Ounce of
white Gum-Maffich, and an Ounce of whire Cum-
D
Sathlarack


Of
VA R N I S H.
18
Sandarack, Three Ounces of the beft and cleareft
Venice Turpentine, Gum-Elemi half anOunce, Gum-
Capel an Ounce and an half, Gum-Benjamin of the
cleareft, half an Ounce, and half an Ounce of
white Rofin; and the Gums being feparated in
their O
Quantities previded, put the Rofin and Capel
in a Glafs Phial, with half a Pint of Spirits, that
they may be diffoived; and to the fame End, in a
Glats Bottle of Three Quarts of Spirits, put the
Venice Turpentine, Animx, and Benjamin, and in
another Bottle the Green Maftich, and Sandarack, in
a Fint and a half of Spirits; pour very finely the
Anima and Benjamin the better to diffofve in the
Spirits, and then pour them off into a large Bottle.
Let them sland to fine as the former, and then strain
them thro' a Linen Cloth gently, not hardly prefting
the Sediment, left you carry the Grittinets of the
Gums along with you, and to injure the Varnifh.
Of Silver Duft, Brats Dufl, Green Gold, Dirty
Gold, Coppers, Powder-Iin, Froft, Coc.
The Silver Duft: The beft is brought from beyond
Ser, and is known from the Counterfeit, by being
fqueczed between your Finger and Thumb;
giving
2 glorious Lufire, as indeed it does in the Work.
Brafs Duft, by Artifts called Duft-Gold, is the beft
made in Germony; and is of a fine bright Cclour,
heareft refembling Gold; try it as the Silver-Duff:
As for the coarfe fort, though it will work pretty well
with Gold-Size; yet it will not do fo with Gum-
Water Green Gold, a corrupt Metal fo call’d, is
very good in this Work for cafting a fading green
Colour Dirty Gold is a corrupt Metal, calling a
dark, duil, though Silverith Colour, having a Re-
femblance of drotly Gold.
 Coppers are Three Sorts, Natural, Adulterace, and
Artificial. As for the Natural, being cleanted, it may
bhe ground without any Mixture: The Adulterate is
the moft fir for a Ground, and ferves commenly to
lay other Metals on; as in etching or heightening
GGeld orsilveron; but the Artificial is of a higher
and


To mate POWDER INES. 19
and brighter Colour than either There are Frofts
of all Colours, being Speckles of Glafs, as alfo thofe
called Speckles of Gold and Silver, and divers other
Colours, differing in Finenefs, which may be worked
as the Artiff fanfies.
The best Gold Size at prefent in Ufe. Take an
equal Quantity of the beft French and English Bole-
Armoniack, grind thefe fine on a Marble-Stone, with
fair Warer; then (crape into it a little Candle-reaie;
incorperare and grind thefe well together; then mix
a litile Quanrity of Parchment-Size, with a dcuble
Proportion of Warer, and the Bufiness is done.
To make FowDER -Irnks, as the London
PowDER-INKS, JAPAN INES, COc.
O NDON Powder-Ink. Take Ten Oun-es
As of the cleareft Rut-galls, bruife them, and fit
the Powder very fine; then white Copperas, Two
Ounces; Roman Vitriol, Three Ounces; Cum-Ara-
bick or Sandarack, an Ounce. Bruife and fift them
very fine, fo trat though they appear white, a littie,
being put into Water, will in a thort time turn it,
and an Ounce of the Powder will make a Pirt of
very Black inx.
To make Jupan or Shining Ink: Take Gur-Ara-
bick, and Romon Vitriol, of each an Ounce; Galls
Mn
y
wellbruifed, a Pound: Put them into Rape-V:ir;
or Vinegar made of Small, Leer; fet them relain
in a warm Place, often firring, till the Liquer be.
comes black; then add to a Callon, an Ounce of
Ivory-Black, and a Quarter of a Pint of Seed-Lac-
Varnifh, and it will be a curious Black Shining ink.
To make Indian Ink. Take Horfc-beans, Furn
them iil they are perfectly black, grind them to a
fine Powder, and with a weak Cum-Arabick-Water
make it into a Pafte, which form into long Square
Cak:s.
A Black


20 To make PO WDER-I NE S.
A Black Ink that vanifhes in Twenty four Hours:
Boil or digeft Nut-galis Twenty-four Hours in gross
Powder, in Lque Fortis; add to them Vitriol or Cop-
peras, and a little Sal Ammoniac, and it is done
WWhat is written with this will vanith in Twenty-
four Hours.
To make a Red Writing Ink: Take Rafping of
Brazil, One Cunce; Whire Lead and Alum, of each
Two Drams: Grind and mingle them; infufe them
in Urine Oue Pound, with Two Scruples of Gum-
Arabick, or a Dram at moft.
To takke ink out of printed Books, Pictures, and
Drawings: Wet a little iqua Fortis upon it, and it
will be speedily out; then wath it over with a little
Alum-Water or Vinegar and it will kill the Rynd
7-83
21
Fortes, which othervic will either eat the Paper, or
make it yellow Spirits of Virriol will do the fame.
And as this Eflay carries with it all along, as linked
in a Chain, Pleafure and Profit, it cannot but be
grareful to the Fancies, especially of the ycunger
Sort, who putting in Practice what beft fuits their
Minds, may much pleafe others, and accomplifh
themfelves. And fo, the whole Work not compre-
hending many Sieets, I ffrill omit what more 1 juftly
might tay; and, fubmitting to the Centure of the
candid and ingenious Reader, take Leave to fubfcribe
nytelf,
Vigue mott File SCrTCht,

C. E.


3 

HC








PR IN T S and BO O R E
Sold by GEORCE BICKHAM, Jun. Engraver,
in Mays - Buildings, Covent - Garden,
Londen.
B 0 0 E S.
Elicix Britannicx: Or, the Curiofities of Hlamptor-Court
 and Windor Cattle; delineared with occafional Re-
Hections, and embellithed with Copper-plates of the two Pa-
laces, &cc. (a neceffary Pocke: Companion for fuch as vifit thofe
Courrs.) The Whole accempted with a View, not only to en-
sage the Atteption of the Curious, but to inform the Judgments
of thofe who have the leatt Tatte for the Art of Painting.
Seccond Edition. Bound 2s. 6d. To be conrinued through
the Courts.
2. The Ufefulnets of the Stage to Religion and Govern
ment: Alfo a Diftinction between the Stage and the Prets;
with a Frontifpiece. 1s.
5. The Life and Death of Pierce Gaveffone, Earl of Corn
wall; Grand Favourice and Prime Minitter: With polirical
Remarks by way of Caution to all Crown’d Heads and Evil
Minifters; with a curious Frontifpiece in a political Taffe. 7s.
4. An Introduction to Dancing: Or, Genicel Behaviour
fully explained by Twelve Figures in Dancing Pofitions,
drawn from the Life, and printed Directions; with Twelve
new Minuets and Rigadoons never before publifhed. The
Mufick by an eminent Hand. 1s.
5. A short Trip into Kent., Containing the Occurres-
ces of Four Summer Days; calculated as an Ancidote againft
the Gloominess of the Winter Months; and particularly that
which is occation by the Obtervation of the goth of January,
in Hludibraltick Veric. 6d.
B O O K S Engraved.
6. A new Drawing, Japanning and Writing Book; beings
curious Dilplay of thoe Ares, in a more accurate Mianner
than any thing of the like Kind hicherto extant; by which
the young Praclisioner is gradually lead from the firit Element
ofeach, to the Performance, in a fhort Time, of the moft finiffed
1. The
Pieces. 2 s. Sepainic 6r. the Whole.




D
a rints and Books, Sold by G. BICKHAM.
7. The New Vears Gift. Or, Times Progrets for the
Year 1747. 1748, 1749, adorn’d with Figures and Habics
adapted to each Month, with the Signs of the Zodiack. and
afeful Obfervarions on the Days of the Week, Husbandry, and
the Seafon, with a Descripiion under each Month. Is.
8. The whole Opera of Flora, with the humorous Scenes
fHob, 28 Page being to many Songs: The Pictures de
fign’d by Mr. Gravelor, and engrav’d with the Mufick; and a
new Bats and thorough Bais by Mr. Howard, proper for ail
Inftruments 2 5.
9. The Opera of the Devil to pay; with the Scenes en-
graved in Picture Work on the Top of each Song, and the
Speech that introduces them: The MMufick and a new Batsby
Mr. Vincent, proper for all Inftruments. 6d.
10. Six Folio Songsnew decorated with Pictures. 5d.
11. The firft Principles of Geomerry explained, with a
whimfical Picture to each Page. 1 s. Bound and Cilr.
12. Select Fables with Pistures to eacn, engraved in a new
Talle. 6 d.
S8Ts Of PR 1 N T S.
13. Fame, Arr, Education, and Invention, curioufly en-
grav’d from Capical Drawings of Mi. Gravelots, with their
Descriptions. 2 s.
14. Soldiers in moft Parts of the known World, viz. Croats,
Pandcurs, Talparches, &c. Twenty Five in Number; shew.
ing the different Regimentals and Likeneffes, with their De-
scriptions. 6 d. each plain.
1s. Game Cocks as big as Life, either plain or beautifully
coloured, according to their particular Feathers, with a Border
faitable to the Game, being the Beginning, Middle and End of
the Bartlc. 7 s. 6d. plain, 4s. each coloured.
16. Four beauriful Auriculates, and Six grand Pulips in Pors
and Warer-Glaffes, as big as Life, and in their natural Colours,
each on a Sheet of large Paper. 1s. plain. 2 s. each coloured.
17. The Ladies Nofegays, drawn from the Life, and en-
grav’d by George Bickham, jun. Being beautiful Groups of
Flowers that blow in each Month, as big as Life, and colour’d
from Nacure; with their Names, Times of Fiowering, and
their Gratsditlinetly exprefted, in Quarto; three or four Flowers
in each Plate, and is the molt ateful Work for all Ladies delight-
ing in Embroidery, Painting, Japanning, and to make Cabi-
nerr. Screens, &cc. making the molt beautiful Furniture for
Dining and Banqueting Rooin:, Cloices, &cc. zs. plain. 6s.
18.A
colour’d.


in May's Buildings, Covent-Garden.
18 A True Lover’s Sweet heart for every Day in the Week,
with orher odd Fancies in it, &cc. 6d.
10. The Town of Maidenhead Unopened under the Rofc.
admird for its folding. 6 d.
20. Univerfal Bufiness. A Card of Meffages of the utmoft
Confequence in Fathion, being the Ace of Hearts; with How
dye Do, and How dye Do, and How dye Do again. 6d.
21. The Victory; or the New Cf Thankfgiving.
a Card, being the Nine of Diamonds. 6d.
22. A Drawing Book of Landskips with Out Lines, fir for
young Learners in that Art. nd another in Shadows, 6d.each.
23 A curious and beautiful Set of Birds, as big as Life, and
colourd in the China Taffe. 2 d. each plain. 4d. colour’d.
24. Black Lines to lay under Paper to help to write Even
without ruling the Paper, with a Copy on the Top neceffary
for Beginners.
25. Bills, at One Peny, and Three-halfpence each, en-
graved with curious Borders faitable, a large Lerter, and on
good Paper, viz. Bills for Lodgings Furnifhed, Lodgings
Unfurnished. All Sorts of Fine Tes, Coffee, and Chocolate
Sold Here. Snuff and Tobacco Sold Here, ecc.
26. A large fine Print as big as Glats willadmit; of a Lady
with a fine Horfe and Grayhound, juft ferring out for a Courte
with her Grooms, and a beauriful dittant Prospect. Price 9s.
27. Rules of Drinking, a curious Print in a French Taite.
23. Nirs. Wof——on in her Regimenials, excerciting
in the Tafle of a Scaramouch.
29. The Twelve Nlonths in large Flower Pots, which make
beautiful Furniture. Price 6s. plain, 12s. coloured.
30. The Manual Exercife, with the Words of Command
undereach Figure, with the Officers Salures, and in their Re-
gimentals, which makes a compleat Pack of Cards to play with.
Infcribed to his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland.
Price 2 s. 5d. Coloured 5s.
One Hundred large Half Sheet, PolITiCAl PRiNTs, the
largelt Variety in London; Bound or Single, Plain or Co.
loured, and as the lowell Prices.
SINGL E Prints.
91. The Whice Rofe in June; or, the Jolly Highlander,
who fought a noted Bartle on a nored Stage and loff.
32. The Opening for the next Seafon of Vaux-hall.
23. The Apoftle Wd: Or, Enthuliaim difplay’d.
34. The Portraiture of the City Advercifing Hu:band.
35. The



1
sin


is



i







n








Sold by G. BICKHA, in May’s Buildings.
5. The Modern Orpheus: Or, Picture of a true Muficiar.
3.1
36. The Picture of Old 1y: Or, Scorch Talle in
Vifte.
37. The Independent Electors of Wellminfter in Union.
38. The Picture of the Hon. James Annefley, with Em-
blems.
29. The Track the French took to furvey our Coafls, a
3
Miap.
40. The Break Neck Fox Chafe; particular People of 2
Parficular County.
. 41. The Vawn of a late Prime Minifter: Lol whit are all
your Schemes come to.
42. Col. Titus's Address to Oliver Cromwell, whofe Name
made all Enrope tremble; himself trembling in the Midit of
his, Guards, upon reading this Paper. Decorated with his
Picture ar Top. 6d.
 43: A Tale, called the Crame of Pur; and Dick and the
Widow’s Picture on the Top. 6d.
: 44. Pnarmacopocis Circumforaneus; Or. the High Ger.
man Doctor's Flarangue: With the Pictures of Dr. W—d,
Di. 7 r, and Nirs. Mapp. 6d.


TR ADEs made our of their own Implements.
F.
.r Lhe Burcher, taken from the Sign of the Burcher, in
Bicher-Row.
5 2 Moll Handy,
with a Letter of Recommendation to a
Service.
:g: The Taylor with proper References.
4. The Victualler or Publican.
.r. The Burcher in another Nlanner.


:5. A fine Pieceof Rockcall for the tie of Japanning
-17. A beautiful Head of a Mathematician as big as Life,
printed on fine Imperial Piper.: Price 2s.
3
At the above Place may be bad;

The very beft Tranfparent Water Colours in Phials: Like
wife the belt mix’d Gum Water to mix in Shells for colouring
Prints, for Japanning, with Directions in general; and the beit
of Pictures in that Tafle. Black Lead Pencils, Pencil Bearers,
Hair Pencik, Indian ink, Writing Paper, Fountain. Pens. fine
Cicons, Rel and Black Chalk, &c. &cc. &c.— Where
ay be had all the newed Prints as they come our: And Old
Prints bought and Johl.



