


The

ASSISTANT.
ARTISTS

DRAWING.
THE great advantages derived from a knowledge of the-
Art of Drawing, are universally known and acknowledged,
it being not only useful, but absolutely necessary to those
Artists concerned in Designing.
Drawing is the basis of Painting, Sculpture, Architecture,
Engraving, Modelling, Chasing, Carving, &c.--It offers
so elegant and agreeable an amusement for the leisure hours
of the man of business, or the gentleman, that every one who
has neglected it has felt and confessed its loss.
To enable those who may not have the assistance of a
skilful instructor to become masters of this desirable accom¬
plishiment, we shall give plain and concise directions, and
point out such a mode of study as we trust will render
the task of acquiring it pleafant, and remove many impedi¬
ments, which, without such assistance, would retard their
The materials necessary for drawing are--black lead
peneils, camel hair pencils; crow quill pens; red, white,
Original trom





The black lead peneil should not be held so near the
point as the pen in writing; the use of it being for the
sketch or first outline of the piece, which should be drawn
with freedom, as any erroneous stroke or line may be
erased by rubbing the work gently with Indian rubber, or
crumb of stale bread.
As the subjects first proposed to the student’s attention
will be found to influence his future practice more than
may be easily imagined, great care should be taken that
none but the works of the most eminent masters be put into
his hands, lest the ill habits he may acquire by a contrary
mode of conduct, should be found difficult to be removed
by the strongest exertions of mature judgment. Every
figure, nay, every stroke, given him as a pattern, should
be excellent in its kind, that he may be early familiarized
to beauty, taste, and symmetry. Fortunately for the
student, such examples are, at prefent, by no means difficult
to be procured. The works of Bartolozzi afford us the
most compleat specimens of correctnefs of drawing, and
elegance of form. After having for a short time accustomed
himself to the use of the pencil, he would do well to study,
with the most scrupulous attention, the Rudiments of
Drawing engraved by that accomplissied artist from the
designs of Cipriani.
Aster having prepared himself by acquiring the habit of
copying correctly the best prints, he may proceed to siudy
from plaister casts, from which he will derive more real
improvement than from copying drawings, since he will,
by this method, become acquainted with the principles of
the chiaroscuro, or light and shade, by the magie sorce
of which, the paintings of Parrhasius were termed realities;
and the fingers of Alexander, (in the character of Jupiter
the Thunderer), painted by the samed Apelles, seemed
to fhoot forward, while the lightning appeared to flaffi
from them,









In the formation of a painter, genius is the first and most
indispensable requisite, for the absence of which no human
acquirements can compensate. A picture, like a poem,
would afford little pleasure, though formed according to
the strictest rules of art, and finished with the most inde-
fatigable attention, were genius wanting to compleat the
design-a design which may be said to be like the celebrated
statue fafhioned by Prometheus, lovely, but lifeless, unless
genius, like the fire which he is fabled to have stolen from
heaven, darts its invigorating ray, and gives a soul to the
finished piece.
But though genius be absolutely necessary, since nothing
can be done without it, yet it will not alone suffice. Like a
rich but uncultivated soil, it will be fruitsul only in weeds,
were not its exuberances corrected by the rules of art, by
reflection, and a strict attention to nature, which is the
grand object of a painter’s meditation, it ought never to be
out of his sight; it is the only source of beauty, since
nothing can be pleasing that is not natural.
An intimate knowledge of the beauties of the ancients
will he of the greatest advantage; they made nature their
peculiar study, and transmitted to us examples in sculpture,
which have triumphed equally over the rage of time and
Barbarians; examples which have ever been considered as
forming a perfect Rule of Beauty.
A close and servile imitation, however, is not what we
would wishi to recommend; a man may find his account in
attending to the manner, and storing up the observations
of a well-bred and intelligent acquaintance, without ridi¬
culoussy affecting his gait, or copying his phraseology.
In order to acquire a knowledge of the face, begin with
drawing the features separate, placing the copy at such a
distance as the eye may measure both it and the drawing
without moving the head. Sketch in the sirst outline very










light; and, in rubbing out, leave faint traces of the first
sketch. By proceeding in this manner, without the assistance
of rule or compasses, the outline should be brought to the
greatest exactness; and in placing the features, à perfect
oval should be formed, through which a perpendicular line
is drawn in the middle; and across the centre of this, a
diameter line from one side of the oval to the other. On
these all the features of the face are to be drawn, according
to the following rules for drawing a head.
The perpendicular must be divided into four equal parts;
one from the crown of the head to the top of the forehead;
two from the top of the forehead to the eye-brows ; three
from the eye-brows to the bottom of the nose; four from
thence to the bottom of the chin.
The diameter line divide into five parts; the breadth of
the face being supposed the length of five eyes; this is to
be understood in a full front face only, and these proportions
are rather inconstant in different men, as to length and
shape; but in a well proportioned face are nearly right, and
should be strictly observed.
When the face turns to either side, then the distances
are to be lessened on that side from you, more or less, in
proportion to its turning. Most artists begin the drawing
with the nose, that being the centre; and then proceed to
the other features, observing that the top of the ear is to
rise parallel to the eye-brows; the eye to be placed so as to
leave exuctly the length of one eye betwixt them; the
nostrils should not project farther than the corner of the
eye ; and the middle of the mouth snould be on the per¬
pendicular line. In order to understand better the different
turnings of the face, it may be very advantageous to procure
a piece of wood, made in the shape and size of an egg;
draw a line down the middle as before directed; divide this
in two equal parts, and draw another across the centre : let































the features be made as accurate as possible from the fore-
going directions. By turning this oval, a great variety of
faces will appear, according as it is inelined or turned; but
care must be taken to observe in what manner the nose
projects beyond the round of the oval. A persect know-
ledge of this may enable the student to form an idea of the
face better than merely copying prints or pictures without
it: but after this acquisition, let the best drawings or
pictures be studied that can be procured; previous to which,
those paffions, in manner of Le Brun, may meritimitation.
The positions and actions of the hands are so various, no
perfect rule or method can be given sor drawing tem.
Time and pains should be employed in bestowing care on
those members, for it is very necessary not only to avoid
all lameness and imperfection, but also to make them appear
with lise and spirit; the attainment of which must be
acquired by application and practice; carefully imitating
such postures, both in hands and feet, as can be procured
in good prints or drawings. Lines and meafures, and such
mechanical rules, are not only perplexing, but rejected in
the practice of the best masters. The properest method
is to lightly fketch the whole shape of the hand or foot
with its position or action; and examine carefully that it
is correct, rubbing out and altering it till it is so ; when
the bending of the knuckles, the veins, joints, and tendons,
may be drawn with much ease, after the shape and propor-
tion is made perfect in size and attitude.
After a proper study of the legs, arms, hands, feet, &c.
and the student has reason to deem himself sufficiently
practised in drawing features, the human figure entire
shiould be his next attempt; to measure which, according
to Fresnoy, es The Antients have commonly allowed eight
heads, though some of them have but seven; but we
ordinarily divide the figures into ten faces; that is to





THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.
fay, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
 in the following manner:
From the crown of the head to the forehead is the
third part of a face.
The face begins at the root of the lowest hairs which

are upon the forehead, and ends at the bottom of the chin.
The face is divided into three proportional parts :¬

 the first contains the forehead, the second the nose, and

the third the mouth and chin.
From the chin to the pit, betwixt the collar bones, are
two lengths of a nose.
From the pit betwixt the collar bones to the bottom of
the breast, one face.
From the bottom of the breast to the navel, one face.
From the navel to the genitors, one face.
From the genitors to the upper part of the knees, two

faces.
The knee contains half a face.
From the lower part of the knee to the ancle, two
faces.
From the ancle to the sole of the foot, half a face.
A man, when his arms are stretched out, is, from tho
 longest finger of his right hand to the longest of his
left, as broad as he is long.
 From one side of the breast to the other, two faces.
 The bone of the arm, called humerus, is the length of
 two faces, from the shoulder to the elbow.
 From the end of the elbow to the root of the little
 finger, the bone called cubitus, with part of the hand,
 contains two faces.
 From the box of the shoulder blade to the pit betwixt
 the collar-bones, one face.
 If vou would be satisfied in the measures of breadth,
 from the extremity of one finger to the other, so that

























































 this breadth should be equal to the length of the body,
 you must observe that the boxes of the elbows with the
humerus, and of the humerus with the shoulder-blade,
bear the proportion of half a face when the arms are

stretched out.
 The sole of the foot is the sixth part of a figure.
 The hand is the length of the face.
 The thumb contains a nose.
 The inside of the arm, from the place where the

muscle disappears, which makes the breast, called the

pectoral muscle, to the middle of the arm, four nofes.
 From the middle of the arm to the beginning of the
hand, five noses.
 The longest toe is a nose long.
 To the utmost parts of the teats and the pit betwixt

the collar-bones of a woman, are an equilateral triangle.
 For the breadth of the limbs no precise measure can be
 ; because the meafures themselves are changeable,
according to the quality of the persons, and according to
the movement of the muscles. 
In drawing a figure there should be a slight sketch made
of the whole, not beginning with the head, and finishing
it, then proceeding to the other parts, a method customary
to many ; in consequence of which the head is often dispro¬
portioned, or some part void of drawing. Skesch in the
whole outline of the figure lightly, and measure with the
eye, or draw the pencil or finger over any way to determine
exactness without the rule or compasses. In beginning the
sketch the head is the first object, then the shoulders in
exact breadth, the trunk of the body next, observing with
accuracy the breadth of the waist; next the legs, and lastly,
the arms and hands.
The principal difficulty is overcome when a perfect outline
is procured ; after which the shadows claim the attention of







the student. Every appearance of bodies represented,
animate or inanimate, in distance, shape, substance, and
distinction, are perfected by this. Let them be first made
broad and massy, without attending to the many little
distracted parts which sall under a second consideration.
In drawing after a plaister figure the eye will easily
discover the general light and shade-the mafs of light
should be kept broad, and be well attended to, before the
smaller parts are divided.
The outline should be exceedingly faint in such parts as
receive the light. The rising of a muscle may, by its
appearance, prove deceiving, and seem darker than it really
is; but by casting the eye to the other darker shadows, a
true degree of its tint may be afcertained, and sometimes
the light may catch on the projection of a bone near the
mass of a shadow, which must be scuibled very tenderly,
or it will have a harsh unpleasing effect. This may also be
regulated by comparing it with the stronger lights. Observ-
ing this rule with care and exactness, is the only true
means of preserving the consistency of the whole together.
The instruction given above respecting the mafs of light
upon the figure, will regulate the student in managing the
solds of the drapery, which should never have the light
parts cut by dark solds, as the effect of the whole is thereby
injured; but this subject will be treated under the article
of painting.
Above all, the young student must apply to his task with
pleasure, as well as with perseverance ; for improvement
cannot reasonably be expected, if the mind, (instead of being
fired with emulation), gloomily contemplates the employ¬
ment as a penance; nor must the patient artist be too easily
satissied with his own performance ; he must review it and
re-touch it, again and again; he must search for its blemishes
with the most rigid scrutiny, till, by repeated efforts, he









brings it as near to perfection as possible. In a word,
diligence, in the beginning of any study, will render the
progress of it easy, and the end delightful.

Of the EXPRESSION of the PASSIONS.
HrAT language which, above all others, a painter should
carefully endeavour to learn, and from nature herself, is the
language of the paffions. Without it the finest
appear lifeless and inanimate. It is not
painter to be able to delineate the most exqu.s
give them the most graceful attitudes, and composecem
well together : it is not enough to dress them nut with
propriety, and in the most beautiful colours. ft is nôt
enough, in fine, by the powersul magie of light and inade
to make the canvass vanish. No, he must likewise know
how to cloath his figures with grief, with joy, with sear,
with anger: he must, in some sort, write on their faces,
what they think, and what they seel ; he must give them
life and speech. It is, indeed, in this branch, that painting
truly soars, and, in a manner, rises superior to herself ; it
is in this branch she makes the spectator apprehend much
more than what she expresses.
The means employed in imitating her by painting, are the
contours or outlines, chiaroscuro and colours; which appear
solely calculated to strike the visual faculty. Painting also
contrives to represent hard and soft, rough and smooth
surfaces, which are objects of touch; and this by means
of certain tints, and a certain chiaroscuro which has a
disserent look in marble, in the bark of trees, in downy







and delicate fubstances. Nay, sne contrives to express
sound and motion by means of light and shade, and certain
particular configurations. In some landscapes of Diderich’s,
we almost hear the water murmur, and see it tremble along
the sides of the river, and of the boats upon it. In the
battle of Burgogne, we are really apt to fancy that the
trumpet sounds; and we see the horse, who has thrown his
rider, scamper along the plain: but what is still more
wondersul, painting, in virtue of her various colours, and
certain particular gestures, expresses even the sentiments
and most hidden affections of the soul, and renders her
visible, so as to make the eye not only touch and hear, but
even kindle into paffion and reason.
Many have written; and, amongst the rest, the famous
Lavater, on the various changes, that, according to various
pafsions, happen in the muscles of the face, which is, as it
were, the dumb tongue of the soul. They observe, for
example, that in fits of anger, the face reddens, the muscles
of the lips puff out, the eyes sparkle; and that, on the
contrary, in fits of melancholy, the eyes grow motionless
and dead, the face pale, and the lips sink in. It is necessary
principal part of his profeffion, should study, with care, the
Le Brun,  written for the pupils of the French academy
Charles Le Brun, a celebrated French painter, born at Paris about the
vear 161s: he was the son of a sculptor of small celebrity. At a very
early age he had the good fortune to gain the patronage of the Chancellor
Seguir, wno, after placing him for some time under the care of Vouet, who
at that period was accounted the Raphael of France, sent him to Italy for
three years, where he allowed him a large pension.
After his return, having by several considerable works established his
reputation, Louis XIV. ennobled him, honoured him with the order of St.
Michael, and made him his principal painter. Through the efforts of Le





























































































of painting, will be more intelligible; but it will be of
infinitely more service to study them in nature itself, from
which they have been borrowed, and which exhibits them
in that lively manner which neither tongue nor pen can
express.
But, if a painter is to have immediate recourse to nature
in any thing, it is particularly in treating those very minute
and almost imperceptible differences, by which, however,
things very different from each other are often expressed.
This is particularly the case with regard to the paffions of
laughing and erying, as in these, however contrary, the
muscles of the face operate nearly in the same manner. '
Brun, the revenues of the academy of painting were enlarged, and the
institution placed upon a permanent foundation. He also drew up a project
for an academy at Rome, to be founded by the King for the use of the French
students who travel there. When the Kinz appointed Le Brun his principal
painter he gave him also the direction of the manufacture of the Gobelins,
which he attended with such affiduity, that he made the designs for every
thing that was done there.
He died in the year 1690.
The most considerable of his works are his pictures, containing the
history of Alexander the Great, in the ceiling of the gallery of Versailles,
and the great stair-case there.
As the famous Pietro de Cortona was one day finishing the face of a

crying child, in a representation of the Iron age, with which he was adorning
the floor, called the Hot Bath, in the royal palace of Pitti, Ferdinand Il. who
happened to be looking over him for his amusement, could not sorbear
expressing his approbation, by erying out, Oh, how well that child cries :
To whom the able artist said, Has your Majesty a mind to see how easy it is
to make children laught Behold, I will prove it in an instant; and taking
up his pencil, by giving the contour of the mouth a concave turn upwards,
instead of the convex downwards, which it before had, and with little or no
alteration in any other part of the face, he made the child, who, a little
before, seemed ready to burst his heart with crying, appear in equal danger
of bursting its sides with immoderate laughter; and then, by restoring the
altered features to their former position, he soon set the child a erying
again. Lectures of Philip Baldinucci, in the academy of la Crasca, Illustrat, &c.









According to Lionardo du Vinci, ' the best masters that
painters can have recourse to in this branch, are those dumb
men who have found out the method of expressing their
sentiments by the motion of their hands, eyes, eye-brows,
and, in short, every other part of the body. This advice,
no doubt, is very good, but then such gestures must be
imitated with great sobriety and moderation, least they
should appear too strong and exaggerated, and the piece
should shew nothing but pantomimes, when speaking figures
alone, are to be exhibited; and so become theatrical and
second-hand; or, at least, look like the copy of a theatri-
cal and second-hand nature.
We are told strange things of the antient painters of
Greece in regard to exprefsion, especially of Aristides, who,
in a picture of his representing a woman wounded to death
at à siege, with a child crawling to her breast, makes her
appear afraid, least the child, when sne was dead, should,
for want of milk, suck her blood. A Medea, murdering
her children, by Timomachus, was likewise much praised,
PLionardo du Vinci had perhaps one of the greatest minds the art of
painting ever possessed :he was a mathematician, an engineer, a poet, and
 philosopher. He wrote on his art with the same spirit and talent with
which he exercised it.
During his residence at Milan he painted an exquisite picture of the
last Supper, for the refectory of the Dominicans. Not being able to find a
fuitable model, he left the head of Christ unfinished for some time, as was
the head of Judas for the same reason, till the prior of the convent, impatient
to see the work compleated, pressed him in so troublesome a manner, that he
drew the head of the importunate sriar, and placed it upon the shoulders
of Judas.
He resided the latter part of hiis life in France, where he ably supported
the high reputation he had acquired by his former works. The King,
Francis I. visiting him during his last illness, in the year 1520, he rose in his
bed to shew his sense of the honour conferred upon him, and his respect for
his royal patron; the exertion caused him to faint; and, whilst the King was
supporting him in his arms, he expired, in the zith year of his age.










as the ingenious artist contrived to express, at once, in her
countenance, both the fury that hurried her on to the
commission of so great a crime, and the tenderness of a
mother that seemed to withhold her from it. Rubens
attempted to express such a double effect in the face of
Mary of Medciis, still in pain from her past labour, and,
at the same time, full of joy at the birth of a Dauphin.
And in the countenance of Sancta Polonia, painted by
Tiepolo, for St. Anthony’s church at Padua, one may, I
think, clearly read a mixture of pain from the wound given
her by the executioner, and of pleasure from the prospect
of Paradise opened to her by it.
Few, to say the truth, are the examples of strong
expression afforded by the Venetian, Flemissi, or Lombard
schools. Deprived of that great happiness, the happiness
of being able to contemplate at leisure the works of the
antients, the purest fources of perfection in point of design,
expression and character; and having nothing but nature
constautly before their eyes, they made strength of colour-
ing, blooming complexions, and the grand effects of the
chiaroscuro their principal study : they aimed more at
charming the senses, than at captivating the under-
standing.
The Venetians, in particular, seem to have placed their
whole glory in setting off their pieces with all that rich
variety of personages and dress, which their capital is
continually receiving by means of its extensive commerce,
and which attracts so much the eyes of all those who visit
it. I doubt much, is, in all the pictures of Paolo Veronese,t
Paolo Cagliari Veronese was born at Verona in 1537. he resided
chiessy at Venice. He was not famous for composition, nor were his designs
correct, but his draperies have a peculiar richness, and are admirable
imitations of the different stuffs of wnich they are composed. He delighted
to copy the rich habits of his countrymen, and of the inhabitants of tne East,








there is to be found a bold and judicious exprefsion, or one
of those attitudes, which, as Petrarch expresses it, speak
without words; unless, perhaps, it be that remarkable one
in his Marriage-feast at Cana of Galilee. At one end of
the table, and directly opposite to the bridegroom, whose
eyes are fixed upon her, there appears a woman in red,
holding up to him the skirt of her garment, as much as to
say, I suppose, that the wine miraculoussy produced was
exactly of the colour with the stuff on her back : and, in
fact, it is red wine we see in the cup and pitchers. But all
this while the faces and attitudes of most of the company
betray not the least sign of wonder at so extraordinary a
miracle. They all, in a manner, appear intent upon
nothing but eating, drinking, and making merry. Such,
in general, is the stile of the Venetian school. The
Florentine, over which Michael Angelot presided, above
all things curious of design, was most minutely and scrupu¬
lously exact in point of anatomy. On this she set her
heart, and took singular pleasure in displaying it. Not
only elegance of form, and nobleness of invention, but
which he often introduced into his pictures, sacrificing propriety and truth
to brilliancy, He had many faults ; but his colouring, and whatever depends
on it is so charming, that it makes us forget those qualities in which he
failed.
He died of a fever in 1588: his tomb, and statue in brafs, are in tue
church of St. Sebastian.
Michael Angelo, from his infancy, snewed a strong inclination for
painting: and made so rapid a progress in it, that he is said, at the age of
14, to have been able to correct the drawings of his master Dominico
Grillandai.
His quicknefs of eye was wonderful. He used to say, that à sculptor
should carry his compass in his eye. « The hands, indeed,  said he,
ne do the work, but the eye judges. 
He was extremely disinterested; for his immortal design of St. Peter’s
church, at Rome, he received onsy 25 Roman crowns. It was sinisned in
a fortnight.











likewise strength of expression, triumph in the Roman
school, nursed, as it were, amongst the works of the
Greeks, and in the bosom of a city which had once been
the seminary of learning and politenefs. Here it was that
Domenichinor and Poussin,f both great masters of expreffion,
refined themselves, as appears more particularly by the St.
Jerome of the one, and the death of Germanicus, or the
Slaughter of the Innocents by the other. Here it was that
Raphaelf arose the sovereign master of them all. One
would imagine, that, pictures which are generally con-
sidered as the books of the ignorant, and of the ignorant
only, he had undertaken to make the instructors even of
the learned. One would imagine that he intended, in some
measure, to justify Quintilian, who affirms, that painting
has more power over us than all the arts of rhetorick.
There is not, indeed, a single picture of Raphael’s, from
the study of which, those who are curious in point of
exprefsion, may not reap great benefit, particularly his
Martyrdom of St. Felicitas; his Magdalen in the house of
the Pharisee; his Transfiguration; his Joseph explaining
This painter, when young, made but a very slow progrefs in his
profession; he took so much pains, and studied so closely, while in the
school of the Carracchis, that his sellow-students called him the Ox, sayins,
he toiled as if at plow; but Annibal Carracchi, who knew him better,
told them, that t This ox, by dint of labour, would make the ground so
fruitful, that painting itself would be sed by what it produced;’’ a prophecy
which has been accomplisnied, since many things may be learned from his
works.
f Nicholas Poussin, commonly called the French Raphael, stands at the
head of the French school of painters. He studied in Italy, and spent the
greatest part of his lise there. His pictures possess more grandeur and classic
simplicity, than those of any other French painter.
t Raphael Sanzio d’Urbino, boin on Good Friday, 1483. He is the moft
celebrated of the modern painters, and the sounder of the Roman school.
He died on Goed-Friday, in the year 1520. A further account of this great
man will be given in the article, Painting.







to Pharaoh his dream, a piece so highly rated by Poussin.
His School of Athens, in the Vatican, is, to all intents and
purposes, à school of expression. Among the many miracles
of art with which this piece abounds, I shall single out that
of the four boys attending on a Mathematician, who,
stooping to the ground, his compasses in his hand, is giving
them the demonstration of a theorem. One of the boys,
recollected within himself, keeps back, with all the appear¬
ance of profound attention to the reasoning of the master;
another, by the brifkness of his attitude, discovers a greater
quicknefs of apprehension; while the third, who has
already seized the conclusion, is endeavouring to explain
it to the fourth, who, standing motionless, with open arms,
a staring countenance, and an unspeakable air of stupidity
in his looks, will never, perhaps, be able to make any
thing of the matter. And it is probably, from this very
groupe, that Albani, ' who studied Raphael so closely,
drew the following precept of his: e That it behoves a
painter to express more circumstances than one by every
attitude; and so to employ his figures, that, by barely
seeing what they are actually about, one may be able to
guefs, both what they have been already doing, and are
next going to do.  This is a difficult precept; but it is
only by a due observance of it, the eye and the mind can
be made to hang in suspense on a painted piece of canvas.
It is exprefsion, that a painter, ambitious to soar in his
profession, must, above all things, labour to perfect himself
in. It is the last goal of his art, as Socrates proves to
Parrhasius. It is in expression that dumb poetry consists,
and what the prince of our poets calls a visible language.
Albani’s success in painting children and handsome females stands unrivalled.
He was remarkably placid; and lived to a very great age.












PERSPECTIVE.
PERSPECTIVE is the art of delineating visible objects
on a plain surface, such as they appear at a given distance
or height, upon a transparent plane, placed perpendicularly
to the horizon, between the eye and the object.
There are three forts of perspective, viz. linear, ærial,
and specular perspective.
Linear perspective (to which most properly belongs our
definition, and which is a branch of the mathematics),
regards the position, magnitude, form, &c. of the several
lines or contours of objects, and expresses their diminution.
Erial perspective (which makes part of the art of
painting), regards the colour, lustre, strength, boldness, &c.
of distant objects, considered as seen through a column of
air, and expresses the diminutions thereof.
Specular perspective represents the objects in conical,
spherical, or other mirrours, erect and clear; whereas,
on a lawn, and other planes, they appear confused and
irregular.
These three sorts of perspective have each its particular
doctrine; but before we proceed in the explanation of the
doctrine, we must teach our pupils what are planes in
perspective ; of which there are five forts, viz. perspective,
geometrical, horizontal, vertical, and objective plane.
Perspective plane is a plain pellucid surface, ordinarily
erpendicular to the horizon, and placed between the
spectator’s eye and the object he views ; through which the
optick rays, emitted from the several points of the objects,
are supposed to pafs to the eye, and in their passage to
leave marks that represent them on the said plane.









A geometrical plane, is a plane parallel to the horizon,
whereon the object to be delineated is supposed to be
placed: this plane is usually at right angles with the
perspective plane--A horizontal plane is a plane passing
through the spectator’s eye, parallel to the horizon, cutting
the perspective plane, when that is perpendicular to the
geometrical one, at right angles.-A vertical plane, is a
plane passing through the spectator’s eye, perpendicular to
the geometrical one; and usually parallel to the perspective
lane-An objective plane, is any plane situate in the
horizontal plane, whose representation is required in
perspective.
There are likewise several disserent lines in perspective,
viz. terrestrial line, geometrical line, line of the front,
vertical line, visual line, line of station, objective line, and
line of distanee--Geometrical line, in perspective, is a
right line drawn in any manner on the geometrical plane—¬
A terrestrial line, or fundamental line, is a right line,
wherein the geometrical plane, and that of the picture, or
draught, interfect one another. Such is the line formed
by the intersection of the geometrical plane, and the
perspective plane-A line of the front, is any right line,
parallel to the terrestrial line-A vertical line, is the
common section of the vertical, and of the draught.-A
visual line, is tlie line, or ray, imagined to pafs from
the oliject to the eye.— An objective line, is any line
drawn on the geometrical plane, whose representation is
sought sor in draughts or picturesA line of station,
according to some writers, is the common section of the
geometrical and vertical planes. Others mean by it the
perpendicular height of the eye above the geometrical
plane, whose representation is sought for in draughts or
pictures.-A line of distance, is à right line drawn from
the eye to the principal point: this, as it is perpendicular










to the perpendiculars of the plane, or table, can only be
the distance of the eye from the table—The point of
the distance, in perspective, is a point in the horizontal
line, at such distance from the principal point, as is that
of the eye from the same.
There are other points befides this point of distance
in perspective, viz. the point of fight, the third point,
the objective point, the accidental point, and the visual
oint; which term, point, is used for various parts, or
places, with regard to the perspective plane-The point
of sight, or of the eye, is a point on the plane, marked
out by à right line drawn from the eye, perpendicular to
the plane: This is also called the principal point. This
point is in the intersection of the horizontal and vertical
planes. Some authors call it the principal point; and give
the name point of sight, or vifion, to the point wherein
the eye is actually placed, and where all the rays terminate.
The third point, is a point taken at discretion in the line
of distance, wherein all the diagonals drawn from the
divisions of the geometrical plane, whose representation
is required on the perspective plane-An accidental point,
is a point in the horizontal lines, where lines parallel to
one another, though not perpendicular to the picture or
representation, meet-A visual point, is a point in the
horizontal line, wherein all the ocular rays unite. Thus
a person standing in a strait long gallery, and looking
forwards, the side, the floor, and ceiling seem to meet, and
touch one another in a point, or common centre.
These things being previousty considered, we shall next
pass to the explanation of the different forts of perspective.








1. From a point in a given line A B, to raise a perpendicular,
See fig. II.
Draw with the ruler the given line A B; then set one foot
of your compasses in B, and extending them to rather more
than half the length of the line A B, sweep the arch cd; and
with the same extent of compasses set one point in c, and
sweep the arch ef; then, without altering the compasses,
set one foot in g, and describe the arch hi; next rule
through the points cg, to intersect the arch hi in k,
and draw the line from k to B, which is the perpendicular
required.
2. Another way. See fig. III.
From the point A, take the equal distances A B and
A C on each side of it, then stretch the compasses to any
distance greater than A B or A C, and with one foot of
them in B sweep the arch d e; then, with the same extent
of compasses, set one point in C, sweep the arch fg; and
these two arches will intersect each other in the point h,
from which a line drawn to the point A is the perpendicular
required.
Te draw one line parallel (or equi-distant) to another given
line A B. See fig. IV.
Extend your compasses to the distance of the parallel you
require ; then with one soot in any point of the given line,
as in c, describe the arch d e. Again, without altering
the compasses, six one foot in any other point, as in f,
and sweep the arch gh; then rule the line IK, touching
the outward parts of the two arches, and that will be the
parallel to the given line.







4. To bisect or divide a given line AB, into two equal parts.
See fig. V.
Take with your compasses any distance greater than half
the given line; then with one soot of them in B, sweep
the arch cc; and with the fame distance, setting one foot
in A, sweep the arch d d; and these arches will intersect
each other in the points gh; which joined by a perpendi¬
cular, will intersect A B in the middle point i.
5. Upon the end A ofa given line, Ab, to raise a perpendicular.
See fig. VI.
Place one foot of the compasses in A, and extend them
to any point c without the given line; then set one foot of
them in cand turn the circle d e and A, and through d c
draw the diameter d ce, meeting the circle in e; join A e,
and that right line is the perpendicular required.
6. To turn the circle through any three given points not in a
right line. See fig. VII.
Fix three points at any distance you think proper, as at
A B and C, and join them by the right lines A B and BC;
then by fig. V. biseet the line A B with the line de; which
done, biseet the line BC with the line fe; and from the
center e, where these lines meet, extend your compasses
to A, and describe the circle A BCG.
7. To draw an oval. See fig. VIII.
Draw a given line A B, which divide into four equal
parts; set one foot of the compasses at C, and from that







center describe a circle e e; with the same extent of com¬
passes place one foot in the center D, and turn the circle ff;
then with one foot still in D, extend your compasses, and
turn the arch gg; and with the same extent, placing one
foot in C, describe the arch hh; join the intersections with
a perpendicular from i to k; next, place one foot of the
compasses in i, sweep the arch LL, and without altering
them, set one foot in k, and describe the arch MM.
8. Another method for an oval. See fig. IX.
Draw a given line A D, and with the compasses extended,
placing one foot in B, with the other turn the circle e e:
then, without altering your compasses, on the line A D in
the supposed point C sweep the circle ff, and through the
points gg, where the two circles intersect, draw the
perpendicular hi; then six your compasses with one foot
in h, and extend them so as to describe the arch kk to
the lower extremities of the circles; then, with the same
extent, with one foot in i, sweep the arch Il, to join the
upper extremities.
By these examples it will appear, that an oval of any
form or size may be constructed at pleasure, only taking
care always to fix the compasses equi-distant from the given
line A D in the perpendicular hi.
PRACTICAL EXAMPLES IN PERSPECTIVE.
1. To draw a square pavement in perspective. See fig. X.
Suppose your piece of pavement to consist of sixty-four
pieces of marble, each a foot square. Your first business is
to draw an ichnographical plan or ground plot of it, which















is thus performed. Having made an exact square of the
size you intend your plan, divide the base and horizon into
eight equal parts, and from every division in the base to its
opposite point in the horizon, rule perpendicular lines;
then divide the sides into the same number, ruling parallel
lines acrofs from point to point; so will your pavement be
divided into sixty-four square feet ; because the eight feet
in length, multiplied by the same in breadth, give the
number of square feet, or pieces of marble contained in the
whole : then rule diagonals from corner to corner; and
thus will your ground plot appear as in fig. X.
Now, to lay this in perspective, draw another square to
your intended size, and divide the base line A B into eight
equal parts, as before ; then fix your point of sight C in
the middle of the horizon DE, and from the same point
rule lines to every division in the base A B; after which,
rule diagonal lines from D to B, and from E to A,
answerable to those in the ground plot, and your square
will be reduced to the triangle A BC; then from the
point F, where the diagonal DB intersects the line AC,
to the opposite intersection G, where the diagonal E A
crosses the line CB, rule a parallel line, which is the
abridgment of the square.
Then through the points where the diagonals crofs the
rest of the lines, which go from the base to the point of
sight, rule parallel lines, and your square pavement will be
laid in perspective, as in fig. XI.
2. To find the height and proportion of any objects, as they
appear above the horizon, on a supposed plane. Seec fig. XII.
First, rule your horizontal line NO, and fix your point
of sight, as at M; then mark the place of your nearest
pillar, by making a dot for the base or bottom, as at A :





THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.
24
and another for the summit or top, as at B: rule a line
from A to the point of sight M, and another from Bto M,
and these two lines will give the height of any number of
pillars. As for example ; suppose you would have a pillar
at C, six your dot for the base, and rule from thence a
parallel line to meet the diagonal A Mat D; then rule the
perpendicular DE to the diagonal BM; which perpendi¬
cular is the height of your figure required at C. Or, if
vou would place pillars at F and I, observe the same
method, ruling the parallelsFG and I K, and the perpen¬
diculars GH and KL will give their heights at the distances
required.
To find the diameter or thicknefs of pillars at any parti-
cular distances, you are also to be guided by that nearest
the base. For instance ; suppose your nearest pillar A B to
be ten feet high and one foot in diameter: divide it from
top to bottom into ten equal parts, and set off one of them
upon the base of the pillar; then rule à line srom the point
of sight M to the diameter P, and you willl have the
thicknefs of all your pillars on their respective parallels or
bases.
3. The fame rule exemplified in objects below the horizon.
Ste
fig. XIII.
below the horizon, rule your horizontal line GR, and six
your point of sight, as at P; then place your nearest figure,
or mark the dots for the head and feet, by the points A
and B, which answers the same purpose; and rule from
these dots to the point of sight tlie lines A Pand Bp; and
if you would sind the height of a figure to be drawn at c,
rule from thence the parallel cd to the diagonal BP, and
the perpendicular de will give the height required. The
digitized by
THE GETTV RESEARCHINSTITUTE
rue Gerny Seeaeen insrirurt



















































































































































well as of all the doors, windows, and other objects that
occur. For instance; having found the height and breadth
of your nearest column G, draw from the top and bottom
of the said column to the point of sight the lines HF and
KF; after which, rule the line IF from the base of the
column to the point of sight, and you have the height
and breadth of all the rest of the columns, as has been
already shewn in fig. XII.
By ruling lines from the points a, b, c, d, &c. to the
point of sight, you will see that all the summits and bases of
your columns, doors, windows, &c. must tend immediately
to that point; and by lines drawn from the points 1, 2.3, 4.
&c. on each side, to the correspondent points on the opposite
side, may be seen all the parts of your building lying upon
the same parallel.
To draw an oblique view. See fig. XV.
5.
First, draw your horizontal line A B; then, if your
favourite object be on the right hand, as at C, place your-
self on the left hand upon the base line, as at D; then from
that station erect a perpendicular DE, which will pass
through the horizon at the point of sightF; to which rule
the diagonals GF and H F, which will shew the roof and
base of your principal building C; and will also, as before
directed, serve as à standard for all the rest.
Observe also, either in direct or oblique views, whether
the prospect before you makes a curve ; for if it does, you
must be careful to make the same curve in your drawing.
6. To draw à perspective view, wherein are accidental points.
See fig. XVI.
Rule your horizotal line a h, and on one part of it fix
your point of sight, as at c; from which rule the diagonals














ed and ce on the one fide, and ef and and eq on the
other; which will shew the roofs and bases of all the houfes
in the street directly facing you, (supposing yourself placed
at A in the center of the base line). Then six your acci¬
dental points g and h upon the horizontal line, and rule
from them to the angles i kand l in (where the streets on
each side take a disserent direction, towards the accidental
oints g and h), and the lines gi and gk give the roofs
and bases of all the buildings on one side, as lh and in h
do on the other.
Accidental points seldom intervene where the distance
is small, as in noblemen’s feats, groves, canals, &c. which
may be drawn by the strict rules of perspective; but where
the prospect is extenfive and varied, including mountains,
bridges, castles, rivers, precipices, woods, cities, &c. it will
require such an infinite number of accidental points, that
it will be better to do them as nature shall dictate, and your
ripened judgement approve.
7. To find the centre for the roof of a house, in an oblique view.
Sce plate IV.
Suppose from the point of sight A, the visual lines B A
and A C be drawn, BC being one perpendicular given,
and DE the other, rule the diagonals from Dto C, and
from E to B, and the perpendicular FG, raised through the
point of their intersection, will shew the true centre of the
roof, as will appear by ruling the lines GE and GC.
For want of being acquainted with this necessary rule,
many, who have been well versed in other parts of per-
spective, have spoiled the look of their picture, by drawing
the roofs of their houses out of their true perpendicular.
Perspective is either employed in representing the
ichnographies, and ground-plots of objects as projective







planes; or in scenographies, and representations of the
bodies themselves.
schnography, in perspective, is the view of any thing
cut off by a plain parallel to the horizon, just at the base
or bottom of it; so that ichnograpliy is the same with what
is otherwise called the plan, geometrical plan, or ground¬
plot of any thing.
Scenography, in perspective, is a representation of a
body on a perspective plane; or à description thereof in all
its dimensions, such as it appears to the eye. The ichno¬
graphy of a building, &c. reprefents the plan, or ground-
work of the building. The orthography the front, or
one of the sides; and the scenography the whole building,
front, sides, height and all, raised on the geometrical plan.
Projection, in perspective, denotes the appearance or re-
presentation of an object on the perspective plane. The
projection, e, gr, of a point, is a point through which the
optick ray passes from the objective point through the
plane to the eye; or it is the point wherein the plane cuts
the optick ray. And hence is easily conceived what is
meant by the projection of a line, a plane, or à solid.
The projection of the sphere in plane, is à representation
of several points or places of the surface of the sphere, and
of the circles described thereon, or of any assigned parts
thereof, such as they appear to the eye situate at any given
distance, upon a transparent plane placed between the eye
and the sphere. The principal use of the projection of the
sphere is in the construction of planispheres, and particu-
larly maps and charts, which are said to be of this or that
projection, according to the several situations of the eye,
and the perspective plane with regard to the meridians,
parallels, and other points and places to be represented.
The projection of the sphere is usually divided into ortho¬
graphic and stereographic.














Orthographic projection, is that wherein the superfices
of the sphere is drawn on a plane, cutting it in the middle ;
the eye being placed at an infinite distance vertically to
one of the hemispheres. The laws of this sort of projec
tion are thefe: 1. The rays by which the eye at an infinite
distance perceives any object, are paralled. 2. A right line
perpendicular to the plane of the projection, is projected
into a point, where that right line cuts the plane of the
projection. 3. A right line not perpendicular, but either
parallel or oblique to the plane of the projection, is projec—
ted into à right line, and is always comprehended between
the extreme perpendiculars. 4. The projection of the
right line is the greatest, when that line is parallel to the
plane of the projection. 5. Hence it is evident, that a
line parallel to the plane of the projection, is projected into
a right line equal to itself; but if it be oblique to the plane
of the projection, it is projected into one which is less.
6. A plane furface, at right angles to the plane of the
projection, is projected into that right line, in which it
cuts the plane of the projection. Hence it is evident, that
a circle standing at right angles to the plane of the projec¬
tion which passes through its centre, is projected into that
diameter, in which it cuts the plane of the projection.
7. A circle parallel to the plane of the projection, is pro-
jected into a circle equal to itself; and a circle oblique to
the plane of the projection, is projected into an ellipsis.
Stereographic projection, is that wherein the surface and
circles of the sphere are drawn upon the plane of a great
circle, the eye being in the pole of that circle. As to the
properties of this fort of projection: 1. In this projection
a right circle is projected into a line of half tangents. 2.
The reprensentation of a right circle perpendicularly
opposed to the eye, will be a circle in the plane of the pro-
jection. 3. The representatien of a circle placed obliquely















to the eye, will be a circle in the plane of projection. 4. If
a great circle is to be projected on the plane of another
great eircle, its centre will lie in the line of meafures,
distant from the centre of the primitive by the tangent of
its elevation above the plane of the primitive. 5. If a
lesser circle, whose poles lie in the plane of the projection,
were to be projected, the center of its reprefentation would
lie in the line of meafures, distant from the centre of the
primitive, by the secant of the lesser circle’s distance from
its pole, and its femi-diameter or radius be equal to the
tangent of that distance. 6. If à lesser circle were to be
projected, whose poles lie not in the plane of the projection,
its diameter in the projection, if it falls on each side of the
pole of the primitive, will be equal to the sum of the half
tangents of its greatest and nearest distance from the pole
of the primitive, set each way from the centre of the pri¬
mitive in the line of meafures. 7. If the lesser circle to be
projected, falls entirely on one side of the pole of projection,
and does not encompass it, then will all its diameter be
equal to the difference of the half tangents of its greatest
and nearest distance from the pole of the primitive, set off
from the centre of the primitive one, and the same way in
the line of measures. 8. In the stereographic projection,
the angles made by the circles of the surface of the sphere,
are equal to the angles made by their representation in the
plane of their projection.
—e
Of COLOURS.
The method of preparing the various kinds used in painting.
IT will now be proper to explain in an easy manner, the
method of preparing the various bodies employed by
painters, for produeing the difference of light and shade:













which may be termed either pigments or fluids, as they are
solid or aqueous; and are distinguisnied in their several
kinds, according to the manner of working them; as oil-
colours, water-colours, enamel-colours, &c. but their
variety are too numerous to be in general use: most pain-
ters therefore felect a set out of them, and become very
unjustly prejudiced against those they reject. It is no
little impediment to their improvement in the profeffion,
that they are not more extensively acquainted with all the
ingredients fit for their purposes.
oa gem
Those colours which become transparent in oil, such as
lake, Prussian blue, and brown pink, are frequently used
without the admixture of white, or any other opake pig-
ment; by which means the tint of the ground on which
they are laid retains, in soie degree, its force; and the real
colour, produced in painting, is the combined effect of
both. This is called glazing; and the pigments endued
with the property of becoming transparent in oil, are called
glazing colours.
As colours are obtained from various substances, the
means of preparing them are consequently various; some
being of a fimple nature, and requiring only to be purified
and reduced to a proper consistence or texture; and others
being compounds of different bodies, to be formed only by
complex processes. It is therefore very difficult to give
such general directions, for the making every sort of colour
as may be intelligible to all; the utensils to be employed,
as well as the methods to be pursued, being such as belong
to different arts and trades.
Where, nevertheless, simple means, and the use of such
utensils as are generally known, may be sufficient to per-
form what is wanting, it is best to avoid all technical terms,
and more complex methods of operation, adopting such a
mode of instruction as may be universally intelligible :






.




We now proceed to the nature and preparation of the dif-
ferent colours, as they follow in their classes.
CLASSL' O RED COLOURS.
VERMILLION, is one of the most useful colours in every
kind of painting; except enamel or on glass; as it is of a
moderate price, spends to great advantage in any kind of
work, and stands or holds its colour extremely well. It
may be prepared in great perfection by the following pro¬
cess:
 Take of quicksilver eighteen pounds, of flowers of
 sulphur six pounds: melt the sulphur in an earthen pot;
 and pour in the quicksilver gradually, being also gently
 warmed; and stir them well together, with the small
 end of a tobaccopipe. But if, from the effervescence,
 on adding the latter quantities of the quicksilver, they
 take fire, extinguish it by throwing a wet cloth (which
should be had ready) over the vessel. When the mafs

is cold, powder it, so that the several parts may be well

mixed together. But it is not necessary to reduce it, by

nicer levigation, to an impalpable state. Having then
repared an oblong glass body, or sublimer, by coating
 it well with fire-lute over the whole surface of the glafs,
 and working a proper rim of the same round it, by
CLASS I. RED.
Scarlet, or tending to the orange.
Crimson, or tending to the purple.
Vermillion.
Carmine.
Native cinnaber.
Lake.
Red lead.
Rose pink.
Red oker-
Scarlet oker.
Common Indian red.
Venetian red.
Spanis brown.
Terra di sienna burnie.









 which it may be hung in the furnace in such a manner
 that one half of it may be exposed to the fire, fix it in
 a proper furnance, and let the powdered mass be put
 into it, so as to nearly fill the part that is within the
 furnace; a piece of broken tile being laid over  the
 mouth of the glass. Sublime then the contents, with as
 strong a heat as may be used without blowing the fumes
 of the vermillion out of the mouth of the sublimer.
 When the sublimation is over, which may be perceived
 by the abatement of the heat towards the top of the body,
 discontinue the fire; and, after the body is cold, take it
 out of the furnace, and break it: collect then together
 all the parts of the sublimed cake, separating carefully
from them any dross that may have been left at the

bottom of the body, as also any lighter substance that

may have formed in the neck, and appears to be dis-
 similar to the rest. Levigate the more perfect part; and,

when reduced to fine powder, it will be vermillion proper
 for use: but on the perfectnefs of levigation, depends,

in a great degree, the brightnefs and goodness of the
 vermillion. In order therefore to perform this, it is
 necessary that two or three mills of different closeness

should be employed, and the last should be of steel, and
 set as finely as possible. 
It is common, perhaps general, for dealers to sophisticate
vermillion with red lead. But to detect with certainty the
fraud, both with respect to the general fact, tand the pro-
ortion, use the following means :
 Take a small, but known quantity of vermillion,
 suspected to be adulterated, and put it into a crucible;
 having first mixed with it about the same quantity, in
 bulk, of charcoal dust: put the crucible into a common
 fire, having first covered it with a lesser crucible inverted








 into it; and give a heat sufficient to fuse lead; when the
 crucible, being taken’out of the fire, should be well
 fhaken, by striking it against the ground. If the suspect-
 ed adulteration has been practised, the lead will be found
 reduced to its metalline state, in the bottom of the cruciblé;
 and, being weighed, and compared with the quantity of
 cinnabar that was put into the crucible, the proportion
 of the adulteration may be thence certainly known.
 But, if no lead be found in the crucible, it may be safely
 inferred, that no red lead had been commixt with the
 vermillion.
NATIVE CINNABAR,
Is found naturally formed in the earth, though seldom
so pure as to be fit for the uses of painting, at least without
being purified by sublimation. The mistaken notion that
it would stand better than vermillion, because it was a na-
tural production, has made it to be coveted by painters who
are curious in colours. It is, however, not worth their
while to be solicitous about it, as it never excelled the beft
vermillion in brightness; and what is generally sold for
it is a pigment compounded of quicksilver and sulphur.
RED LEAD, OT MINUM.
The goodness of red lead may be seen by its brightnefs,
and a mixture of any kind will make it of a dull appear-
ance. It is on this account not so liable to be sophisticated,
as white lead or vermillion. It is lead caleined, till it ac-
quires a proper degree of colour, by exposing it with a large
surface to the fire.











SCARLET OKER,
Is an ochrous, earthy, or rather irony substance, and
is the basis of green vitriol, separated from the acid of the
vitriol by calcination. It is a kind of orange scarlet colour,
and rivals any of the native okers, from its certainty of
standing, and extreme strength and warmth, either as a
ground, or in the shade of carnations. It is useful as a
colour in any kind of painting; the manner of its prepara¬
tion is as follows;
 Take of green vitriol or copperas, any quantity; and
 being put into a crucible, of which it will sill two thirds,

set it on a common fire to boil (taking care that it do

not boil over) till the matter be nearly dry; when it
 will be greatly diminished in quantity. Fill then the
 crucible to the same height again, and repeat the boiling

and replenishing, till the crucible be sfilled with dry
 matter. Take it then from this fire, and put it into a
 wind-furnace; or, if the quantity be small, it may be

continued in the same fire, the coals being heaped up
 round it. Let the contents be calcined there till they
 become of a red colour when cold; which must be exa¬
 mined by taking à little of the matter out of the middle,
 and suffering it to cool; for so long as it remains hot,

the red colour will not appear, though it be sufficiently
 caleined. When duly calcined, take the oker out of
 the crucible while hot, and put it into water, in which
 the parts of the broken crucible may be soaked likewise,
 to obtain more easily what shall adhere to them; and stir

 oker well about in the water, that all the remaining
vitriol may be melted out of it. Let it then settle, and
 when the water appears clear, pour it off, and add a fresni
quantity; taking out all the broken pieces of the crucible;









 and proceed as before ; repeating several times this treat-
 ment with fresh quantities of water. Then purify the
 oker from any remaining foulness by washing over; and
having brought it to a proper state of dryness, by drain-
ing off the fluid by a filter, in which the paper must be
 covered with a linen cloth, lay it to dry on boards. 7
COMMON INDIAN RED,
Is substituted in place of the real kind brought from the
East-Indies: serving equally well for common purposes,
giving a tint verging to scarlet, (varying from the true
Indian red, which is greatly inelined to the purple), and on
account of its warm, though not bright colour, it is much
used, as well in finer as coarser paintings in oil. It is af¬
forded cheap and may be thus managed :
 Take of the caput mortuum, or oker, left in the iron
 pots after the distillation of aquafortis from nitre and
 vitriol, two parts, and of the caput mortuum or colco-
 thar, left in the long necks after the distillation of oil of
 vitriol, one part ; break the lumps found among them,
 and put them into tubs with a good quantity of water;
 and having let them stand for a day or two, frequently
 stirring them well about, lade off as much water as can
 be got clear from them; and add a fresni quantity, repeat-
 ing the same treatment till all the salts be washied out,

and the water come off nearly insipid. The red powder

which remains must then be wassied over, and, being

freed from the water, laid out to dry.
 When this is designed for nicer purposes, it should be
 washed over again in basons, the grofs manner of lading

it out of one tub into another not sitting it always com¬
 pletely to such ends. 









VENETIAN RED.
Useful to house-painters, in imitating mahogany, and is a
native red oker inclining to scarlet, and easily prepared by
mixing it with the colcothar or caput mortuum, taken out
of the aquafortis pots and wassied over. It requires no
other preparation for use than to be well ground with oil,
unless when it is used in miniature painting--when it
should be wasnied over with the utmost care.
SPANISH BROWN,
Resembles the Venetian red very much in colour, but is
fouler: it is a native pigment, and is used much in the same
state nature produces it ; being dug up in several parts of
England. No other preparation is needful than freeing it
well from stones and filth, and grinding it with oil to ren¬
der it fit for colourmen, in the preparation of cloths for
pictures, and other coarse work.
Calcined or burnt TERRA di SIENNA,
Is originally yellow; but, when moderately caleined, be-
comes an orange red, though not very bright. It is à na-
tive oker, brought hither from Italy in the state in which
it is naturally found. It is calcined by putting lumps of it
either in a crucible, or naked in a common fire, and conti¬
nuing it there till the colour be changed from yellow to
red. It is exceedingly useful in oil-painting, and admits
of no adulteration : it may be distinguishied from other
ochrous earths by its semi-transparency.










CARMINE,
Is a bright crimson colour, of great advantage in paint
ing, as well in water as varnish : the preparation of it is
kept à secret by those who prepare it in perfection; and
the superiority of the French carmine shews that the pro¬
per method is wanting in England--though some wrongly
attribute the excellence to qualities in the air and water of
France. There are several recipes for this colour, but
rather than insert imperfect instructions for an article of
great consequence, we choose to be silent.
LAKE.
The best of what is commonly sold is made from the eo-
lour extracted from scarlet rags, and deposited on the cuttle-
bone, which may be done in the following manner:
 Take a pound of the best pearl-ashies, and, having
 dissolved them in two quarts of water, purify them by
 filtering through paper. Add then to this solution two
more quarts of water, and having put in a pound of
carlet shreds, procured of the taylors, (which must be
entirely clean), boil them in a pewter boiler, till the

shreds appear to have wholly lost their scarlet colour.
 Take them out of the solution and press them well; dip-
 ping them after in water and pressing them again, that

all the sluid they had imbibed may be got from them, in

order to be put back to the rest. Take then another

pound of the scarlet snreds, and repeat the like treat-

ment of them in the same solution; as also a third and

fourth pound. While this is doing dissolve a pound and











 half of cuttle-fishi-bone in a pound of strong aquafortis in
 a glafs receiver; adding more of the bone, if it appear
 to produce any ebullition in the aquafortis : and, having
 strained off this solution through flannel, pour it into the
 other by degrees ; observing whether it produce any
 esservescence on putting in the last quantity : which ifit
 do in any great degree, more of the cuttle-fish-bone must
 be dissolved in aquafortis: and the solution very gradu-
 ally added till no ebullition appear to be raised by it in
 the mixture. If this be properly managed, the fluid will
 soon become clear and colourless, and the tinging parti-

cles extracted from the shreds, together with the cuttle-
 fishi-bone, will subside to the bottom and form a crimson
sediment; which is the lake. The water must then be
 poured off; and two gallons of hard spring water must
 be put to the lake; and well stirred about to mix them.
 This being likewise poured off, after the lake has again
settled to the bottom, must be replaced by another two

gallons; and the same method must be repeated four or
five times. But ifhard water cannot be procured, or the

lake appear too purple, half an ounce of alum should be

added to each quantity of water before itbe used. When
 the lake is thus sufficiently freed from the salts, it must
 have the water drained from it in a filter covered with a
 linen cloth, which has been so worn as to have no nap
 or down remaining on its furface. After the lake has
 been drained to a proper dryness, it must be dropped on
 clean boards, by means of a proper funnel : through
 which, the drops being suffered to pafs, and rest on the
 board at proper distances, they will become small cones
 or pyramids; in which forin the lake must be suffered to
 dry, and the preparation is then completed. 








ROSE PINK.
The basis of this pigment is principally chalk; and the
tinging substance extracted from Brasil, or Campeachy
wood. It will not stand with oil or water, and is seldom
employed but for the coarse work of house painters, or for
paper hanging, unless secured from slying with varnisn,
when, if good, it may be substituted for lake. It is pre-
pared as follows :
 Take brasil wood six pounds, or three pounds of brasil
 and three of peachy wood. Boil them an hour with
 three gallons of water, in which a quarter of a pound of
 alum is dissolved. Purisy then the fluid by straining
 through flannel; and put back the wood into the boiler
 with the same quantity of alum, and proceed as before ;
 repeating this a third time. Mix then the three quan¬
 tities of tincture together; and evaporate them till only
 two quarts of fluid remain : which evaporation must be

performed first in the pewter boiler, and afterwards in a
 balneo mariæe. Prepare in the mean time eight pounds
 of chalk by washiing over; a pound of alum being put

into the water used for that purpose, which, after the

chalk is washied, must be poured off and supplied by a
fresn quantity, till the chalk be freed from the salt form¬

 by the alum; after which it must be dried to the con¬
 sistence of stiff clay. The chalk and tincture, as above
 prepared, must be then well mixed together by grinding;
and afterwards laid out to dry where neither the sun or
 cold air can reach it; though, if it can be conveniently
 done, a gentle heat may be used. 
RED OKER,
Is a native earth, brought chieslsy from Oxsordshire, and
burnt afterwards (by those who prepare it) in large ovens,
















till by caleination it becomes red. It is very useful as well
in the more delicate as coarser paintings in oil, for it stands
infallibly. For nicer purposes it should be washied over ;
but for others it may be used in the state in which it is
found in the shops.
CLASS II. Of BLUE COLOURS.
UlTRaMarINE is a bright blue colour, of the highest
value in every kind of painting; being equally serviceable
in all, even in enamel. It has a transparent effect in oil,
and in some degree in water, and will stand without the
least hazard of flying. By reason of its high price, Prussian
blue has been much introduced, to the prejudice of paint-
ing in general ; as the skies of landfkapes and many other
parts of modern pictures, shew the loss of ultramarine, by
their changing from a warm or clear blue, to a faint green
or olive tint. The methods have been continually varied
by those who have attempted to prepare this pigment.
The
following is the best of the more modern :
 Take the lapis lazuli, and break it into very small

pieces, or rather a grofs powder; put it into a crucible,
 and cover it securely, to prevent the coals from falling
 amongst it. Calcine it then with a strong fire, for an

hour, if there be any large quantity, or less time in pro¬

portion; quench it, when taken out of the fire, in

vinegar, stirring them well together, and suffer it to re-
CLASS II. BLUE.
UItramarine.
Indigo.
UItramarine affies.
Smalt.
Prussian blue.
Verditer.
Litmus, or latmus,
Cendre blue, or Sanders blue.







 main in that state for a day or two. Pour off then the
 vinegar, except what may be necessary for moistening the
 caleined lapis lazuli in grinding; which operation it must
 then undergo, in a mortar of flint or glass, till reduced
 to the greatest degree of finenefs those means may effect.
 But, if it appear yet too hard to be easily ground, give
 it another short calcination, and quench it a second time
 in vinegar. The vinegar must then be washed off from
 the powder, by the putting to it several successive quanti¬
 ties of clean water; each of which must be poured off
 when the lapis lazuli has been well stirred about in them,
 and is again settled to the bottom. It must then be
 ground on a porphyry stone, with a mullar, till it be
 perfectly impalpable, and then dried : in which state it is
 duly prepared to mix with the following cement. Take
 of Burgundy pitch nine ouncesof white resin, and
 Venice turpentine, six ounces-of virgin wax one ounce
 and halfand of linseed oil one ounce and a quarter;
 mix them together by melting in a pipkin over the fire ;
 and suffer them to boil till they acquire so stiff a con-
 sistence, that being dropt into water while of this boiling
 heat, they will not spread on the surface of it, but form a
 roundishi mass or lump. The cement being thus formed,
 may be poured out of the pipkin in the water, and made
 into cakes or rolls for use. Of this cement, take an
 equal weight with that of the calcined lapis lazuli and
 melt it in a glazed earthen pipkin; but not so as to ren¬
 der it too fluid. Then add to it the calcined matter by
 very slow degrees ; stirring them together with an ivory

spatula, till the whole appear perfectly mixed. Being

thus mixed, heat the composition to a something greater

degree, and cast it into a large bason full of cold water.
 When it has cooled to a consistence to bear such treat-







 ment, knead it well like tlie dough of bread, with the
 hands rubbed over with linseed oil, till all the parts be
 thoroughly incorporated with each other. Then make
 the mafs into a cake, which may be either kept till some
 other convenient time in cold water, or immediately pro¬
 ceeded with in the following manner: put the cake into
 an earthen disni or bason, the bottom of which should be
 rubbed with linseed oil; and pour on it water of the
 warmth of blood. Let it stand a quarter of an hour;

and, as the water softens the cake, it will let loose the

finest part of the calcined matter, which, on gently stir-
ring the water, but without breaking the cake, or sepa¬
rating it into lesser parts, will be suspended in the water,

and must be poured off with it into another vessel. The
 quantity of water must be then renewed, and the same
 operation repeated a second or third time : and, as the
 mass appears slack, in affording the colour, it must be
 moved and stirred, in the manner of kneading, with the
 ivory spatula, but not broken into fragments or small

parts; and when so much of the colour is extracted, as
 to render it necessary for the obtaining more, the heat of

the water must be increased to the greatest degree. The

quantities of the calcined matter (which is now the ultra-
marine) that were first washed off, and appear of the

same degree of deepness and brightness, may be put to-

gether; and the same of those of the second degree; the
 last washiings making a third. The water being then

poured off from each of these parcels, put on a lixivium

formed of two ounces of salt of tartar, or pearl-ashies,
 dissolved in a pint of water, and filtered through paper
ce
after the solution is cold. This lixiviui must be put on

boiling hot, and the ultramarine stirred well about in it:

and then the mixture set to cool. The powder being
 subsided, the clear lixivium must be poured off, and clean







 water put in its place; which must be repeated till the
 whole of the salts of the lixivium are washied away. The
 ultramarine must afterwards be dried; and will be then

duly prepared for use. 
UItramarine is subject to be adulterated, on account of
its great price. This is frequently done by a precipitation of
copper, made by alkaline salt, and is very injurious; be-
cause the magistery of copper (if the ultramarine sophisticat-
ed with it be used in painting, either with oil or water)
will change its hue and turn black. And, in enamel paint-
ing, as soon as fluxed, it will become a green, and conse-
quently make the effect of the ultramarine vary from what
is intended. This fraud may be easily detected by pouring
some diluted spirit of nitre on a small quantity; which, if
there be any copper, will soon dissolve, and form a greenisn
blue solution.
ULTRAMARINE ASHES.
After the ultramarine has been extracted from the lapis
lazuli, the residuum or remains form this pigment. And
when the operation of extracting the colour has not succeed-
ed well, a considerable share of the ultramarine is left behind
with the recrement, and greatly enhances the worth of
the ashies; for of course the value of the latter is inferior to
the former, but it is still subject to adulteration, which may
be discovered by putting some of it into a small quantity of
spirit of nitre, and if there be any copper in it, it will be
tinged green. It is prepared as follows:
 Take the cement of the ultramarine, which remains
 after the colour is extracted, and mix it with four times
 its weight of linseed oil. Let the mixture be set in a

glazed pipkin over the fire, and when it is thus boiled a
te fhort time, put it into a glass vessel sufficiently large to













 contain it, of a cylindrical figure : of which vessel the
 diameter must be small in proportion to the length. But
 care must be taken, that the matter, when put into this
 glass, be cool enough not to endanger the breaking it.
 This glass must then be put into a balneum mariae,
 which must be made as hot as possible without boiling,
 and kept there till the colour appears to be all subsided
 to the bottom. The oil must then be poured off, till
 the colour appears to rise with it; and the remainder,
 with the colour in it, must be put into another glass of
 the same kind with as much fresn oil as will rise sive or

six inches above the colour. This glass must be treated
 in the same manner as the first: observing when the
 colour has subsided, the oil must be poured off, and a
 fresni quantity put in its place. This having been like-
 wise poured off, the colour must then be well wasnied,
 to free it from the remaining oil, first in boiling water,
and afterwards in some of the lixivium abovementioned,
made boiling hot also. As much of the lixivium being
poured off, when the colour has subsided, as can be se-
parated from it that way, the colour must be thoroughly

freed from the remainder by frequent ablutions with
 clean water: after which the water must be taken off
 by the means above directed for the ultramarine, till the

matter be ofa proper degree of moisture for grinding. It

must then be thoroughly well ground on a porphyry, and

washied over; that all the harder and insufficiently cal-
 cined parts may be reduced to an impalpable powder;
 in order to which, the remaining grosser parts, after the
 finer have been separated by the washing over, must be
 again ground till the whole be perfectly fine. The
 same means must be afterwards used to bring the afhies to
 a dry powder that were before directed for the ultra-
 marine. 







PRUSSIAN BLUE,
Is the earth of alum, combined with the sixed sulphur of
animal or vegetable coal; and may be made from almost
any animal substance; but it is generally made of the coal of
blood only. It is useful in all kinds of painting, save
enamel; and prepared to different degrees of brightness
and strength. The common kind found in the shops,
and sold at very low prices, can be little depended upon in
paintings of consequence; therefore it should be prepared
perfect, and in the true manner: and then, considering the
high price of ultramarine and the soulness of the indigo, it
may be truly deemed a very valuable acquisition to the art
of painting.
 Take of blood any quantity; and evaporate it to per-
 fect drynefs. Of this dry blood, powdered, take six
 pounds, and of the best pearl-ashies two pounds: mix
 them well together in a glass or stone mortar; and then

put the mixt matter into large crucibles or earthern
 pots; and calcine it in a furnace; the top of the crucible
 or pot being covered with a tile, or other such con-
 venient thing, but not luted. The calcination should
 be continued, so long as any flame appears to issue from

the matter; or rather till the flame become slender and

blue; for if the fire be very strong, a small slame would

arise for a very long time, and a great part of the tinging
 matter would be dissipated and lost. When the matter
 has been sufficiently calcined, take the vessels which con¬

tain it out of the fire; and, as quickly as possible, throw

it into two or three gallons of water; and, as it soaks

there, break it with a wooden spatula, that no lumps
 may remain. Put it then into a propertin vessel, and boil
 it for the space of three quarters of an hour or more.











 Filter it while hot through paper in tin cullenders, and
 pafs some water through the filter when it is run dry,
 to washi out the remainder of the lixivium of the blood

and pearl-ashies; the earth remaining in the silter may
 be then thrown away. In the mean time, dissolve
 of clean alum four pounds, and of green vitriol or cop¬
 peras two pounds, in three gallons of water. Add this
 solution gradually to the siltered lixivium, so long as any

effervescence appears to arise on the mixture; but, when
 no ebullition or ferment follows the admixture, cease to
 put in more. Let the mixture then stand at rest, and
 a green powder will be precipitated: from which, when
 has thoroughly subsided, the clear part of the fluid
 must be poured off, and fresh water put in its place, and
 stirred well about with the green powder; and, after a

proper time of settling, this water must be poured off

like the first. Take then of spirit of salt double the
 weight of the green vitriol which was contained in the
 quantity of solution of vitriol and alum, added to the
lixivium, which will soon turn the green matter to a blue

colour; and, after some time, add a proper quantity of

water, and wasn the colour in the same manner as has
 been directed for lake, &c. and, when properly washed,

proceed in the same manner to dry it in lumps of con¬
 venient size.
The brightness, deepness, and coolness of Prussian blue,
are proofs of its goodness; for with these qualities it may be
depended upon in standing well. Sophistication, or any
thing amiss in the process, may be seen by its heing more
foul and purple.








VERDITER,
Is formed by adding a due proportion of chalk to a solu-
tion of copper, made by refiners in precipitating the silver
from the aquafortis, in the operation called parting. Ver-
diter is to be had at a cheap rate from the refiners, who
are at no expence in making it, but that of the chalk and
labour. The manner in which it may be best done by
them is as follows :
 Take any quantity of chalk, and having rendered it

sufficiently sine by washiing over carefully, add it gra-

dually to the solution of copper, so long as any change

appears to be produced by it from the ebullition excited;
 or the due proportion may be perceived by the fluid
 losing its green tinge and becoming colourless. Let it
 then stand at rest till the sediment be subsided, and pour
 off the clear part of the fluid from the powder; adding
 in it its place clean water, which must be several times

renewed till the salts be entirely washed out. The
sediment, which is the verditer, must be afterwards freed
from the sluid by siltering through paper covered with
 a cloth, and laid out in lumps of a middling size to dry. 
Those who desire to make verditer themselves, may
prepare, the solution of copper, by adding copper filings
gradually to aquafortis of any kind, or putting plates of
copper in it; and then proceeding as is above directed for
the refiner’s solution.
BLEU de CENDRES; or SANDERS BLUE.
lf enquiry is made at the colour shops for this article,
nothing is to be found under the name but common ver-
diter, or à species of it where the precipitation of the copper













appears to be made in part upon starch as well as chalk.
It
may be prepared as sollows :
 Take of the refiners solution of copper made in the
 precipitation of silver from the spirit of nitre; or dissolve
 copper in spirit of nitre or aquafortis, by throwing in
 filings or putting in slips of copper gradually, till all
 effervescence cease. Add to it of strach finely powdered,
 the proportion of one fifth or sixth of the weight of the
 copper dissolved. Make then a solution of pearl afhies,
 and filter it; and put gradually, to the solution of copper,
 as much as will precipitate the whole of the 
 which may be known by the fluid’s becoming clear and
 colourless, though before highly tinged with green.
 Wasni the powder, which will be precipitated, in the

manner directed for lake, &c. and, when it is so well
 drained of water by means of a filter, as to be of a proper
 consistence, grind the whole well together, and lay it out
to dry.
INDIGO.
This was formerly almost the only blue colour used in
painting. It is made in the Spanishi West-Indies, by means
of putrefaction from certain plants, and a coagulation by the
air. It cannot (as far as is hitherto known) be prepared in
these colder climatés, on account of the tender nature of the
lants which produce it. The indigo brought from the
French, or our own plantations, is foul, and greatly inferior
in brightnefs to that formerly imported hither from the
Spaniards, it being equal to the Prussian blue sor some pur-
poses; and there is no other preparation necessary to using
it in painting, except a perfect levigation.







SMALT.

Smalt is made from glafs ground to a powder, and colour-
ed with zaffer; or prepared from fluxing to the proportion
of glass, one seventh part of zaffer, or more or lefs, accord¬
ing to the degree of deepnefs required. It will not work
with either brushi or pencil; but, by strewing it upon any
ground of oil-paint while wet, it makes a bright blue shining
furface, proper for large sun-dials, and other such applica-
tions. In enamel-painting, and in painting on glafs, it is
of great use.
BICE.
At present several compositions of indigo and verditer
with chalk, and other cheap substances, are sold in this
name; but the true kind is smalt, reduced to a fine powder
by levigation. From its unfuitable texture, it is now
greatly disused, or it makes a light warm blue colour, and
was formerly used in oil, but more frequently in water-
colours.
LITMUS Or LATMUS.
Water painting is the only kind in which this can be
used, and as it is brought from Holland at a very cheap
rate, it were almost needless to give the preparation. But
if any are desirous, for curiosity, to know the process, it is
formed from archal, a species of mofs, brought from the
Canary and Cape de Verd Islands, and prepared as follows:
 Add quick line and putrified urine, or spirit of urine
 distilled from lime, to the archal, previoussy bruised by
 grinding. This mixture must be susfered to stand till it









 acquires a very blue colour. After which the fluid must
 be suffered to evaporate, and the remaining mafs, when
 it is of the consistence of a paste, must be laid on boards
 to dry in square lumps. 
If it is used in miniature paintings, care must be taken
of the approach of acid, sor that changes it instantly from
blue to red; though it will stand if no such accident in¬
tervene.
CLASS IIL. Of YELLOW COLOURS.
King’s yellow, when prepared well (which must be
done by mixing sulphur and arsenic by sublimation) is an
extremely bright colour, and a true yellow; but when
mixed with white lead, and several other pigments, its
colour flies or changes: this defect, joined to its nauseous
smell, and the notion of its being a strong poison, renders it
unpleasing, and causes it to be rejected by many. Never-
thelefs, it may be used on many occasions, with great ad-
vantage, not only as a yellow, but by mixing it with
blue pigments, and forming a green. King’s yellow is
prepared as follows :
ei Take of arsenic powdered, and flowers of sulphur,
e in the proportion of twenty of the first to one of the
YELLOW.
CLASS III.
Common orpiment.
King’s yellow.
Gall stones.
Naples yellow.
Terra di Sienna unburnt.
Yellow oker.
Turpeth mieral.
Dutch pink.
Yellow berry wasni.
English pink.
Light pink.
Turmeric washi.
Zedoary wasn.
Gamboge.
Tincture of saffron.








 fecond: and having put them into à sublimer, sublime
 them in a sand heat. The operation being over, the
 king’s yellow will be found in the upper part of the glafs,
 which must be carefully separated from any caput
 mortuum, or foul parts that may be found in the glafs
 with it. It must be afterwards reduced to an equal
 powder by levigation. 7
NAPLES YELLOW.
The neighbourhood of Naples is said to produce this
pigment naturally: of the truth of this we are dubious,
but certain that it is brought from abroad. It is a yellow
rather inelining to the orange; seldom used but in oil
painting, where it is generally found to stand well. It is
brighter than other yellows at present in use, except the
king’s yellow; but if it touch iron along with the least
watry moisture, it will be changed by it, for which reason
care should be taken to employ an ivory spatula, instead of
a pallet knife, during the grinding of it with oil, which is
the only preparation practised on it, as it does not well bear
levigation with water.
YELLOW OKER.
The substance of this is a mineral earth, sound in dif-
ferent places, of various degrees of purity. There is no
other preparation necessary but levigation, and freeing it
properly from dirt and other matter. It is a valuable
colour, being a true yellow that will not sly in the least,
and its texture fuits it for all kinds of painting. Notwitli-
standing its utility it ought to he of low price.










DUTCH PINK.
As this colour will not bear well to be worked in oil,
nor can be depended upon with regard to its standing, it is
used principally for coarser purposes in water, and is some-
times prepared in the same manner with starch and white
lead; but the following preparation is very cheap and easy,
and makes it to perfection :
 Take of French berries one pound, and of turmeric
 root powdered four ounces; boil them in a gallon of
 water two hours, and then strain off the tincture through

flannel, and boil it again with an ounce of alum till it be

evaporated to one quart. Prepare in the mean time four

pounds of chalk, by washiing it over, and afterwards
 drying it, and mix the chalk with the tincture, by grind-
 ing them together; and then lay out the Dutch pink
 thus made to dry on boards.
As it should be a full gold coloured yellow and very
bright, any adulteration may be discovered by the eyer.
ENGLISH PINK.
Prepare this in the same manner, and with the same in¬
gredients as the Dutch, only increasing the quantity of
chalk, to render it of an inferior quality; it being the same,
only lighter and coarser.
LIGHT PINK.
The only kind fit for use in oil painting is prepared in
the following manner:
 Take of French berries one pound, boil them with a
 gallon of water for an hour; and having strained off

Acid of sugar poured on a dissolution of martial vitriol produces a yellow
precipitate, superior to Dutch pink.










 the fluid, add to it two pounds of pearl affies, dissolved
 and purified by filtering through paper. Precipitate
 with alum dissolved in waten, by adding the solution

gradually, so long as any ebullition shall appear to be
 raised in the mixture. When the sediment has thorough-
ly subsided, pour off the water from it, and wash it with

several renewed quantities of water, proceeding as has
 been before directed in the case of the lake, &c. drain off
«e the remaining fluid in a filter with a paper covered with

a linen cloth; and, lastly, dry it on boards in small
square pieces.
GAMBOGE.
No yellow is of greater service in water colours; eafily
dissolving to a milky consistence, from the state in which it
arrives. It is a gum produced in the East Indies, and
nothing but the addition of water is wanting to prepare it
for use.
MASTICOT.
As this is not a very bright colour it is little used; or it
will stand persectly in oil or in water; it works with the
pencil better than most other pigments, and certainly might
be made very useful by putting slake white, or white lead,
on an earthen or stone dissi before à strong fire; and con¬
tinuing it there till the colour be sufficiently yellow. The
calcination being finished, the parts which are of the desired
tint must be picked out from the rest and put together
For with the greatest care, it is difficult to caleine the whole
equally. Grinding with oil is the only preparation ne-
cessary to the using of it.










COMMON ORPIMENT.
It is generally disagreeable to meddle with this, on
account of its nauseous smell and poisonous quality; being
a fossil body composed of arsenic and sulphur, with a mix¬
ture frequently of lead, and sometimes other metals. In
its unrefined state it is only useful to colour the matted bot-
toms of chairs, or other coarse work; but if purified by
sublimation it becomes king’s yellow.
GALL STONES.
The real kind are found in the gall bladder or like ducts
of beasts; and require nothing more than rubbing with
water (as gamboge) to dissolve them to a dark warm yellow.
But as these are not always to be procured, a fictitious kind,
of equal service, may be made as follows :
 Take a quart of the bile of oxen, as freshi as possible.
 Put it into a properpewter vessel, and set it to boil in a
 balneo mariæ; having added to it a quarter of an ounce
 of clear gum arabic. Evaporate the whole to about an
eighth; and then remove it into a china cup or bason of
proper size, and evaporate it to dryness; collecting it
 into a mass as it becomes of a stiff consistence. ’
TERRA di SIENNA unburnt.
Mention has been made of this pigment being a native
ochrous earth, brought from Italy; that calcination changes
it from yellow to red: therefore those that choose to use
it as a yellow, should take care to have it extremely well













levigated, as it will serve for a deeper shade by many de-
grees than any of the other okers, and of a superior bright-
ness.
TURPETH MINERAL.
This for use is much such another colour in yellow as
vermillion in red, and will stand equally well with that.
oil of vitriol, and is much brighter than any other yellow
used in oil, except king’s yellow. The preparation :
 Take of pure quicksilver, and oil of vitriol, each six
pounds. Put them into à retort, to which, (being placed
 in a fand bath), fit on a receiver, and distil them with a
 strong fire, while any fumes appear to rise into the
ce receiver; urging it at last with as great a heat as the

furnace will bear. When the retort is again cold, re-
 move it out of the sand bathi; and having broken it, take
 the white mafs, which will be found at the bottom of it,
 and break it to a grofs powder, and having put it in a
glass mortar, pour water on it, which will immediately

convert it to a yellow colour. Let it next be thoroughly

ground in this mortar, with water, and afterwards washed
 with several successive quantities. It must then be
 thoroughly well levigated on a stone, and dried.
The YELLOW WASH, from the French berries.
 Take a pound of the French berries, and put to them
 a gallon of water, with half an ounce of alum: boil them
 an hour in a pewter vessel, and then filter off the sluid,
 through paper, if it be designed for nicer purposes, or









 flannel for more ordinary. Put them again into the

boiler, and evaporate the fluid till the colour appears of

the strength desired ; or part may be taken out while less
 strong, and the rest evaporated to a proper body. 
It may be used in water as a washing colour, and is ap-
plicable to many material purposes, as it may be made of al-
most any degree of deepness.
TURMERIC WASH.
The gum made from the turmeric-root dissolved in water,
serves for the same purposes of the yellow-berry-wasn; but
to procure a bright tincture, it must be dissolved in spirit of
wine instead of water, by the following method:

 Take two ounces of proof spirit, and add to it one
 ounce of water. Being put into a proper phial, add two
drams of turmeric root in powder. Shake them well to-
gether, and then let them stand three or four days, re-

eating the shaking as often as convenient; and a strong

tincture will be thus obtained.
TINCTURE of SAFFRON.
It makes a good shade for gamboge or other light bright
yellows: by pouring hot water on the best Englisn saffron
in a proper phial or other vessel ; which should be placed
for some time in a heat next to that which would make
water boil; and the tincture should then be siltered from
the dregs through a piece of linen cloth.
ZEDOARY WASH.
Take an ounce of zedoary-root, and boil it in a quart of
water till the water appears sufficiently tinged to a yellow:











strain it through linen and it will be à stronger colour than
can be made of turmeric without spirits of wine, and is va-
luable for many purposes in painting with water colours, as
flowers, yellow draperies, &c.
CLASS IV. Of GREEN COLOURS.
VERDIGRISE.
Let the pulp of grapes or any such acid remain upon cop¬
per; and the rust formed by its corro sive action is verdi-
grise. It is brought from France and Italy hither, and
makes a blue-green colour in paint; but will not stand in
oil. It should have a small admixture of yellow to render it
a true green.
CHRYSTALS Of VERDIGRISE; called
DISTILLED VERDIGRISE.
 Take of the best verdigrise four ounces, and of dis-

tilled vinegar two quarts. The verdigrise being well

pounded, let them be put into a circulating vessel, that
 may be formed of a mattrafs (which is a round bodied

glass with a long straight neck) and a Florence flafk;

which must have its neck inverted into the mattrafs, the
 thick end being broken off. This circulating vessel must
 be placed in a gentle sand-heat, or other warm situation,
 where it must continue, being frequently shaken, till the
 vinegar has dissolved as much as it can of the verdigrise.
 Remove the verdigrise and vinegar then into a proper
*CLASS IV. GREEN.
Prussian green.
Verdigrise.
Terra verte.
Distilled verdigrise, or chrystals
of verdigrise.
Sap green.










 glass for decanting the fluid, when it shall become clear
 from the sediment; and when it has stood a due time to

settle, let it be carefully poured off and evaporated to

about half a pint; which is best done with a sand-heat,
 in a glass body or cucurbit, having its neck cut off to
 form a wide mouth. It may be set to fhoot in the same
 vessel, or in a glass receiver with a wide neck ; and
 when the chrystals are formed, they must be taken out

and carefully dried in the shade.
 A fresn proportion of vinegar may be added to the re-
 mains of the verdigrise; and at the same time the sirst

quantity left undissolved; and the mothers, or fluid re-
 maining after the chrystals were formed, may be put into
 it; by which means, the other parts of the process being
 repeated, a second quantity of the chrystals may be ob¬

tained. 1
The chrystals made thus are of a bright green colour, and
if used with varnishi so as to stand, have a fine effect; but
they will not hold their colour very well in oil, being apt
to turn black.
SAP GREEN,
Is made of the juice of buckthorn berries, and is very
useful in water painting as a wafhing colour, making a
strong and pretty deep stain. It is prepared as follows :
 Take any quantity of buckthorn berries before they
 be ripe, and press out the juice in such a press as is used
 for making cyder or verjuice; or by any other method.
 Strain this juice through slannel, then let it stand to
 settle; and when it has stood a proper time, decant off'
 the clearer part of the fluid srom the sediment. Put this

juice into a stone or earthen vessel, and evaporate it till
it begins to grow of a thick consistence; then remove it








into a pewter vessel, and finisn the evaporation in a balneo
mariæ, collecting the matter into one mafs as it acquires
a proper consistence.
PRUSSIAN GREEN.
This colour is much neglected, and seems almost wholly
laid aside, or it has nearly all the uses in its colour that
the Prussian blue has, only not so bright; nor will it stand so
well; yet it might be of advantage in many kinds of paint-
ing. To make it,
Proceed in all points as in the process given for the
Prussian blue, till the solution of alum and vitriol be¬
mixed with that of the pearl-ashies and sulphur of the
 coal, and the green precipitation made. Then, instead
 of adding the spirit of salt, omit any further mixture, and
 go on to wasni the sediment, which is the Prussian green ;
 and afterwards dry it, in the same manner as is direct-
 ed for the blue.
TERRA VERTE.
This is supposed to be a native earth, brought from
abroad, of a coarse texture, requires to be well levigated
and washed over; but no other preparation is necessary pre-
vious to its use.
CLASS V.  OF PURPLE COLOURS.
The true INDIAN RED.
Perhaps it may be no easy matter to procure this co-
lour true; for it is a native ochrous earth, very useful in
PCLAIS V. PURPLE.
True Indian red.
Archal, or orchal.






oil, in its compounded state, as well for force in its effect as
certainty of standing. But the fictitious kind, now fallaci¬
oussy called by its name, has no good property as a purple :
in short, it is varied into a broken orange, and rejected by
most colourmen and painters. The true kind needs no
other preparation than grinding or washiing over.
ARCHAL, or ORCHAL.
This may be made in a very easy manner by those who
cannot procure it of the manufacturers; and is an extreme
bright purple sluid, but apt to dry to à reddissi brown, and
therefore much disused at present. To prepare it,
 Take an ounce of the archal weed or moss, as it is sold
 at the dry-salters; and, having bruised it well, put it into
 a glass phial with half a pint of weak spirit of sal ammo¬
 niacus distilled with lime. Stop the phial close, and leave
 the archal to infuse till a strong bluish purple tincture be

formed. 
CLASS VI.  OF BROWN COLOURS.
BROWN PINK.
AMong the variety of methods for preparing this pig-
ment, the following is one of the best :
 Take of French berries one pound; of fustie wood in
 chips half a pound, and of pearl affies one pound. Boil
 them in a tin boiler, with a gallon and a half of water,
 for an hour; and then strain off the tincture through
PCLASS VI. BROWN.
Terra japonica, or japan earth-
Brown pink.
Umbre.
Bistre.
Brown oker.
Asphaltum.
Spaniss juice, or extract of liquorice.
Cologn, or Collin’s earth.












 flannel while the sluid is boiling hot. Having prepared,
 in the mean time, àa solution of a pound and a half of
 alum, put it gradually to the tincture, so long as an ebul¬
 lition shall appear. Proceed then to wasni the sediment
 as in the manner directed for the lakes; and being
 brought, by filtering through paper with a linen cloth,
 to a proper consistence, dry it on boards in square
pieces.
Its goodness may be judged of by its transparency, in
every quality but that of standing, which can only
be
known on trial.
BISTRE.
This colour is extremely serviceable in water, if proeur-
 good, which may be done dy the following recipe :
 Take any quantity of soot of dry wood, but let it be
 of beech wherever that can be procured. Put it into
 water in the proportion of two pounds to a gallon; and
 boil them half an hour. Then, after the fluid has stood
 some little time to settle, but while yet hot, pour off the
 clearer part from the earthy sediment at the bottom; and
 if, on standing longer, it form another earthy sediment,
 repeat the same method : but this should be done only
 while the fluid remains hot. Evaporate then the sluid to
 dryness, and what remains will be good bistre, if the
 foot was of a proper kind.
BROWN OKER.
After procuring this substance of fossil earth from the co¬
lourmen, which may be done at a very low price, care
should be taken to have it well levigated and washed over ;
when it may be used for a foul orange colour, and may be
depended on for standing well.
THE GETTV RESEARCH INSTiTUTE
THE GETTV RESEARCH INSTTUTE





Where the fore-ground of a water painting requires to be
pretty strong, the Cologn earth may be used to advantage.
It requires no preparation, suve grinding perfectly sine with
water; it being of a fossil substance, and a dark blackisn
broyn colour.
TERRA JAPONICA, Or JAPAN EARTH.
A full brown colour is produced from this gummy sub¬
stance, by dissolving it with water; but it will not mix well
with oil. It is extracted from some kind of vegetable, and
its goodness may be distinguissied by the clearness of its
colour.
UMBRE.
It has the quality of the other ochrous earthy substances,
joined to that of drying better, which occasions it to be
much used in making drying oils, japanner’s gold size, and
the black oil lacker. In painting some sew use it with wa¬
ter; but before it is fit for that purpose it should be burnt,
levigated and wassied over.
ASPHALTUM.
There is an additional advantage in this colour, when
used in lieu of brown pink: It is secure from flying, and
retains in drying a transparent brown. If it can be procur-
ed pure as it is found in the earth in Asia, it is certainly
very useful; but it is a bituminous matter, of a consistence
like tar, and liable to be adulterated with turpentine and
other cheap balsamic substances; which fraud is noteasy to








be detected, unless by the mixture taking off the native
transparent, and deep brown colour, which the eye may
discover.
SPANISH JUICE, OT EXTRACT O LIQUORICE.
The liquorice root is extracted by a decoction in water,
and then evaporated to a well known consistence. In mi¬
niature painting it is at this time much used. It supplies
the place of bistre in a great measure, though it is inferior;
but there is no trouble in procuring, nor process in prepar-
ing the liquorice that is ever wanted in England.
CLASS VII.: Of WHITE COLOURS.
WhITE FLakE is brought here from Italy ; it is used
for oil or varnish painting, where a very clean white is re-
juired; and is à kind of ceruss or lead corroded by acid.
There is a great deal sold at the colour shops ready pre-
pared; that is, the true kind levigated, mixed with starch
or some such substance. But ip is best to. procure the white
flake in a lump, and then levigate it, and if it is thought
proper, add any quantity of starch in the grinding, that
may render it suitable to work with.
WHITE LEAD,
Is a corrosion by acid from plates of lead, prepared by
those who are concerned in it at a low price. It is much
PCLASS VII. WHITE.
Pearl white.
White flake,
White lead.
Troy white.
Egg-shell white.
Calcined hartshorn-


















































employed in common purposes of painting, and may be used
in nicer ; but will require washiing over, and then it is little
inferior to flake white. Notwithstanding its cheapnefs, it
is frequently adulterated by the makers or wholesale dealers,
by adding chalk or powdered tale, which may be seen by
comparing a pure piece with a fuspected one; as the fraud
will appear by the difference of the weight. But to prove
it more exactly use the following means :
 Take an ounce of the white lead suspected; and mix
 it well with about half an ounce of pearl affies, or of any
 fixed alkaline salt, and about a quarter of an ounce of

charcoal dust: and having put them into a crucible, give
 them a strong heat. The lead will by this means be re-

duced to its metallic state: and being weighed, will

shew, by what it may fall short of the weight of an
 ounce, the proportion of the adulteration; about à tenth
part being allowed for the corroding acid which formed
 part of the white lead. '
CALCINED OT BURNT HARTSHORN.
 Take horn, or bones, and burn them in any common
 fire till they become a coal, or are caleined to some de¬

gree of whitenefs. Then, having freed them carefully

from any coal or filth, reduce them to a gross powder;

and put them upon a vessel made in sorm of a common
 earthen dissi, of ground crucibles and Stourbridge clay,
 and well dried ; and procure this to be placed in a to-
 baccopipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, during the time
 they keep their pipes or pots in the fire. The earth of
 the horn or bones being thus thoroughly calcined, it must
 be very well levigated with water; and it will he yet
 further improved by being carefully washed over.







This is a pure white, nor will change by eitlier air or
time : for the nicest purposes it is much used in water paint-
ing, and will not turn black in the manner flake white and
white lead sometimes will. It is therefore preserred by the
more experienced painters.
PEARL WHITE,
Is prepared by drying or caleining oyster shells at a fire,
and taking that part of the powder that is of a perfect white-
ness, levigating it well on a stone, and washiing it over. It
is serviceable in miniature painting.
TROY WHITE, or SPANISH WHITE,
May be used in water colours, from the following pre¬
paration :
 Take a pound of chalk, and soak it well in water.
 Then wasn over all the fine part; and having poured off
 the first water, add another quantity, in which two
 ounces of allum is dissolved. Let them stand for a day or
 two, stirring the chalk once in six or eight hours. Wasni
 then the chalk again over, till it be rendered perfectly
 fine; and pour off as much of the water as can be sepa¬

rated from the chalk by that means, taking off the re-

mainder of the dissolved allum, by several renewed quan-
 tities of fresn water. Aster the last water is poured off, put
 the chalk into one of the cullender filters, with a linen
 cloth over the paper; and and when the moisture has
 been sufficiently drained off from it, lay it out in lumps
 to dry on a proper board. 7
EGG SHELL WHITE
Is made of the clear shell when the inner skin is peeled
off, levigated to powder of a proper fineness, and washied
over. It is used by some in water colours, and preserred
to flake white.









CLASS VIII. Of BLACK COLOURS.
LAMP BLACK.

There is no other preparation than procuring it good,
from burning oil, in a confined place, and collecting the
soot. It mixes well either with oil or water, and is esteem-
ed as the principal black in all nicer kinds of painting.
 Take plates, chips, or shavings of ivory; and soak
 them in hot linseed oil ; or, iffilings are to be more easily

procured, they may be used moistened with the hot oil.
 Put them into à vessel which will bear the fire; covering
 them with a fort of lid made of clay and sand; which

should be dried, and the cracks repaired besore the vessel
 be put into the fire. Procure this vessel to be placed in a
 tobacco-pipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, or any other
 fuch fire; and let it remain there during one of their

heats. When it shall be taken out, the ivory will be

burnt properly; and must be asterwards thoroughly well
 levigated on the stone with water; or it should, indeed,
 to have it perfectly good, be also washed over. 
It is not so much used as lamp black, owing perhaps, to
its drying slowly in oil, or to the frequent adulterations
with charcoal dust, which renders it of a blue cast; other-
wife it is, if genuinely prepared from the ivory, a full clear
black, and extremely serviceable.
INDIAN INK.
The true Indian ink is imported from China, and is of a
consistence, when dissolved with water, extremely well
adapted to the pencil. It is much used in miniature paint-






ing, and drawings of small kinds. There is a fort frequent-
ly sold for it made as follows :
 Take of isinglass six ounces; reduce it to a size, by
 gissolving it over the fire in double its weight of water.

Take then of Spanishi liquorice one ounce: and dissolve

it also in double its weight of water; and grind up with
it an ounce of ivory black, prepared as above directed in

p. 67. Add this mixture to the size while hot; and stir
 the whole together till all the ingredients be thoroughly
incorporated. Then evaporate away the water in a bal-
neo mariae, and cast the remaining composition into lead¬
 ed moulds greased; or make it up in any other form.
The preceding are the chief of the substances there will be
occasion to mention in drawing and painting; but crayou
and enamel colours will be treated of in their places.

Those persons who are accustomed to paint in oils,
generally purchase their colours ready prepared in bladders;
a compleat set of which, with a pallette, and requisites
for painting, may be procured at the colour-shops.
Compleat sets of water-colours are also sold in boxes,
with peneils, &c. for miniature painting, drawing, &c.
The price, from eight shillings to three guineas.
As the oil colours prepared in bladders, if they are kept
long, become useless; and as those who are not professed
artists seldom paint so much as to use them without great
waste, it became à desideratum that some method should be
found to render them more durable :-this Mr. Blackmen
has accomplished; and at the same time has made them a
portable, that they can be used with equal ease with the
common water-colour cakes. We give the method of
preparing them from Vol. XII. of the Transactions of the
Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and
Commerce.










Method of preparing BLACKMANS OIL-COLOUR
CAKES.
Take of the clearest gum mastick, reduced to fine powder,
four ounces; of spirit of turpentine, one pint; mix them
together in a bottle, stirring them frequently till the
mastick is dissolved: if it is wanted in haste, some heat may
be applied, but the solution is best when made cold. Let
the colours to be made use of, be the best that can be
procured, taking care, that by washing, &c. they are
brought to the greatest degree of finenefs possible. When
the colours are dry, grind them on a hard close stone
(porphyry is the best) in spirit of turpentine, adding a
small quantity of the mastick varnissi; let the colours so
ground become again dry ; then prepare the composition
for forming them into cakes, in the following manner :
Procure some of the purest and whitest spermaceti you can
obtain; melt it over a gentle fire, in a clean earthen vessel;
when fluid, add to it one third of its weight of pure poppy
oil, and stir the whole well together; these things being in
readiness, place the stone on which your colours were
ground on a frame or support; and, by means of a charcoal
fire under it, make the stone warin; next grind your
colour sine with a muller; then, adding à sufficient quan¬
tity of the mixture of poppy oil and spermaceti, work the
whole together with the muller to a proper consistence;
take then a piece of a fit size for the cake you intend to
make ; roll it into a ball, putit into a mould, press it, and
it will be complete.
When these cakes are to be used, they must be rubbed
down in poppy or other oil, or in a mixture of spirit of
turpentine and oil, as may best suit the convenience or
intention of the artist.









Of PAINTING.
PAINTING is the art of representing to the eyes, by
means of figures and colours, every object in nature that is
discernable by the sight, and of expressing the various
emotions of the mind. By an admirable effort of human
genius, it offers to our vision every thing which is most
valuable in the universe ; its empire extends over every
age and country : it presents to us the heroic deeds of
ancient times, as well as those with which we are more
conversant, and distant objects equally with those we daily
see. In this respect it may be considered as a supplement
to Nature, which gives us only a view of present objects.
The painter, who is distinguished for noble and profound
concentions ; who conveys to the spectators the sentiments
with which he is himself inspired; who animates them
with his genius, and makes a lasting impression on their
minds; this Artist is a poet, and worthy to share in the
glories of Homer; but if he seek only to please, or astonisn
by the illusion of colours, he must rest contented with the
secondary merit of flattering the eye with a variety of tints,
or making an industrious assemblage of a multiplicity of
objects.
The poet or the painter who excel in their profefsions,
deserve all the respect due to genius; they are of the
number of those men whom nature, sparing of her best
gifts, grants but occasionally to the inhabitants of the
earth. If they are sublime, they elevate the human race ;
if tney are agreeable only, they excite those sweet sensations
necessary to our happiness.














of the SCHOOLS.
A School in the sine arts denominates a class of artists
who have learned their art from a certain master, either by
receiving his instructions, or studying his works. All the
painters which Europe has produced since the renovation
of the arts, are classed under the following schools :The
school of Florence, of Rome, of Venice, the Lombard,
French, German, Flemisn, Dutch, and Englisn schools.
The school of Florence is remarkable for greatnefs, for
attitudes seemingly in motion; for à certain dark severity;
for an expression of strength, by which grace is perhaps
excluded; and for a character of design approaching to the
gigantic. It cannot be denied that the productions of this
school, although overcharged, possess an ideal majesty which
elevates human nature above mortality. The Tuscan
artists, satisfied with commanding admiration, seem to have
considered the art of pleasing as beneath their notice.
Cimabue, a noble Florentine, born in the year 1240,
was the first, who, after the destruction of the Roman
empire, practised the art of painting, which he learned
from some Greek workmen who were employed by the
Tuscan government. His pictures were, as may be ima¬
gined, in an ordinary stile : but they received the applause
of his countrymen. So little practised was he in his art,
that in his pictures, to prevent the possibility of a mistake
in the judgment of the spectator respecting the subject,
inscriptions were added, with sentences coming out of the
mouths of the persons represented in them. To Cimabue
succeeded Giotto, his disciple, who, when a shepherd’s boy,
was found by him drawing the figure of a shieep upon a
stone: he soon become more celebrated than his master, and is








accounted one of the founders of the Florentine school.
From this time the number of artists encreased so rapidly,
that, in 1350, they established a society under the protection
of St. Luke.
Towards the commencement of the sisteenth century,
the works of the Florentines possessed something of gran-
deur, life, and expression; and Massacio is mentioned as
the first who gave force and relief to his pictures; but
Michael Angelo, and Leonardo de Vinci were the glory
of the school of Florence; the former superior in grandeur,
in boldness of conception, and knowledge of design; the
latter in all the amiable parts of the art. Leonardo, pos¬
sessed of a fine imagination, and full of sensibility, devoted
himself in painting to express the affections of the soul :
and, if in this sublime branch of the art he was afterwards
surpassed by Raphael, he had at least the glory, not only
of surpassing all the painters who went before him, but of
pursuing a path which none of them had attempted. Mi-
chael Angelo, lefs formed to experience sweet affections
than violent pafsions, sought in nature what the strength of
man might accomplisn, not that which constitutes beauty.
Better acquainted with anatomy than any other artist, he
seems too eager to display his knowledge of it, and to have
forgotten that the muscles are less visible in children,
females, and young men, than in confirmed and vigorous
manhood. 1. You never perceive, (says Mengs) a muscle
at rest; and although he knew admirably well how to
place them, their action is very frequently inconsistent with
their situation. He never (says Sir Joshua Reynolds),
attempted the lesser elegances and graces of the art; and if
any man had a right to look down upon the lower accom-
plishiments as beneath his attention, it was certainly Michael
Angelo.






3


THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.
75
The Roman school has exceeded every other in beauty
of form, grandeur, stile, and just exprefsion: this is to be
attributed to the superior advantages they enjoyed, in
having access to those precious remains of ancient art, which
Rome, in its prosperity, drew from declining Greece; or
which were executed in its own bosom by Grecian artists.
This school was altogether devoted to the principal
parts of the art, to those which require genius and vast
conceptions, and was no farther occupied with colours
than was necessary to establisn a difference between painting
and sculpture; or rather between painting varied with
colours, and claro obscuro.
At the head of this school is placed Raphael Sanzio,
born at Urbino, in 1483.
In the early part of his lise he had accustomed hiinself to
copy nature with great exactness, but without being solicit-
ous about the choice, or perhaps ignorant that any choice
was necessary. When he saw the works of Leonardo de
Vinci, and Michael Angelo, they gave to his genius a new
direction ; he perceived that there was something more in
the art of painting than a simple imitation of truth; but the
works of those masters were not sufficient to enable him
to make the best choice; and he continued in uncertainty
till he saw at Rome the works of the ancients ; then he
perceived, that in imitating them, he had only to follow
the natural impulse of his genius.
His design is admirable-he excelled in representing the
character of philosophers, apostles, and other figures of that
kind. The Greeks were superior to him in ideal figures,
but if he did not succeed in embellishing nature in the same
high degree, he saw, at least, and imitated her in whatever
was expressive and beautiful. The Greeks (says Mengs),
sailed with majesty between earth and heaven; Raphael
walked with propriety on the earth.







Composition is in general (says the same authorl, of two
kinds: Raphael’s is the expressive kind; the other the-
atrical or picturesque, which consists of an agreeable dispo-
sition of the figures. Lanfranc was the inventor of the
last, and after him Pietro de Cortona. The preference is
given to Raphael, because reason presides over all his
works, or at least the greatest part of them. He never
allowed himself in common ideas, nor ever sussered his
accessary figures to turn the attention from the principal
object of the piece. The excellency of Raphael (says Sir
oshua Reynolds) lay in the propriety, beauty, and majesty
of his characters; his judicious contrivance of composition,
correctness of drawing, purity of taste, and the skilful
accommodation of other men’s conceptions to his own
purpose.
The school of Venice is the child of nature. The
Venetian painters, not having under their eyes, like the
Romans, the remains of antiquity, were destitute of the
means of forming a just idea of the beauty of forms, and
of expression. They copied without choice the forms
of nature, but were chiefly delighted with the beauties
which presented themselves in the mixture and variety of
colours. Colouring was their chief object; and they
endeavoured by the agreement and opposition of colours,
and by the contrast of light and shade, to produce à vigor-
ous effect, to demand and fix the attention. In this they
succeeded.
Dominico, who was the second Italian artist who painted
in oil, had educated, before he quitted Venice, Giacomo
Bellino, who had two sons, Gentile and Giovanni, both of
whom were painters ; the latter contributed much to the
progress of his art in painting constantly in oil and after
nature. Giorgione and Titian, his scholars, are considered
as the founders of the Venetian school.













Giorgione distinguished himself by a better taste in de-
signing than his master; but he chiessy surpassed hiin
in colouring. He died in his zad year.
Tiziano Vecelli, better known by the name of Titian,
was instructed in the school of Bellino, to copy nature in
the most servile manner; but when he had seen the works
of Giorgione, he began to study the ideal in colouring.
The truth of history is not to be expected in hipniings,
or in those of the artists of the same school. He paig little
attention to the consistance of scene, to the costume, to
expression adapted to the subject; or, finally, to the accom¬
modation of parts which characterise the works of those
who have studied the ancients.
The artists of the Florentine and Roman schools painted
most commonly in water-colours, or in fresco; and, instead
of nature, they finished their work from their sirst sketches.
Titian painted in oil, and finisned from the objects in
nature; and this practice, joined to his exquisite talents,
gave the greatest truth to his colours. His being a portrait
painter was also of advantage to him as a colourist. In this
department he was accustomed to the colours of nature in
carnations and draperies.
He was a landfkape painter; and here he also took the
colours from nature.
Titian has, in general, little expression in his pictures;
and he sometimes introduces figures which augment the
coldness of the piece; for if it be true that heads, even in
historical painting, ought to be studied from nature, it is
true also that individual nature should not be presented, but
one general and ideal. The painter fails in the effect
which he ought to produce, if, when he represents Achilles,
Hector and Cæsar, his personages are familiar to our obser-
vation.








The distinguishing characteristies of the Lombard school
are grace; an agreeable taste for design, without great cor-
rection ; a mellowness of pencil; and a beautisul mixture
of colours.
Antonio Allegri, called Corregio, was the father and
greatest ornament of this school: he began by imitating
nature alone; but as he was chiefly delighted with the
graceful, he was careful to purisy his design :-he made his
figures elegant and large: and varied his outlines by fre-
quent undulations ; but he was not always pure and correct.
Corregio painted in oil, a kind of painting susceptible of
the greatest delicacy and sweetnefs; and as his character
led him to cultivate the agreeable, he gave a pleasing cap-
tivating tone to all his pictures. He sought transparent
colours to represent shades conformable to nature, and
adopted a manner of glazing which actually rendered his
shadows more obscure. It is chiesly in this that he deserves
to be imitated; for his lights are too clear, and somewhat
heavy ; and his fleshy parts are not sufficiently transparent.
Harmony and grace are connected together; and on this
account Corregio is excellent also in harmony. As the
delicacy of his taste suffered him not to employ strong
oppositions, he naturally became a great master in this
part, which chiesly consists of easy gradations from one
extreme to another. A delicate taste in colours, a perfect
knowledge of the claro obscuro, the art of uniting light
to light, and shade to snade, together with that of de-
taching objects from the ground; inimitable, grave, and
perfect harmony, were the qualities which distinguished
Corregio from all painters, and placed him near the head of
his profefsion.
The Carracci, Lewis, Augustin, and Hannibal, formed
what is called the second Lombard school, which is fre-
quently distinguished by the name of the school of Bologna.







Lewis was the master of the other two; he had studied
the works of Titian and Paolo Veronese, of Andrea del
Sarto, of Corregio, and of Julio Romano; but he chiesly
endea voured to imitate the manner of Corregio. Hannibal
sluctuated between Corregio and Titian. Augustin, their
rival in painting, had his mind cultivated by learning,
and devoted part of his time to poetry, music, and other
many exercises.
These three painters often employed their talents upon
the same work; and their united labours seemed to be
animated with the same spirit.
They established an academy at Bologna, called l’Academia
degli Desiderosi; but it was afterwards known by the name
of the Academy of the Carracci. In this school was
taught the art of constructing models, perspective, and
anatomy ; lessons were given on the beautiful proportions of
nature, on the best manner of using colours, and on the
principles of light and snade. The academy separated on
Hannibal’s going to Rome to adorn the gallery of the
cardinal Farnese.
The works of the Carraci are often, from the resemblance
of their manner, confounded together; nevertheless, each
of them has a decided character, distinct from the other
two. Lewis had less fire, but more grace and grandeur :
Augustin had more spirit in his conception, and more
pleasantness in his execution. Hannibal is characterized
by boldness, by a design more profound, by an exprefsion
more lucky, and by an execution more solid.
Lodovico Carracci (says Sir Joshina Reynolds), appears to
me to approach nearest to perfection ; his unaffected breadth
of light and shadow, the simplicity of colouring, which,
holding its proper rank, does not draw aside the least part
of the attention from the subject; and the solemn essect of











that twilight which seems diffused over hie pictures, appears
to me to correspond with grave and dignified subjects, better
than the more artificial brilliancy of sunshine which en¬
lightens the pictures of Titian.
Hannibal is esteemed by the best judges as a model for
beauty and design. Those who blame him for becoming
less a colourist at Rome than he was at Bologna, ought
to recollect that it is his performances at Rome which
have chiefly secured his reputation. Severe critics have
maintained, that his design is too little vaired in the figures;
that he excels only in male beauty, and that in imitating
ancient statues, he excites some resemblance, but without
arriving at that sublimity of ideas and of stile which cha¬
racterise the ancients.
The success of Hannibal, and the reputation which he
acquired, have been pernicious to the art. His successors,
deluded by these considerations, have made him the object
of their imitation, without ascending to the sources from
which he derived his knowledge, and which they never
could equal. The result has been, that instead of be¬
coming equal to Hannibal, they have often copied his
imperfections.
The French school has varied so much under different
masters, that it is difficult to characterise it. Some of its
artists have been formed on the Florentine and Lombard
manner; others, on the Roman; others, on the Venetian;
and a few have distinguisned themselves by a manner which
may be called their own. In speaking in general terms
of this school, it appears to have no peculiar character;
and it can only be distinguishied by its aptitude to imitate
easily any impression; and it may be added, speaking
still in general terms, that it unites in a moderate degree
the different parts of the art, without excelling in any
one of them.








It is equally dissicult to determine the progress of painting
in France. Miniature painting, and painting on glafs,
were early cultivated in that country; and in these two
kinds, the Italians had often recourse to French artists.
Cousin, a painter on glafs, and portrait painter, was the
first who establishied any kind of reputation in France.
He was correct, but possessed very little elegance of design.
Painting, for some time encouraged by Francis the First,
fell into a state of languor, from which it was not recovered
till the reign of Louis XIII. Jaques Blanchard, formed in
the Venetian school, and called the French Titian, flourissi-
ed about this period; but as he left no pupils to perpetuate
his manner, he must be regarded as à single good artist, and
not as à founder of the French school.
In the same manner Poussin, whom they call the Raphael
of France, educated no pupils, and formed no school. His
stile and manner of painting, are described by Sir Joshua
Reynolds as simple, careful, pure, and correct. No works
of any modern have so much the air of antique painting
as those of Poussin. His best performances have a certain
dryness of manner, which seems perfectly correspondent to that
ancient simplicity which distinguisn his stile. In the latter
part of his lise he changed from this manner into one
much soster and richer, where there is a greater union
between the figures and the ground. His favorite subjects
were ancient fables; and no painter was ever better quali¬
fied to paint such subjects, as he was eminenily fkilled in
the knowledge of the ceremonies, customs, and habits of
the ancients; and well acquainted with the different cha¬
racters which those who invented them gave their allegorical
figures.
Poussin, more admired than imitated, had no manner of
insluence in forming the French school. Simon Vouet had
this honour, because his pupils, in the happy age of the arts










in France, conferred on it the greatest splendour. Vouet
was a man of distinguished abilities; but the school which
he erected would have had no continuance, if his scholars
had pursued his manner of painting. He had a kind of
grandeur and facility; but his design was false with
regard to colours, and without any idea of exprefsion.
He had the merit of destroying the insipid taste which
reigned in France, and pointing the way to a better.
If Vouet laid the foundation of the French school, Le
Brun finishied the edifice. He had a noble conception, and
a fruitful imagination ; on no occasion was he inferior to
the vast compositions he undertook. Few painters have
united a greater number of essential qualities and access-
ories of the art:—-he drew well, but his design was far
from being so elegant as that of Raphael, or so pure as
that of Domenichino; and it was less lively than that of
Hannibal Carracci, whom he had taken as a model. In
drapery he followed the Roman school; but in this part he
was not equal to the painter of Urbino. He had studied
the expression of the affections of the soul; but after
observing the general characters, and establishing the prin-
cipal traits of expression, he thought he had reached the
whole extent of this subject which is so infinitely extended.
He was delighted with great compositions; and he gave
them life, animation, and variety; but he wanted the
vigour and inspiration of Raphael. His compositions are
founded on philosophical principles; but those of Raphael
are created. Le Brun thought well; Raphael, Poussin, and
Le Sueur thought most profoundly. Le Brun had eleva-
tion, but he was not elevated, like Raphael, to the sublime.
In colouring, Le Brun did not follow the painters of the
Venetian school. The sweet attractions, and strong and
solid colours of the schools of Rome and Lombardy, seem
rather to have been the object of his imitation; and from







them also he learned an easy, agreeable, and bold manage¬
ment of the pencil.
Eustach le Sueur was the cotemporary and rival of le
Brun; and no painter approached nearer to Raphael in
the art of drapery, or in disposing the solds in the most
artful and the noblest manner. His design was in general
more slender than that of Raphael, but like his it was form-
ed on the model of the ancients. Like Raphael he re-
presented with art and precision the affections of the soul;
like him he varied the air of the head, according to the
condition, the age and the character of his personages; and,
like him, he made the different parts of every figure
contribute to the general effect. His intention in compos¬
ing was to express his subject, not to make shining con¬
trasts or beautiful groups of figures, not to astonish and
bewitch the spectator by the deceitsul pomp of a theatrical
scene, or the splendour of the great machine. His tones
are delicate, his tints harmonious, and his colours, though
not so attractive as those of the schools of Venice and
Flanders, are yet engaging. They steal peaceably on the
soul, and fix it, without distraction on the parts of the art,
superior to that of colouring.
If le Sueur had lived longer, or if like le Brun he had
been employed under a court, fond of the arts and of
learning, to execute the great works of the age, the French
school would have adopted à disserent and a better manner.
The noble heauty of his heads, the simple majesty of his
draperies, the lightness of his design, the propriety of his
expreffion and attitudes, and the simplicity of his general
disposition would have formed the character of this school.
The deceitful pomp of theatrical decoration would have
been more lately introduced, or perhaps would never have
appeared, and Paris might have been the counter part to Rome.








But as le Brun, by an accidental concurrence of favour-
able circumstances, was the faffiionable painter, to be em¬
ployed or rewarded, it was necessary to imitate his manner;
and as his imitators possessed not his genius, his faults be¬
came not only current but more deformed.
The French school not long ago changed its principles;
and, if they follow the road which they have marked out
for themselves, they have the chance of becoming the most
riged observers of the laws imposed on the Greek artists.
The Count de Caylus, pupil of Buchardon, who by his
rank and fortune had the means of encouraging the imitators
of the ancients, and of the masters of the i5th century,
first sormed the design of restoring a pure taste to the art of
painting. He was seconded by the talents of M. Vien,
an artist who had only occaston to have his lessons and his
example laid before him.
In this manner commenced a revolution, so much the
more wonderful, as it was scarcely ever known that any
nation substituted a system of simple and rigid excellence
in place of à salse and glittering taste. The history of all
nations on the contrary, discovers à gradual progrefs froin
à rude beginning to perfection, and afterwards to an ir-
remediable decay. The French have the prospect of stopping
short in this ordinary course. They have begun in a
manner which promises success, and the best consequences
may be expected from the study of those master pieces of
ancient art with which the capital the of French Republic is
ornamented, and which, to the honour of the government,
are open to the inspection of every one. It is almost need-
less to mention that these invaluable works are the most
capital productions of art, which were formerly at
Florence, Rome, Turin, Naples and the cities in the
Austrian Netherlands.







In Germany there can hardly he said to be a school, as
it is a continuation of single artists, who derived their
manner from different sources of originality and imitation.
There were some German painters of eminence, when the
art, emerging from its barbarous state, first began to be
cultivated in Europe. As they were totally unacquainted
with the ancients, and had scarcely access to the works of
their contemporaries in Italy, they copied nature alone, with
the exception of somewhat of that stisfness which forms the
gothic manner. But this is by no means the case with
their successors, part of whom were educated in Flanders,
and part in Italy. For if Mengst or Deitrich, were com-
prehended in this school, there would be nothing peculiar
to its manner discovered in their works. It is therefore
necessary to confine our observations to the more ancient
German painters in whom the gothic stile is conspicuous.
Albert Durer was the first German who corrected the
bad taste of his countrymen. He excelled in engraving as
well as painting. His genius was fertile, his compositions
varied, his thoughts ingenious, and his colours brilliant.
His works, though numerous, were finished with great exact-
ness; but as he owed every thing to his genius, and as
works of inferior merit were by the salse taste of the times
preferred to his, it was impossible for him altogether to avoid
* Antonio Raphael Mengs was born at Ausig in Bohemia. His first patron
was Augustus id King of Poland, and his last and most generous was Charles
3d King of Spain. His grand work was the Apotheosis of St. Eusebius at
Rome, andhis most beautiful picture, that of the nativity at Madrid. There
was à great rivalsnip existing between Reynolds and Mengs, who possessed
little original genius, and was a scrupuluus if not a servile copyist. He was
coldly correct and the greater plagiary. In the chamber of painters at
Florence are the portraits of Mengs and Reynolds by themselves, strongly
characterised by the dignified but sullen air of the one, and the universal in
telligence and liberality of the other.









the faults of his predecessors. He is blamed for stiffnefs, and
aridity in his outlines, sor little taste or grandeur in his
expression, for ignorance of the costume, of ærial per-
spective, and of gradation of colours; but he had studied
lineal perspective, architecture, and fortification.
John Holbein, nearly cotemporary with Albert Durer,
painted in oil and water-colours. He excelled chiesly in
history, and in portrait painting. His colours are fresni
and brilliant, and his works highly finishied; but in his
historical subjects, his draperies are not in so good a taste as
those of Albert Durer.
The Flemish school is recommended to the lovers of the
art by the discovery, or at least the first practice of oil
painting. It has been generally attributed to John Van
Eyck, who was accustomed to varnisn his distemper pictures
with a composition of oils, which was pleasing, on account
of the lustre it gave them. In the course of his practice
he came to mix his colours with oil, instead of water,
which he found rendered them brilliant without the trouble
of varnishing. From this and subsequent experiments,
arose the art of painting in oils, of which wonderful dis-
covery Van Mandes gives à very particular account; but
the truth of it is now very much questioned; and it is even
proved that this method of painting was discovered long
besore the time of Jolin Van Eyck. It is admitted that
Joln and his brother Eubert, were the sirst who brought it
into general practice, by shewing the excellence of which it
was susceptible; their own paintings having acquired, all
over Europe, great reputation for the softnefs and delicaey
of their colours. The attention of the Italian painters was
soon excited; and Antonio de Massina persormed à journey
into Flanders sor the express purpose of acquiring the con¬
sidence of John Van Eyck, and of discovering the secret.







John of Bruges was the sounder of painting as a profeffion
in Flanders. Peter Paul Rubens was the founder of
the art. This extraordinary person produced an im-
mense number of works. He excelled equally in historical,
ortrait, and landskape painting; in fruits, flowers, and in
animals. He invented, and executed with the greatest
facility. The works of Rubens were destitute of that soft
inspiration, productive of sweet and pleasant effects so con¬
spicuous in the works of Raphael; but he possessed that
prightlinefs of genius and strength of mind, which are
ever ready to burst forth in wonderful and astonishing
effects. His figures appear to be the exact counterpart of
his conceptions, and their creation nothing more than a
simple act of the will. His chief merit consists in colour-
ing; though in this branch of the art he has not equalled
Titian. He is the first among painters eminent for pomp
and majesty; the first among those who spedk to the eye ;
and the power of the art is often by him carried almost to
enchantment.
Rubens (says Sir Joshiua Reynolds) is a remarkable in¬
stance of the same mind, being seen in all the various parts
of the art. The whole is so much of a piece, that one can
fcarce be brought to believe but that if any one of them had
been more correct and perfect, his works would not be so
compleat as they appear. If we should allow a greater
urity and correctuess of drawing, his want of simplicity in
composition, colouring, and drapery, would appear more grofs.
The Flemisn school, of which Rubens is the greatest
master, is remarkable for great brilliancy of colours, and
the magie of the claro obscuro. To these may be joined a
prosound design, which is yet not founded on the most
beautiful forms; a composition possessed of grandeur, a
certain air of noblenefs in the figures, strong and natural
exprefsions; in short, a kind of national beauty, which is






neither copied from the ancients, nor from the Roman or
Lombard schools; but which deserves to please, and is
capable of pleasing.
To speak in general terms, and without regarding a great
number of exceptions, the Dutch school carries none of the
above qualities to great perfection, except that of colouring.
Far from excelling in the beauty of heads and forms, they
seem to delight in the exact imitation of the lowest and most
ignoble. Their subjects are derived from the tavern, the
smith’s shop, and from the vulgar amusements of the rudest
peasants. The exprefsions are sufficiently marked; but it
is the expression of passions which debase instead of ennobling
human nature.
It must be acknowledged, at the same time, that the
Dutch painters have succeeded in several branches of the
art. If they have chosen low objects of imitation, they
have represented them with great exactness; and truth must
always please. If they have not succeeded in the most
difficult parts of the claro obscuro, they, at least, excel in
the most striking, such as is in light confined in a narrow
space, night illuminated by the moon, or by torches, and
the light of a smith’s sorge. The Dutch understand the
gradations of colours. They have no rivals in landskape
painting, considered as the faithful representation of a
particular scene; but they are far from equalling Titian,
Poussin, Claude Lorrain, &c. who have carried to the
greatest perfection the ideal landskape; and whose pictures,
instead of being the topographical representation of certain
places, are the combined result of every thing beautiful in
their imagination or in nature. The Dutch distinguisn
In so great estimation are some of the landskapes by this master, that
two pictures, known by the name of the Altiere Claudes, (from their having
been long in the Altiere palace at Rome) were lately purchased by Mr.
Beckford, for the almost incredible sum of zooo guineas.




themselves by their perspective, by their clouds, sea scenes,
animals, fruits, slowers, and infects; and they excel in
miniature painting: in short, every thing which requires a
faithful imitation, colour, and à nice pencil, is well exe-
cuted by the Dutch painters.
Holland has also produced history painters, as Octavius
Van Been, and Vander Hilst, the rival of Vandyke; but
it is not in the works of these artists that we find the
character of the Dutch school.
Neither is the origin of their style to be derived from the
the works of Lucas of Leyden; though from the time he
flourished, viz. about the end of the fifteenth century, he
may be considered as the patriarch of the Dutch school.
Lucas painted in oil, in water-colours, and on glass; and the
kinds of his painting were history, landfkape, and portrait.
If miniature painting be considered as a character of the
Dutch school, Cornelius Polembourg may be regarded as
the father of it. He possessed the colour, delicacy of touch,
and disposition of the claro obscuro, which chiesly distin-
guish this school; and if any thing is to be added, it is
want of correctness in his design.
But, if the choice of low figures is its chief characteristic,
this is to be found in the greatest perfection in the works of
the celebrated Rembrandt Vanryn; and it is the more
offensive in this artist, as his compositions frequently re-
quired an opposite choice of figures. As his father was a
miller, near Leyden, his education must altogether have
depended on the exertion of great talents, and the study of
nature. He studied the grotesque figure of a Dutch peasant,
or the servant of an inn, with as much application as the
greatest masters of Italy would have studied the Apollo of
Belvidere, or the Venus de Medicis. This was not the
manner of elevating himself to the noble conceptions of







Raphael; but it was acquiring the imitation of truth in
vulgar painting.
Rembrandt (says Mr. Descamps) may be compared to the
great artists for colour, delicacy of touch, and claro obscuro.
He delighted in great oppositions of light and shade; and
he seems to be chiesly attentive to this branch of the art.
His workshop was occasionally made dark, and he received
the light by a hole, which fell as he chose to direct it on
the place which he desired to be enlightened. His painting
is à kind of magie: no artist knew better the effects of
different colours mingled together, nor could better distin-
guisn those which did not agree from those which did.
He placed every tone in its situation with so much exactness
and harmony, that he needed not to mix them, and so
destroy what may be called the slower and fresnness of the
colours.
Such is the power of genius, that Rembrandt, with all
his faults, and they are enormous, is placed among the
greatest artists by Mr. Descamps, who had attentively exa-
mined his works, and was himself an artist. 
John de Laer, a miniature painter, and who made
choice of his subjects from common life, deserves à distin-
guished place in the Dutch school. He painted hunting-
scenes, the attacks of robbers, public festivals, landikapes,
and sea views. He had a correct design, and employed
vigorous and lively colouring.
Van-Ostade, although born at Lubeck, Gerrard Dow,
Metzu, Miris, Wouvermans, Berghem, and the celebrated
painter of slowers Van Huysum, belong to the Dutch
school.
The greater part of the schools of which we have treated
have no longer any existence. Italy alone had four schools,
and there only remain at present à very sew Italian













artists known to foreigners. The school of Rubens is
in vain sought for in Flanders. If the Dutch school still
exists, it is not known beyond the precincts of Holland.
Mengs, a German artist, has rendered himself famous in
our days; but it was in Italy that he chiefly improved
his talents, and exercised his art. M. Dietrich, another
German, has made himself known to strangers: but two
solitary artists do not form a school.

The Englisn school has been formed in our own times.
It is connected with the Royal Academy in London, insti-
tuted in 1766: but although as a school it did not exist before
that time, yet ever since the revival of the arts, and the
consequent encouragement given to them by the fovereigns
of Europe, England has possessed portrait painters of
ability; and perhaps it has been owing only to the re-
markable partiality of the nation for this branch of the
art, that the more noble one of history painting has been
neglected.
Hans Holbein is ranked by Du Piles among the German
painters ; yet he painted his most celebrated works in
England. He was the first painter of eminence encouraged
by Henry the Eighth, who, excited by the fame which his
cotemporaries Francis 1. and Charles V. had gained as pa¬
trons of the arts, employed him, and invited Titian to Eng-
land; but merely as a portrait painter--whether the reward
offered was not thought adequate to his merit, or for
some other cause, perhaps the knowledge that his talents
for historical design would be depreciated ; he firmly re-
jected the overture. The public works of Holbein, in
England, are four only, as enumerated by Mr. Walpole,
which are rather groups of portraits than history.






Nothing could be more unsavourable to female beauty
than the dress of those times: Holbein’s men are there-
fore much more characteristic than his ladies; even his
Anna Bulleyne is deficient in loveliness, as he pourtrayed
her. In his likeness of Anne, of Cleves, he is said to
have sacrificed truth to slattery; yet the original, which is
in the possession of Mr. Barret, of Lee, in Kent, is below
mediocrity. There are, in his Majesty’s collection, a
feries of portraits of persons of quality in the reign of
Henry the Eighth, sketched upon paper, with crayons,
probably taken al a single sitting. They have lately been
engraved by Bartolozzi, with all the strength and spirit of
the originals.
Holbein was as celebrated in miniature as in oil colours.
He made a great number of designs for engravers, sculp-
tors, and jewellers. He died at his residence at White-
hall, in those lodgings which were afterwards the paper-
offices.
The fame of lsaac Oliver, who flourished about the latter
end of the reign of Elizabeth, as a miniature painter, is
well known:he received some instructions from Fre-
derico Zucchero, who was in England at that time, where,
among other portraits, he painted that of the unfortunate
Mary, Queen of Scots. Oliver drew well, and made some
admirable copies from the Italian masters. Greatly as lsaac
was celebrated, he was afterwards exceeded by his son
Peter, who drew portraits of King James the First, Prince
Henry, Prince Charles, and most of the court.
About this period, Cornelius Janson, a fkilful portrait
painter, came to England from Amsterdam, and painted
the king and many of the nobility ; but his merits being
eclipsed by Vandyke, of whom he was jealous, and the
civil war breaking out, he fled from England. Cornelius
Janson was remarkable for high finisning in his draperies;










many of which are black, which seems to. add roundness,
relief, and spirit, to his figures and carnations. He is said
to have used ultra marine in the black colours, as well as
in the carnations, to which may be attributed their lustre
even at this day. The Duke of Beaufort has a capital
portrait of Janson by himself; but one of his best perform-
ances is the Rushiout family, at Northwick, in Worcester-
shire.
Daniel Mytens was a popular painter in the reign of
James, and Charles l—He had studied under Rubens, and
was for some time principal painter to Chadles, but was
deprived of his place when Vandyke arrived in England.
Charles, however, continued his pension during lise.
Vandyke had his first instructions from Vaubalen,
of Antwerp; but he soon found in Rubens a master
every way more suited to direct his genius, and to ma¬
ture that consummate taste which he very early showed
marks of possessing. Under the instructions of Rubens, he
acquired such sxill in his art, that the portrait of his master’s
wife, which he painted whilst he was yet his disciple, is
esteemed one of the best pictures in the Low Countries.
He painted for his master two admirable pieces, one repre-
senting Christ seized in the garden, and the other the
crowning him with thorns. When he left Rubens, he
travelled into Italy ; and on his return, having established
his reputation as one of the first painters of the age, he
was invited to England, where he was knighted by
Charles 1. and married one of the handsomest ladies of
the court, the daughter of Lord Ruthven, Earl of Gowry.
Towards the latter end of his lise he went to France, in
hopes of being employed in the great gallery of the Louvre ;
but not succeeding, he returned to England, and proposed
to the king to make cartoons for the banqueting-house at
Whitehall; but his demand of Z. So,ooo being judged







unreasonable, whilst the king was treating with him for a
less sum, the gout, and other distempers, put an end to his
lise.
Dobson had merited from Charles I. the title of the
English Tintoret, besore his premature death, in 1646, at
the age of only thirty-six years. He was the father of the
English school of portrait painting; and though sometimes
unequal, had much the manner of his master Vandyke.
He resided much at Oxford, and left there the portraits of
himself and wife, and of Sir Tradescant and his friend
Zythepsa the Quaker, in the staircase of the Ashmolean
Museum. Dobson sometimes painted history. His decolla-
tion of St. John, at Wilton, and the astronomer and his
family at Blenheim, are amongst those which are most
known and admired.
Lely was in the former part of his life à landskape
painter, but was induced to practice portrait painting,
perhaps from the reputation and emolument which its pro¬
fessors obtained in England. Lely was chiefly celebrated
for painting females; and it is sometimes objected to him,
that his faces have too great à fimilarity of expreffion.
The languishing air, the drowsy sweetness peculiar to him-
self, and
e The sleepy eye that spoke the melting soul 
is found in nearly all the pictures of females by this painter.
His crayon drawings are admirable. He drew the por-
trait of Charles 1. when a prisoner at Hampton-Court.
Charles I1. Knighted him, and made him his principal
Kneller was the fafhiionable artist in the reigns of James II.
and William :among an infinity of portraits, there are
some which bear the marks of excellence. Dr. Wallis,
the mathematician, and Lord Crew, both for colouring and
exprefsion, are in a great style. The latter was admired






by Sir Joshiua Reynolds sor the air of nobility it possesses.
Kneller is said to have drawn ten crowned heads, viz. four
kings of England, and three queens; the Czar of Muscovy,
the Emperor Charles, and Louis XIV. Notwithstanding
the negligence which is manisest in most of his works,
which arose from the desire of gain, his genius is very
apparent. In his lise-time he received the praise of his
contemporaries ; but the connoisseurs of the prefent age by
no means allow that the praises of Pope were merited ;
speaking of Kneller he says-
ee Whose art was nature, and whose pictures thought. 
But hoiv sew of them deserve the compliment !
Thornhill painted several great works : his fresco paint-
ings in the dome of St. Paul’s, and the painted hall at
Greenwich, are too well known to need deseribing. His
copies of the cartoons of Raphael, which were purchased
in 1800, for 450 guineas, have been presented to the Royal
Academy by the Duke of Bedford. Richardson was a
portrait painter of eminence : to his Treatise on Painting,
we are indebted for the greatest ornament to the art; Sir
Joshua Reynolds sixed the destination of his mind on the
prosession, occasioned by the accidental reading of that work.
Pope praised Jervais, but without discernment. Those
beauties which were to ee bloom in his colours for a thousand
years,’ are now faded and unnoticed. Hudson was the
best pupil of Richardson. The merit of Sir Joshiua Rey-
nolds, as a portrait painter, cannot be attributed to Hudson’s
instructions, since his manner seems entirely his own. Sir
Joshiua was born at Plimpton, in Devonshire, in the year
1723: his relations still preserve some frontispieces to the
lives of Plutarch, as specimens of his early predilection for
his art, and tlie promise he gave of becoming eminent
in it. He became pupil to Hudson about 1742; who, amonstg








other advice he gave him, recommended him to copy
Guerchino’s drawings, which he did, with such still, that
many of them are preserved in the cabinets of collectors,
as the original of that master. About the year 1750, he
went to Rome to prosecute his studies, where he remained
nearly two years, and employed himself rather in making
studies from, than copying the works of the great painters :
he amused himself with painting caricatures, particularly
one of all the Englisn then at Rome, in the disserent
attitudes of Raphael’s celebrated school of Athens. On his
return he resided in Newport-street, but shortly after re-
moved to Leicester-fields, where he continued till the time
of his death.
An ingenious critic thus delineates Sir Joshua’s
professional character: e Sir Joshua Reynolds was, most
assuredly, the best portrait painter that this age has pro-
duced: he possessed something original in his manner,
which distinguished him from those painters who preceded
him. His colouring was excellent; and his distribution of
light and shadow so generally judicious and varied, that it
most clearly shewed that it was not a mere trick of practice,
but the result of principle. In history painting, his abilities
were very respectable; and his invention and judgment
were sufficient to have enabled him to have made à very
distinguished figure in that very arduous branch of his
profession, if the exclusive taste of his country for portraits
had not discouraged him from cultivating à talent so very
unproductive and neglected. His drawing, though incor-
rect, had always something of grandeur in it.1'
To his own pictures might well be applied what he used
to say respecting those of Rubens: ee They resemble,
said he, et a well-chosen nosegay, in which, though the
coloure are splendid and vivid, they are never glaring or







oppressive to. the eye. Sir Joshua was a great experiment-
alist with respect to the composition of his colours: at first
he used preparations from vegetables, which he relin-
quissied for minerals: he is known to have purchased
pictures by Titian, or his scholars, and to have scraped off
the several layers of colouring in order to ascertain it, and
discover his secret.
The Englisn school of painting must acknowledge Sir
Joshiua Reynolds as its great founder, under Royal auspices,
in the establishment of the Academy. The pure precepts
which he laid down in his annual orations, were exempli¬
fied in his own works: his most favourite paintings are :
I. Garrick between Tragedy and Comedy, 2. The
Ugolino in prison, in which he has imitated Michael
Angelo in his te terribil via,  as it is called by Augustino
Caracei, in his fonnet on painting. It is Sir Joshua’s
triumph in the art. 3. The Nativity. 4. The Infant
Hercules. 5. The Death of Cardinal Beaufort, in which
are united the local colouring of Titian, with the chiaro
feuro of Rembrandt. 6. Mrs. Siddons. 7. Mrs. Billington.
8. Robin Goodfellow. 9. Cimon and Iphigene. 10. Holy
Family, which displays a norel and beautiful manner of
treating that very frequent sulject.
To speak generally of the Englisn school, their colouring
is less glaring than that of the Flemisn or Venetian masters.
Their talents are more admirable in portrait than history,
particularly in those of females. Examine (says a French
writer) a picture of a French woman, painted by an artist
of that nation, and you will generally find, in place of ex-
pression, a foreed grin, in which the eyes and forehead do
not partake, and which indicates no affection of the soul. Ex-
amine the picture of an English woman done by one of their
painters, and you observe an elegant and simple expression,








which makes you at once acquainted with the person re-
presented.
Perhaps it might be difficult to assign to the English
school, as exhibited in the Royal Academy, any perfect
discrimination ; as each painter, either implicitly follows
his own genius, or attaches himself to that particular
manner of the foreign schools which approaches nearest to
his own ideas of excellence: but there are other exhibitions
in which the best painters of the age have exerted a fuccess-
ful competition. Alderman Boydell’s Shakespeare Gallery;
Macklin’s Gallery of Subjects, taken from the English
poets ; Boyer’s Gallery of those illustrative of Englisn
History; and Fuseli’s, from Milton, all by his own pencil,
are very honourable testimonies of the spirit of private
individuals in the cause of the arts.
Mr. Fuseli’s boundless imagination has attempted, with
surprising effect, to embody several metaphysical ideas
which occur in the Paradise Lost. He has gained a free
and uncontrouled admission into the richest regions of
fancy ; but appears not to be solicitous about how sew of his
spectators can partially follow him there, or how many are
totally excluded. The excellence of the present president
of the Royal Academy (Mr. West), in historical and scrip-
tural subjects, is universally allowed. The institution of
the Order of the Garter is his grand work, both for com¬
position, correctness, and finishing. His Death of the
Stag; the Battles of La Hogue and the Boyne; and his
Death of General Wolse, are all in an excellent style of
composition : the latter is esteemed by an eminent critic, a
perfect model of historical composition; as the pictures by
Barry, late professor of painting in the Royal Academy,
(in the rooms of the society for the Encouragement of the
Arts), are of the poetic style.














In the course of the last twenty years, some of the most
able artists this country ever produced, have flourished and
died. The great landskape painters of Italy have scarcely
exceeded the Smiths of Chichester, Gainsborough, and
Wilson, in truth and nature, and the accuracy of their
native scenery. It would be injustice not to mention
Wilson’s pictures of Niobe, Phaeton, and Cicero at his
Villa; which last rivals even Claude himself.
Mortimer, who died prematurely, in the freedom of his
pencil, and the savage air of his banditti, his favourite
subject, approached nearly to the boldest efforts of Salvator
Rosa.
We rarely have met with an artist who was not admirer
of some particular school, or attached to some favourite
manner. The difficulties they find in the practice of their
art tie them down to the mechanic, whilst self-love and va-
nity lead them into an admiratien of those strokes of the
pencil, which come nearest to their own.
Of living artists we decline speaking, with the exception
of those whose eminence, as men of genius, has placed
them beyond competition. In the works of Northcote,
Opie and Lawrencer we hail the continuance of an Englisn
school, and the happy application of those classical precepts
which its founder, Sir Joshiua Reynolds, delivered with so
much dignity and effect. The principles of the art are
exemplified in their works; and genius, so directed, will
reach a degree of perfection of which the modern schools
painting in Europe will aspire to with unsuccessful emu¬
lation.
Lawrence’s colossal figure of Satan and Beelzebub, from Milton, noW
the Duke of Norsolk’s :- Mr. Kemble in Coriolanus, Sir Richard Worsley’s :
and as Rolla in Pizarro, have gained him unanimous admiration.








DESIGN.
IN painting, a good taste, and correctness of design, are
so necessary, that a painter who wants them must not hope
to attract esteem. Design being the foundation of all the
other parts, its elegance and correctness are no less neces-
sary in painting, than purity of language is in eloquence.
We are told by Pliny, that all the statues before the
time of Daedalus, were represented stiff and motionless,
with the feet closed, and arms hanging in right lines to
their sides; or they had only the head finished; the body,
arms, and legs not being expressed. These were the rude
essays of design.
In the progrefs of the art, and in abler hands, motion
was fashiioned into grace, and life was heightened into
character: beauty of form was no longer confined to mere
imitation, which always falls short of the object imitated ;
to make the copy equal in its effect, it was necessary to give
it an advantage over its model: the artists, therefore,
observing that nature was sparing of her perfections, and
that her efforts were limited to parts, availed themselves of
her inequalities, and drawing those scattered beauties inte
a more happy and compleat union, rose from an im¬
perfect imitation, to a perfect ideal beauty. We are in-
formed, that the painters of Greece, pressed in crowds to
design the bosom and breast of Thais; nor were the elegant
proportions of Phryne less the object of their study: by
this constant contemplation of the beautisul, they enriched
their imagination, and confirmed their taste; from this fund
they drew their systems of beauty; and though we should
consider them but as imitators of the parts, we must allow
them to have been the inventors in the compositions.







Should we doubt the justice of the preference given to
invented beauty, over the real, we need only contemplate
the fine proportions, and the style of drawing in the
Laocoon and Gladiator, and mark the expressive energy of
Apollo, and the elegant beauties of the Venus de Medicis.
These are the utmost efforts of design ; it can reach no
farther than a full exertion of grace, beauty, and character.
The design of the ancients is distinguishied by an union
of proportions, a fimplicity of contour, and excellence of
character.
There is no one excellence of design from which we
derive such immediate pleasure, as from gracefulness of
action: if we observe the attitudes and movements of the
Greek statues, we shall mark that careless decency, and
unassected grace, which ever attend the motions of men
unconscious of observation.
Raphael has been wonderfully happy in imitating this
simple elegance of the antique; the most courtly imagin-
ation cannot represent to itself an image of more winning
grace than is to be seen in his Sancta Cæcilia. Indeed, an
elegant simplicity is the characteristie of his design; we no
where meet in him the affected contrasts of Michael
Angelo, or the studied attitudes of Guido.
The design of Raphael was, in its beginning, dry, but
correct ; he enlarged it much on seeing the drawings of
Michael Angelo : of too just an eye to give intirely into
the excesses of his model, he struck out a middle style,
which, however, was not so happily blended as quite
to throw off the inssuence of the extremes: hence, in the
great he is apt to swell into the charged ; in the delicate
to drop into the little : his design, notwithstanding, is
beautisul; but never arrived to that persection which we
discover in the Greek statues.







He is excellent in the characters of philosopliers, apostles,
and the like; but the figures of his women have not that
elegance which is distinguisned in the Venus di Medicis,
of the daughter of Niobe; in these, his convex contours
have à certain heaviness, by which, in seeking to avoid,
he falls into a dryness still less pardonable. His proportions
are esteemed excellent, yet not having formed his manner
on the most beautiful antique, we do not see in him that
elegant symmetry, that freedom in the joints which lend all
their motion to the Laocoon and Gladiatorl instead of
these, the figures of Michael Angelo were his models in
the great style ; whence, having quitted the lines of nature,
and not having substituted ideal beauty, he became too like
his original, as may be seen in his Incendio di Borgo.
Would we therefore place Raphael in his true point of
view, we must observe him in the middle age; in old men,
or in the nervous nature : in his Madonna’s, he knew how
to choose, as likewise how to vary the most beautiful parts
of nature; but he knew not how to express a beauty
superior to the natural.
Thus in his Galatea, where he has attempted a cha-
racter of perfect beauty, he has fallen short of the beauty of
his Madonna’s: the cause of this seems to be, that he
drew the former after his own ideas, which were im
perfect: in the latter he copied beautiful nature, which
was almost perfect : à second observation will confirm this
opinion ; of all the objects of painting, Angels call moft
for ideal beauty; and those of Raphael are by no meant
distinguished in this particular.
One of the greatest excellences of design is grace. Cor-
regio in this is inimitable. His constant aim was grace,
and a happy effect of light and shade. A waving and
varied contour was necessary to this end: hence he studi






oussy avoided right lines, and acute angles as too simple in
their effects. Thus the habit and necessity of continually
varying his outline, threw him into little errors in draw-
ing, which spring not from an ignorance of this branch
of his art, but from a predilection for another; and there
are few who would wishi those inadvertences away, accom-
panied with the charms which gave occasion to them.
We may affirm of hiis design where it is not sacrificed to
his more favorite aims, that it is often masterly, and always
pleasing ; a quality rarely to be met with in those servile
painters, who think they have attained every persection,
if they keep within the rules of drawing (such painters,
says Quintilian) while they think it sufficient to be free
from faults, fall into that capital fault, the want of beauties.
We shall close this article with an account of the Apollo
Belvidere, and the celebrated Groupe of Laocoon, so long
the pride of Rome, but removed to Paris during its ravages
by the French republicans, as described by the late Abbe
Winckleman :
THE APOLLO BELVIDERE.
et Of all the productions of art, which have escaped the
ravages of time, the Statue of Apollo Belvedere is unques-
tionably the most sublime. The artist founded this work
upon imagination, and has only employed substance for the
purpose of realizing his ideas. As much as the descriptions
which Homer has given of Apollo are superior to those
given of him by other Poets, in the same degree is this
statue superior to any other statues of that deity. Its stature
is above that of man, and its attitude breathes majesty. An
eternal spring, such as reigns in the delightful fields of
Elysium, clothes with youth the manly charms of his body,









and gives a brilliancy to the animated structure of his
limbs.
 Endeavour to penetrate into the regions of incorporeal
beauty ; try to become the creator of a celestial nature, in
order to elevate your soul to the contemplation of super-
natural beauties; for here there is nothing mortal: neither
thie veins nor sinews are too conspicuous ; a kind of celestiai
spirit animates the whole figure. The God has pursued
Python, against whom he has, for the first time, bent his
dreadful bow: in his rapid course he has overtaken him,
and given him a mortal blow. In the height of his joy,
his august features denote more than victory. Disdain is
seated on his lips, and the indignation which he breathes
distends his nostrils, and affects his eye-brows; but still
his forehead expresses serenity, and he is all full of sweet-
ness as if he were surrounded by the Muses, eager to caress
him.
Among all the figures of Jupiter which we possess, you
will not see one in which the Father of the Gods displays
so much of that majesty described by the poets, as does this
statue of his son. The peculiar beauties of all the other
gods are united in this figure, in the same manner as in
the divine Pandora. The forehead is the forehead of
Jupiter, impregnated with the Goddess of Wisdom; his
eye-brows, by their movement, declare their wishies; his
eyes in their celestial orbits, are the eyes of the Queen of
the Goddesses; and the mouth is that which inspired the
beautiful Bacchus with voluptuousness. Like the tender
branches of the vine, his sine hairs play about as if they
were slightly ruffled by the breath of zephyrs; they seemed
erfumed with celestial essence, and negligently tied by the
hands of the Graces.
 On seeing this prodogy of art, l forgot the whole uni¬
verse; I placed myself in a more noble attitude to contem














plate it with dignity. From admiration I passed to extacy;
silled with respect, I felt my breast agitated like those who
are inspired with the spirit of prophecy.
et I felt myself transported to Delas and the sacred woods
of Lycia, places which Apollo honoured with his presence ;
for the beauty which was before my eyes appeared to be
animated, as was formerly the beautiful statue produced by
the chizel of Pygmalion. How can l describe you, oh,
inimitable chef d’auvrel Art itself must inspire me and guide
my pen.
ee The outlines which I have traced I lay at your seet ;
so those who cannot reach to the head of the deity they
adore, place at his feet the garlands with which they wishi
to crown him. 
THE GROUPE OF LAOCOON.
ee Laocoon prefents to us a picture of the deepest distrefs,
under the representation of a man, contending with all his
powers in his own defence, while his muscles and sinews are
dilated and contracted by agony; vou may still perceive the
vigour of his mind expressed on his wrinkled forehead. His
breast oppressed with restrained respiration, seems to contend
against the pain with which it is agitated.
ee The groans which he restrains, and his breath which
he holds in, seei to exhaust the lower part of his body, and
the loins, by being drawn in, seem to discover his very
entrails. Nevertheless, his own sufferings seem to affect
him less than those of his children, who look up to him as
if imploring his succour. Compassion, like a dark vapour,
overshadows his eyes. His physiognomy denotes complaint,
his eyes are directed towards heaven, imploring assistance.
His mouth bespeaks languor, and his lower lip is fallen.
Agony, mixed with indignation at his unjust punishment,
is displayed in all his features.







 The contest between pain and resistance is displayed
with the greatest sxill ; for while the former draws up the
eye-brows, the latter compresses the flesn over the eyes,
and makes it descend over the upper eye-lids. The subject
not allowing the artist to embellisn nature, he has exerted
himself to display contention and vigour. In those places
where there is the greatest agony, there is also great beauty.
The left side, on which the furious serpent makes its
attack, seems to be in the greatest pain from its proximity
to the heart. This part of the body may be called a
prodigy of art. Laocoon wishies to raise his legs in order to
escape. No part of the figure is in repose. The very
flesn, by the skill of the artist, has the appearance of being
benumbed.

Of COLOURING.
COLOURING, though a subject greatly inferior to many
others which the painter must study, is yet of sufficient
importance to employ a considerable share of his attention;
and to excel in it, he must be well acquainted with that
part of optics which has the nature of light and colours for
its object. Light, however simple and uncompounded it may
appéar, is nevertheless made up, as it were, of several
distinct substances; and the number, and even dose, of
these ingredients, has been happily discovered by the
moderns. Every undivided ray, let it be ever so fine, is a
little bundle of red, orange, yellow, green, azure, indigo,
and violet rays, which, while combined, are not to be
distinguished one from another, and form that kind of










light, called white; so that white is not a colour perse, as
the learned De Vinci (so far, it feems, the precursor of
Newton) expressly affirms, but an assemblage of colours.
Now, these colours, which compose light, although immu¬
table in themselves, and endued with various qualities, are
continually, however, separating from each other in their
reflection from, and passage through other substances, and
thus become manifest to the eye. Grafs, for example,
reflects only green rays, or rather reflects green rays in
greater number than it does those of any other colour; one
kind of wine transmits red rays, and another yellowish
rays; and from this kind of separation arises that variety of
colours with which nature has diversified her various pro-
ductions.. Man, too, has contrived to separate the rays of
light by making a portion of the sun’s beams pafs through
a glass prism; for after passing through it, they appear
divided into seven pure and primitive colours, placed in
succession one by the other, like so many colours on a
painter’s pallet.
Now, though Titian, Corregio, and Vandyke, have
been excellent colourists, without knowing any thing of
tliese phyfical subtleties, that is no reason why others should
neglect them. For it cannot but be of great service to a
painter to be well acquainted with the nature of what he
is to imitate, and of those colours with which he is to give
life and perfection to his designs; not to speak of the plea¬
sure there is in being able to account truly and solidly for
the various effects and appearances of light. From a due
tempering, for example, and graduating, of the tints in a
picture ; from making colours partake of each other, ac-
cording to the reflection of light from one object to ano¬
ther ; there arises, in some measure, that sublime harmony
which may be considered as the true music of the eye :
and this harmony has its foundation in the genuine prin-










ciples of opties. Now this could not happen in the system
os those philosophers, who held, that colours did not ori-
ginally exist in light, but were, on the contrary, nothing
else than so many modifications which it underwent in
being reflected from other substances, or in passing through
them; thus subject to alterations without end, and every
moment liable to perish. Were that the case, bodies
could no more receive any hues one from another, nor
this body partake of the colour of that, than scarlet, for
example ; because it has the power of changing into red
all the rays of the sun or sky which immediately sall
upon it, has the power of changing into red all the other
rays reflected to it from a blue or any other colour in
its neighbourhood ; whereas, allowing that colours are in
their own nature imiutable one into another, and that
every body reflects, more or less, every sort of coloured
rays, though those rays in the greatest number which
are of the colour it exhibits, there must necessarily arise, in
colours placed near one another, certain particular hues or
temperaments of colour: nay, this influence of one colour
upon another may be so far traced, that three or you bodies
of different colours, and likewise the intenseness of the light
falling upon each, being assigned, we may easily determine
in what situations, and how much they would tinge each
other. We may thus, too, by the same principle of optics,
account for several other things practised by painters, inso-
much that a person, who has carefully observed natural
effects with an eye directed by solid learning, shall be able
to form general rules, where another can only distinguish
particular cases.
But after all, the pictures of the best colourists are, it is
universally allowed, the books in which a young painter
must chiefly look for the rules of colouring; that is, of that
branch of painting which contributes so much to express











the beauty of objects, and is so requisite to represent them
as what they really are. Giorgio and Titian seem to have
discovered circumstances in nature which others have
entirely overlooked; and the last in particular has been
happy enough to express them with a pencil as delicate as
his eye was quick and piercing. In his works we behold
that sweetnefs of colouring which is produced by union ;
that beauty which is consistent with truth; and all the in-
sensible transmutations, all the soft transitions, in a word,
all the pleasing modulations of tints and colours. When a
young painter has, by close application, acquired from
Titian, whom he can never sufficiently dwell upon, that
art which, of all painters, he has best contrived to hide,
he would do well to turn to Bassano and Paolo, on account
of the beauty, boldnefs, and elegance of their touches.
That richnefs, softness, and freshness of colouring, for
which the Lombard school is so justly cried up, may like-
wise be of great service to him; nor will he reap less
benefit by studying the principles and practice of the Fle-
missi school, which, chiesly by means of her varnishes, has
contrived to give a most enchanting lustre and transparency
to her colours.
But whatever pictures a young painter may choose to
study the art of colouring upon, he must take great care
that they are well preserved. There are very sew pieces
which have not suffered more or less by the length, not to
say the injuries, of time; and perhaps that precious patina,
which years alone can impart to paintings, is in some mea-
fure akin to that other kind which ages alone impart to
medals; inasmuch as, by giving testimony to their anti¬
quity, it renders them proportionably beautisul in the super-
stitious eyes of the learned. It must, indeed, be allowed,
that if on the one band, this patina bestows, as it really
does, an extraordinary degree of harmony upon the colours












of a picture, and destroys, or at least greatly lessens, their
original rawness, it, on the other hand, equally impairs the
freshiness and lise of them. A piece seen many years aster
it has been painted, appears much as it would do, imme¬
diately after painting, behind a dull glass. It is no idle
opinion, that Paolo Veronese, attentive above all things to
the beauty of his colours, and what is called strepiro, left
entirely to time the care of harmonizing them perfectly,
and, (as we may say) mellowing them. But most of the old
masters took that task upon themselves; and never exposed
their works to the eyes of the public, until they had ripened
and finished them with their own hands. And who can
say whether the Christ of Moneta, or the Nativity of Bassano,
have been more improved or injured (if we may so speak)
by the touchings and re-touchings of time, in the course of
more than two centuries ? It is indeed impossible to be
determined: but the studious pupil may make himself
ample amends for any injuries which his originals may
have received from the hands of time, by turning to truth,
and to Nature which never grows old, but constantly retains
its primitive slower of youth, and was itself the model of the
models before him. As soon, therefore, as a young painter
has laid a proper foundation for good colouring, by study-
ing the best masters, he should turn all his thoughts to truth
and nature. And it would perhaps be well worth while to
have, in the academies of painting, models for colouring as
well as designing ; that as from the one the pupils learn to
give their due proportion to the several members and mus¬
cles, they may learn from the other to make their carnations
rich and warm, and faithfully copy the different local hues
which appear quite distinct in the different parts of a fine
bodv. To illustrate still farther the use of such a model,
let us suppose it placed in different lights; now in that of
the sun, now in that of the sky, and now again in that of a






lamp or candle; one time placed in the shade, and another
in a reflected light: hence the pupil may learn all the disserent
efsects of the complection in different circumstances, whe-
ther the livid, the lucid, or transparent; and, above all,
that variety of tints and half tints, occasioned in the colour
of the skin by the epidermis having the bones immediately
under it in some places, and in others a greater or less
number of blood-vessels or quantity of fat. An artist who
had long studied such a model, would run no risk of de¬
grading the beauties of nature by any particularity of stile,
or of giving into that preposterous fulness and floridness of
colour which is at present so much the taste. He would
not feed his figures with roses, as an ancient painter of
Greece shrewdly expressed it, but with good beef; a differ-
ence which the learned eye of a modern writer could per-
ceive between the colouring of Barocci and that of Titian.
To practise in that manner, is, according to a great master,
no better than inuring one’s self to the commission of
blunders. What statues are in design, nature is in colour
ing; the fountain head of that perfection to which every
artist, ambitious to excel, should constantly aspire : an,
accordingly, the Flemish painters, in consequence of their
aiming solely to copy nature, are in colouring as excellent
as they are wont to be aukward in designing. The best
model for the tone of colours, and the degradation of shades,
is furnishied by means of the cumera-obscura.
We may form a general idea of the various effects of
reflections from the following examples; If a blue be reflected
on a yellow, the latter becomes greenish ; if on a red, the
red becomes purple ; and so on through a variety of combi-
nations. And as the white is of a nature to receive all the
colours, and to be tinged with that of each reflection, the
painter must he caresul how his carnations may be affected
by the several reflections.







Of COMPOSITION.
COMPOSITION, which may be considered as a branch
of invention, consists in the proper stationing of what the
inventive faculty has imagined, so as to exprefs the subject
in the most lively manner. The chief merit of compo¬
sition may be said to consist in that disorder, which, wear-
ing the appearance of mere chance, is, in fact, the most
studied effect of art. A painter, therefore, is equally to
avoid the drynefs of those ancients who always planted
their figures like so many couples in a procefsion, and the
affectation of those moderns who jumble them together as if
they were met merely to fight and squabble. In this branch
Raphael was happy enough to choose the just medium, and
attain perfection. The disposition of his figures is always
exactly such as the subject requires. In the Battle of Con-
stantine, they are confusedly clustered with as much art,
as they are regularly marshalled in Christ’s commitment
of the keys to St. Peter, and constituting him prince of the
apostles.
Let the inferior figures of a piece be placed as they will,
the principal figure should strike the eye most, and stand
out, as it were, from among the rest: this may be effected
various ways, as by placing it on the foremost lines, or in
some other-conspicuous part of the piece ; by exhibiting it,
in a manner, by itself; by making the principal light fall
upon it; by giving it the most resplendent drapery, or, in-
deed, by several of these methods; nay, by all of them toge¬
ther; for beins the hero of the picturesque fable, it is hut
just thatit should draw the eye to itself, and lord it, as it
were, over al the other objects.











According to Leon Batista Alberti, painters should follow
the example of comic writers, who compose their fable of
as few persons as possible : for, in fact, a crowded picture
is apt to give as much pain to the spectator, as a crowded
road to the traveller.
Some subjects, it must be granted, require à number ;
nay, a nation, as it were, of figures. On these occasions,
it depends entirely on the skill of the painter to dispose
of them in such a manner, that the principal ones may
always make the principal appearance, and contrive mat-
ters so, that the piece be not over-crowded, or want conve-
nient rests and pauses : he must, in a word, take care that
his piece be full, but not charged. In this respect, the
Battles of Alexander, by Le Brun, are master-pieces which
can never be sufficiently studied ; whereas nothing, on the
other hand, can be more unhappy than the famous Paradise of
Tintoret, which covers one entire side of the great council¬
chamber at Venice. It appears no bêtter than a confused
heap of figures, a swarm, a cloud, a chaos, which pains
and fatigues the eye. What a pity it is that he did not
dispose this subject aster à model of his own, now in the
gallery of Bevilacqua at Verona l In this last, the several
choirs of martyrs, virgins, bishops, and other saints, are
judicioussy thrown into so many clusters, parted here and
there by à fine sleece of clouds, so as to exhibit the innu¬
merable host of heaven, drawn up in a way that makes a
most agreeable and glorious appearance. There goes a
story, to our purpose, of a celebrated master, who, in a
drawing of the Universal Deluge, the better to express the
immensity of the waters that covered the earth, left a corner
of his paper without figures. Being afked, if he did
not intend to sill it up: No, said he ; do not you see that
my leaving it empty is what precisely constitutes the picture?







The reason for breaking a composition into several groups
is, that the eye passing freely from one object to another,
may the better comprehend the whole. But the painter is
not to stop here ; for these groups are, besides, to be so
artsully put together, as to form rich clusters, give the
whole composition a singular air of grandeur, and afford
the spectator an opportunity of discerning the piece at a
distance, and taking the whole in, as it were, at a single
glance. These effects are greatly promoted by a due regard
to the nature of colours, so as not to place together those
which are apt to pain by their opposition, or distract by
their variety. They should be so judicioussy disposed as
to temper and qualify each other.
A proper use of the chiaro-scuro is likewise of great ser-
vice on this occasion. The groups are easily parted, and
the whole picture acquires a grand effect, by introducing
some strong falls of snade; and, above all, one principal
beam of light. This method has been followed with great
success by Rembrandt in a famous picture of his, represent-
ing the Virgin at the Foot of the Crofs on Mount Calvary;
the principal light darting upon her through a break of the
clouds, while the rest of the figures about her stand more
or less in the shade. Tintoret, too, acquired great repu¬
tation, as well by that brifkness with which he enlivened
bis figures, as by his masterly manner of shading them;
and Polidoro de Caravaggio, though he scarce painted any
thing but basso-relievos, was particularly famous for intro-
ducing with great skill the effects of the chiaro-scuro, a
thing first attempted by Mantegna in his Triumph of Julius
Cæsar. It is by this means that his compositions appear so
strikingly divided into different groups; and, among their
other perfections, afford so much delight through the beau-
tiful disposition that reigns in them.














In like manner, a painter, by the help of perspective,
especially that called ærial, the opposition of local colours,
and other contrivances which he may expect to hit upon by
studying nature, and those who have best studied her before
him, will be able not only to part his groups, hut make
them appear at disserent distances, so as to leave sufficient
passages between them.
But the greatest caution is to be used in the purfuit of
the methods here laid down; especially in the management
of the chiaro-scuro, that the effects attributed to light and
shade, and to their various concomitants, may not run
counter to truth and experience. This is a capital point.
For this purpose, a painter would do well to make, in little
figures, as Tintoret and Poussin used to do, a model of the
subject that he intends to represent, and then illuminate it
by lamp er candle-light. By this means he may come to
know with certainty, if the chiaro-scuro, which he has
formed in his mind, does not clasti with the reason of
things. By varying the height and direction of his light,
he may easily discover such accidental effects as are most
likely to recommend his performance, and so establisn a
proper system for the illuminating it: nor will he after-
wards find it a difficult matter to modisy the quality of his
shades, by softening or strengthening them, according to
the situation of his scene, and the quality of the light
falling upon it. Ifit should happen to be a candle or lamp¬
light scene, he would then have nothing to do but consider
his model well, and faithfully copy it.
In the next place, to turn a groupe elegantly, the best
pattern is that of a bunch of grapes, adopted by Titian; as,
of the many grains that compose a bunch of grapes, someare
struck directly by the light, and those opposite to them are
in the shade, whilst the intermediate ones partake of botli
ight and shade in a greater or less degree ; so, according to






Titian, the figures of a groupe should be so disposed, that,
by the union of the chiaro-scuro, several things may appear
as it were but one thing: and, in fact, it is only from his
having pursued this method, that we can account for the
very grand effect of his pieces this way, in which it is
impossible to study him too much.
The mannerists, who do not follow nature in the track
of the masters just mentioned, are apt to commit many
faults. The reason of their figures casting their snades
in this or that manner, seldom appears in the picture, or at
least does not appear sufficiently probable. They are,
besides, wont to trespass all bounds in splafhiing their pieces
with light, that is, enlivening those parts which we usually
term the deafs of a picture. This method, no doubt, has
sometimes a very sine effect; but it is, however, to be used
with no small discretion, as otherwise the whole loses that
union, that pause, that majestic silence, as Caracci used to
call it, which affords so much pleasure. The eye is not less
hurt by many lights scattered here and there over a picture,
than the ear is by the confused noise of different persons
speaking all together in an asfembly.
Guido Reni, who has imparted to his paintings that
gaiety and splendour in which he lived, seems enamoured
with a bright and open light; whereas Michael Angelo de
Caravagio, who was of a sullen and savage disposition,
appears sondest of a gloomy and clouded sky ; so that neither
of them were qualified to handle indifferently all objects.
The chiaro-scuro may likewise prove of great service to a
painter in giving his composition a grand effect; but, never-
thelefs, the light he chooses must be adapted to the situation
of the scene where the action is laid : nor would he be less
faulty, who, in a grottoor cavern, where the light entered by a
chink, snould make his shades soft and tender, than he wlio
should represent them strong and bold in an open sky-light.









But this is by no means the only fault which mannerists
are apt to be guilty of in historical pieces, and particularly
in the disposition of their figures. To say nothing of their
favourite groupe of a woman lying on the ground with one
child at her breast, and another playing about her, and the
like, which they generally place on the first lines of their
pieces ; nor of those half-figures in the back ground peep¬
ing out from the hollows contrived for them : they make à
common practice of mixing naked with clothed figures;
old men with young; placing one figure with its face
towards you, and another with its back; they contrast
violent motions with languid attitudes, and seem to aim at
opposition in every thing; whereas oppositions never please ;
but when they arise naturally from the sulject, like Anti¬
theses in a discourse.
As to foreshortened sigures, too mucl assectation in using
or avoiding them is equally blamable. The attitudes had
better be composed than otherwise. It very seldom happens
that there is any occasion for making them so impetuous as
to be in danger of losing their equilibrium, a thing too much
practised by some painters.
In regard to drapery, equal care should be taken to avoid
that poverty which makes some masters look as if, through
mere penury, they grudged clothes to their figures; and
that profusion which Albani imputed to Guido, saying, that
he was rather à tailor than a painter. The ornaments of
dress should be used with great sobriety; and it will not be
amiss to remember what was once said to an ancient painter:
e I pity you greatly; unable to make Helen handsome,
you liave taken care to make her sine.'
Let the whole, in a word, and all the different parts of
the composition, possess probability, grace, costume, and
the particular character of what is to be represented. Let
nothing look like unisormity of manner which does not








appear less in the composition than it does in colouring,
drapery, and design; and is, as it were, that kind of accent,
by which painters may be as readily distinguished
as
foreigners are, by pronouneing in the same manner all the
different languages they happen to be acquainted with.

CRAYON PAINTING.
WHETHER the painter works with oil colours, water
colours, or crayons, the grand olject of his purfuit is still
the same : à just imitation of nature. But each species has
its peculiar rules and methods. Painting with crayons re-
quires, in many respects, a treatment different from painting
in oil colours ; because all colours used dry are, in their
nature, of a much warmer complexion than when wet with
oils, or any other binding fluid. Let this be proved by
matter of fact :-Mr. Cotes painted a portrait of Sir William
Chambers, which is in Lord Besborough’s collection. An
ingenious foreigner had discovered a method of fixing crayon
pictures, so that iliey would not rub or receive an injury if
auy accident happened to the glass. The Society for the
encouragement of Arts had before offered a premium to any
one who should discover so valuable a secret, for which
premium he made application. Mr. Cotes being eminent
in his prosession, was desired to lend a picture for the trial,
and give his judgment, which was made on this portrait of
Sir William Chambers. Tlie crayons he indeed so persect-
ly fixed as so resist any ruh or brush without the leust injury,
which before would have entirely defaced or spoiled it: but










the picture, which before had a particularly warm, brilliant,
and agreeable effect, in comparison became cold and purple ;
and though in one sense the attempt succeeded to the de-
signed intention of sixing the colours, yet the binding quali¬
ty of whatever sluid was made use of in the process, chang-
ed the complexion of the colours, rendering the cold teints
too predominant. For this reason, in order to produce a
rich picture, a much greater portion of what painters term
cooling tints must be applied in crayon painting, than
would be judicious to use in oils. Without any danger of a
mistake, it is to be supposed, the not being acquainted with
this observation is one great cause why so many oil painters
have no better success when they attempt crayon painting.
On the contrary, crayon painters, being so much used to
those tints which are of a cold nature when used wet, are
apt to introduce them too much when they paint with oils,
which is seldom productive of a good effect.
Another observation l would make, which requires par-
ticular notice from the student who has been conversant
with oil painting, prior to his attempts with crayons; oil
painters begin their pictures much lighter and fainter than
they intend to finish them, which presents the future co¬
louring clear and brilliant, the light underneath greatly
assisting the transparent glazing and scumbling colours,
which, if they were laid over any part already too dark,
would but increase its heavy effect. On the contrary, cray-
ons being made of dry colours, are difficult to procure fuffi-
ciently dark, the crayon painter therefore will find an ab-
solute necessity to begin his picture in dark and rich as pos¬
sible, except in the strongest lights; for if once the grey
and light tints become predominant, it will be next to im¬
ossible for him (in the deep shadows especially) to restore
depth and brilliancy, having no opportunity of glazing or
scumbling to give the effect, as the grey tints being mix-








tures with whiting underneath, will continually work up
and render the attempt abortive.
I shall now endeavour to give the student some directions
towards the attainment of excellence in this art.
The student must provide himself with some strong blue
paper, the thicker the better, if the grain is not too coarse
and knotty, though it is almost impossible to get any intire-
y free from knots. The knots should be levelled with a
penknise or razor, otherwise they will prove exceedingly
troublesome. After this is done, the paper must be pasted
very smooth on a linen cloth, ' previoussy strained on a
deal frame, the size according to the artist’s pleafure; on
this the picture is to be executed; but it is most eligible not
to paste the paper on till the whole subject is first dead-co¬
loured. The method of doing this is very easy, by laying
the paper with the dead-colour on its face, upon a fmooth
board or table, when, by means of a brush, the backside of
the paper must be covered with paste; the frame, with the
strained cloth, must then be laid on the pasted side of the
paper; after which turn the painted side uppermost, and
lay a piece of clean paper upon it, to prevent fmearing;
this being done, it may be stroked gently over with the
hand, by which means all the air between the cloth and the
paper will be forced out.
When the paste is persectly dry, the student may proceed
with the painting. The advantages arising from pasting
the paper 4 in the frame, according to this method, after
That side of the paper should be pasted which has the strokes from the
wires most evident, that the painting may be on the smoothest side, otherwise
the lines, which these wires have left in the paper will prove troublesome
and look unpleasant.
f Some crayon pictures are painted on vellum; but the animal salts in the
skin very often cause them to mildew. It must be confessed the vellum gives
tne picture à foft effect: but its use cannot be recommended in our unsavour-
able climate. Others make use of smalt grounds; Le Tour, lately a painter













the picture is begun, are very great, as the crayons will
adhere much better than any other way, which will enable
the student to finish the picture with a firmer body of co¬
lour, and greater lustre. The late Mr. Cotes discovered
this method by accident, and esteemed it a valuable acquisi¬
tion; and, I remember, on a particular occasion, he re-
moved a sine crayon picture of Rozalba’s and placed it on
another strained cloth, without the least injury, by soak ing
the canvas with a wet sponge, till the pafte between the
cloth and paper was sufficiently wet to admit of separation.
When painters want to make a very correct copy of a
picture they generally make use of a tiffany, or black
gauze, strained tight on a frame, which they lay flat on the
subject to be imitated, and with a piece of sketching chalk,
trace all the outlines on the tiffany. They then lay the
canvas to be painted on, flat upon the sloor, placing the
tiffany with the chalked lines upon it, and with an hand¬
kerchief brush the whole over: this prefents the exact out¬
lines of the pictureon the canvas. The crayon painter may
also make use of this method, when the subject of his imi¬
tation is in oils, but in copying a crayon picture, he must
have recourse to the following method, on account of the
glass :
The picture being placed upon the esel, let the outlines
be drawn on the glass with a small camel’s hair peneil dip¬
ped in lake, ground thin with oils, which must be done
with great exactness; after this is accomplishied, take à sheet
of paper of the same size, and place it on the glass, stroking
of note in Paris, often used them with great fuccess. The method to prepare
them is to brush over the paper with gum water, which directmy strew with
smalt moderately fine, the superfluous part of which should be swept off, with
a painter’s brussi, when the gum water is perfectly dry. On this the picture
is to be painted; but we have paper now in England to be procured of so ex-
cellent a texture, as to render this preparation perhaps unnecessary.







over all the lines with the hand, by which means the co¬
lours will adhere to the paper, which must be pierced with
pin holes pretty close to each other. The paper intended
to be used for the painting must next be laid upon a table
and the pierced paper placed upon it; then with some fine
pounded charcoal, tied up in a piece of lawn, rub over the
perforated strokes, which will give an exact outline. Great
care must be taken not to brushi this off till the whole is
drawn over with sketching chalk, which is a composition
made of whiting and tobaccopipe clay, rolled like crayons,
and pointed at each end.
When the student paints immediately from the life, it
will be most prudent to make a correct drawing of the out-
lines on another paper, the size of the picture he is going to
paint, which he may trace by the preceding method, be¬
cause erroneous strokes of the sketching chalk (which are
not to be avoided without great expertness) will prevent the
crayons from adhering to the paper, owing to a certain greasy
quality in the composition.
The student will find the sitting posture, with the box of
crayons on his lap, the most convenient method for him to
paint. The part of the picture he is immediately painting
should be rather below his face, for, if it is placed too high,
the arm will be fatigued. Let the windows of the room
where he paints he darkened at least to the height of six feet
from the ground, and the subject to be painted should be
situated in such a manner, that the light may fall with
every advantage on the face; avoiding too much shadow,
which seldom has a good effect in portrait painting, especi-
ally if the face he paints has any degree of delicacy. Before
he begins to paint, let him be attentive to his subject, and
appropriate the action or attitude proper to the age of the
subject: if a child, let it be childishi; if a young lady, ex-
press more vivacity than in the majestie beauty of a middle








aged woman, who also should not be expressed with the same
gravity as a person far advanced in years. Let the embel¬
lishments of the picture, and introduction of birds, animals,
&c. be regulated by the rules of propriety and consistency.
The features of the face being carefully drawn with chalk,
let the student take a crayon of pure carmine, and carefully
draw the nostril and edge of the nose, next the shadow ; then,
with the faintest carmine tint, lay in the strongest light upon
the nose and forehead, which must be executed broad. He is
then to proceed gradually with the second tint, and the suc-
ceeding ones, till he arrives at the shadows, which must be
covered brilliant, enriched with much lake, carmine, a little
broken, with brilliant green. This method will, at first,
offensively strike the eye, from its crude appearance; but,
in finishing, it will be a good foundation to produce a plea-
sing effect, colours being much more easily sullied when
too bright, than when the first colouring is dull, to raise the
picture into a brilliant state. The several pearly tints,
discernable in sine complexions, must be imitated with blue
verditer and white, which answers to the ultramarine tints
used in oils. But if the parts of the face where these tints
appear are in shadow, the crayons composed of black and
white must be substituted in their place.
Though all the face, when first coloured, should be laid
in as brilliant as possible, yet each part should be kept in
its proper tone, by which means the rotundity of the face
will be preserved.
Let the student be caresul when he begins the eyes to
draw them with a crayon inelined to the carmine tint,
of whatever colour the iris are of; he must lay them in
brilliant, and, at first, not loaded with colour, but executed
lightly : no notice is to be taken of the pupil yet. The stu-
dent must let the light of the eye incline very much to
the blue cast, cautioussy avoiding à staring, white appear-










ance, (which, when once introduced, is seldom overcome)
preserving a broad shadow thrown on its upper part, by
the eye-lashi. A black and heavy tint is also to be avoid-
ed in the eye-brows ; it is therefore, best to execute them
like a broad, glowing shadow at first, on which, in the
finishing, the hairs of the brow are to be painted, by which
method of proceeding, the former tints will shew themselves
through, and produce the most pleasing effect.
The student should begin the lips with pure carmine and
lake, and in the shadow use some carmine and black; the
strong vermillion tints should be laid on afterwards. He
must beware of executing them with stiff, harsh lines, gently
intermixing each with the neigbouring colours, making the
shadow beneath broad, and enriched with brilliant crayons.
He must form the corner of the mouth with carmine, brown
oker, and greens, varioussy intermixed. If the hair is dark,
he should preserve much of the lake and deep carmine tints
therein; this may be easily overpowered by the warmer
hair tints, which, as observed in painting the eye-brows,
will produce a richer effect when the picture it finished;
on the contrary, if this method is unknown or neglected, a
poverty of colouring will be discernable.
After the student has covered over, or as artists term it,
has dead-coloured the head, he is to sweeten the whole to-
gether by rubbing it over with his finger, beginning at the
strongest light upon the forehead, passing his singervery light-
ly, and uniting it with the next tint, which he must continue
till the whole is sweetened together, often wiping his finger
on a towel to prevent the colours being sullied. He must
be cautious not to smooth or sweeten his picture too often,
because it will give rise to a thin and scanty effect, and
have more the appearance of a drawing than a solid painting,
as nothing but a body of rich colours can constitute à rich
effect. To avoid this, (as the student finds it necessary to







sweeten with the singer) he must continually replenisn the
picture with more crayon.
When the head is brought to some degree of forwardnefs,
let the back ground be laid in, which must be treated in a
different, covering it as thin as possible, and rubbing it into
the paper with a leather stump. Near the face the paper
should be almost free from colour, for this will do great
service to the head, and, by its thinnefs, give both a soft and
solid appearance. In the back ground also, crayons which
have whiting in their composition should be used, but
seldom or never without caution; but chiessy such as are
the most brilliant and the least adulterated. The ground
being painted thin next the hair, will give the student an
opportunity of painting the edges of the hair over in a light
and free manner, when he gives the finishing touches.
The student having proceeded thus far, the face, hair,
and back ground being entirely covered, he must carefully
view the whole at some distance, remarking in what respect
it is out of keeping, that is, what parts are too light, and
what too dark, being particularly attentive to the white or
chalky appearances, which must be subdued with lake and
carmine. The above method being properly put into
execution will produce the appearance of a painting prin¬
cipally composed of three colours, viz. carmine, black, and
white, which is the best preparation a painter can make for
producing a sine crayon picture.
The next step is to compleat the back ground and the
hair, as the dust, in painting these, will sall on the face,
and would much injure it, if that was compleated first.
From thence proceed to the forehead, finishing downward
till the whole picture is compleated.
Back grounds may be of various colours; but it requires
great taste and judgment to fuit them properly to different
complexions: in general, a strong coloured head should








have a weak and tender tinted ground, and, on the contrary,
à delicate complexion should be opposed with strong and
powersul tints; by which proper contrast between the
sigure and the back ground, the picture will receive great
force, and strike the spectator much more than it could
possibly do was this circumstance of contrast not attend¬
ed to.
Young painters often treat the back grounds of pictures
as à matter of very little or no consequence, when it is most
certain great part of the beauty and brilliancy of the picture,
especially the face, depends upon the tints being well suited,
the darks kept in their proper places, and the whole being
perfectly in subordination to the face. Thus à simple back
ground requires attention, but the difficulty is still greater
when a variety of objects are introduced, such as hills,
trees, buildings, &c. in these cases one rule must be strictly
attended to, that each grand object be disposed so as to
contrast each other; this is not meant merely respecting
their forms, but their colour, their light, shade, &c. For
instance, we will suppose the figure receiving the strongest
light; behind the figure, and very near at hand, are the
stems of some large trees; these must have shade thrown
over them, either from a driving cloud or some other inter-
posing circumstance; behind these stems of trees, and at a
distance, are seen trees on à rising ground; these should re-
ceive the light as a contrast to the former, &c. lf an ar-
chitectural back ground be chosen, the same rule must be
applied; suppose a building at a moderate distance is placed
behind the figure receiving the light, a column, or some
other object in shadow should intervene, to preserve proper
decorum in the piece, or what will have the same effect, a
shadow must be thrown over the lower part of the building,
which will give equal fatisfaction or repose to the eye. It
must be remembered, the light must be always placed against








the dark, and the weak against the strong, in order to pro-
duce force and essect, and vice versa.
In painting over the forehead the last time, begin the
highest light with the most faint vermillion tint, in the
same place where the faint carmine was first laid, keeping
it broad in the same manner. In the next shade succeeding
the lightest, the student must work in some light blue tints,
composed of verditer and white, intermixing with them
some of the deeper vermillion tints, sweetening them to-
gether with great caution, : insensibly melting them into
one another, increasing the proportion of each colour as his
ugdment shall direct. Some brilliant yellows may also be
used, but sparingly; and towards the roots of the hair,
strong verditer tints, intermixed with greens, will be of
singular service. Cooling crayons, composed of black and
white, should succeed these, and melt into the hair. Be¬
neath the eyes, the pleasing pearly tints are to be preserved,
composed of verditer and white, and under the nose, and
on the temples, the same may be used; beneath the lips
tints of this kind also are proper, mixing them with the
light greens and some vermillion.
The introduction of greens and blues into the face, in
painting, has often given surprize to those who are unac-
quainted with the art, but there is reason sufficient for their
introduction (though it may appear strange at first) in order
to break and correct the other colours.
The carmine predominating in the dead colour, is, as
has been observed, the best preparation for the succeeding
tints ; the crudeness of this preparation must be corrected
hy varioussy intermixing greens, blues, and yellows; which
of these are to be used is to be determined by the degree

* This direction is sor the finest complexions, but the student must vary
nis colouring accordin to his subject.








of carmine in the dead colour, and the complexion intended.
The blue and yellow are of a nature diametrically opposite,
and serve to correct the reds, and oppose one another; the
greens being compounded of both these colours, is of pecu-
liar use in many cases were the transition is not to be so
violent.
The student, attentively considering nature, will discover
a pleasing variety of colours on the furface, and discernible
through a clear and transparent skin; this variety will be
still increased by the effect of light and shade; he will per¬
ceive one part inclining to the vermillion red, another to
the carmine or lake, one to the blue, this to the green, and
that to the yellow, &c. In order to produce these different
effects he will apply those colours to which the tints are
most inclined; yet in crayon painting it is often best to
compound the mixed colours upon the picture, such as blue
and yellow instead of green; blue and carmine instead of
purple ; red and yellow instead of orange; in other circum-
stances the compounds already mixed should be used: but
in this case there can be no absolute rule given, it must be
left to the experience and discretion of the painter, though
the student may be greatly assisted in the commencement
of his studies, by an able master to direct and point out the
best method to treat circumstances of this nature, as they
occur in practice, which may at first appear obscure and
mysterious, but will soon, to a good capacity, become de-
monstrably clear upon certain and sure principles; the cir-
cumstances that require different treatment are so various
and so many, as to render it impossible here to descend to
every particular.
In finishing the cheeks, let the pure lake clear them froin
any dust contracted from the other crayons; then, with the
lake, may be intermixed the bright vermillion; and last of
all (if the subject should requre it) a few touches of the











orange coloured crayon, but with extreme caution; after
this sweeten that part with the finger as little as possible,
for sear of producing a hieavy, disagreeable essect on the
cheeks: as the beauty of a crayon picture consists in one
colour shiewing itself throughi, or rather between another;
this the student cannot too often remark, it being the only
method of imitating beautiful complexions.
The eye is the most difficult fcature to execute in crayons,
as every part must be expressed with the utmost nicety, to
appear finishied; at the same time that the painter must pre-
serve its breadth and solidity, while he is particularizing the
parts. To accomplishi this, it will be a good general rule
sfor the student to use his crayon, in sweetening, as much,
and his singer as liitle as possible. When he wants a point
to touch a small part with, he may break off a little of his
crayon against the box, which will produce a corner fit to
work with in the minutest parts. If the eye-lashies are
dark, he must use some of the carmine and brown oker,
and the crayon of carmine and black; and with these he
may also touch the iris of the eye (if brown or hazel)
making a broad shadow, caused by the eye-lasni. Red tints
of vermillion, carmine and lake, will execute the corners
of the eye properly; but if the eye-lids are too red, they
will have a disagrecable sore appearance. The pupil of the
eye must be made of pure lamp-black ; between this and the
lower part of the iris, the light will catch very strong, but
it must not be made too sudden, but be gently diffused
round the pupil tiil it is lost in shade. When the eye-balls
are sufficiently prepared, the shining speck must be made
with a pure white erayon, which should be first broken to a
point, and then laid on firm; but as it is possible they may
be desective in neatness, they should be corrected with a
pin, taking off the redundant parts, by which means they
may be formed as neat as can be required.







The difficulty, with respect to the nose, is to preserve
the lines properly determined, and at the same time so
artfully blended into the check as to express its projection,
and yet no real line to be perceptible upon a close examin-
ation; in some circumstances it should be quite blendid
with the check which appears behind it, and determined
entirely with a slight touch of red chalk. The shadow
caused by the nose is generally the darkest in the whole
face, partaking of no reflection from its furrounding parts.
Carmine and brown oker, carmine and black, and such
brilliant crayons will compose it best.
The student having before prepared the lips with the
strongest lake and carmine, &c. must, with these colours,
make them compleatly correct; and, when finishing, intro¬
duce the strong vermillions, but with great caution, as they
are extremely predominant. This, if properly touched,
will give the lips an appearance equal, if not superior to
those executed in oils, notwithstanding the seeming supe¬
riority the latter has, by means of glazing,t of which the
former is entirely destitute.
When the student paints the neck, he should avoid ex-
pressing the muscles too strong in the stem, nor should the
bones appear too evident on the chest, as both have an un¬
pleasing effect, denoting a violent agitation of the body, a
circumstance seldom necessary to express in portrait painting.
The most necessary part to be expressed, and which should
ever be observed (even in the most delicate subjects) is a
strong marking just above the place where the collar bones
unite, and if the head is much thrown over the shoulders,
some notice should be taken of the large muscle that rises
e The method with which painters in oil express transparency in the lips
is, by painting them first with light vermillion tints, and, when dry, touchint
them over with pure lake.








from behind the ear, and is inserted into the pit between
the collar bones. All inferior muscles should be, in general,
quite avoided. The student will sind this caution neces-
sary, as most subjects, especially thin persons, have the
muscles of the neck much more evident than would be
judicious to imitate. As sew necks are too long, it may be
necessary to give some addition to the stem, a fault on the
other side being quite unpardonable, nothing being more
ungraceful than a short neck. In colouring the neck, let
the student preserve the stem of a pearly hue, and the light
not so strong as on the chest. If any part of the breast
appears, its transparency must also be expressed by pearly
tints, but the upper part of the chest should be cosoured
with heautiful vermillions, delicately blendid with the
other.
t
Of the MATERIALS.
HHE perfection of the crayons consists, in a great meafure,
in their softnefs, for it is impossible to execute a brilliant
picture with them if they are otherwise, on which account
great care should be observed in the preparing them, fo pre-
vent their being hard-In all compositions, slake white,
and white lead should be wholly rejected, because the
slightest touch with either of these will unavoidably turn
black.
The usual objection to crayon paintings is, that they are
subject to change, but whenever this happens it is entirely
owing to an injudicious use of the above-mentioned whites,
which will stand only in oils. To obviate the bad effects









arising from the use of such crayons, let the student make
use of common whiting prepared in the following manner:
Take a large vessel of water, put the whiting into it, and
mix them well together; let this stand about half a minute,
then pour off the top into another vessel, and throw the
gritty sediment away; let what is prepared rest about a
minute, and then pour it off as before, which will purisy
the whiting and render it free from all dirt and grittiness.
When this is done, let the whiting settle, and then pour
the water from it; after which, lay it on the chalk to dry,
and keep it for use, either for white crayons, or the purpose
of preparing tints with other colours, for with this, all
other tints may be safely prepared.
The student must be provided with a large, slexible pallet-
knife, a large stone and muller to levigate the colours, two
or three large pieces of chalk to absorb the moisture from
the colours aster they are levigated, a piece of flat glafs to
prevent the moisture from being absorbed too much till the
colours are rolled into form, and vessels for water, spirits,
&c. as necessity and convenience snall direct.
REDS.
CARMINE and LAKE.
It is rather difficult to. procure either good carmine or
good lake. Good cermine is inclined to the vermillion
tint, and should be an impalpable powder, and good lake
to the carmine tint. The carmine crayons are prepared in
the sollowing manner:
As their texture is inclinable to hardness instead of
grinding and rolling them, take à sufficient quantity of
carmine, lay it upon the grinding-stone, mix it with a







levigating knife with spirits of wine, till it becomes smooth
and even ; yet the less friction produced by the knife the
better. The chalk-stone being ready, lay the colour upon
it to absorb the spirit, but be careful that it is laid on in a
proper shape for painting.
The simple colour being prepared, the next step is to
compose the disserent tints by a mixture with whiting; the
proportion to be observed consisting of twenty gradations
to one, which may be clearly understood by the following
directions: Take some of the simple colour, and levigate
it with spirits of wine, adding about one part of wasnied
whiting to three parts of carmine, of which, when properly
incorporated, make two parcels. The next gradation
should be composed of equal quantities of carmine and
whiting, of which sour crayons may be made. The third
composition should have one fourth carmine, and three
fourths whiting; of this make six crayons, which will be a
good proportion with the rest. The last tint should be
made of whiting, very faintly tinged with carmine, of
which make about eight crayons, which will compleat the
abovementioned proportion.
N. B. Though these tints made with whiting may be
rolled, yet the pure carmine will not bear it, but must he
lest on the chalk-stone till persectly dry.
LAKE
ls a colour very apt to be hard ; to prevent which the
student must observe the following particulars :
Take about half the quantity of lake intended for the
crayons, and grind it very sine with spirits of wine; let it
dry, and then pulverize it, which is easily done if the lake
is good; then take the other half and grind it with spirits;








after which mix it with the pulverized lake, and lay it out
directly in crayons on the chalk. The colour will not bear
rolling. The simple colour being thus prepared, proceed
with the compound crayons as directed before, and in the
same degrees of gradation as the carmine tints.
VERMILLION, or NATIVE CINNABAR.
The best is inclined to the carmine tint. To prepare
this colour, mix it on the stone with soft water, or spirits,
aster which it may be rolled into crayons.
BLUES.
PRUSSIAN BLUE
Is a colour very apt to bind, and is rendered soft with
more difficulty than carmine and lake. The same method
of preparation is to be followed with this as directed with
respect to lake, only it is necessary to grind à larger quan¬
tity of the pure colour, as it is chiefly used for painting
draperies.
BLUE VERDITER
Is a colour naturally gritty, and therefore it is necessary
to wasni it well. Its particles are so coarse as to require
some binding matter to unite them, otherwise the crayons
will never adhere together. To accomplish this, take a
quantity sufficient to form two or three crayons, to which
add a piece of slacked plaister of Paris about the size of a
pea; mix these well together, and form the crayons upon
the chalk. This blue is extremely brilliant, and will be
of great use in heightening draperies, &c.







Brilliant greens are produced with great difficulty, which
may be procured of those who make it their business to
prepare them; yet the following compositions will be
found useful: Take yellow oker, and after grinding it
with spirits, mix it with the powder of Prussian blue; then
temper it with a knife, and lay the crayons on the chalk
without rolling them: besides this, use king’s yellow,
mixed with Prussian blue, brown oker, and Prussian blue.t
The crayons made of these last may be rolled.
YELLOWS.
KING’S YELLOW
Is the most useful and the most brilliant, levigated with
spirits of wine, and compose the different tints as before
directed. Yellow oker, and Naples yellow, ground with
spirits, will make useful crayons.
ORANGE
Is produced with king’s yellow and vermillion, ground
together with spirits, and the tints formed as in other cases ;
but no great quantity of them is required.
BROWNS.
CULLENS EARTH.
Is a sine dark brown. After six or eight of the simple
crayons are prepared, several rich compound tints may be
Roman oker and Prussian blue mixed in difserent proportions will be
useful.









produced from it, by a mixture with carmine in various
degrees : black, carmine, and this colour, mixed toget ier,
make useful tints for painting hair; several gradations
may be produced from each of these by a mixture with
whiting.
UMBER
May be treated in just the same manner, only it is
necessary to levigate it with spirits of wine.
PURPLES.
Prussian blue ground with spirits, and mixed with pulve¬
rized lake, will produce a good purple. Carmine thus
mixed with Prussian blue will produce a purple something
different from the former. Various tints may be made
from either of these compounds by a mixture with whiting.
BLACK.
LAMP-BLACK
Is the only full black that can be used with safety, as all
others are subject to mildew.
Cinnabar mixed with carmine-This is a composition of
great use, and tints made from this with whiting will be
found very serviceable.
Carmine and black is another good compound, of which
five or six gradations should be made, some partaking more
of the black, and others having the carmine most predomi¬
nant, besides several tints by a mixture with whiting.
Cinnabar and black is also a very useful compound, from
which several different tints should be made.










Prussian blue and black is another good compound, and
will be sound of singular service in painting draperies.
It is impossible to lay down rules for forming every tint
necessary composition a set of crayons, there being many
accidental compositions entirely dependent on fancy and
opinion. The student should make it à rule to save the
leavings of his colours, for of these he may form various
tints which will occasionally be useful.

O ROLLING the CRAYONS and DISPOSING
them for PAINTING.
The different compositions of colours must be cut into
a proper magnitude after they are prepared, in order to be
rolled into pastils, for the convenience of using them. Each
crayon should be formed in the left hand with the ball of
the right, first formed cylindrically, and then tapered at
each end. If the composition is too dry, dip the finger in
water; if too wet the composition must be laid upon the
chalk again to absorb more of the moisture. The crayons
should be rolled as quick as possible; and when finished,
must be laid upon the chalk again, to absorb all remaining
moisture. After the gradation of tints from one colour is
formed, the chalk and the grinding-stone should be well
scraped and cleansed with water before it is used sor another
colour.
When the set of crayons is compleated according to the
rules prescribed, they should be arranged in classes for the
convenience of painting with them. Some thin drawers,
divided into a number of partitions, is the most convenient








method of disposing them properly. The crayons should
be deposited according to the several gradations of light.
The bottom of the partitions must be covered with bran
as a bed for the colours, because it not only preserves them
clean, but prevents their breaking.
The box made use of when the student paints, should be
about a foot square, with nine partitions. In the upper
corner, on the left hand, (supposing the box to be in the
lap when he paints) let him place the black and grey
crayons, (those being the most seldom used); in the second
partition, the blues; in the third, the greens and browns :
in the first partition on the left hand of the second row, the
carmines, lakes, vermillions, and all deep reds ; the yellows
and orange in the middle; and the pearly tints next; and
as these last are of a very delicate nature, they must be
kept very clean, that the gradations of colour may be eafily
distinguished: in the lowest row, let the first partition con¬
tain a piece of fine linen rag to wipe the crayons with while
they are using; the second, all the pure lake and vermillion
tints; and the other partitions may contain those tints,
which, from their complex nature, cannot be classed with
any of the former.

ENCAUSTIC PAINTING.
Tiis method of painting has been little practised
in
England. For the information of the curious we give the
following directions, which will enable them to produce
with ease a picture in this very curious manner.
The first method is described in a letter from Mr. Febroni,
the inventor, published in Maty's Review for 1785.














 Mr. Lewis, of Gottenbrun, has lately executed a picture
according to my manner: it is done upon wood prepared
with wax; and is remarkable for the vivacity and splendour
of its colours. I believe I have already mentioned to you,
in what this new manner consists : you melt, or rather
dissolve, some good white wax in naptha petrolei, ' without
colour, till such time as the mixture has acquired, by cool¬
ing, the appearance of an oil beginning to freeze. Mix
your colours in this, and then keep them in small tin boxes;
ou dilute them more or less, with the same naptha, ac-
cording as they dry, or as you wisn to use them. This
painting allows time enough to give all the finishing you
desire; and if you wisfi to work in haste, you may dry as
fast as you please by exposing it to the heat. When the
picture is finished, it is of that fine tone which is preferable
to any varnish; but if you choose a varnisn only, warm the
picture, and the naptha will evaporate. When this is done,
you must wait till the picture cools, when you must polishi
it by rubbing it over neatly with a cloth. If vou wishi to
have it still brighter, you must melt white wax on the fire,
without suffering it to boil; mix a little naptha with this,
and draw a layer of it over the picture already heated, by
means of a brazier, which you hold under, if the picture is
small, or before it if it is large : the colours at first appear
spoiled, but you restore them to their first beauty, if, when
the layer of wax is cooled, you polisn it by rubbing with a
cloth; it is then that the colours take the high tone of oil.
lf vou fear the effect of fire for your picture, you are to
make a soap of wax, which is to be done by boiling white
wax in water, in which you have dissolved a twentieth part
e Naptha petrolei is a bituminous kind of oil, issuing out of certain
rocks in the territory of Modena. There are three forts, more or less, pure
and colourless.







of the weight of the wax of marine alkali, or sel de sourde,
very pure. Rub your picture with this soap; and when it
is dry, polish it as before-mentioned : if you do not choose
either of these methods, give your painting its usual var-
nisn of sandarac and spirit of turpentinc. This method has
been found preferable to all those that have been tried, and
superior to oil for the beauty of their colours. There are
many fine colours which cannot be used in oil, which
may be made use of with great success in this method.
As the naptha entirely evaporates, one may be asfured
that this is the true method or painting in wax. There is
likewise much to hope for the duration of the pictures
painted in this manner, as wax is much less liable to altera¬
tion than oil, and does not so easily part with its phlogiston.

The ANCIENT GRECIAN METHOD of
PAINTING,
By EMMA JANE GREENLAND. .
TAKE an ounce of white wax, and the same weight of
gum mastick in lachrymae, that is, as it comes from the
tree, which must be reduced to a coarse powder. Put the
wax in a glazed earthen vessel, over a very slow fire, and
when it is quite dissolved, strew in the mastick, a little at a
time, stirring the wax continually, until the whole quantity
A Gold Pallet was, on this occasion, voted to Emma Jane Greenland,
November 14. 1786, by the Society at London for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce.










of gum is persectly melted and incorporated; then throw
the paste into cold water, and when it is hard, take it out
of the water, wipe it dry, and beat it in one of Mr.
Wedgwood’s mortars, observing to pound it at first in a
linen cloth to absorb some drops of water that will remain
in the paste, and would prevent the possibility of reducing
it to a powder, which must be so sine as to pafs through a
thick gauze. It should be pounded in a cold place, and
a little while at à time, as, after long beating, the friction
will in a degree soften the wax and gum; and instead of
their becoming a powder, they will return to a paste.
Make some strong gum arabick water, and when you
paint, take a little of the powder, some colour, and mix
them together with the gui-water. Light colours require
but à small quantity of the powder, but more of it must be
put in proportion to the body and darkness of the colours ;
and to black, there should be almost as much of the powder
as colour.
Having mixed the colours, and no more than can be used
before they grow dry, paint with fair water, as is practised
in painting with water colours, a ground on the wood being
first painted of some proper colour prepared in the same
manner as is described for the picture; walnut-tree and
oak are the forts of wood commonly made use of in Italy
for this purpose. The painting should be very highly
finished, otherwise, when varnisned, the tints will not
appear united.
When the painting is quite dry, with rather a hard
brush, passing it one way, varnisn it with white wax, which
is put into an earthen vessel, and kept melted over a very
slow fire till the picture is varnissied, taking great care
the wax does not boil. Afterwards hold the picture before
a fire, near enough to melt the wax, but not make it run ;
and when the varnissi is entirely cold and hard, rub it gently







with a linen cloth. Should the varnisn blister, warin the
picture again very slowly, and the bubbles will subside.
When the picture is dirty, it need only be washied with
cold water.

The VENETIAN METHOD Of COLOURING;
By TIMOTHY SHELDRAKE, Efa.
THE method of Painting practised in the Venetian
School :
ee The cloth was primed with colours in distember, of a
brownisn hue, such as would properly enter into the darkest
parts of the picture. The most transparent colours are the
properest. I believe umber was most generally used, broken
with red, vellow, or blue, according to the tint intended
to be produced, and diluted with chalk or whiting to the
proper degree of strength. Upon the ground so prepared,
the subject was correcty drawn with umber, pure, or mixed
with lake, blue, or black; and, with the same colours,
those shadows that were darker than the ground were then
painted in.
The artist then painted the lights with pure white, in a
solid body, where the light was brightest, or where the
full effect of colour was to be produced; and, where the
demi-tints were afterwards to be, scumbling it thinner by
degrees, till it united with the shadows.
In this manner the chiaro-oscuro was finished as much
as possible, and the local colour of every object in the picture
The Greater Silver Pallet was voted to Mr. Sheldrake, sor this Disser-
tation on Painting in Oil, in 1798, by tne Society instituted at London, for
the Encouragement of Arts, Manusactures and Commerce.












glazed over it. All the colours used in this part of the
work were ground in oil, which was absorbed into the
ground, the picture remaining flat, something like a picture
in water-colours or crayons; it was then varnissied, till
saturated with varniss, and the full of every colour brought
out : the picture was then complete.
Upon the most superficial view of this process, it will be
evident that a picture painted by it is, as to all visible pro¬
perties, a varnish picture ; for the small quantity of oil that
had been used, sunk into the ground, and never could rise
again to be hurtsul; while the varnisn, being laid on after
the colours, gave them all the brilliancy and durability
they could derive from that vehicle, without being
liable to the objections that are made to painting in
varnissi, supposing it to be used in the same manner as oil is
in painting with oil. It is true that this mode of painting
is itself liable to some objections ; these l have endeavoured
to obviate, and shall therefore mention hereafter. Here it
may be observed, that, as any varnisn may be used, it is to
this circuistance we must attribute the different degrees of
durability in pictures of the Venetian School. I have seen
some that would resist the most powerful solvents, while
others were destroyed by the weakest; though all possessed
the apparent properties that distinguish the Venetian
pictures from all others.
As l do not pretend to degrade painting to the rank of a
mechanical art, that may be infallibly practised by a receipt,
 shall be permitted to observe, that this was the general
system of the Venetian school, wlich I have seen variously
modified in the works of different artists of that, as well as
of the Flemissi, which is derived froi it. It is susceptible
of an almost infinite number of modifications, in proportion
to the talents, the judgment of, and the objects to be painted
by the artists who may adopt it. This being the case, if it is






proved by experiment that effects similar to those of the
Venetian pictures may be produced by this method; and
that the system has a strong tendency to produce that bril-
liancy and harmony of colouring as is so much admired,
with more certainty and facility than those qualities can be
obtained by any other mode of painting.
l once afked Sir Joshua Reynolds, by what circumstances
in the management of a picture he thought the harmony of
colouring was to be producedP He replied, an unity of light
and an unity of shadow should pervade the whole. He
explained to me the difficulty of reducing the various colours
of all the objects that may be included in a picture, and the
various modifications of those colours to the simple, harmo-
nious state he described, and illustrated what he had said by
this simile. :e A picture, to possess harmony of colouring,
should look as if it was painted with one colour (suppose
umber and white), and, when the chiaro-oscuro was com¬
plete, the colour of each object should be glazed over it. 1
This observation, from such authority, was impressed
with peculiar force on my mind; and if l can retrace its
perations on a fubject which has so long engaged my atten¬
tion, I should say Sir Joshua’s observation was the clue that
guided me through all my experiments; and, I hope, will
enable me to prove, that the beautiful and simple practice
which he suggested as à simile, was literally the practice of
that school upon whose works his ideas of colouring were
founded. At the same time l may observe, that the fact
seems to have eluded his observation, or he would not have
used it as a comparison to simplisy his description of a
practice which he thought both difficult and complex.
In the Newfonian doctrine of Light and Colours, it is
believed that all colours are inherent in light, and are ren-
dered visible by the action of various bodies, which reflect








particular rays, and absorb the rest. Without disputing
the truth of this doctrine, it is to be obserred, that a
painter must consider the objects he represents as being
analogous to the materials he uses to represent them; and,
in this view of the subject, colour is to be considered as a
property inherent in bodies, which is rendered visible by
the contact of light, a colourless, or at least a mono-
coloured substance, and shadow the mere privation
light.
A picture may reprefent either a groupe of figures, or
other objects, in a room, or any objects in the open air:
whatever the situation may be, it reprefents certain objects
in a given space, possessing individually their peculiar
colours, and generally exposed to the operations of light.
The quantity of light each can receive, must depend upon
its form, and its position respecting that part whence the
light comes; for, in proportion as other parts recede fromn
the light, the shadow becomes visible : but shadow is no¬
thing but privation of light, and privation of colour, in pro-
portion as the light is diminished. Some attention to these
circumstances will, perhaps, enable us to demonstrate the
truth of Sir Joshiua’s position.
If a globe of one colour be exposed in a painter’s room,
properly darkened, that part which is nearest the light will
partake of its colour; the next part will shew the true
colour of the object; that which first recedes from the light
will be à little obscured, the next a little more, and so on
progressively, till that part which is farthest from the light
will lose its colour, and appear equally dark with the
shadiest part of the room. Now we know this globe is of
one unifori colour; the variations we see in disserent
parts of it are only deceptions, occasioned by the accession
of light in some parts, and the privation of it in others.









What is true of this one object and its parts, would be
equally true of any number of objects, whatever their
colours or relative situations might be: if they were placed
together in the same room, each would possess its own
indvidual colour, each would partake of the general light,
in proportion to its situation, and of the general darkness in
proportion as it recedes from the light. All this may be
easily conceived; but the difficulty, and, in the ordinary
modes of painting a ferious one it is, is to represent such
objects with the appearance of trutà, and preserve the har-
mony necessary to constitute a whole. The Venetian
painters, however, by whatever means they obtained their
knowledge, discovered a method so simple, that perhaps no
other can produce such brilliant effects, and undoubtedly
not with facility and certainty at all comparable with
their’s.
The artist will remark that, in describing the whole of
the Venetian method of painting, I have said nothing of
the manner of producing those demi-tints which conduce so
much to the brilliancy of a picture, which are so difficult to
execute, and in which he most frequently fails. Those
tints are, in the ordinary modes of painting, produced by
the mixture of black, grey, blue, or brown (according to
the judgment of the artist), with the local colours of the
objects. It is these tints which, from their being made
with such colours, it is difficult to get clear, and which
never are so clear in any other as in the Venetian, and in
some of the Flemisn pictures, which are painted upon ana-
logous principles. The fact is, that those painters pro-
duced all such tints without the admixture of any colour to
represent them, and by a method so like that by which
they are produced in nature, that this circumstance alone
ensures a degree of brightness to their colours, and of













harmony to their shadows, that it is perhaps impossible
to produce, in an equal degree, by any other mode of
painting.
It is à singular fact, which l have not skill in physies to
be able to account for, though by numerous experiments I
have ascertained, beyond contradiction, that if upon any
degree of brown, between the deepest and the lightest
brown yellow, we paint pure white, in gradations, from
the solid body to the lightest tint that can be laid on, all the
tints between the solid white and the ground will appear to
be grey, intense in proportion to the depth of the ground,
and the thinnefs of the white laid upon it. But in every
case all the tints laid upon one ground will harmonize with
each other, and form one connected chain (if I may use
the expression), which will persectly unite the highest
light with the darkest shade.
If then we examine the component substances of a
Venetian picture, we shall sind the lighter parts consist only
of white, to represent the light; and of the local colours
of the objects it represenis, the demi-tints are imitated by
an appearance almost as deceptive as the similar appearances
in nature: but in every other method of painting, these
demi-tints are produced by mixing some dusky colour with
the local colours and the light. The comparison of these
inethods will afford a demonstrative reason why the Vene-
tian must be brighter than any other mode of painting.
Having shewn, as near to à demonstration as the nature
of the subject will perhaps admit, why those parts of a
Venetian picture that are connected with light and colours
are brighter than the corresponding parts of any other
pictures, it remains to explain the cause of similar superi-
ority in the darker parts of the same pictures.








It has been said, with much confidence, that as wlite
represents light, so black is the representative of darkness.
But though this may be true in physies, it certainly is not
so in painting : for the painter’s art is to represent objects
as they appear, in point of colour, to be, not as they really
are. Thus, if l know an object is perfectly black, and am
to reprefent it as it appears to be at the distance of fisty
feet, black from the pallet will not produce a good imitation
of it, because the interposition of sisty feet of the atmosphere
will cause it to appear of a colour disserent froi what it
really is; and vice versa, if we go into a cavern, a cellar,
or a room, so darkened that the colour of no object can be
distinctly seen, and if we there hold any solid black sub-
stance near to the eye, the disference will be visible at once ;
the black object will be immdiately distinguished, by its
solidity and colour, from the surrounding space, and such
remote objects as may be obscurely visible through it.
These objects actually possess their individual colours,
and only appear indistinctly from the absence of light.
The black object may appear solid, and of that colour,
from its proximity to the eye; but the circumjacent ones
will appear of a colour perfectly distinct from it, more
or less transparent, in proportion to their distance from
the eye, and shewing a portion of their individual colours,
according to the quantity of ill-defined light that may
be admitted. Thus we see (if l may venture to mention
so notorious à truism), that shadows are nothing real; they
only seem to exist in the absence of light, and give to
objects an ill-defined appearance, distinct from, though in
some instances mixed with, light and colours in disserent
degrees : but as the painter must represent this appearance
by something real, he chooses the colours most analogous,







viz. browns, and the most transparent of their class, to
represent this transparent, but imperfectly defined appear-
ance in nature. 
It has been supposed that the Venetian painters had some
peculiarly rich and transparent brown colour, which is seen
to pervade all the works of that school; the effect of
which no modern artist has been able to imitate, and which
therefore is supposed to have been lost. Is it not very
probable that a colour so common as to pervade the works
of the worst as well as of the best artists of that school,
should be so unaccountably lost; and, as the effect attributed
to it may be easily produced by the mode of painting I
have described, it is not unreasonable to conclude that this
much-lamented colour has never existed.
It is well known that chalk, and other earths of the
same kind, lose, when wetter, much of their whitenefs,
and become semi-transparent ; it is equally certain, that if
umber or other earths are mixed with chalk, and saturated
with varnisn after they are laid on the cloth, they, in like
manner, become diaphanous, and are infinisely more bril-
liant than the same colours can be when mixed with white
lead and oil. This seems, on good grounds, to have been
the basis of the Venetian method of painting, and all its
peculiar efsects; at least, if l may draw any conclusion srom
the numerous experiments l have made. But if artists,
whose talents will enable them to repeat those experiments
to the hest advantage, should be induced to do so, the fact
will be determined in the most satisfactory manner.
I may now be permitted to say, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to conceive à theory more simple, more beauti-
ful, or more true, than that of Sir Joshua Reynolds. It is
certainly impossible to form a practice more simple, or more









conformable to that theory, than the one l have described,
as will be evident on recapitulating the particulars.
The artist, having determined what hue should pervade
his picture, formed his ground with that colour prepared in
distemper; upon this the subject was drawn, and the
darker shades painted in with transparent colours, which
sunk into the ground : with pure white he then painted in
all the lights and demi-tints; and, lastly, glazed in the
colours, each in its place. Upon applying the varnisn, the
darker shades were, as to body, incorporated with the
ground ; and thus, though different in colour, appeared
thinner and more transparent than any colours could be
when laid upon any ground: the sull effect of every colour
was brought out, and the picture was complete.
Whoever has been accustomed to paint, or to mark the
progrefs of painting in the common way, and will reslect
on the practice of the method I have described, by artisis
who had been brought up to it, must see that such artists
would paint with a degree of facility, expedition, and
certainty, as to effect, that could never be equalled in the
ordinary way of painting in oil ; besides, it will be evident
that an artist would not onsy paint a picture himself with
more facility; but, if he had occasion, could employ a
number of subordinate artists upon large works, and put
those works out of hand with more uniformity, as to
merit and effect, than if he were to employ such affistants
in similar works if they were to be painted in the common
way.
I am sensible how litile attention will, and perhaps ought
to be paid to observations on painting, if made by those
who are not professionally artists: for practical men acquire
a kind of knowledge that can never be obtained in any













other way; but at the same time they contract preju-
dices that often prevent them from sully investigating
any novelty in practice that may be offered to their notice.
The speculative man, on the contrary, who investigates
the properties of matter, unshackled by practical preju
dices, and with ideas purely chemical or philosophical,
will be more likely to ascertain all the facts relative to
any theory that may become the object of enquiry. In this
way l hope I have proceeded in this investigation. I have
endeavoured to consider pictures as masses of matter, pos¬
sessing the properties, but differing from each other in
degree of brilliancy, transparency, and duration.
I ought, perhaps, here to take leave of the subject; but
it may be expected that l should give an account of the
manner in which the pictures were painted.
I have already mentioned that there are some difficulties
in the method of painting I have described, as being that
of the old artists, and which would form objections of
considerable force to the practice of it by artists who are
well acquainted with the usual modes of painting: these
difficulties are first, the ground absorbs the oil from the
colours so fast, that they are not so manageable as in oil-
painting ; secondly, the effect of the picture is not seen
till the finishing varnish is laid on; and thirdly, as the
effect is not seen till the picture is finished, it will some¬
times disappoint the artist, and in that case it will be dif-
ficult, if at all practicable, to alter it.
As l believe the process I have described in the beginning
of this paper is similar to that of Miss Provis, the artists
who are acquainted with her recipe, can afcertain whether
my conjectures on this subject are right or not. I am
certain at least that these difficulties occurred in my












attempts to paint, and to obviate them l adopted the sol¬
lowing process:
I prepared the ground in distemper, and painted the
dark parts in the way I have described ; l then varnisned
the ground with the copal oil-varnissi, till it was fully
saturated; and by this means the full effect of that part of
the picture was seen : upon this l painted the lighter parts
with white, using much of the vehicle where the colour
was thin, and little in the folid parts, leaving the white in
them dead: by this means l understood the effect of my
chiaro oscuro, as l saw the effect of the demi-tints nearly
as well as when the picture was finished.
Upon this l glazed the colours in the way I have
described in the beginning of this, and finished the
picture. 1 often found (probably from want of practice)
that the effect was different from what l intended, as the
effect of the colours, added to that of the chiaro ofcuro,
produced an essential alteration in the whole ; as l took
care in general that the defect did not arise from too much
white, I added more where it was deficient, and glazed
freshn colours over it, which united perfectly with what had
been done before, and did not give the appearance of a
mended picture. If the defect was from too much white,
I glazed on it a colour similar to that of the ground,
painted with fresn white upon that, and glazed the proper
colours over it. In this way I sound I could alter the
picture, but not so well as in the former case.
I found l could, when necessary, increase the effect of
the picture, by painting on the principal mass or maffes of
light with the local colours, only mixed with white; as
this practice brought those parts more forward by making
them appear solid, and thus contrasting them with the










transparency of the rest of the picture. In this way I
could use the colours tempered with copal varnissi without
difficulty; and, I believe, that if I had been accustomed
to paint large pictures, l could have painted one as large as
lise with the same ease.
 
METHOD and PROCESS or TRANSFERRING
PAINTINGS.
By Mr. ROBERT SALMON.,
THE first thing to be attended to, either for paintings on
plaster walls or ceilings, or from boards, is, that the place
in which they are, be secure from wet or damp. If the
paintings are on old walls, in large buildings, and places
where this cannot be aftained by art, then the summer
season should be taken for the purpose, as the picture
would rarely escape damage if the wet or damp gets at it,
while under the process; at the same time caution should
be taken that the room or place be not over-heated, which
would also produce equally bad effects: these precautions
taken, the next thing is to examine the face of the paint-
ing. If there are any holes in the same, they must be
carefully filled up with paste, or putty of glue and whiting:
this, if the holes are large, should be twice or thrice done,
so as to entirely fill up and leave the face even and smooth;
but if there are any bruised places, with paint still remaining
The Great Silver Pallet was voted to Mr. Robert Salmon sor this
Discovery, by the Society sor the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and
Commerce, Dec. 5. 1796.








on the face of the bruised parts, then this stopping must not
be applied, but the securing canvass, hereaster described, be
pressed down into these places. In the places that are
stopped, there will, of course, appear blemishies, when the
picture is transferred; but the process is rendered much
more certain and sure by being so done. Attention must
next be paid, to lay down any blisters, or places where the
paint is leaving the ground: this is done by introdueing,
between the paint and the ground, some very strong paste
of slour and water; and the face of the blistered paint
being damped with a wet sponge or pencil, it may then be
pressed with the hand home to the ground, to which it will
then adhere ; all the unsound places being thus secured, care
must be taken to clear the face of any grease or dirt; as
also of any particles of the paste that may happen to be
left on the surface. The next thing is, to determine the
size of the painting meant to be taken off; and if on a plain
surface, a board of the size of the picture must be procured,
of not less than an inch in thickness, and framed together
with well-seasoned wood, in small pannels, smooth, and
flushi on one side: this done, a piece of fine open canvass
must be provided, such as the finest sort used for hanging
paper on : this canvass to be made somewhat larger than
the picture, and so sewed together, and the seam pressed,
that it be persectly smooth and even. This is what l call
the securing-canvass, which, being so prepared, is then
stuck on the face of the picture with a paste made of strong
beer, boiled till it is half reduced, and then mixed with a
sufficient quantity of flour to give it a very strong consist-
ence. To large pictures on walls or ceilings, the canvass
must for some time be pressed, and rubbed with the hand as
smooth as possible, working it from the middle to the out-
side, so as to make it tolerably tight; and observing, as it








dries, to press it with the hand or cloth into any hollow
or bruised places, so that it may adhere to every part of the
painting: this done, it is left to dry, which it will mostly
do in a day or two, when dry, a second canvass, of a
stronger and closer sort, and of the same size as the other,
is in like manner to be attached on the top of the first.
This last will want very little attention, as it will readily
adhere to the first; and, being dry, attention must be paid
to the face thereof, to take off any small knots, or uneven¬
nefs thereon; which done, the whole should be again
covered with a thin paste of size and whiting; when dry,
to be pumiced over, so as to make the whole perfectly
smooth and even. The painting being thus secured, the
board, already prepared to the size of the picture, is to be
put with the smooth side against the face thereof , so as
exactly to cover as much as is-intended to be transferred.
The edges of the canvass, which, as before directed, are
left larger than the painting, are then to be pulled tight
over, and closely nailed to the edge of the board. If the
painting be large, either on ceiling or walls, the board
must, by proper supports, be firmly fixed against the
picture, so that it can readily be lowered down when the
plaster and painting is detached.
The canvass and board being fixed, the paintings from
walls or ceilings are to be freed, together with a certain
portion of the plastering: this, with proper care and atten¬
tion, may be readily done. If on a ceiling, the first thing
is to make some holes through the plastering round the
outside of the board and painting; and, with a small saw,
to saw the plastering from one hole to another, till the whole
is disunited from the other parts of the ceiling: this done,
the workman must get at the upper side of the ceiling,
where he must free the plastering from the laths, by break-











ing off the keys thereof: and, with a chissel, cut out the
laths, whereby the plastering, together with the picture,
will be left resting on the board and supports: if there be
apartments over the ceiling, the readiest way will be to
take up a sew of the floor boards above; if next the roof,
means may always be found to get into the fame; and,
although at first this operation may appear difficult, vet
it is presumed no difficulty will be found by any ingenious workman.
If the painting is on a brick or stone wall, the same must
be cut away at top, and down the sides of the painting :
and then, by means of chissels or saws in wood handles, of
different lengths, the wall must be cut away quite behind
the painting, leaving the same, together with the plaf¬
tering, resting on the board ; this operation may sometimes
be done with a saw; or, if the wall be not thick, nor the
other side of much consequence, the bricks or stones may
be taken out from that side, leaving the plastering and
painting as before: this last method I have not practised ;
the other, of cutting away some part of the wall, I have,
and see no difficulty, or very great labour in the operation ;
but that of course must be various, according to the texture
of the wall and mortar.
If paintings are on curved furfaces, such as the coves of
ceilings, then the only difference of operation is, that some
ribs of wood must be cut out and boarded smooth to the
eurve of the surface of the painting, and then fixed up
thereto in place of the before described bearing board; the
painting is then to be freed, and left with the plastering,
resting on the bearers.
For paintings painted on wainscot or boards, the same
securing and process is exactly followed, only that, as the
wainscot or board can always be cut to the size wanted,











or laid horizontal, the securing canvass is stretched thereon,
and turned over the edges of the same, till it is dry; after
which the edges are again turned up, and nailed to the
board, in the same manner as those from walls.
Having, as before described in any of the aforementioned
cuses, freed the paintings from their original places, you
have then got them secured to two thicknesses of canvass,
with their faces next and on to the board prepared for that
purpose ; which being the case, they can readily be re-
moved to any room or shop, to be finishied as sollows :
having got the painting into the shop or room, which
should be moderately warm and dry, but by no means over¬
heated, laying the board on a bench or tressels, the back of
the picture will be uppermost, and the plastering or wood,
as may happen, is then to be cleared away, leaving nothing
but the body of paint, which will be firmly attached to the
securing canvass ; to perform this, a large rasp, a narrow
plane and chissels will he requisite : this operation is dif-
ficult to describe, but would soon be learnt by any one who
makes the attempt; nor is it very tedious; and, being per-
formed, the picture is ready to be attached to its new can¬
vass, as follows :
The painting being cleared, and laying on the board,
the back thereof is to be painted successively, three or four
times over, with any good strong-bodied paint, leaving
each coat to dry before the other comes on; a day or two
between each will generally be found sufficient; each of
these coats, and particularly the first, should be laid on
with great care, taking but a small quantity in the brushi at
a time, and laying it very thin: this precaution is necessary
to prevent any of the oil or paint from searching through
any small cracks or holes that may happen to be in the
face of the picture, which would run into the paste, and so











attach the securing canvass to the picture as to prevent its
being afterwards got off. If any of these holes or cracks
are observed, they should be stopped up with the glue and
whiting paste, and the painting then repeated till a com¬
plete coat is formed on the back of the picture; and it is
then ready for attaching to its canvass, which is done by
spreading all over the picture à paste made of copal varnissi,
mixed with stiff white lead, and a small quantity of any
other old fat paint; all which being spread equally over
with a pallet knife, such a canvass as the first securing-
canvass is laid thereon, and strained and nailed round the
edges of the board, in which state it is left till it becomes
tolerably dry ; and then a second canvass, of a stronger
fort, must be in like manner attached on the first, and left
till it is perfectly dry and hard. This mostly takes about
two months; and the louger it is left, the more secure the
painting will be attached to its canvass, and less liable to
crack or sly therefrom. When sufficiently dry, all the
four canvasses are to be unnailed from the board, and the
edges turned up the reverse way, and nailed to a proper
stretching frame; this is done by unnailing from the board
a part on each side at à time, and immediately nailing it to
the stretching frame, so as never to leave the canvass to
rack or partially stretch, which would damage the picture ;
in this manner, by degrees, the cloths are entirely detached
from the board, and firmly fixed on the stretching frame;
the superfluous left larger than the frame, may then be cut
off, and the wedges put in the frame, and moderately
tightened up. There remains then only to clear the face
of the painting from the securing canvass, which is done by
repeatedly washing the face with a sponge, and moderately
warm water; in doing this, no force or violence must be
used ; with frequent and gentle wasnings the paste will all







worked out with the sponge: the edges of the outer canvass
is then to be cut round, and stripped off, and the other
next the face of the picture is to be done in like manner;
which done, there only remains to clear the paste clean off,
and repair any desects; and the picture will be as strong as
if painted on the canvass.
For taking pictures off walls, without taking the walls
down, or cutting away more thereof than the plastering,
the following process is proposed: the face of the picture
to be first secured, in every respect, in the manner before
described: instead of the plain board, a bearer should be
prepared, with a convex surface, composed of ribs, hoarded
over, so as to form part of a cylinder, of not less than five
seet radius, and as long as the height of the picture. This
bearer being prepared, in order to apply it, a floor or
platform should be erected, and placed horizontally, with
its surface level, and its edge immediately in contact with
thie bottoin of the picture meant to be transferred. The
use of this platformn is for the above-described bearer to rest
and move upon; which bearer should be set on its end, with
one edge in contact with the wall, at one side of the
picture ; consequently the other edge will be at some
distance from the wall, according to the size of the picture
and convexity of the bearer. Being thus placed, the super-
fluous edge of the securing-canvass should be turned over,
and nailed to that edge of the bearer that is next the wall :
this done, the operation of cutting away the plastering
should be begun, which may be done with the corner and
end of a fhort saw, by sawing between the brick-work and
plastering, leaving the thick ness, or part of the thicknefs of
the plastering, on to the painting, fastened to the bearer; and
when this edge of the picture is fieed, the whole height,
for nine or ten inches under, the edge of the bearer that is










furthest from the wall must then be gently forced nearer:
consequently the other edge, together with the painting
and plaster that is freed, will leave the wall, and give an
opportunity of introdueing the saw behind, and cutting
away the same to a certain distance further under; and, by
repeating this, the whole of the picture will at last be freed,
and left on the bearer: each time the bearer is removed,
and, as it is were, rolled on the vertical surface of the
wall, care must be taken to turn and nail the securing-
canvass on the top and bottom edges of the bearer, so as to
secure the freed plastering and picture from moving about;
and, lastly, before the bearer and painting be moved, to
nail the other edge of the picture in the same way, which
will secure the whole to the bearer: this done, the picture
and bearer are at liberty to be moved to a proper place, in
order to be freed from the remaining plaster; the edges
may then be unnailed, and the painting and canvass slipped
from this bearer on to a plain board, and the new canvass
then put on, and remain till dry, as in other cases.
It may appear that the bending of the canvass and plaster-
ing to the convex bearer will crack the plaster, and damage
the painting; but from experience I have observed, that,
to a curve of such, or even less radius, plastering will bend,
without any visible crack, even on the exterior part thereof;
and that part next the bearer, not having occasion in bend¬
ing to extend its parts, will confequently be much less liable
to be disturbed by such bending.










