
2283


3
38
2Da
20a6

8
890
389
7
HIE
C

and i
£2 4 
O F





L
IN

C

R

WATE


a
8
3
20Gae
23

23
 56
3
33
3


53


1









1


in










E.



1









&






1







-




























































-




















-






























-


















THE
Whole ART of PAINTING
IN

WATER-COLOURS:


EKEMPLIFIED IN
LANDSCAPES, PLOWERS, EC.
TOGETHER WITH
INS TRUC TIONS
FOR
Painting on GlAss and in CRATONS:
Explained in a full and familiar Manner.
WITH
Particular DIRECTTONs for preparing the ColOURS,
agreeable to the Practice of the moft eminent
Mafters.
By the AUrHOR of the ARTISTS ASSISTANT.
N D O N.
L C
Printed for T. KITCHIN, Engraver, and Coo
at Nc S9, Holborn-Hill.
Publiffed as the Act directs, iff May, 177
1130











4





+














-














+









t







8

















8

37 S3
2
3ONT
T
138
H e 0 S

162
182



Ft I ans offsrEE
0
a3
DESS
TO THE
D

E
E
R.
R
AHIE Editor of the following Treatife,
well affured it contains fufficient In-

Sructions for the whole Art of Painting in
Water-Colours, on Glats, Ecc. prefumes to
recommend it as equal to the beft of Maf-
ters for Teaching (the Lovers of to pleaf-
ing, ingenious, and genteel an Amufement
the perfect Acquifition of it respecting Theory
and Practice; it muft undoubtedly be far pre
ferable to thofe who undertake to give Rules
for the attaining of it, as in the firtt place it
Colts but little, not to much as is ufually
charged for one Leffon by a Mafter; secondly,
it may be referred to, as often as you pleafe
in a Day without any additional Expence; and
laftly, as it includes the lateft, and confequently
moft ufeful Difcoveries, with the greatelt Va-
fiety of new, cheap, and approved Receipts
for mizing the Colours, and laying them on
to the beft Advantage: Confiderations which
make all Apologies for publifhing it needlets
and fuperfluous. To enter into the fingular
Beauties the Noble Art of Painting exhibits,
would be too redious here. fuffice it to fay,
the


To the READER.
the real Entertainment it always affords the
Spectator as well as Practitioner, and its fo
nearly refembling Nature in her gayeft Attire
and brighteft Colours, muft furely be per-
fuafive Arguments to enforce the Practice
of it.
What is the finelt Drawing without Paint,
but as a Man without Cloaths, or a Diamond
without Polifhing; who then would not leave
the latter, if he has any Tatte for the former ?
This Book is intended as a neceffary Com-
panion to the Art of Drawing in Perspective;
and it is thought, by feveral good judges who
have feen it, truly worthy the Notice and Re-
oard of the Painter in particular, and the
5
Public in General, to whofe candid Accept-
ance and Perufal the Author humbly offers it,
5
not doubting but by a feady Adherence to,
and Obfervation of the various Directions, the
Student will in a fhort Time be fully enabled
was it poffible) to rival the Flower-Garden in
its richeft Dyes. But
7110 C211 PaIIlE
Like Nature? Can Imagination boaft,
Amid its gay Creation, Hues like hers?
Or can he mix them with that matchlefs Skill,
And lay them on fo delicately fine,
And lofe them in each other, as appears
In svry Bud that blows ?
THOMSONS SPRINC.
C O N.




26.4
26
 ..
4 43
7

48
C  et
83

N
7
2t P
2
30
a
1oy


5

a  s
5 p
ta F


278
55 27
853

C
1
1

I
1
S.
F PAINTING IN WATER- COLOURS, p.T
4
Directions for preparing the Single Colours
2

Directions for preparing the Mixed Colours
17

Directions for using the Colours
20

The Methed of Colouring Naked Figures
21
To colour Haw after the mest approved Methods
22



To colour Beafts
23


Of Birds in General
25


Of Fruit in general
26



Cardon S .
2
To colour Flowers after Nature
28-51
-
Some excellent Receipts for those who paint in Water.

Colours
51

OF PAINTING ON GLASS
55


Colours for Painting on Glass
56

The Manner of Working the Colours
58

Other necesfary Directions
59
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS-
61


Directions for using the Crayons
62


Miethed of preparing them
6
3
THE


448



5
8

D
33
EHHSDEREASSC
53
A
4
396
3
CtK
3

34

to e  tt Je J  4
J 4 F  38
2
J.48X
5
4


5
78



5
24
ETRdESNYAdES&LIsINEsNRadEsAadEstped
1
T H E
WHOLE ART OF PAINTING
IN
W A T ER-COL OUR S.
AINTING in Water-Colours, is an Art

which has been encouraged by the Inhabitants
of Palaces eminent for their Titles, but more emi-
nent for their Virtues; and no Wonder, fince no
Reprefentations can thew forth Nature with more
Splender and Magnificence, than a Painting exe-
cuted in this Manner.
The Materials neceffary, are Gum-Colours, (of
which we shall treat more particularly hereafter
Camels-Hair Pencils, Fitches, a Pallet and Pen-
Knife.
The General or Simple Colours are, White,
Black, Brown, Red, Vellow, Blue, and Green.
The various Species of each are as follow :
Blacks.
Whites.
Cerufe.
Burnt Cherry-Stones.
Conftant White.
Ivory-Black.
Spanish White.
Keating's Black.
Flake Whife.

Spodium.
Browns.
B


2
Blues.
Browns.
Spanish Brown.
Saunders Blue.
Spanith Liquorice.
Blue.
Umber.
Verditer.
Biftre.
Indico.
Litmofe.
Reds.
Simalt.
Native Cinnabar.
Pruffian Blue.
Burnt Oker.
Light, ditto.
Indian Red.
Ultramarine.
Red Lead.
Minium.
Fellows.
Lake.
English Oker.
Vermilion.
Gall-Stone.
Carmine.
Gamboge.
Mafficot.
Greenss
 
Oker de Luce.
Bice.

Orpiment.
Werdites
Roman Oker.
Grats-Green.
Dutch Pink.
Sap-reen.
Saffron Water.
Dif. Verdigreafe.
Pink.

DikzeriONs for preparing the following Single
Colours.
WHITES.
8
The beft White for painting in Water Colours,
is Flake White: But fome recommend a White
made of Pearl and Oyfter-Shells, brought to an im-
palpable Powder: This is called a Pearl White, an
If you ufe Whit
vill mix well with any Colour.
Lead, clarify it with White Wine Vinegar; an
after the White is fettled, pour off the Vinegar, an
1V21


3
wath it with Water. The Method of wathing it
is thus: Put the Powder into a Glats of Water, Hir
it abeut, and prefently pour the Water off while it
is white, into another clean Glafs, and when it is
fettled pour off the Water,, and you will have an ex-
cellent White, to which add as much Gum, as is
neceffary to give it a Gloss.
It has been often neticed that White Lead will
turn black, if mixed with Water that comes from
Iron or Clay; to that in the Space of a Month of
two, you may perceive it, and it will alfo change
any Colour, with which it is mixed.
It is recommended by some to take the Powder of
Egg-Shells, of the brighteft and whiteff Sort: Let it
be well ground with Gum-Water, to the State of
an impalpable Powder, to which you may add one
twentieth Part of White Sugar-candy, and then
ufe it; though others efteem it moft when clarified
in Spirits of Wine, and then ufe it with Gum-
Water.
It has been found by repeated Experience, that
this Egg-fhell Powder is extremely ferviceable as a
White in Water-Colours, and that this, and the
Oyfter-shell Powder rectified, and well bruifed, will
make an excellent Mixture with other Colours, and
will keep them from changing.
A fine White for Water-Colours may be made by
diffolving Filings of Silver, or Silver Leaf, in Aqua
Fortis. Then evaporating the Aqua Fortis, till it
appears like Chryffal in the Bottom of the Glals:
Decant the other Part of the Aqua Fortis, and wath
the Silver four or five Times in pure Water, till it is
entirely cleaned from the Aqua Fortis, which may
be known by tafting it; then dry it for Ufe. It
muft be ufed with the Waters of Gum and Sugar-
Candy.
78
B7


4
To make a good WHTTE for Water-Colours proper for
Miniature.
Take a Pound of the Shreddings of Glovers Lea-
ther, and let them steep in Water, and boil them in
a Kettle with twelve Cuarts of Water, till it shrinks
to two; then ffrain it through a Linen Cloth, into
2 well-glazed earthen Pan: This is called Glue
or Size; and to know if this be firong enough,
when it has got its Confiffence, feel if it is ffiff and
firm under your Hland.
The Glue being made, reduce fome White Chalk
to a Powder; then melt the Glue, and while it is
Hot, add fuch a Quantity of Chalk, as will bring it
to the Confiftency of a Pafte; then letting it fteep
warter of an Hour, ftir it with a Brufh
for 2 C
made of Hog's Briftles.
Then, in order to make this White brighter, add
more Glue, for the firft or second Lay; this muft
be applied, by beating it with the End of a Bruth.
Be careful to obferve that every Layer be dry, be-
fore you puton another. If you work upon Wood,
you muft put on a Dozen; but fix or feven is fuffi-
cient, if your Paper is thick. When this is done,
dip a foft Bruth in fome Water; then draining it
with your Fingers, rub the Work with it, in order
to make it the fmoother. When your Bruth is full
of Whice, you muft wath it again, and alfo change
the Water, when it is too white. Or you may ufe
2 wet Linen Rag inflead of a Brush.
Of XELLows.
In Come Objects, there may be feen a fhining like
that of Gold, through Colours of Red, Blue, or
GGreen, fuch as fome Sort of Flies, or Beerles, and
the Cantharides. This Gold Tranfparency may be
very well imitated, by laying fome Leaf-Gold on
the


5
the shaded Side of the Drawing, giving a little to the
light Side. To lay on the Gold Leaf, press it
fmooth and clofe with Cotton, after you have
wathed it with ffrong Gum-Water. But in this
Part of the Performance, care muft be taken that
in laying on the Gum, you do not exceed the Li-
mits, through which you would have the Gold ap-
pear. In this Cafe, the Gold is only to thine
through the tranfparent Colour, which is to be laid
Over it.
As Leaf Gold will not receive Water-Colours re-
gularly, it is neceffary that the Student should be
prepared with Water of Ox-Gall, and with this Li-
quor to Htroke over the GGold Leaf; by which means
it will receive any Colour you are defirous of laying
over it, and will alfo retain it. The Reds may be
Lake, or Carmine; the Purples, Lake, and fine In-
digo. The Greens, Verdigreafe, or Sap-Green;
and for the Blues, Indigo on the dark Side, and a
little Ultramarine on the Light (all which Colours
shall be defcribed in their proper Places).
In June and July, there may be found upon Rofe-
Trees, a Kind of Beatle, of 2 Gold and Crreen Co-
lour, which may prove extremely serviceable in this
Kind of Painting; but in ufing your Gold, it will be
beft to polish it, which may be done after the follow-
ing Directions.
In some Manuscripts there may be feen Gold Let.
ters, which feem to rife above the Surface of the
Paper. The Compofition which raifes them thus,
is made of Vermilion, and the White of an Egg,
beat to the Confiffence of an Oil, and then fixed to
the Paper with Gum Arabic: On this figurative
Letter, wath fome ffrong Gum-Water, with a
Camel’s Hair Pencil; then lay on the Gold Leaf,
clofe with fome Cotton, and when it is dry, rub it
2gain with Cotton, and burnish it with a Dog's
Toothy
B
3


6
Footh; and it will by this Means appear as if it
was really caft in Gold.
There is alfo another Way of working in Gold,
which is performed by Shell-Gold (but then it muft
be pure, and not that brought from Germany,
which turns green in a few Days). You muft cover
the fhady Parts with Vermilion, before you ufe this
Gold; and when you have rectified it with Spirits of
Wine, lay it on, and when dry, burnith it as be-
fore directed.
In laying on this Gold, it is beft to leave the
Lights without it, as it will appear to a much greater
Advantage, than if all the Object was covered : But
providing the whole Performance should chance to

be covered, the beft Way of fetting it off, is to trace
over the fhady Parts with Gall-ftone, or the Fellow
made of French Berries (of which we shall treat
hereafter) and heightened with Minium.
Having treated thus much upon Gold, we shall
ow peak of Fellows in general. Gamboge is, be-
youd Doubt, one of the melloweff Colours Nature
has produced : it is of fo mild a Temperature, that
when it is touched with any Fluid, it inflantancoufty
diffolves; to that confequently it wants neither
summing nor grinding: It is productive of a Va
riety of the moft agreeable and pleafant Vellow
Pints, that Fancy or Art could ever imagine; it
wrill generally shade itfelf; though you will fome-
times find in the Description of Flowers it requires
Help.
Gall-Rone is a very rich deep Yellow, tending to
wards a Brown: it is exceeding ufeful in many
Lafes, and the Painters hold it in great Effeem; it
reeds but little gumming
or grinding,: it works
free, but will not shade itfelf.
We have a Recipe for making the following Yel-
low from Mr. Boyle, who fays, that if you cut the
Roots





Roots of Barberries, and put them into a frong
Lixivium made of Pearl—Affies and Water, from

them will proceed a very agreeable Vellow: This
Experiment has often been made, and as often at-

tended with Success,
He alfo gives an Account of another fine trant-
parent Fellow, made by boiling the Root of a
Mulberry-Tree, well cleanfed; in the foregoing
Lixivium. This will produce a yellowith Juice,
from which a Liquor much deeper than the former
may be extracted.
Fellow Oker makes a very good Pale Yellow; and
being ground with Gum-Water, will prove ex-
tremely ufeful.
Another very ufeful Vellow, may be made by in-
fuling the Plant Celandine in clear Water, and
gently preffing it, and adding to the Liquor some
Allum-
Water, and then let it boil.
The Virtues of the Yellow made of French Ber-
ries is fo well known; that we need not difcourfe
upon it, but only give the Student the following

Directions for preparing it.
Quart of the preceding Lixivium, boil two.
In a 9
Ounces of French Berries till the Liquor is of a fine
Fellow; then ffrain it from the Yellow Berries,
and when it is cold it is fit for Ufc. Then to the
Berries put a Pint of the fame Lixivium, and boil it
till the Liquor is as ffrong as Gall-ftones, with which
you may shade any Yellows: This you may boil
till it comes to a Brown, and will, with the Addition
of a little Ox-Gall, ferve to shade the Gold Leaf.
You may likewife make a Yellow, by infufing
Saffron in pure Water, which produces a bright Rich
Fellow. When this is ffeeped in rectified spirits of
Wine, there is nothing higher; but it is very apt to
Hy, unless it is high gummed.
A 500d
B4


8
A good Yellow for the Illumination of Prints may
be extracted from the Roots of Ginger, which makes
a good Green, when mixed with tranfparent, Verdi-
greafe.
Thofe Yellows, called English and Dutch Pinks,
are made with French Berries ground to a fine Pow-
der, and then boiled.

OF ORANCE COLOUR.

This Colour is made of a Mixture of Vermilion
and Gamboge; the latter moft predominant; in
which you are prefented with a pleafant and service-
able Colour in painting Lillies, and all other Orange-
Colour Flowers. What induced us to introduce this
Colour, was to encourage thofe Young! Beginners,
who may have grown weary of working in Red Lead,
that they may divert themfelves with this foft, eaty,
and agreeable Colour, as they will find no Difficulty
in the uting it, and it will reprefent the Flowers in

the moft lively Manner imaginable.





Of REDS.

As Minium, or Red Lead, is a ftrong heavy Co-
Jour, Mr. Boyle has given us the following Direc-
sions for preparing it : Put four Ounces of this Co=
Your in a Glals, to a Quart of Rain-Water, and
when it has been thoroughly firred, pour off the
Water; and by a frequent Repetition of this, there
vill remain at the Bottom of the Glass a beautiful
ed when it is dry, which is to be ufed with Crum-
Water. When the Colour has been thus prepared,
you muft not expect above twenty Grains to remain
out of four Ounces.
Carmine affords the brighteff and moft perfect
Crimfon, and is the moft beautiful of all Reds; for
with


9
with this Colour and Lake you may make the Shades
as frong as you pleafe. But we think it neceffary
to inform the Student, that this Colour should never
be purchafed but by Day-light; for if it is not good,
it will but fpoil your Work.
Lake is a fine Tranfparent Colour, not much in-
ferior to Carmine: but in painting with Carmine on
that Part of the Print, on which the Light is fup-
poted to ftrike, you muft lay on to light a Tint, as
is fcarce vifible, working it fironger as it grows
darker, and touch it in the darker Parts with Lake.
Lake may be bought at moft Colour(hops ready
prepared in Shells for Water-Colours But if you are
lefirous of making it yourfelf, it is neceftary to ad-
here to the following Directions.
Having prepared a Lixivium made with the Afhes
of Vine-Tvigs, to three Pints of it, add a Pound of
he beft Ground Brazil Wood, and boil it till half
he Lixivium is evaporated, and then ftrain it. off,
which being done; boil it again with the Addition of
our Ounces of freth Brazil Wood, two Ounces of
Cochineal, half an Ounce of Terra Marita, and 2
Pint of fair Water, and let it evaporate as before:
Then add half an Ounce of calcined Allum (re-
luced to an impalpable Powder) and a Quarter of a
Drachim of Arfenic. Diffolve them in it, by ffirring
t with a Stick, and when it is fettled ftrain it off.
To give this a Body, reduce two Cuttle-fith Bones
o a Powder, and putting it in; let it dry leifurely.
Then grind it in a Quanrity of fair Water, in
which you may let it ffeep: Then ftraining it through
Cloth, and making it into a few Cakes, fet it by
or Vfe, after drying it on a Piece of Marble.
If you would have this Lake redder, add fome of
he Juice of a Lemon; and to make it deeper, add
Dil of Tartar.
Another


10

Another Lake may be made in the following Man-
her: Boil the Shreds of fuperfine Scarlet Cloth in 2
Ley made of the Afhes of burnt Tartar, and when
it has fufficiently boiled add fome Cochineal, pow-
dered Maftich, and Roch—Allum; and then boil this
Composition again; and while it is quite het, ftrain


a imes. The firft Time, the
it thro' a bag feveral
Bag muft be ffrained from Top to Bottom, and the
remaining grofs Matter being taken out, let the Bap
be well wathed; after this, ftrain the Liquor thro
the Bag again, and you will find a Pafte remaining
on the sides, which you may divide into fmall Cakes,
and fet it by for ufe.
To make another Lake: Steep four Ounces of the
beft Brazil Wood in a Pint and a Half of the fineft
diftilled Vinegar, for three Weeks at leall, tho' the
Longer it remains the better it is; after which feethe
the Whole in Balneum Marie, till it boils up three or
four Times; then let it fettle for a Day or two, after
which put to it an Ounce of powdered Allum, and
put it into a clean Pan with the Liquor, and let it
remain fo for twenty-four Hours; then heat the Com-
pofition, and fir it till it is cold; and when it has
food about twelve Hours, frain it, and add two
Cuttle-fith Bones, prepared as before.
But a liquid Colour of a very good Crimfon may
be made as follows. In twelve Ounces of pale ffale
Beer, boil one Ounce of ground Brazil Wood (which
may be had at moft Druggifts) till the Colour is as
frong as you defire; then ftrain it thro' a Linen
Cloth, and bottle it up for ufe. If you want to

bring this Colour to a Body, take fome dried Ox
blood reduced to a Powder, and mix it with the
Colour.
We have the following Directions from Mr. Boyle,
for extracting a fine Crimfon from the Berry-bearing
Spinach, which being preffed, affords a very agree-
able


I7
able Juice; to which add a fourth Part of Allum,
Doil it, and when it is cold it is fit for ufe.
Or you may extract a very beautiful Red, from

the Red Beat-root, baked with a little ffrong Vine-
gar and Allum, and when it is cold it is fit for
ife.
Another way to make a Crimfon Put twenty (or
more) Grains of bruifed Cochineal into a Gallipot,
with as many Drops of the Ley of Tartar, as will
make it give forth its Colour, and then immediately
add to this Mixture about Half a Spoonful of Water,
or more, and you will have a very agreeable Purple;
then reducing fome Allum to a very fine Powder,
put it to the Purple Liquor, and you will have as
beautiful a Crimfon: ftrain it thro' a fine Cloth, and
ufe it as foon as poffible; for tho' this is a Colour
which if foon ufed looks extremely well, yer by
long flanding is subject to decay.
Of PURPLES in General.
To Extratt a Purple from Legweed.
Take of Logwood eight Ounces, to which add a
Pint of Rain-Water, and an Ounce of Allum, and
let it be well infufed over a flow Fire in a well-glazed
Pan, or Pipkin, for about twenty-four Hours; then
add to it a Quarter of an Ounce of Cum Arabic;
let it fand for a Week, and ffrain it thro' a Piece of
fine Cloth. Keep it clofe, or it will mould.
Or vou may make a redder Purple by adding to
one Ounce of the above, four Ounces of Brazil
Wood, and a Pint of Htale Beer, and boiling it till
the Liquer is as ftrong as you defire. It may be
made darker by adding more Logwood.

Tho' the richeft Purple is made by blending Car-
mine and Pruffian Blue, or Indico, to what Shade
you pleafe.
Of



12
Of BivEs.
s the Ultramarine is the beft and brighteff Blue,
we shall begin with its Temperature. The Method
of preparing it is by divefting the Lapis Lazuli of its
Gold, and reducing it to the State of an impalpable
Powder, which muft be done as follows: Heat fix
Ounces of the Lapis Lazuli till it is red; cool it in

Rrong
Vinegar, and grind it with a Stone and Mul-
ler, prepared for that Purpofe; then make a Com-
poficion of Bees-Wax, Rofin, Linfeed Oil, and
Purpentine, of each three Ounces; incorporate the
Whole together over a flow Fire, till it is near boil-
ing, and then pour them into a Pan well glazed.
This is called the Pafte of UUltramarine. The Lapis
Tuantity
Lazuli being prepared, add to it an equal O
of the Paftil, or Pafte; mix them together thorough-
ly, and let them remain twelve Hours; and to ex
tract the Ultramarine from the Pafte, pour clear
Water upon it, and prefting the Pafte with your
Hands, the UUltramarine will come out; for the Re-
ception of which, place a Glass Tumbler, (or what
you chufe) under your Hland, and let it fettle in this
Water till the Ultramarine finks to the Bottom.
If your Colour feems foul, you may cleanfe it
thus: Diffolve fome Tartar in Water, and add as
much of it to the Ultramarine as will cover it; in
which let it fland for twelve Hours; then wath it in
warm Water, and you will have your Colour well
clarified and perfectly clean. Let your Ultramarine
be of a high Colour, and care muft be taken that it
be well ground. Next to Ultramarine in Beauty is
Pruffian Blue, when ufed in Oil, tho' it will not
sand fo long,
on account of its not having the
Body of the Ultramarine. The Pruffian Blue does
hot grind Kindly with Water, on account of its oily
Subftance.
Blue


 23.
Blue Bice is a Colour of a very good Body, and
fows very agreeably in the Pencil; but it muft be
wathed according to the Rules laid down for UI-
framarine.
Blue Verditer is a very bright pleafant Blue, of a
good Body, and works very well when ground with
Gum-Water. It is a little inclinable to a Green,
and makes a very good one, when ground with
Gamboge, or French Berries. This Blue is moftly
ufed for a Sky, or Garment.
Saunders Blue is extremely serviceable in the Shad-
ing of Ultramarine, where no very dark Shades ap-
pear, which when they do, you may add a little
Indigo to it.
The Lirmas is a very agreeable Blue, and may be
had at moft Druggifts; the following Direction for
preparing it we have of Mrs. Mariana, (as it cannot
be bought ready prepared for Water- Colours.) Take
a Quart of Small Beer Wort, in which boil two
Ounces of Litmus, till the Colour is as flrong as
you require; then pour the Liquor into a glazed
Pipkin, and it will foon congeal.
Indigo is the darkeft Blue, is a foft free Colour,
and runs very warm in the Pencil; it requires to be
well wathed and ground, and may be made darker or
lighter by the Addirion of more or less Gum-Water.
Care is required in the ufing this Colour; for, as we
before hinted, its running to free may be a means of
deceiving the Student, and it may prove too dark
for the Completion of his Defires.
Mr. Boyle has given us the following Directions
for making a very fine Colour of the blue Leaves of
Rue, by preffing and bruifing the Leaves, and in
fufing both Leaves and Juice in pure Water, for
about a Fortnight, wathing them every Day; and
then incorporate them and the Warer, till they be-
come a Pulp, and let them dry gradually.
Thele


14
Thefe will produce an excellent Blue for Shadine
39
which has a good Body, and runs free in the Pencil;
with this you should mix the Powder of Crum Arabic,
which will be a means of making it keep; and add
of the Gum as much as you would have it more of
lefs ffiff in working.
A fine tranfparent Blue, (from the preceding
Author) equal to a Tint of UUltramarine.—The
Flower from which this Blue is chieffy extracted is
the Cyanus, or Blue Cornbottle, which is poffeffed
of two Blues in the outer and inner Leaves; the
firft of which is light, the other dark, and is held
in preference, which should be picked from the But-
tons and Cafes in which they grow, as alfo from the
outer Leaves, the fame Day they were gathered.
thefe middle
Having prepared a Quantity of
Leaves, prefs out as much Juice as poffible, and with
the Addition of a little Allum, you will be poffeffed
of a fine, durable, tranfparent Blue, little inferior to
Ultramarine.
The procuring of the Flowers, and the preffure of
the Juice, should be done with all poffible Expedi-
tion, left the Flowers should lofe of their Perfection.
It has been thought by fome, that if the Leaves
of thefe Flowers were cured as thofe of Saffron;
there would proceed from them a much greater
quantity of Colour, from which might be preffed
more Tincture, than when freth from the Field.
In the curing of which it would appear, that
each Time the Cake was turned, the Flowers would
be darker, till they became a dark Blue. Great
care is required during this Operation, that the Fire
be kept very conftant and gentle, that the Flowers
may not be fcorched, which will be an inconteftable
Way of bringing the Flowers to Perfection.
Therefore to put this Operation in Execution, 2
Kiln muft be procured, as for curing Saffron; the
Top


15
Top of which is to be covered with Hair Cloth,
upon this lay feveral Sheets of Paper, afterwards a
Parcel of the inner Leaves of the Flower, two or
three Inches thick, prefting them clofe, and sprinkle-
ing them with Gum Water; after which, a small
Charcoal Fire muft be made in the Kiln, to as to
communicate Heat to the Top. Then cover the
Cake with a few Sheets of Paper, and a Board with
a fmall Weight upon it; then after a few Minutes
the Cake is to be turned, and when it is placed, take
off the upper Papers, and fprinkle the Cake again
with Grum-Water, and then lay on the Board a
Weight, as before, for a few Minutes; and to re-
peat the Turning and Sprinkling feveral Times, till
the Cake is united, and of the Thickness of a Cake
of Saffron.
For further Particulars, which we think neceltary,
we refer our Readers to a Treatife on curing Saffron,
made public by Mr. Bradly, in his Monthly Account
of Hufbandry and Gardening.
Of BLACES.
The proper Blacks for Water-Colours are as fol-
low Ivory Black, which is to be prepared in the
following Manner. Let the lvory Black be tho-
roughly ground, and there will proceed from it a
Liquor of an Oily Substance; mix as much of which
in the lvory Black, as will make it work freely in
the Pencil. It has a fine Crlofs, and is extremely
serviceable in painting of fhining Objects.
There is another very agreeable and ufeful Black
called Keating's Black, and may be had at most Co-
four-fhops ready prepared for Water-Colours.
Indian Ink is a very good Black, and of great
Service, as it may be laid on to any Shade, and will
21ways


16

always (hade itfelf; on which account it is often ufed
for Drawings.
Of GREENS.
Sap-Green is a Colour extremely serviceable, and
is the beft Green for Water-Colours our Age affords;
it being of fo gummy a Subftance, is a great Re-
commendation, and its dilating fo eafily in Water;
besides this produces an infinite Variety of Tints, and
has the Advantage of fhading itfelf. In the Purcha
fing this Colour, remember to obferve that it looks
very black and bright.
A Sea or Artificial Green may be made, by mixss
ing Indigo and Sap-Green, which may be made
darker or lighter by adding more or less Indigo: It
is a very serviceable Colour,, very eafily worked, and
is productive of many Tints. Let your Judgment
direct you to fuch as are neceffary in your Perform-
ance. This Colour, as well as Sap-Green, shades
itfelf. Be careful that your Indigo is well ground,
before you mix it.
Another may be made with Indigo and Gamboge
well ground together, and is extremely ufeful in
Painting of Trees, Grafs, Vegetables, &c. and
with the Addition of Sap-Green is very ferviceable in
Flowers and shading of Garments.
A Tranfparent Green is made by mixing Verdi-
greafe and Yellow to various Tints, by leaving
either predominant.
Of BROWNS.
Biffre is a very good and ferviceable Colour; but
the good Sort is difficult to be found, the beft being
very bright and clofe; and as it is a Colour difficult
to work of itfelf, it will be better to mix a little Spa-
Rish



nith Liquorice with it, as that will mellow and take
off its Harthness. It requires a good deal of grind-
ing, and the higher it is gummed, the better it is
for Ofe.
Spanish Lignorice is allowed by the beft Mafters to
be productive of a great Variety of Brown Tints, of
a very agreeable Colour, but will not do for fhading
itfelf; it works as free as any Gum Colours, and
by dilaring in fair Water, is fit for Ufc.
A Brown Mixture may be made by incorporating
Sap-Green and Carmine, which is remarkable for
being of an extraordinary foft Nature. It is. a Co-
four that is extremely ferviceable, as you will find
hereafter in a Description of painting Flowers in
Water-Colours.
Another may be made, by blending Vermilion
and Biftre thoroughly; the Biftre muft be extremely
well ground, before you incorporate it with the
Vermition, and it will produce you 2 Brown, worthy
of your Efieem.
DIRECTiONs for preparing the following Mixed
Colours.
A/p Colour. Cerufe, and Keating's Black; and White,
shaded with Cherry-Stone Black.
Bay. Lake, and Flake-White, shaded with Carmine.
Biftre, and Vermilion, shaded with Black.
Changeable Silk. Red Lead and Mafticot Water,
shaded with Sap-Green, and Verdigreafe.
nother. Lake, and Vellow, shaded with Lake, and
Pruffian Blue.
Clond Colour. Light Mafficot, or Lake and White
shaded with Blue Verditer.
Another Conftant Whice, and Indian Ink, with 2
little Vermilion.
C
nrther


18

White, with a litle Lake and Blue Ver.
nother.
diter, which makes a very agreeable Cloud
Colour, for that Part next the Horizon.
Lake and White, with a little Vermilion
Crimson.
shaded with Lake and Carmine.
Vermilion and Orpiment heightened
Flame Colour.
with White.
Gamboge shaded with Minium, and then
nother.
with Red Lead.
Flesh Colour. Cerufe and Red Lead, with Lake; for
a fwarthy Complexion, add Vellow Oker.
Conftant White, and a little Carmine,
Another
shaded with Spanith Liquorice, and that
wathed with Carmine.
French Green. Light Pink and Dutch Bice, shaded
with Green Pink.
Glass Grey. Cerufe, with a little Blue of any
Kind.
Hair Colour Mafticot, Oker, Umber, Cerulc, and
Cherry-Stone Black.
Lead Colour Indico and White.
Light Blue.
Blue Bice, heightened with Flake
White.
Knother.
Blue Verditer, and White of any fort well
ground.
Light Green. Pink and Smalt, with White, (if re-
quifite
Knother.
Blue Verditer, and Gamboge.
Another
Gamboge with fome Verdigreafe. The
chief fe of this Green, is to lay the
Ground-Colours for Trees, Fields, Ec
and is a very serviceable Colour.
Lyon-Towney. Red Lead and Mafticot, fhaded witl
Umber.
Murry.
Lake and White Lead.
Orange.
Red Lead and a little fine Mafficot
shaded with Gall-fione and Lake.
12
O


19
Orange Tawney. Lake and light Pink, with a litle
Riafticot, shaded with Gall-fione and
Lake.
Pearl Colour. Carmine, with a little White, shaded
with Lake.
Popingay Green. Green, and Mafticot; or Pink and
a lirtle Indigo, fhaded with Indigo.
Indigo, Spanith Brown and White; or
Purple.
3
Blue Bice with Red and White Lead; of
Blue Bice and Lake.
Cherry-Stone Black and White.
Rusct.
Red Lead and Lake, with or without Ver-
Scarlet.
milion.
Sea Green. Bice, Pink and White, shaded with
Pink.
Sky Coloar. Light Mafticot and White for the
loweft and lighteff Parts, Red Ink and
White for the next: Blue Bice and White
for a third Degree, and Blue Bice alone
for the next. Thefe are all to be foftened
into one another at the Edges, fo as not to

appear harfh.
Sky Colour
for Drapery. Blue Bice and Cerufe, or
Ultramarine and White, shaded with In-
digo.
Straw Colour. Mafticot and a very litle Lake,
shaded with Durch Pink.
Violet Colour Indigo, Whice and Lake; or fine
Dutch Bice and Lake, shaded with Indigo;
of Litmofe, Smalt, and Bice, the latter
moft predominant.
Water.
Blue and Whire, shaded with Blue, and

heightened with White.
Another.. Blue Verdigreafe, fhaded with Indigo, and
heightened with White.


DREC
C2



20

DIRECTIONS for using the Colours.
four Pencils muft be faft in their Cuills, and

tharp pointed (after you have drawn them thro your
Mouth) not apt to part in the Middle.

Before you begin, you should have all your Co-
lours ready, and a Pallet for the Conveniency of
mixing them, a Paper to lay your Iland upon, as
well as try your Colours; alfo a large Brush called a
F
Pitch to wipe off the Duff from the Colours.
Being prepared according to the foregoing. Me-
thod, proceed in your Painting, which if it should
be a Landfcape you muft at firtt lay dead Colours all
leaving no part uncovered: And in
Ver your Piece,
this Part of the Performance there needs no great
Pains, but a mafterly Freedom is rather required;
and the Work, tho' feemingly rough, upon a clofe
Inspection, will have a good Effect, when placed at
2 Diftance.
Let not the Roughness of the Work difcourage you,
nor be any Means of flopping your Progrefs, for it is
cafily to be foftened by Degrees, with the other Sha-
dows, obferving only to fweeten and mellow them,
and heighten them as the Light falls.
In some Placeslay on ftrong and mafterly Touches,
and in thofe Places bring up your Work to an equal
Roundness and Strength, tempering and fwectening
your Colours with a fharper Pencil than the firft,
that no Lumps or harth Edges may be left, but that
all your Shadows may lie disperfed, foft and fmooth,
12.
gliding gently as it were into one another.
You are not to finith any one Part firff, but work
up every Part gradually alike, till you fee nothing
wanting to complete your Piece.
Having laid your dead Colours, begin firft with
the lightelt Parts, as the Sky, Sun-Beams, &c. then
the Vellowith Beams (which are to be done with
Mafficot



21

Wiafficot and White), next the Bluenets of the Sky
(with Blus Verditer alofie) : for Purple Clouds only
ix Lake and White; istaking your Colours deeper
as they go upwards from the Horizon, except in
tempeftuous Skies. The Tops of diffant Mountains
muft be worked fo faint; that they may feem to lofe

themfelves in Air.
Bring your Colours forward as your Diftance de-
creafes, painting your firft Ground next the Horizon
downwards, of bluiffi Sea-Green; and as you ad-
vance forwards, of a darker Green; till you come to
the Fore-Ground, which as it is the darkeft Part of
all, do with dark Green worked up in fuch Manner,
as to give the Appearance of Shrubbery; Eic.
In painting of Trees, having firft laid a Verdi-
greafe Green for a dead Colour; proceed with work-
ing it; to as to give a leaty Appearance; and feem to
hang free and natural, especially towards the Edges,
where you thay-touch a few Leaves clofe to the
Tree, which will give your Performance a mafterly
Eeffect. And you may alfo bring fome of your
Leaves forward with Mafficot and White: And for
the Trunk or Body; work up the Brown with Sap-
Green; and if you fhould introduce any Oak Trees
in your Defign; you should lay on some Touches, to
Express Leaves of Ivy twined about it.
All diffant Objects are to be made imperfect, as
they appear to the Eyc.
Thefe Rules are adapted to General Appearances,
but the Student may deviate from them, as Nature
and his own ripened Judgment shall dictate.
The Method of Colouring Daked Figures.
We shall begin firft with the Naked Figures of
Women and Children, and though the Life is to be
Principally followed, yet we think it necefiary to give
some
C
3


22

ome few Directions to prepare thofe Colours seen in
Nature. Take Flake White, and a little Lake,
blend them together, and with that lay- the Ground
Colour, then proceed to shade, with Red. Oker,
Cherry-ftone Black, and a little Lake mixed toger
ther, touching the Lips, Checks,. &cc. with a Fint
of Carmine, and heighten it with White, and a
little Carmine. Remember that you are never; to
heighten it with pure White, which will rather give
it the Appearance of Fith than Flells.

For old Women, take Vermilion, White, and
Brown Oker for the Ground Colour, and shade it
with Red Oker, and Cherry-ftone Black; and to
put a little Bloom in their Faces, ufe Lake and Vers
milion, heightened as before.
Loung Women and Children deceafed, should be
coloured with Brown, White, and a little Vermis
lion shaded with Cherry-fione Black; but to old
Women you muft add more brown Oker, fhaded as
before.
In the colouring of young Men you muft add more
brown Oker, and shade them with Kearing's black
and brown Oker, touching their Lips and Cheeks
with Carmine and Lake.
For Dead Men, take Brown, with a little White
and Vermilion, and shade it with Black.

3

3
To Colour Halk after the most approved Methods.
Loung
g Women and Children, lay on brown Oker
alone, and heighten it with Mafficot, or Brown
Oker and White heightened with the fame. Or
with light Oker darkened with brown Oker, and
heightened with Mafticor.
Old Women's Hair, lay on Brown Oker and
Black mixed, heightened with Brown Oker and
White. In Grey Hair, use more Black than Whice,
and


23
1
and for the heightening ufe pure White (or Cerufe).
Thefe fame Colours may be applied to the Hair of
Men, making them darker or lighter as Occafion
shall require.
To Colour BERSTS.
A Chefnut brown Horfe, muft be coloured with
Red Oker and Black mixed together, and shaded
with Black, heightened with Red Oker and White.
An Ath Grey fforfe, with Black and White mixed,
shaded with Black, heightened with White.
A White Horfe, for the Ground-Colour, Black and
White mixed, shaded with Black, White, and
Biffre, and heightened with pure Water.
A Black fIlorfe, lay on your Black lightly; and
Shade it with Keating's Black.
Spotted Horfes are to be variegated according to
Nature, and the Difcretion of the Artiff.
For Sheep, lay on White, and fhade it with Spa-

hith Liquorice.
Colour Hogs with Brown Oker; and shade them
with Keating's Black and Biffre, and heighten them
with Mafticot; the Briftles may be coloured with
Rrong Brown Oker, the Eyes with dark Mafticot
shaded with Vermilion, the Mouth with Indigo
darkened with Indian Ink; touch likewife black
Sparks among the Hairs the Infide of his Mouth
muft be laid with Vermilion, shaded with Lake.
The Lion may be coloured in much the fame
Manner as the Hog, only adding some Lake in the
Ground Colour.
A Bear muft be coloured with Brown Oker, Red
Oker, and Black mixed, and shaded with Biffre and
Ivory-Black.
For
C4


an
24
E
For a Leopard, mix brown and light Oker, and
darken it with lvory-Black; the Spots may be made
with Red Oker, and Black shaded with Black.
A Wolf, Spanish Liquorice and Black, shaded.
with Elack.
A Grey Wolf, is coloured with Black, White,
and Brown, and fhaded with Black; the Eyes are of

2 Chefnut Colour.
Affes may be coloured with Black and White
mixed,Or you may add unto the foregoing Colour,
a. little Brown Oker; and shade it with Black.
The Elephant is to he coloured with Black and
Whise, and Spanith Liquorice mixed, and shaded
5
with Black and Biftre; the inner part of the Note
muft be laid with Vermilion and White, shaded with.



Blask,
Rats and Mice to be coloured the fame as the

Sermer.
Apes, Monkies, &c. with Dutch Pink and Black,
heightened with Mafticot, and White. The Face
with Black and Biffre mixed, as alfo the Feet and
below their Bellies, which fhade with Black and
Pink, mixed with a little Brown Oker,
 The Stag muft be laid with Brown Oker, shaded
with Bifire tewards the Back. The Neck and Belly
muff be of a White Colour, the Mouth and Ears in-
clining to a Red, his Hoofs Black, and his Legs
thaded with Black.
A Hlare is to be laid with Brown Oker, his Belly
White, and his Back shaded with Biftre.
A Rabbet, for the Ground Colours take Black
and Whire, and his Belly with Whice; then shade
II ith Black


C


 25

Of BIRDs in General.
The Eagle, for the Ground-Colour, Black; and
Brown shaded with Indigo; the Feathers heightened
with Brown Oker and White; the Beak and Claws
are to be laid on with Saffron, and shaded with
Biffre; the Eyes with Vermilion, heightened with
Mafficot, or Saffron shaded with Vermilion,
The Falcon is laid on with Brown Oker, Black
and Whitemixed; and shaded with Black; the Fea-
thers muft be deferived by Strokes: of Black, his
Breaff muft be fprinkled with Black, the Eyes and

Talons the same as the Eagles, the Beak is Grey.
The Turkey, both Male and Female, upon the
Back, are Black and White mixed gradually, shaded
off to a White under the Belly, and fprinkled and
shaded with Black; the Legs Indigo shaded with the
same, the Beak blue, the Eyes blue, heightened
with Whire. The Turkey-Cock when angry has a
Red Skin hanging over his Bill, which muft be laid
with Vermilion, fhaded with Lake; but when he is
not angry, it may be coloured with Black and
White, tinged with Blue.

. The Swan, with White shaded with Black; the
Legs and Bills are black, the Eyes yellow, with a
Ball in the midlt,
The Goofe, Cerufe shaded with Black, the Legs
black, and the Bills red.
the
The Pheafant; White and Black mixed,
Eyes like thofe of the Falcon; the Legs, Dutch Pink.
shaded with Black.
The Owl, Whire, Black and Brown Oker mixed,
and shaded with Biftre; the Eyes are yellow; en-
circled with White, the Legs Fellow Oker, shaded

with Bifire.
Of


26
1
Of FRUIT in General.
Apples, with fair thin Mafticotmixed with Verdi-
greafe, shaded with Brown Oker, and give them a
Bloom with Lake, and heighten them with Mafticot
and. White. Confider whether the Apple is ripe or
green, for too great a Deviation from Nature is not

to be allowed.
A Pear, should be laid on with Mafficot, deepened
3
and mellowed with Brown Oker; you muft give 2
Bloom the same as the Apple.
Cherries, are coloured with Vermilion and Lake,
and shaded with Carmine, heightened with Vermi-
lion and White.
Spanith Cherries, are in the middle laid on with
Vermilion, Lake; and White mixed, foftened off
toward the Extremities; give them a Bloom with
Lake heightened with White.

The Mulberry; muft be laid on with Carmine,
and that with Blatk, in fuch Manner, as between
the Stalks and Berries it may appear red, according
to Nature.
Strawberries, lay the Ground White, draw it
over with Vermilion and Lake, and shade it with
fine Lake; then heighten it with Red Lead and Maf=
ficot mixed, and after with White; stipple them
with White and thin Lake only.
Blue Grapes; lay on a dark Purple, and shade
them with Blue; and give a Bloom with Bice.
White Grapes, with a Mixture of Verdigreafe and
Mafticot, fhading them with thin Verdigreafe, and
heightening with Mafticot and White.
Peaches, are to be laid on with thin Mafficot, and
shaded with Brown Oker; give them a Bloom with
Lake, and heighten with White.
White


27
White Plumbs are coloured according to the former

Directions.
Bine Plumbs, with Purple, shaded with Bice;
and let them be foftened into a Green towards the
Stalks.
Green Walnuts, with Verdigreafe and Sap-Green
mixed, and shaded with Sap-Crreen ;: and:for thofe
without their Hulks, lay on with Brown Oker, and

shaded with Biftre.
3






GARDEN STUFF, COc.


Raddish, with Whice, and thade it with Lake, and
near the Top foftened into a Blooming Purples:and
in Come Places with Green; the Leaves with Verdi=
a

greate, shaded with Sap-Green.
Whice Cabbage, with Gamboge, and a very little
Verdigreafe; shading it with Sap-Green; touching in
some Places with a little Brown Oker, heightening
it with. White.
Red Cabbage, with Lake and a little Pruffian Blue
mixed, and shaded with Eake and Indigo, and the
Veins with Lake and White.
Cucumbers, lay yellow for the Ground Colour,
wath it over with Verdigreafe, and fhade it with
Sap-Green.
Fellow Pompions, with yellow (haded with Brown
Oker, the Veins with a flronger Brown Oker.
Green Pompions, with Sap-Green, Verdigreafe;
and Indigo mixed, Ihaded with Indigo and Sap-
Green.
Turnips, Whire shaded with Verdigreafe touched
with Brown, the Leaves with Verdigreafe fhaded
with Sap-Green, heightened with Mafticot.
70


28


To Colour FLOwERs after Nature.
 

s 
53 Eettects
Huricula.
FATURE, together with the Art of the Bota-
A:& :niftf: has rendered the Auricula productive of
Luch a Wariery of Colours, as to enter upon a parti=
cular Description, would carry us beyond the Limits
of this Treatife: We shall therefore defcribe two
only, and refer the Student to Nature for the reft.
For the Ground Colour ufe a tender Wath of Gam-
Boge, which shade with Sap-Green and Carmine
r Round the Centre leave a broad
gethe.
blended tog


white Space, whichemift be shaded with Indian Ink
and Sap-Green mixed; then Kipple the Camboge
5

&
With a Purple extracud from Logwood; the Cup in
the Infide: muft bs. arRrong Yellow: shaded with
Dutch: Pink, ior Gall-fone; after which fipple it
with White, darkening the White gradually with

Indiar Ink: as the Shade increafes.
 TherStalks and Leavss: muft be coloured, with a
Green, made of Cerufes Indigo, and Sap-Green,
Tarkeningrt as the Shade requires.



os

Another uricula.

o
14  
   p 
For the firft lay: a light Wath of the Purple ex-
gracted from Logwood, which (hade with a flronger

Exnact of the fame, and in the darkeft Parts Car-
mine and Indigo mixed; the White Circle is to be
shaded with Sap-Green, the inner Part muft be laid
with Purple, and the Seeds are Fellow, which do
with Gamboge.
The Leaves and Stalks are to be laid with Sap-
Green, fhaded with that and Indigo mixed.

Single


29


Single Anemone.
There is in the Anemone Nature difplayed in the
noft variegated Colours, which are laid on to deli-
rately fine, and blended with fuch matchlefs Skill,
that in painting it we would recommend the Student
to pay great Attention to Nature; but not being
willing to leave him quite deftitute of Directions in
executing this beautiful Flower, we shall infert the
following.
For the Ground Colour lay a thin Wath of Gam-
boge, shaded with Biffre; or Carmine, and Sap-
Greenblended together; and for the Crimfon Stripes
ufe Carmine, shading it with the same, and with
Indigo in the darkeft Parts, or you may stipple with
it; for the Leaves ufe Sap-Green shaded with In-
digo and French Berries, the Stalk is Brown.
Belfilvia Anemone.
With a Mixture of Liquid Purple and Carmine,
Sripe this Flower, and shade it with Liquid Purple;
wath and fhade the Heart or Apple with Sap-Green,
and you may flipple it with White; the Seeds muft
be done with Gamboge.

Begin and finith the Leaves and Stalks with Sap-
Green, mixed with a little Indigo.
lthea Frutex.
The curious Student who is willing to enlarge his
Sfudy upon this, may apply to Nature for farther
Particulars, than what we shall here de(cribe: This
Flower is compoted of White and Purple, as well
as its Bud, and in the Middle projects a large Pod;
begin by the Pod with Gamboge and Sap-Green
mixed, and shade the dark side with a Mixture of
Sap-


t


Tn





30
Sap-Green and Indian Ink; then having harched
round the Outfide with Liquid Purple and Carmine,
proceed to fhade the White Leaves with, Indian Ink
only : You may alfo stipple the Flower with Indian
Ink.

The Leaves begin and finish with Sap-Green; and

make the Stalk to imitate Wood.


+
imond Blesfom.
i 

This Flower, is of a pale Rofe Colour, tending to
wards a Purple. For the Ground Colour ufe a ten-
der Wath of Carmine, fhading it with Care and Ac-
curacy with a dark Purple, made by mixing Carmine
he But-
and Pruffian Blue to the required Colour.
tons are of Yellow, which is laid with Mafticot,
shaded with Gamboge; the Stem is Brown, for
which ule Bittre, fhading it with Keating's Black;
the Foot-ftalks and Cups of the Flowers are of a pale
Green.
While this Flower is in Bloom, only a few
Leaves appear, which begin to thoot out from the
Branches, and are of a pleafant Green.

Double Almond Bloffom.
The Flower of this, which is darker than the for-
Ther, may be done by adding more Pruffian Blue to
the Carmine, and carefully blending White in the
light Parts.
-

The Stalks, Leaves, &c. the fame as the fingle

Almond Bloffom.

Aconite.
F
This Flower is to be laid with Gamboge, and
shaded with Gall-ffone or Durch Pink: It is fur-
rounded


32

founded by Leaves of a ffrong Green, to be com-
pofed of Indigo and Gamboge, and the Stalks with
a Mixture of Verditer, Gamboge, and White Lake,
and shade it towards the Flower with Biftre.
Cydamen.

This Flower is White, and muft be shaded with a
Mixture of Indian Ink and Sap-Green; the Pod is
done in the fame Manner, and from the Pod there is
2 fine Shade of Crimfon, which is to be done with
Carmine carefully worked in the Shades of the
Leaves.
The Stalk and Back of the Leaves, begin and
finith with Carmine and Sap-Green mixed.
 Colchicum.
For the firft Colour of this Flower, lay a tender
Wath of Carmine, and a litle of the Purple of Log-
wood mixed, and then stipple it with Carmine only.
The Stalks and Leaves as the Cyclamen.
Fellow Grown Imperial.
Forthis Flower lay a thin Wath of Gamboge, and
upon that another of Minium, and (hade it with
Carmine; the Leaves, which are fo difpoted by Na-
ture, as to add greatly to the Beauty of the Flower,
are to be painted with Sap-Green, and fhaded with
Indigo and French Berries.
Orange Crown Imperial.
To reprefent this Flower, lay a thin Wath of Red
Lead; the light Shades are to be done with Car-
ine, and the dark with Vermilion and Bifire
mixed:


32
mixed : The Seed to be done in the Jame Manner 23
the Flower.
The Leaves and Stalks as thofe of the preceding.
nother Crown Imperial.
For the Ground Colour of this, lay a pale Tint of
Gamboge, which in the light Parts shade with Gall-
ftone, and the darker with Carmine and Sap-Green
rixed.
The Stalks and Leaves in the fame Manner as the
Scarlet Lychnis.
Convolvulus.
-
Begin this Flower with Pruffian Blue and Ver-
diter mixed (and well ground and gummed) the
Rays excepted, then fhade with Pruffian Blue alone;
the Euds to be done the fame; the Rays leave
Whire, and shade with Indian Ink and Sap-Green
mixed next the Cup, and for thofe infide Rays hatch
with a Mixture of White and Gamboge.
The Leaves and Stalks as thofe of the French
Marygold.
nother Convolvulus.
Wath this with Carmine, and deepen it with the
fame, till you have brought the Flower to its proper
Roundness; (hade the Rays with Sap-Green, Indian
Ink; and a little Indigo, blended together.
The Leaves and Stalks as the preceding,

The Carnation.
Thefe Flowers, as well as many others, afford a
Variety that makes them paft Description; for while
in one we fee the Ruby with her bleeding Ra-
diancey


2


57
33
diance; in another the Sapphire with her sky-tince
tured Blue; and in all fuch an exquifite richness of
Dyes, as o other Sort of Paintings can boaft.—
With what a mafterly Skill is every varying Tint
difpoted, whilft they seem to be thrown on with an
eafy Dath of Security and Freedom, and adjufted by
the niceft and moft judicious Touches of Art and
Accuracy. But as Plainness and Perfpicuity, is all
that is artned at in this fmall Treatife, the Carnation
on which we shall here Difcourfe, is to be worked
in the manner following: Begin to shade as in the
Rriped Rofe, then put in your Red Stripes in the
fame manner, and when this is done, ftipple it in
different Parts with Carmine.
The Leaves and Stalks muft be done with Verdi-
greafe, and shaded with the fame.

Double China After.


Thefe Flowers are very much variegated in their
Colours; fome are white, others crimion, and some
are tinged with a Bluith Purple; the Centre of the
Flowers are Vellow; the Leaves are of a Hrong
Green; the Stalks are Brown; to reprefent which
lay on fome Biffre, and fhade with the fame, touch-

ing the darkeff Parts with Indian Ink.

1
. Double Crowfeot.
This Flower, is of a fine light fellow; to re-
prefeht which, make ufe of a render Wath of Gam-
boge, and thade it with the fame, touching the darkest

Parts with Gall-ftone.
The Leaves are of a very pale Green, as are alfo
the Stalks, and ringed with Red towards the Botfom.

3

D
TBe


34


The Crocus.
Of this Flower there are two Colours, the one
Purple, the other Saffron Colour; wath the Purple
one oyer with Pruffian Blue and Carmine mixed,
and shade with the fame, but the readieft Way is to
colour with the Purple of Logwood; with this Co-
lour-wath it over lightly, and then proceed to darken,
renewing the Shade with a darker Tint of the
same; you may mix a little Pruffian Blue (if need
be) with your darker Shades.
The Tellow Crocus work upon the fame Prin-
ciples as thofe of the Jonquil. The Stalks and
Leaves to be done in the fame Manner as the Mar-
Eagonn.
Dafodil.
In painting this Flower, together with its Stalks
and Leaves, the Student is referred to the Rules laid
down for the Jonquil.
Daisy.

Of thefe Flowers, there are three Colours, Red,
White, and others ftippled with Red and White.
The Leaves are of a pleafant Green, and the Stalks
of a light Green, tinged with Red towards the Bot=
Lom.
Hen and Chicken Daify.

This Flower being common in almoft every Gar
den, is rendered in a manner unnoticed, though we
think it worthy the Obfervation of the Artiff: The
Fien, or principal Flower round which the small ones
called Chickens grow, is beautifully mottled with
Red and White, and thofe which inclofe it are almoff

all White; for the hrif, lay on Flake-White, and
Ripple with Carmine; and in the fame Manner for
619



35
only ufing
the (maller Ofes,
lets Red; which will.
give it the defited Effect.
The Leaves and Stalks as the precedinc
3
Pritillary.
For layifig the Ground-Colour of this Flower;
make ufe of a Purple compoted of Indigo, Carmine;
and a litile Verthiliors, adding fo much of each, as
will give it the Appearance of a dull reddith Purple;
and Hipple it with a darker Shade of the fame, or
with Durch Pink: The Stalks are of a bluifh
Green; which may be made with Pruffian Blue and
Sap-Green mixed, adding Indigo for the darkeff
Shades. The Leaves to be done with the fame.
The Chequered Fritillary.
To make this Flower look of a rich atid pleafant
Colour, take Carmine, and the Purple extracted
from Logwood; blend them well together; and waili
your Flower with it; this being done, add more of
the Purple to your Mixture, and then proceed to
darken your Flower; and chequer it with Indian
Ink.
The Leaves, with Verdigreafe and Gamboge, and
for the Shade add thereto a little Indigo:
Gladiolas.
This is a delightful Flower, but difficult to work;
though its Difficulties may be eafily furmounted by.
1

Practice. In the colouring of this Flower begin
with a frong wath of Carmine, and then carefully
shade it with Carmine and Pruffian Blue blended to-
gether. The Bottom of the Flower is white fhaded
with Sap-Gfreen, and darkened with Indian Ink; but
great Care is required in this Part of the Perform-
RaCEs
D2


36
afice, that the Colours may appear foft, and lofe
themfelves in each other.
The Leaves and Stalks from the Beginning to the
Top of the Flowers are of a Brown Colour, which
may be compounded by mixing Carmine and Sap-
Green; the Green. at the Bottom may be made by
Sap-Green and a finall Quantity of Pruffian Blue.
shaded with the Jame Colour, and fhading with In-
digo and French Berries mixed.
Geranium.
This Flower, together with its Leaves, is begun
and finished in the fame manner as the Yellow



Crown Imperial.
 Ifellebbore.
This Flower is white, and the Bafe of each Petal
is ftained with Crimfon; the Burton yellow, the
Jame as other Rofes.
The Leaves to be done with Indigo and French.
Berries, the Stalk paler Green, and stippled with
Crimfon.
Single Helyoak.
Begin with a thin Wath of. Gamboge, then 2
deeper of the fame, and for the darkeft Shades ufe

Gall-fone, and finith with Gall-ftone and Sap
Greeh.
The Pod, Leaves, and Stalks, begin and finish

with Sap-Green.
Double Helyoak.
This Flower begin with a flight wath of Carmine,
preferving your White Paper for your heightenings,
mnlets you chufe to heighten with White, in which
Cafe yeu may lay a thin Wash all over your Flower;
But


2

31
but having wathed as before, hatch with Carmine;
and for your darker Shades ufe a Mixture of Sap-
Green. Four Flower being finithed thus far, lay
on your Bloom with a pale Liquid Purple, but in
the Buds make no ufe of Purple.
Js
The Stalk and Leaves, begin and finish with Sap
Green.

 Hearfs- Ease.
The Bloffom of this Flower confifts of five
Leaves or Petals, the two upper of which are of a
beautiful Purple, which may be beft reprefented by 2
Mixture of Carmine and Liquid Purple, shaded with
the same; and the other three are of a light Vellow
or Straw-Colour edged with Purple; the Bafe of
which are alfotinged with deep Purple, impercept-
ibly blending itfelf with the Straw Colour, from
which Place five or fix Lines delicately extend them-
felves over each Petal.
The Stalks and Leaves, begin and finith with Sap=
(reen.
Double Hypatica.

For the Ground Colour of this Flower, lay fome
Pruffian Blue, and shade it with that and Indigo
mixed; and for the darkeff Parts ufe Indigo alone.
The Leaves are of a deep Green, which may be
prepared with Indigo and Gamboge, or French Ber-
ries; the Stalk is of a pale Green, tinged with Reaf
2
towards the Root.
Honey-Juckle.

The Infide of the Petals of this Flower are per
formed by White, shaded with Sap-Green, or Maf-
ticot shaded with Sap-Green, or with Gamboge and
Biftge; which Infides are to be shewn by carling the
Leaves
D
3


38
Leaves back at the Ends, or fplitting them; the Cutr
5
sides with a thin Wath of Carmine and Lake mixed.
thaded with Carmine, ufing Indigo for the darkeft
Shades. It is to be obferved that the Flowers grow-
ing on the fame Stalks, are fome more inclineable to
Purple, others with Carmine; the Style and Buttons
seen at the Ends of the flowers, are of a faint
Green.


The Stalks, which are of a purplifh Brown, gre to
be compoted of Sap-Green and Carmipe.. The
Leaves Sap-Green, shaded with Indigo and French
Berries.
The Blue Bell Hyacinth.
This is a. very beautiful Flower, but attended with
its. Difficulties. Was not Ultramarine fo very ex-
pepfive, we should give it the Preference, as it is
23
fmoft unquestionably the fineft Colour for this Pur-


pole: But whether you paint with Wltramarine of
Verditer, be careful to put in your firft Hlatches very


free and fort; shade it with Pruffian Blue in the fame
manner; and for the darkeff use indigo; let pot the

Difficulty disparage the Student in his Progress, as it
well deferyes a little Trouble to bring fo fine a

Flower to its proper Effcel.

31
4ne Leaves and Stalks as the Orange Lilly.


Hi 3.l. w3

 Deuble Ilyacinih.
o
77
1ne Soft which we shall now describe, is a White.


the White, and
ofe; which may be done by leaving
to fhading it with Indigo, Indian ink, and a very
Litle Sap-Green; for thofe with a Crimfon Bluth,
wath a faint Tinge of Carmine, leaving it in the
5
White towards the Tof
and firengthening it to-
2.

2
2a  
wards the Boltom.



33
e
The
2


 33
 The Leaves and Stalks are of a bluith Green,
compoted of Pruffian Blue and Sap-reen, fhaded


with Sap-Green and Indigo.


Ir2s.
The three upright Petalsof this Flower, are
33
white tinged with Gamboge; at the Bafe of each,
the White to be done the same as the Narcifius; the
other three are Purple with a Vein of Yellow; which
beoins in the Middle, and to widens till it comes to
22
the Bafe.
The Leaves and Stalks, the same as the Wall.
Flower.


FeJamine.


This Flower is white, and muft be shaded with
Indian Ink and Sap-Green blended together, and
worked extremely foft; and for the darkeft Shades
add more Indian Ink; you may alfo in a few Places
add fome foft Tints of
French Berries at the Backs
of some of the Flowers, and others intirely Yellow.
For the Leaves and Stalks mix Sap-Green; Verdi-
greafe, and a little Indigo; adding more Indigo for
The darkeft Shades.
Tonquil.
Nature, ever ambitious of shewing us what the is
capable of performing, hath in this Flower given us
an indifputable Proof of her Airand Delicacy; and
therefore in order to preferve it in painting, let your
firtt Tint of Gamboge be very tender; wath the
Cup likewife, and then proceed with another Wath
over your firft; this being done, proceed to fhade
over your Leaves with Wermilion and Biffre mixed,
and let this be done fo foft, as that the Colours may
feem to glide gently into each other; shade your Cup
with Gall-ftone, mixed with a little Bifire, or Car-
224
mine





49
mine and Sap-Green; but in all: be careful to pre-
 3 
221"
Lerve a Softness,
The Leaves and Stalks to be done with Pruffian
Blue and Sap-Green mixed, and shaded with the
Lame.
The Scarlet Lychnis,

This Flower walh. very tenderly with Carmine
and Wermilion mixed; and finish with Carmine, ufed
with ffrong Allum Water; put in your Lights with
Whice tinged with Gamboge.
The Leaves and Stalks as the Single: Holyoak.
Lychnidea.
This Flower is a pale Red, with a purplish

Tinge.
The Leaves the same Colour as the former; the
Stalk is green near the Flower, hut grows brown

towards the Bafe,
T

Larkfpur.

In this Flower we should refer the Student in ge-
heral, to thofe Rules laid down for the China After;
but as the different Species of them vary in Colour,
Nature will direct him in a proper Application of the
different Tints.

Lilly.
ice tr 
The White Lilly is to be done in the fame Man=
her as the White Hlyacinth; the Orange Lilly the
1
Jame as the Nafturtian.


 Guernsey Lilly.

5

For the firft Colour lay: on flrong
Famboge, and
wall that (except the lighteff Parts
with Minium;







touch.




E3.

1


15


5


47
touch the darker; Parts. with Vermilion, and finifh
with Carmine.
The Leaves are of a bluith Green, which may.
mixing Indigo, Pruffian Blue, and
be reprefented b
I
1
French Berries; the Stalk is Green, tinged with Red
towards the Bottom.
Mezerion.

This Flower is within of a pale Crimfon, but the
Ourfide is much darker.
 Thofe Leaves which appear while the Flower is.
in Bloom, are of a pleafant Green; the Stem is
Brown.
i
S
African NErigeld.
This Flower begin and finith the fame as the
Orange Lilly.
The Leaves and Stalks begin and finith with Sap=
Green.
The French Marigeld.
This, though but a fimple Flower, demands great
or
Attention to colour it well:. 1ne. Edges of the
Leaves wash with Gamboge, and the infide Leaves.
with Red Lead; shade it with Carmine, and for the
deeper Shades ufe Biftre.
Marvel of Peru.
Begin this Flower with a thin Wash of Carmine,
and proceed to a deeper Shade of the same; then
finith with Carmine and Sap-Green mixed.
The Leaves are of a yellowith Green; to make
which mix fome Gamboge with your Sap, finith
with Indigo and French Berries: The Stalks of 2
light Green tinged with Brown toward the Bafe.

Martagon



2


42
3

Martagon, or Turk's Cap.


Toreprefent this Flower, lay a foft Wath of Gams
Foge, which thade with Gall-ffone, and that with
Biffre, or Sap-Green and Carmine mixed.
+
But there are others of a rich Scarlet, to paint

which, firff ufe a Lay of Red Lead Thoroughly pre-
pared, which fhade with Carmine, adding thereto
for the darkeff Parts, a fnall Quantity of Indigo;
the Style and Buttons are Orange-Colour, to be
Jone with Gamboge shaded with Red Lead, and that
with Carmine.


The Stalks and Leaves begin with Sap-Greenand
Pruffian Blue, and finith with the Addition of In-

Digo.
Nestarlian:

The Orange-Colour with which this Flower is
aforned, is fo rich as makes it paft Conception;
That Colour which comes the neareft to the natural
ane, is the artificial Orange-Colour; the Method of
compounding which, is given in the Directions for
Preparing Water-Colours. On the twolargeft Perals
muff be drawn feven or eight Lines, of the same Co-
four and Manner as thofe directed in the Hearts=


Eafe.
Double Nasturtian.
This Flower is to be coloured according to the
4
foregoing Directions; only with this Exception,
that the two large Petals in that; are obliterated in
 
37
the Double one.

Polyanibus.
is.
Thefe Flowers, like many others in different Sizes
and Colours, are fo variegated that Nature feems
to have taken a Pride in shewing how far the can
exercife herfelf, even in thofe Individuals that
Plenty





43
Plenty has rendered in fome Meafure contemptible:
But we would not advife the Student to look. on
thefe Flowers with an Eye of Contempt, nor think
it any Condefcention to copy the Works of unerring
Nature; fince in them, there are to many various
Beauties, as gives the Auricula very little, if any
Preference. This which we shall here deferibe is
mottled with Purple and White, the Edges and Cup
of a fine Vellow, and the Back of a rich Crimfon;
do the Edges and Cup with pure Gamboge, and
shade with Gall-ffone; then marble your Leaves
with Pruffian Blue and Carmine mixed; wath the
Flowers at the Back with Carmine and a little Lake,
and shaded with Carmine and Sap-Green
Another Polyanihus.
In the Centre of the Cup of this Flower is a small
Straw-coloured Spot, which together with the whole
Cup muff be painted the fame; the Spot muft re-
main, but the Cup is to be shaded with Vermilion
and Biffre mixed; some Space round the Cup is like-
wife hatched with Straw-Colour, the Shape of the
Flower; the outfide Edges preferve alfo White, and
then proceed with Carmine, preferving the infide
White Circle.
Piony.
This Flower is of a deep Crimfon, to exprets
which begin with a Lay of Carmine, darkening with
the fame Colour, and as the Shades grow darker;
adding Indigo to the Carmine; the Stalk muft be
laid with Sap-Green, and wathed over with Sap-
Green and Carmine; the Leaves are to be laid with
Sap-Geen, shaded with Indigo and French Berries;
the under Parts are not to dark.

Pastion


44



Passion-Flower
The Petals of this Flower are white, which fhade
with Sap-Green, and Indian Inkmixed; the Threads
are ranged in fuch order as to form three Circles,
each of a different Colour; The firft or outer one is
Blue Verditer, (haded with Pruffian Blue; the second
WWhite, to be expreft by carrying on the Stroke with
Flake—White, making the Space between the Strokes
with Indigo and Indian Ink; the third Circle is a red-
dith Purple, made by blending Carmine and Pruffian.
Blue together. The Infide of the five Buttons (which
Parts are chieffy feen) are Vellow as is the Centre
of the Flower; the other Parts which preject from
the Centre are a light Green, thofe three from the
7
op excepted, which are of a bluith Purple.
The Leaves are to be done with French Berries
and Indigo, and for the Shades add a little Indian
Ink; the Tendrils and Stalks, with Sap-Green and
Carmine,
5
Pasque-Flower.

This Flower is of a rich Purple, fomewhat incli-
ning to a Blue, which may be repreiented by mixing
3
5

Carmine and Mazarine Blu
The Stalk is of a light Whitith Green, tending to
2 Purple towards the Bafe; the Leaves are of the
Same Colours as the Stalks; which may be made by
mixing White, Gamboge, and a little Indigo tor
gether; the Foothalks are of a livid Red.

E
4

Pemgranate Bloffom.
2.
This Flower, together with its Cup, is of a rich
Scarlet, to be begapn with. Red Lead, and finifhed
with Carmine.
The Stalk and Leaves are of a pleafant Green.
Sweet





45
1


Sweel Scented Pea.
The Bloffom of this Pulfe is compofed of Red
and Purple Leaves; the Red Leaves are begun and
finished as the Mundi Rofe; for the Purple ones lay
on a thin Wath of liquid Purple, and for the darker
Shades a Mixture of Carmine and Pruffian Blue, and
finish with Indigo.
For the Leaves and Stalks, mix a little White
with Sap-Green, and shade with Sap-Green alone.
Ranunculus.
There are a great Variety of thefe Flowers; the
Student will have a delightful Paftime in fudying
from Nature; and as his Eye will be agreeably en-
tertained with a Diverfity of Colours, fo will he find
himfelf improved by painting from them: We
should recommend him therefore, carefully to ob-
ferve and perufe with Attention the Rules of Nature,
and this following.
Lay on a fine Wath of Red Lead, fripe it
with Carmine, and finith it with Carmine, and Sap-
Green mixed; do the Seeds with Indigo or Indian
Ink, and flipple it with White. The Leaves and
Stalks to be done the fame as thofe of the Fritil-
larid.
Another Ranunculus.
This Flower is compofed of White Leaves, the
upper Parts ftriped with Red; beginning this Flower,
Bade your White Leaves with Sap and Indian Ink,
the Sappredominant; then ftripe the Outfide of your

Leaves with Carmine.
Rose.
The noble and majeftic Appearance of the Rofe,
together with its incomparable Boldness, and yer
Tenderness





46.
Tendernets of Colour, when confidered, it is not to
be wondered at irs being introduced in almoff every
Wreath or Balket of Flowets; and the neareft Di-
fections we can give for the lmitation of Nature are
the following: Firft, lay on a light Tint of pure
Carmine, over which another of Pruffian Bluey

which will give the Flowers a 7 int of that Blooni
which appears in Nature; then proceed with darker
Shades of Carmine (which should be the beft that
9
can be precured) and in the darkeft , arts of the
Flower add a little Indlgos which will give a
Roundness and Body to your Work; and if the Bur-
fons of the Flower are feen, lay fonme Gamboge,
and fhade it with Gall-ffone; the upper Sides of the
Leaves, for the Ground Colour lay. Sap-Greeng
which fhade with Indigo and French Berries mixed;
for the under Part ufe White, Indigo, and Sap-
Green mixed; and shade with the fame.
The Stalks to be dohne with the Brown made of
Sap-Green and Carmine, and fhade with Iidigo.
Rofe-Bud.
We shall not here undertake to defcribe the dif-
ferent Colours and various Tints, with which Na=
ture has furnished us; this which we shall here
describe is of a fine Red, to express which use 2
pale Wath of Carmine, and shade it with a fironger
Wath of the same; let your flatchings be extremely
tender, that you may preferve a Tranfparency, and
Keep that Sweetness the Flower has by Nature.
The Stalks and Leaves you muff begin and finiffs
with Sap-Green, after which give it a flight Walh
a
with Carmitie.
Guelder Rofe.
This Flower is whice, and may be done by leav-
ing the light Parts uncovered, or washing them over
With


47
with Flake Whice, and shade it with Indian ink and
Sap-Green mixed, keeping a proper Gradation of
Shades.
The Leaves are to be done in the fame mmanner 2s
the Crown Imperial; the Stalk muft be done with
Biftre, shaded with Indian Ink to as to exprets
Weod.
Mundi Rose.
This Flower begin with a flight Wath of Car-
mine, if you chufe to heighten with White, other-
wife you muft preferve your Paper white, and only
lay your Tint of Carmine in thofe Parts which are
to be shaded, finithing with the fame; and for
Thading the White, make ufe of a Mixture of Indian
Ink and Sap-Green, adding more Indian ink for the
Carker Shades, which is to be ftriped in the same
manner as the Holyoak. The Leaves and Stalks
with Sap-Green, adding a little Indigo for the
darker Shades.

Sun-Flower.
Of this Flower there are only two Sorts, the
common Sun-Flower, and the same improved; to
begin the firff, lay on a flight Wash of Carmine, and
deepen that with another, proceeding to fhade is
with Vermilion mixed with Carmine and Biltre, and
finith your deepeff Shades with the same, being care-
ful: to relieve your Flower, to as to make it look
founds the Seed muft be shaded with the same as the
Flower,, but the darkeff muft be much deeper; the
Seeds on your light Side, muft be heightened by
Rippling with Flake-White, and wathed over with.
JOur Lights muft be done
Gamboge very lightly
the Jame.
The


48

The Leaves and Stalks are to be done with Sap=
Green and Gamboge mixed, and finithed with Saps

Green alone.
 Snow-Drop.

This Flower is white, and should be laid over
with Flake-White, and the Inner Petals are edged
with Green.
The Leaves and Stalks are of a pleafant Green,
which may be made by mixing Prushan Blue with
Fellow Berries, the firft moft predominant; and
for the Shades mix ladigo with Gamboge.
3

4
1: Single Stock.

begin with a thin Wath of Carmine, and proceed
with a ftronger Layer of the same; then finith it with
a Mixture of Sap-Green and Carmine; fhade round
the Seed with Sap.
The Leaves and Stalks muft be done with Gam-
boge, White, and Sap-Green; the Shade with a
Tint of Indigo, and finith with a darker of the
Lame.
Double Stock.
There are of thefe Flowers different Colours;
tome are 2 purplith Crimfon only, others mottled
with Crimforn and White, and some are all. white :
For the Crimfon one mix a little Pruffian Blue with
your Carmine; and for the mottled ones ufe the
same Colour, and ftipple them with Flake-White;
and for the White Sort shade with Indian Ink and
Sap-Green mixed.
The Leaves and Stalks are of a pleafant Greeny

inclining to a White.
Sweet


-
4


Sweet William.

Some of thefe Flowers are endowed with an agree-
able Variety, fome are stippled by Nature, and
others poffels one Colour only; we shall endeavour
to thew how to colour two, and leave matchlefs
Nature to direct the Pupil in his farther Studies., In
working the firft, wath your Flower over with Car-
mine till it is of a rich Crimfon; then finith it with
Carmine and Sap-Green.
To do the other, wath it over with a pale Tint of
Carmine, and shade it with the fame very, dark, and
Kipple it round the Fibre with Flake-White; the
Fibres in the Middle are to be done with Indian
Int.
The Leaves and Stalks begin and finith with Sap-
Green; and touch them with pale Carmine.

St. John’s Wert.

This Flower is to be laid with Gamboge, it being
a very fine Vellow, and may be shaded with Biffre
or Carmine and Sap-Green mixed.
The Leaves, which are of a bluifh Green, to be
prepared as the Guernfey Lilly.
Fulis.
This Flower is juftly admired for its Gaiety and
Multiplicity of Colours; what a Profufion of Dyes
arrays its painted Cupl Iis Tinges are glowing; its
Contrafts frong; and the rrangement of them
both elegant and artful: And though Nature has in
the Tulp diverted the Eye, with an agreeable and
enchanting Variety, we shall be content with de-
Icribing two only (and recommend the Student to
that unerring Guide for the Remainder). Begin
this by putting in your Carmine Stripes, which
muft have White well blended with the Carmine;
this
E





50
this done, proceed to add fome very tender Stripes
with Gamboge, then heighten your Carmine, and
in your darkeff Shades ufe a little Sap-Geeen mixed
with it; then fhade your Vellow Stripes with a little
of the fame Mixture, and for the darkeff Shades mix
some Vermilion and Bifire.
Another way to colour the Tulip, is to begin
with your Yellow Stripes, which are to be done with
Gamboge, and proceed with laying in your Purple
Stripes; in the doing of which be careful to preferve
your White ones, which will give it an agreeable
Effect; for your darker Shades ufe your Liquid
Purple, to which (if requifite) add a little Pruffian
Blne.
The Leaves and Stalks with Sap-Green, and
shaded with the fame.
Parrot Tulip.
This Flower derives its Name from the uncom-
mon Appearances at the Back of each Petal,
which very much refembles the Beak of a Parrot:
the Edges of this Tulip are jagged, and much
unlike the other Tulip in Shape, though not in
Colour.
Double Violet.
Lay the Ground Colour of this Flower as the
former, and inner Petals tinged with Purple; the
Stalks, which are green, muft be tinged the fame
Colour as the Petals towards the Bottom.
The Leaves are of a ftrong Green.
Wall-Flower
The Common Sort of this Flower are pellow,
which may be Camboge shaded with Gall-ftone.
But that Sort moft effeemed by the Florift, is called
the Bloody Wall; for the outer Petals of which take
Gamboge,






51
3
Camboge, which tinge with a litle of the Purple of
Logwood; and for the inner Petals Red Lead
finithed with Carmine: the Cup of the Flower is a
Purplish Brown.
The Leaves alid Stalk of a Bluith Green, to be
Worked as thofe of the Flowers of the fame Colour.
Double White Narciffus.
In painting this Flower, you may either leave the
Paper plain, of wath it over with Flake-White; and
for the firft Shade ife Sap-Green, and a little Indian
Ink, addine more Indian ink in the darker Shades;
tinge the Bottom of each Petal with Green. A
harrow Edge of Carmine farrounds a Turf of finall
Petals in the Center of the Flower.
The Stalks and Leaves the fame as the Itis.
The Scabbard at the Bottom of the Flower is a
pale Browin.
Some Excellent RECETErs for those who paint. in
WATER-COLOURS.
AVIN G procured two Ounces of the beft and
cleareft Glue; add thereto one Pint of pure

Water, and half an Ounce of the fineff Roch-Allum,
boiling them till they are diffolved; which will be pro-
ductive of a very ferviceable Liquor; with which
you may temper thofe Colours intended for a Sky;
sis it will prevent them from cracking:
To make a Solution of Gum.
Diffolve an Ounce of the beft White Gunm Arabics
and half an Ounce of double-refined Sugar, in 2
Quart of Spring Water; and ffrain it through a Piece
of Muffin; then bottle it off for Ufe, keeping it free
from Duft.
Knoibs
E 2.


52
Another Way.
Take of the whiteff Sort of Gum Arabic, bruife
, and tie it in a Piece of Woollen Cloth, and steep
Water till it is diffolved. If it is too
it in Spring
iff, which may be known by the fhining of the
Colours, add more Water, if too weak more Gurl.
With this Water you may temper moft of your Co-
lours, ufing fuch a Quantity of it, that the Colours
when dry being touched, will not come off if the
Colour shines the Water is too frong.
To keep the Flies from your Work.
Having prepared your Gum-Water according to
either of the preceding Directions, add a little
Coloquintida thereco, which, if your Performance
should be exposed, will keep it from being damaged
by the Flies.
To prepare Allum-Water.
Take four Ounces of Roch—Allum, and a Pint of
pure Spring Water, boil it till the Allum is tho-
roughly diffolved; then filter it through a Brown
Paper, and it is fit for Ufe. Before you lay on your
Colours, take fome of this Water hot, and with a
Spunge wet the Back of your Paper, which if it is
not good it muft be wetted three or four times.
This will not only prevent the finking of your Co-
Jours, but will alfo keep them from fading, and give
them an additional Beauty and Luftre. Remember
that your Paper muft be dried each Time before you
wet it again.
To make Lime-Water.
Put some unllaked Lime in a well-glazed Pan,
cover it with pure Water, fo as to be one Inch
above the Lime, and let it remain fo for one Day at
leafts
I



53
leaft; ftrain off the Water and keep it for use by
the Means of this Water you may change your Sap-
Green into Blue.
To make a Lixivium of Pearl Afpes.
Steep half an Ounce of Pearl Affes in Rain or
Spring Water for one Day at leaft, then ftrain off
the Water as clean as poffible; this Infufion will
prove extremely ferviceable in many Colours, parti-
cularly Brazil-Wood, to which it will give an ad-
ditional Beauty and Luftre.
To make a Sixe for Candle-Light Pieces.
Steep fix Ounces of the Shreds of White Glove
Leather in Water for fome Time; and then boil
them in four Quarts of Spring Water, till it walles
to a Pint and half; then firam it through a Cloth
into an Earthen Pan: If it feels firm under your
Hand when cold, it is frong enough; you may ufe
any Colour with this Size while it is warm, and it
will take off that Glare which appears upon them
by Candle-Light when used in Gum-Water.
To recover decayed Colours.
Take double diffilled Rofemary-Water, or pure
Effence of Rofemary, and with a few Drops temper
your Colours, which however dead and faded will.
recover their primitive Brilliancy; this Effence will
prevent the Bubbles which are troublefome in grind-
White and Umber.
ing
To prepare Liquid Gold for Vellum- Painting, Fans, ESc.
Having f
procured fome of the fineft Leaf Gold,
orind it with flrong Gum-Water, adding more
2
Gum-Water (as you fee requifite) in the grinding;
and when it is thoroughly ground, temper it with a
small Quantity of Mercury Sublimate, binding it

E 3
i1n





54
in the shell with a little diffolved Gum; Tpread if
equally over the Shell, and ufe it with fair Water
ply.
A Liguid Silver, for the same UIfc.
The Manner of making this is the same as that of
Liquid Gold, only remembering to temper it with
8
the Glaiy of Eyss, and not Water.
3

To make the Glair of Egss.

Beat the Whites with a Spoon, till they rife in a
Foam; let them fland twelve Hours, and they wifl
be clarified into a good Glair.
To recover Liquid Silver that has contracted Rust.
If your Silver, by damp Weather (or the like) be-
gomes rufly, cover that Part of the Performance with
the Juice of Garlick, which will recover it effec-
tually.
To make a single Ground to lay Silver or Gold upon.
Take the new Shreds of Parchment (they being

preferable to Glovers Leather) and boil them in 2
Quart of Spring Water till it is confumed to a Pint;
then ftrain the Size from the Shreds, and put it into
a well-glazed Pan; ufe if before it is cold; and be
careful when you lay on your Silver or Gold, that
your Size is not too moiff nor too dry, for in either
cafe you will be in danger of impairing your Per=
formance.
A White Varniss from Mr. Boyls.
Melt two Drachms of White Refin in a glazed
Pipkin, adding to it by Degrees an Gunce of fine
white Amber, ground to a very fine Powder; then
put rover agentle Fire, ffirring it till it is diffolyed
when it begins to grow fliff, pour into it at feveral

4ames a little Oil of Turpentine: Be very cautious
in



55


in the melling of this, as the Vapours of the Oil of
Turpentine will take fire by Heat alone, which if it
should chance to do, the beft Method you can purfue
to extinguith it, is by clapping a Board over the Poty
or a wet Blanket, which by keeping it from the Air
will suffocate and put it out.
Therefore the beft way of preparing this Varnish
is by melting the Refin in a cylindrical Glass in a
hot Sand-Bed, after the Glals has been well warmed
in the Sand, under which you muft keep a gentle Fire.
The Varnish being melted, pour it into a coarfe
Linen Bag, and prefs it between two hot Cak
Boards, and receive the clear Part into a warm
glazed Pan; it is then fit, and may be ufed with
any Colours, as well as to varnish them after they
are painted.
 

8


15.8
32
 
   
OF PAINTING ON GLASS.
AINTING on Glass is an Art which. has

been efteemed by the generality of Mankind

an Amufement attended with many Difficulties; yer
nothing can afford us a more (plendid and magnifi-
cent Reprefentation of Nature, thanca Painting in
this Manner well executed: As there is given all
the Softness imaginable, being no Outlines to draw
nor Shades to make; but is eafy to work, and may
 
be decorated with Colours without either.


Metzotinto Prints are generally ufed for this Puri
pofe; the Shades and Lines not being to harth and
abrupt as thofe of Engraving; as they are blended in
each other, and have the appearance of a Drawing
in Indian Ink.
Having procured fuch Metzotinto Prints as you
Fet 2
intend to paint, cut off the Margins, then p
Piece
E 4



56
3.
Piece of Glass of the finell Crown Sort, the Size of
your Print (quite free from Knots and Scratches).
clean it well with Whiting, and lay on one fide
Some Venice Turpentine with a Hog's Hair Brush as
thin and fmooth as poftible; lay the Print flat in
Water, and let it remain on the Surface till it finks.;

then take it carefully out with its Face downwards;
and dab it between some Papers till no Water ap-
pears, yet fo as the Print remains damp.:
Then proceed with laying the damp Print on its
Back upon a Hat Table; hold the Glats over it
without touching the Turpentine, till it is exactly.
even with the Print, then letting the Glats fall.
gently on it, carefully prefs it down with your
Curpentine
Kingers in different Parts; to that the T

may Rick to the Print; then taking it up hold the
Glass towards you, preffing the Print from the
Centre towards the Edges till no Eliffers reinain,
Lx
4

Next wet the Back of your Print with a Spunge,
till the Paper will rub off with your Fingers, then
rub it gently, and the White Paper will come off,
leaving a very plain Impreffion on the Glats, and
when it is dry, wet it all over with a Camels Hair


Pericilidipt in Turnentine Oil, and it will be per-
5
E
feetly tranfparent, and fir for Painting.

5
illntint Eren:.
y QuCoLoURS for PAINTINC on GlAss.
7
580 V843


henitan
H.E Colours fit for painting, on Glass are
  
25
round, in Oil,and tied up in small Bladders;:
Thets Blr
and are to be had of MIr. Drake, at the White Hart in
Lons. Acre, or Mf, Bicker oppofite Newf
Oft- Market,
1D



whole bufiness. it. is (diftinet from other Colours.

lt


men! to prepare the finer Colours for Limners.
1i1 Cbt a
n


DEstYS3
ir s ciialoer
his
77

BiieS.
Blacks.
4
Jake
White.
 Lamp-Black.
ilalin
157
5
apodium.
lvory-Black.
85
E. L.L0
 


145
Browns.
2
 


1


?
1
57
Browns.
Indigo.
Spanith Brown.
Gaunders Blue,
Imber.
Smalt.
Reds.
Greens.
Rofe Pink,
Verdigreafe.
Vermilion.
Werditer.
:Red Lead.
Terra Wert.
3
Indian Red.

Lake Cinnabar.
Fellows.

Englifh Pink.
Blries.
Mafticot.
Blue Bice.
Orpiment.
D
Irulfian Blue.
English Oker.


We think it neceffary to inform the Student, that.
the Reafon of our not mentioning the Carmine (for
Red) and the Ultramarine (for Blue) in the Liff.
prefixed, as on account of its being moft proper

to purchafe them in Powder, they being to liable to
be loft; and as a small Touch of thefe will give the
Painting an enlivening Caft, what you require for
prefent Ofd, mix with a f.w Drops of Nut-Oil upon
your Pallet.
The Pallets and Pallet-Knives may be had at the
aforementioned Colour-Chops.
Cut a Hole at the Bottom of each Bladder you
want to get the Colourout of, and press out no more
pon your Pallet than you intend for immediate Ife,
ecaufe the Colours are apt to dry and IKin over.
Thenlaying a Sheet of White Paperon the Table,
ake the Glats in your left Hand, the Turpentine
de next you; hold it floping, (and let the Bottom
and upon the White Paper) and the Outlines and

ints of the Prints will appear on the Glafs, and
en decorate it as follows.
Tbe






58
The Manner of Working the Colours.
S the Lights and Shades are difperfed on your
4& Picture, you muff be careful in difpoting of
your Colours accordingly, and to do fo lay on the
light Colours on the lighteff Parts of your Print, and
the darker over the shaded ; and the brighter Colours
being laid on properly, it is not of any material con-
fequence if the darker ones should by accident run
over them, for the upper Colour cannot be feen
through that which was laid on firft; for inftance:
C
TREENS.
Firff lay on some Verdigreafe, and then mix that
and Dutch Pink for the next; this Colour may be
made darker of lighter by adding more or lets Dutch
Pink.
BLUES.
For the Lights, lay on Ultramarine or Blue Bice

for the firft fhade Saunders Blue, and for the darkeff.
Indigo.
REDS.
For the firft ufe Minium, of Red Lead (tho
roughly ground); fhade it with Lake, and in the

higheft rarts touch it with Carmine, which will en-
liven your Painting, and fet it off to a great Advan-
12ge.
TELLOws.
For the lighteff Yellow lay on Mafticot, and for
the Shade ufe Dutch Pink.
Any of thefe Colours may be darkened by adding
to them a darker Shade of the same Colour on your
Pallet; or lighten them, if too ffrong
by mixing
shem with White.
I8





1.





  



10 face pupreI
    re pe    es  ee e e   e e n tn 
e is a erse p a ay  e  e
D
A
 e m doneca
for 

   nder een

I

a 
 ef





C
o D
      he nwal  wme
 o    "-









59
If you find the Colours thick and troublefome,
they are to be made thinner, by mixing with them 2
few Drops of Turpentine Oil, for they muft never
be ufed thick, as you will be in Danger of fpoiling
your Piece.
You muff have a Pencil for each Colour; and be
careful that you never put a Bruth which you have
afed with one Colour into any other, before you
have washed your Bruth well in Turpentine Oil,
particularly Green, as that Colour will appear pre-
dominant when dry.
Obferye that when you have dane uling your
Bruthes, they are to be thoroughly wathed in the
Oil of Turpentine.
When your Glats is painted, you muft let it re
main three or four Days free from Duft, before it is
fit for framing,
The Student who is defirous of amuling himfelf
with this beautiful Art, would find it very conve-
pient, was he to provide himfelf with a Box upon
the following Conftruction; in Length two Feet fix
Inches, in Width one Foot four Inches, and in
Height five Inches, with Partitions. See the En-
graved Plate.
A, muft be a Box made of Tin, and fixed in the
great Box, to contain Turpentine Oil for wathing
your Pencils after you have done, before you lay
them by.
Between A and B upon the Tin, is the Place for
preffing the Colour out of the Bruth after you have
dipped it in the Oil of Turpentine to clean it: the
Colours which fall into the Box B, will with their
Oils make a very good Size for Gold.
The Box E is for the Reception of your Pencils
after you have cleaned them, where they will be
ready whenever they are wanted. It is to be ob-
served,


60

served, that fome of the Pencils are fuch as are to be
ifed in laying on your Colours, while the others are
to be thofe of White Hair for the foftening and
blending your Colours in each other as foon as laid
on, that if the Student should leave off harth and
abruptly, the Place may not be diftinguithable.
The Profeffor in this polite Art, should not have
lets than two or three dozen Camels Hair Pencils
of Various Sizes, with Sticks to each, about ten or
tweive Inches long, which are made of Cedar, and
may be procured at Mr. Drake's in Long Acre.

The Box D is to be divided into feveral Parts for
keeping your dry Colours diffinet, and thereby from
(poiling each other; in which Place you may keep
your Ultramarine of Carmine.
:. If you have any Occafion to grind your Colours,
you muft provide yourfelf with a Stone, which may.
be made of a Pebble or fine Marble thoroughly po-
lithed, and may be had at any Stone-Miafon s.

If you have a large (
antity of Colour to grind,
he careful that your Oil is in Proportion, and never
overpower it with a fuperffuous O
uantity: Your
Colour being fufficiently ground (which it is not
while there are any Lumps remaining) dip a Piece of
Bladder in warm Water to mollify it, and make it
thore pliable; which being done, immediately tie up
the Colour in it, and it will be fit for ufe when re-
quired.
The Partition C is to be lined with Tin, as it is
to enclofe the Bladders of Nut and Burnt Oil (which
you should never be without), as alfo the Oils of
Turpentine and Linfeed; which was it not lined,
the frequent taking the Eladders out, would be a
Means of greating and ffaining the Wood; whereas
the Tin will preferve it free from any Stain.
The Partition F in the Middle of the Box should
alfo be made of Tin, to take out whenever it is re-
quired,


61

quired, as that is to contain the Bladders of Oil-
Colours. Over thefe should be laid your Paller,
which ought to be cleaned as foon as you have done
with Turpentine Oil, or elfe laid in Water fuf-
ficient to cover the Colours, which will be a Means
of keeping your Colours till the next Occafion, and
preventing a very great Wafte. Rub your Pallet
with a clean Cloth and Linfeed or Nut Oil, till it is
quite dry, and you will then have it clean, and fit
for the Reception of your Colours.
But though you take all the Care poftible, when
your Colours are expoted to the Air, and ufed in
small Quantities, there will be a thick hard Skin
over them in a very fhort Time, which though it
may be taken off with your Pallet Knife, will occa-
Lion 2 great Decreafe of your Colour. After the
Skin is taken off, the Remainder will in all proba-
bility prove too thick for Ufe, without a Drop or
two of Nut-Oil, which muft be well tempered with
your Pallet-Knife.
Once more let us caution the Artiff to keep his
Bruthes to their feparate Colours; for the mixing
of them is attended with many ill Confequences, and
will greatly endanger the whole of his Perfermance.
5
5

OF PAINTING IN CRATONS.
AfIE Crayons we would recommend are thofe
imported from Switzerland, the beft of which

may be had of Mr. Drake in Long Acre; the various
Sorts are as follow.
Whice, Black, Yellow, Orange, Purple; Red,
Blue, Green, and Brown, each of which may be
ufed in thading, the two firft excepted.
Dirsctions.



62
Directions for using the same.

Rough Venice Paper is to be ufed on this Oced
fion, which is of a whiced-brown Colour, the stiffer
the better; but there is a Sort called Cape-Paper
which is preferred, as it diftributes the Colours to
the beft Advantage. By this Means, Figures may
be reprefented in their proper Colours as appearing
to the Eye, becaufe the Colours can be matched
with the Crayons, which being dry will not fades
whereas the Colours, when wee; feem deeper than
when they are dry, which perhaps may perplex a
Young Beginner.
To make farther neceffary Preparations; provide
Yourfelf with fome of the thickeff and fmootheft
light blue or other Papet, and getting a Straining
Frame from a Frame-maker, ftrain a Piece of coarfe
Scotch or Irish Cloth over it, which may be done by
drawing and faftening it with small Tacks round the
Edges till quite fmooth; or you may provide your—
self with ohe ready prepared, by applying to Mirs
Drake, Long Acre. Then damp your Paper with a
Spunge dipt in Wates, and pafte it, laying it on
the Cloth, being particular that it is even with
the Straining Frame; then laying a Piece of White
3.
paper upon the Table, put the Straining Frame with
the Blue Paper downwards upon it, keeping it feady
with one Hand, rubbing the Cloth clofe to the Paper
with the other; then turning the Frame, with a
Piece of White Paper in your Hand rub clofe the
Edges: when it is dry fet if on an Eafel (which may
be had at the Colour-thop before-mentioned) and
proceed as follows:
With Charcoal sKetch your Rough-Draught, and
with Black, White, or Red Chalk, correct your
Faults. Having thus outlined your Object com-
pletely, your Crayons may be rubbed iir; but Care is
required


63

required concerning the proper Coours; and then
foften or blend them together with your Finger or
Firch.
When you prepare your Crayons for Ufe, re-
member to cut the Prints from the Bottom upwards,
and take Care they are not made too fharp, the Red
Oker, Charcoal, and White Chalk excepted.
As it is a very great Difficulty to get Crayons that
are really good, we think it no way fuperffuous to
give the Student, willing to encourage the Art of
Drawing in Crayons, the Method of preparing them
after the moft approved Manner.
WHITES.
No other White is required than the beft and
fofteff French or Italian White Chalk cut into
Pieces about two Inches long, and a Quarter of an
Inch in Thickness; with your Penknife round off the
Corners, and point them as directed above.
Of thefe it will be expedient that the Artiff should
have a great Number (as they are of continual Ufe
and muft be feparated from the reft; or they will
otherwife be much difcoloured.
VElLows.
As Yellows are next to be treated of, we shall
divide them into fix or feven different Shades.
Firft Degree. Take fome Flour of Brimffone and
Grounds of Starch, and with your Pallet-Knife in-
corporate them upon a polifhed Marble, and it will
make an agreeable Straw-Colour; then bring them
to the Confiffency of a Pafte, with Milk or pale
Ale Wort, then with your Pallet-Knife (pread them
on a Piece of fmooth Cloth, till they are in Thickness
about one third of an Inch, and let them remain fo
till half dry; then with a sharp Knife reduce it into
Pieces


64
Pieces about two Inches long, and one third of ad
Inch wide, and roll it between your Hlands, or two
Pieces of Board, till round as the Stem of a Tobacco
Pipe, and not much thicker; and point it as directed
for the Chalk. Or if moft convenieht, you may
ufe Ground Chalk inftead of the Grounds of Starch;
a5 that will work near the fame Effect.
A second Vellow is made after Yellow Oker has
been well ground in fair Water, then dried and beat;
by mixing with it fuch a Quantity of ground Chalk;
or Grounds of Starch, as will render it little darker
than the above; then mixing with it as much Milk
as will make it a Paffe, and to into Crayons as the
preceding. A little Sugarcandy may be diffolyed
in the Milk.
A third Vellow is prepared by grinding Vellow
Oker and Water upon a Stone with a Muller, and
when it is dry beating it well, and mixing it with a
very little ground Chalk to be darker than the
former, and add to it pale Ale Wort or Size, and
make it into Crayons as before. For the Method of
Preparing the Size, we refer the Reader to thofe
ufeful Receipts; publifhed at the End of the Dirsc-
tions for painting in Water-Colours.
A fourth Fellow. To prepare this, grind Englifh
Pink with Water as the former, and when it is dry
beat it in the fathe Mianner, and mix it with a little
of the Grounds of the beft White Chalk, that it
may be darker than the former Colour: Then incor-
porate with it as much pale Ale Wort as will bring it
to a Pafte, then prepare and reduce it into Crayons
a5 before directed.
A Fifth Yellow. For this, Englifh Pink is to be
mixed with pale Ale Wort. After being ground
with pure Spring Water, and then reduced to Paftils
or Crayons, according to the aforementioned Direc=
LiORs.
A fixths


65
A fixth Vellew. Dutch Pink prepared as the
former.
A feventh Fellow
Orpiment, though one of the
moft pernicious Yellows ufed, is a very beautiful
Colour.
This muft be mixed with a little ground
Chalk or Grounds of Starch well incorporated, and
brought to the Confiftency of a Paffe with pale Ale
Wort, in which muft be diffolved fome Gum Dra-
gon, and then rolled in Crayons according to the
SirRl Directions.
ORANGE COEOUR.
Firff Degree. Grind Orpiment alone, and make
it into Paftils from the foregoing Directions.
Second Degree. Grind Red Lead with pure
Water very fine, and when it is dry beat it, then
grind Orpiment, and with it mix a fmall Quantity
of Red Lead (that is, to much as will make it a
Shade darker than the preceding); then diffolve fome
Gum Dragon in Milk or Ale Wort, and with it
temper your Colour, and roll it into Crayons as
before.
Third Degree. This is prepared by grinding
English Pink with pure Water, and mixing it with
as much Vermilion as will make it agreeable to your
Defign; then boil Ale Wort till it becomes ofuti-
nous, with which bring your Colour to a Pafte,
then cut it in Lengths, and roll it as before.
Fourth Degree. Prepare English Pink and Red
Lead as before, and mix as much of them together
as will make it a Shade darker than the former.
Mix thefe with Ale Wort prepared as above, and fo
into Paftils or Crayons.
Fifth Degree. Mix as much Dutch Pink finely
ground with Red Lead as will bring it to the Shade
required, and to proceed as the former.
Be


3.


56
Be careful in the compounding thefe Colourss to

make as many Shades as poffible.
REDS.
Firff Red. Grind Red Lead very fine with pure
Water; and when dry beat it as fine as poffible, and
heighten it with White Chalk finely ground; then
diffolve fome Gum Dragon in Ale Wort, and make
your Compofition into Paffe, and then cut and roll
11 into Crayons. Of this Compofition you may
make different Shades, by adding more or lefs
White.
Second Red. Procure fome of the beft Red Eead,
and grind it with a Multer and Stone, and proceed
as before directed.
Third Red. Red Oker, which is to be prepared
in the fame manner as White Chalk.
Fourth Red. Take some fine White Chalk, or
Whire Leadwell pulverized, and with it mix fome Ver-
milion ground to the State of an impalpable Powder.
Divide them in three or four Shades, and make each
of them into Pafte with Ale Wort boiled, and cut,
and roll them as before.
Fifth Red. Grind Vermilion very fine with a
Stone and Muller, and to mix it with pale Ale Wort
prepared as before directed, and then roll it into
Crayons.
Sixth Red. Take some Lake of the beft Sort,
and grind it with a Stone and Muller with Water,
and when it is dry, beat it to an impalpable Powder.
Divide them in three or four feparate Parcels, and
then add more or lets White to each, as will give
them different Shades; then work each Parcel into
Paffe with Ale Wort, and afterwards into Crayons.
Seventh Red. Reduce fome pure Lake to as fine
a Powder as poffible with clear Water, and after you
have dryed it, reduce it to as fine a Powder as be-
fore,
S


C
fore, then mix it with Wilk, or Ale Wort, and bring
it into Crayons according to the firft Directions.
Righth Red. Take Indian Lake, and prepare it as

the former. This alone will be a very ffrong Co-
lour, but you should make three different Shades at
leaft, by the Addition of, more or lets White.
Ninth Red. Cut Rofe-Pink into the Shape of
Crayons, and they will be fit for Ufe without any
farther Preparations. Carmine will come very ex=
penfive, as a Shilling's-worth will make but a very
little Crayon.
BLUES.
Firft Blue. Take Blue Bice, and grind it with
pure Water with a Stone and Muller, and when it is
dry, reduce it to a Powder again, and add to it
White Chalk finely powdered; divide them into
3
a afcels, and put to them more or lefs Chalk, fo as
to produce various Shades. Bring thefe to the Con-
fiftency of a Pafte with Ale Wort mixed with a little
Size, made according to the former Directions, and
to proceed with making them into Crayons.
Second Blue. Blue Bice alone finely ground, and
prepared as the preceding
Third Blue. Grind some Verditer with Water
upon a Stone, and then let it dry, after which beat
it into a Powder, fo fine as that no Lumps can be
feen; then divide if into four or five Parcels, to all
of which, except one, add fuch different Propor-
tions of White Chalk, as will make them Shades for
each other: Make thefe into Pafte with Ale Wort,
wherein Gum Dragon has been diffolved; and that
Blue with which no White has been mixed, make
into Paffe with pale Ale Wort and a little Size, and
to into Paffils or Crayons as before.
Fourth Blue. Take fome Pruffian Blue, and be
very careful that it is thoroughl
ground; and then
make
F2


68
make it into Pafte with pale Ale Wort-boiled
and thickened with Size, and fo into Crayons, in
purfuance of the firft Directions. Then, to make
Tome lighter Shades, take some more of the Pruffian
Blue, and after you have ground it well by itfelf and
dried it, divide it into two or three Parcels, to each
of which add White Chalk, in proportion as you
would have your Shades lighter or darker; make
thefe into Pafte with Ale Wort boiled, and to into
Crayons as the former.
Fifth Bluc. Take some of the beft Rock Indigo,
and grind it with your Stone and Muller in pure
Water, dry it, then reduce it to a very fine Powder,
and divide it into feveral Parcels, to which add
Whice Chalk in different Proportions: Mix thefe
with pale Ale Wort boiled, and have at leaft four
Shades of them, and for the darkeft ufe Indigo made
into Pafte as the reft, and to into Paltils according
to the firft Directions.
PURPLES.

Firft Purple. Take Rofe Pink, and grind it as
fine as poffible, and when dry powder it, and mix it
well with a little Saunders Blue, till it appears of the
Colour you defire; then bring it to a Pafte, and fo
froceed as the former.
Second Purple. Take Lake finely ground and
wathed, add to it as much Blue Bice as will make it
of an agreeable reddith Purple, and make this of
two or three different Degrees, each lighter than the
other, and into the lighter Parts put White Chalk
or Grounds of the beft White Starch, and make
them into Pafte with Ale Wort boiled, and mixed
with Size, and make them into Paftils or Crayons as
the laft.

Third Purple. Grind fome Lake with pure
1.7
Vater, and add as much Pruffian Blue to it, as will.
make
5


69
make it of the Purple you defire; mix thefe well
together in feveral Parcels, making fome more in-
clining to Blue, others to Red, and to the fainteff
add as much White Chalk as you fee neceffary, and
make the feparate Parcels into Pafte with Ale Wort
boiled till it becomes glucinous, and make them into
Paftils in the fame manner as the former.
BLACES.
Firff Black. The Black which is generally ufed
for Crayons, is Charcoal cut into Pieces about two
Inches long, and a Quarter of an Inch wide; the
foffeft and beft are thofe made of Willows. You
should have of thefe at leaff one Dozen, becaufe the
Contrafts Black and White are moft wanted.
Second Black. Grind lvory Black as fine 2s pof-
fible with pure Water, adding to it in the grinding a
small Quantity of Indigo, which will very much en-
liven the Black, and relieve it from that Deadnefs
which attends it when ufed by irfelf; make it into
Pafte with boiled Ale Wort, and fo into Paftils or
Crayons as before.
BROWNS.
Firft Brown. Take fome Fullers Earth of the
bett and pureft Sort, and after you have ground it
well with Water, add to it fome ground Chalk in
different Quantities, that may have three or four dif-
ferent Shades; mix each of thefe up with pale Ale
Wort, boiled till it become glatinous, and when
it is half dry, cut it into Pieces about two Inches
long, and a Quarter of an Inch thick, and then roll
it into Crayons.
Second Brown.
Take Some Spanith Brown,
grind it well with Water, to which add in the grind-
ing fome Fullers Earth, which will very much en-
lighten it, the Spanish Brown being of itfelf a very
dark


7
C
Jark Colour; this being done, when dry beat it into
2 Powder again; and divide it into four different
Parcels, to three of which put rounds of Starch in
different Degrees, fo that you may preserve feveral
Shades of Colour. Mix each of thefe feparately into
Pafte with a little Size of Kinglass, or pale Ale
Wort boiled, or thick. Water-Cruel wherein Gum
Dragon has been diffolved, and to make it into Paf-
tils or Crayons, according to the former Directions.
Third Brown. Take some Indian Red and Spa-
nith. Brown, and grind them together with your
Stone and Muller, and mix them with Ale Wort
till they are as fliff as Pafte. Of this Colour you
may make different Shades, by adding more of lefs
White, which may be either of the aforementioned
Colours.
GREENS.
Firff Green. Provide yourfelf with some diffilled
Verdigreafe, and grind it with ffrong Vinegar with 2
Stone and Muller; after which wath it well with
Water, the Manner of which is as follows: Pat the
Verdigreafe into Water, and let it remain there about
2 Minute, then pour the Water off into a Cup, and
let it fettle; then pour that from it; and wath it
again in the same manner, and when it is dry make
it into Paffils of different Shades with ground White
Chalk.
Second Green.
Take some of the beft Verdi-
greafe, and boil it with fharp Vinegar, and while it

is boiling add to it a little powdered Tartar, which
being of fo sharp a Nature will foon diffolve the Ver=
digreafe, and you will have the Liquor of a very fine
Colour, forewhat inclinable to a Blue; then fet the
Liquor in small Gallipots, and let it be expofed to
the Airy and it will foon be congealed and become
hard, then mix it with as much Ale Wort as will
bring
3


E 77
bring it to a Paffe, and fo into Paftils or Crayons as
before directed.
Third Green. Prepare Verdigreafe after the same
Manner as the laft, then reduce it, and divide it
into feveral Parcels, to which add Pruffian Blue in
different. Proportions, as you would have them
lighter or darker, and to the lighteff Parts add a little
White Chalk, or a little Straw Colour, to variegate
the Shades as much as poffible. Mix all thefe with
pale Ale Wort boiled, as before directed.
Fourth Green. Grind fome Blue Bice very fine,
and in the grinding add to it fome of the beft Durch
Pink. Divide them into feveral Parts, and make
them into different Shades with White Chalk; bring
them to a Pafte with Ale Wort boiled, and fo into
Paftils.
Fifth Green. Grindfome Rock Indigo very finewith
pure Water with a Stone and Muller, and after you
have dried it, reduce it to Powder, and divide it into
four Parcels at leaft; and add to some, Durch Pink, to
others Dutch Pink and Brimffone, and for the
lighteff, Flour of Brimffone only. After you have
made as many Shades as you defire, bring them into
a Paffe with pale Ale Wort mixed with Size, made
according to that Receipt prefcribed at the End of
the Directions for painting in Water-Colours, and
then cut them into Lengths, and roll them into Paf-
tils or Cravons as at firft directed.
Sixth Green. Grind Rock Indioo with Water
pon yourStone, then divide it into Parcels more or
less as you think proper, and add Dutch Pink in fuch
different Quantities as will produce feveral Shades,
after thefe are well incorporated; make them into
Pafte with boiled Ale Wort, and roll them into
Paftils according to the former Directions.
The Artiff will find thefe Crayons far preferable to
thofe generally bought at Shops, and for this Reafon,
they


72
they being frequently tempered to high with Gum-
Water, rendersthem fo fliff and obdurate, that they will
too often rather fcratch, than give any Appearance of
Colour upon your Paper; on the contrary, thofe
which we have here recommended, may be ufed with
all the Eafe and Freedom imaginable, and will ex-
press the Diverfity of Colours as pleafantly and agree-
able as can be defired.
When the Student is defirous of making a Draw-
ing in Crayons, either from Nature, or from a cor-
reet Imitation of Nature, he should be caseful, before
he begins, that he has every Colour that is in his
Original, as he cannot here, as in a Painting either
in Water er Oil Colours, prepare a Colour at 2
Minute's Warning; which Confideration it was
that induced us to direct to many Shades to be made
from each Colour.
The Arciff, in order to keep his Colour feparate,
(for if they mix, it will, on account of their Soft-
ness, be very prejudicial to them) should be prepared
with a Box which contains as many Partitions as will
Keep each Shade by itfelf.
F I N I S.
81
8

Loe
nt
malsnld
V 
s
F


4
9
Do


