


THE

S VADEMECUM:
RRTIS
BEIN G T HE


5

DRAING
OLE AR
Taught in a NEw V
ORK,
Elegantly engraved on One Hundred Folio Copper-Plates;.
CON.TAIN.ING.
Great Variety of Examples in every Branch of that noble Art;:
A. 8.

Parts of the Face; Heads, Hlands, Feet, Hcademy, Antiques;
A N D.
Bealts, Birds, Infects, Flowers, Fruit, Shells, Ornaments,,
Croups of Figures,
Buildings, Landicapes, (Sc. ESc. CSc.
Collected from the Works of the greateft Mafters.
TO WHICH IS PREFIKED:
AN E SSAY ON DR A W IN G:
W I. T H.
INTRODUCTORY RILEs for the Ufe of LEARNERS:

IN WHICH
The Firft Principles of that ufeful and noble Art are explained in fuch;
Manner that it may be attained in a fhort, Time without a Mafter.


The THIRD EDITTON with, confiderable ADDITioNs.



E O. N. D O. N:.
Printed and publiffied according to Act of Parliament:
And Sold by R. SATER; and J. BENNETT, Map and Print Sellers, at No. 53;.
FLEET-STREET. MDCCEKKVI.
Price. 7s. 6d. fewed, bound 1os. 6d.


93


P


BOOKS,
DR A WIN C
NEV

Printed for R. SAvER, and J. BENNETT, Map and Print Sellers, at the
Golden Buck, Flect-Street.
1. AYHE Triumph of Painting, a new Drawing-Book, on Forcy Folio Copper-Plates: confitting
of Features, and Parts of the Human Body, &cc. by Hayman, Worlidge, Lx Brun, &c.
Parts of Horfes, and orher Animals, by Seymour, Parocell, Ridinger, &cc. Academy Figures, by
1. C. Vanloo and Bouchardon; Croups, defigned by Gwinn, and engraved by Mr. Ravenet. Folio,
Price i0s. 6d. fewed.

2. A Collection of Landscapes and Figures, &cc. on Twenty-nine Copper-Plaies, by Paul Sanby,
and M. Charelain. Folio, Price 10s. 6d. fewed.
3. The School of Art, or moft compleat Drawing-Book extant; confifting of an extenfive Series
2
of well-cholen Examples, on Sixty CopperPlates. Folig, Price 19s. fewed, bound-1l. 4s.
4. The Draught -Man, Aiffant, or Drawing made Esty, in Twelve Leffons; illutraced with a
great Variety of Examples. By an eminent Arrift. Price 7s. 6d.
5.  Collection of Figures and Converfations, Cattle, Beafts, and Birds, on Sixty Copper-Plates, from
Vernet, Boucher, Berghem, Barlow, &cc. Quarto, Price 10s. 6d. fewed.
6. Twenty-four Delighful Views, by the eclebrated Mr. Coller. Quarte, jos.. 6d. fewed.
7. The Complete Drowing-Book; containing felect Parts of the Human Body, &cc. on One Hundred
and Sixteen Copper-Plates, from Le Cierc, Le Brun, Rembrandr, Berghem, Barlow, Charelain,
Swain, &cc. The Fourth Edirion. Octavo, Price fewed gs. bound 6s.
8. The Camplets Drawing-Maffer, &cc. Quarto, Price 6s. fewed, 8s. bound.
9. A Neaw Introduction to the Art of Drawing, collected from the moft free and eafy Deligns of the
bell Mafters, on Thirty-fix Folio Copper-Plates, Price 5s.
10. Heads reprefenting the various Passions of the Soul, by Le Brun, on Twenty Folio Copper-
Plates, Price fewed gs.
11. Twelve of the most capital Heads, felected from Le Brun's Paffions, engraved in Imitation of
Red Chalk. Folio, Price 3s.
12. A Compendious Treatife of natomy, adapted to the Arts of Defiguing, Painting, and Sculp-
ture, on Right Rolio Copper-Plates. Price 4s.
13. Six- Hcademy-Figares, by Vantoo and Bouchardon. Price 2s. 6d. the Set.
14. Twelve Heads, half the Size of Life, from Originals of Raph. Urbin. Price 2s.
15. A Book of Beafts, drawn from Natare, by M. Oudri. Price 2s.
16. A Neav, Ufeful, and Extensive Collection of the moft Beautiful Flowers, by J. Pillemont, on
Twenty Copper-Plates. Price 6s.
17. The Ladies Amsissment, or, the auhele Art of Tapanning made Easy, alluttrated in upwards of
Two Thouland different Defigns, on Three Hundred Copper-Plates, by J. Pillemont, and other
Wafters; to which are added, the moft approved Methods of Japanning. The Third Edirion.
N. B. The above Work will be found extremely afeful to the Porcelane, and other Manufactures
depending on Defign. Quarto, Price 2l. 2s. fewed, and gl. ys. coloured.
N. B. The Above us divided into four Parts, 175 Places in each, Price 10s. 6d. plain, or
1l. 11s. 6d. coloured.
18. Flower-Painting made Eefy, on Sewenty-two Copper-plates. Price 6s. fewed, and 1l. 10s.
coloured.
1
10. The Floriff. Octavo, Price 6s. fewed, rand 1l. 1s. coloured.
20. One Hundred and Fourteen Perspective Vreavs of the moll principal Cities, Villages, Country-
Houfes, Canals, &cc. in the United Provinces, by Radamaker. Price 7s. 6d. fewed, 8s. 6d. bound.
21. Fifty Vicws of Villages, &c. by M. Charclain, from the moft agreeable Prospects near Lon-
don. Price 4s. fewed, ys. bound.
22. Bloemarg's Drawing-Book, on Twenty-five Copper-Plates. Folio, Price 2s.
23. Principes de Desfein, by Le Clerc, on Fifty-two Copper-Plates. 12mo. Price 2s. fewed.
24.  New Collection of Hifferical Subjects. Price 1s. 6d.
4
25. A New Drawing-Book. Price 1s. 6d.
26. The Artiffs Aiflant in Drawing, Pertpective, Erching, Engraving, Mezzounto-Scraping,
Painting on Glafs, in Crayons, in Water Colours, and on Silk, Sauins, &c. Price 1s.
27. The Cbagkt, or a Collection of Flowers, &c. on Thirty-Right Folio Plates. Price 1l. 1s.
half-bound.
A 2 80.
Seventy-Seven different Drawing Books, in Quarro, on various Subjccls, at 1s. gagh.
One Hundred and Forty-Six Dirto, on different Subjects, at 1s. 6d. each.
Eightdifferent Books of Views of Villages, 8sc. near London, at 6d. each.
fos Dicto of Views in Holland, at 6d. each.
Ej
Fiticlff different Books of Kmblems, for the Amufsment of Children, commonly called Wurs-upr,
3.
al 6d. fich
5

40
7 1
19 
V 4
Ci
Mni
f





  at th te ba  h hi ethe  th n  d the bnad ond the nad hths ued ath &
i


5
 y
g
4

0



O N T H E
E3C.
DRAWING,
AT Of
RA WIIG is the Art of reprefenting by Lines and Shades:
& the Figure of any thing feen in Nature, or whatever form:
we conceive in idea; it is the nobleft Operation of human inge—
truity, and may certainly be reckoned among the Qualifications
which are the Characteriftic of a Gentleman. The Study of it
ought to be encouraged in every Vouth, whatever Station of Life
he may be placed in; for besides its great Ufe to all Perfons con—
cerned in the way of Art, it muft be extremely agreeable to a
Gentleman to Sketch a fine Building, beautiful Prospect, Piece
of Art, or uncommon Appearance in Nature. Befides, Drawing;
erables us to fee things in a plainer and clearer Manner, and
remember their Form, Shape, and other Circumftances, much
better than can poffibly be dene without a Knowledge in this
Art. In all Ages it has been carefully cultivated by the moft-
3
pelite Nations; and the great Men who have excelled in it,
have been homoured by the Protection of thofe Kings and Prin—
oes who had a Tafte for the Liberal Arts. It fets before us the
moft magnificent Buildings; the moft delightful Gardens, the
Beauties of Art, or the Productions of Nature, in to ftrong and
juft a Light, that one might imagine one's felf on the Spot;;
and this in a Language underftood by all Mankind.
The Implements for Drawing, are fmooth-grained Charcoal,,
Black-Lead Pencils,red, black, and White Chalk, a Port-Crayon,
Hair Pencils, Crow-Quill Pens, Indian Ink, a Ruler, and a Pair of
Compaffes.——Charcoal is proper to Lketch with, as any Strokes
made with it may be brushed out with a Feather if wrong, and
the Black Lead Pencil gives the correct out-line; Red Chalk is
proper to draw large or Academy Figures with, and Black Chalk
the fame, especially on colour’d Paper, where the Lights put in
with
A 2




4
On the ART of DRAWING.
with White-Chalk, has a beautiful Effect.——It is beft to begin
drawing from fome of the leaft complex Examples as they are
placed in this Collection. Every thing should be drawn at firft
with Strokes juft vifible, and afterwards corrected by altering
what is amiss, made as like the Original as poffible. In this
Manner 2 Learner should draw the feveral Fearures, in different
Pofitions, well, before he attempts an Entire Head or Face: for
he cannot do the whole together, until he is Mafter of the Parts.
This done, draw Faces and Heads, from forme in Outlines only,
ketch the Out-line, and finith from the same (haded. Before 1
proceed in this particular, I will here give the moft approved
Proportions of a Face and Head, and the better to underfland
it, shall defcribe one viewed in Front; in which Pofition it's
Outline makes nearly the Shape of an Egg divided by Lines, as
in the Examples. The upper Divifion for the Hair, then to
the Top, and next to the Bottom of the Wose, the lower one
to the Chin. This laft Part is fubdivided equally into three;
the uppermoft is the Diftance between the Nose and Mouth.
The Breadth is divided into five equal Parts, of which one is
the Eye, another the Diftance between the Eyes; from the
Outfide of the Eye to the Side of the Face is another Part, the
Mouth is a little more than one, the Nose a little lefs. The
Eye, in Front, is divided into three, one of which is the Pupil
or Sight; the Ear is the Length of the Nofe.
One of the greateft Beauties in drawing a Face, and which
is abfolutely neceffary to it, is to place the Features truly in their
Places; that is, the Middle of the Forebead, the Nofe, and the
Moutb, exactly under one another in a Line, and the Eyes on
a Line, properly croffing that on which the Forchead, Nofe, and
Mouth are placed: If you would fee how thefe Lines curve in
the feveral Attitudes the Head may be put into, there is a very
ingenious method in doing it, by getting a Piece of Box, or other
fmooth-grained Wood, turned in the Shape of an Egg, make a
Rraight Line on this Piece of Wood from the Middle of the Top
to the Middle of the Bottom; then make cross Strokes on it at
the


On the ART of DR A WIN G.
5.
the proper Diftances (as before directed in (peaking of the Pro-
portions of the Head,) for the Eyes, Nofe, Ec. and by fetting
this Piece of Wood in Variety of different Attitudes, you will fee
how the Lines curve on thofe Occafions, and according to thofe
Curves you muft place and turn the feveral Features. By this
means, I think, you will eafily underftand this Rule for placing
the Features properly, which is one of the moft difficult Points,
and, at the fame time, to abfolutely neceffary, that it is impoftible
to do any Head well without it: And next proceed to Blands,
Feer, Oc. and for due Proportions of which, fee the Examples:
After you draw thefe Parts well and with Eafe, try an entire
Figure, of which I shall here give you the moft approved Mea-
fures and Proportions.—The Antients commonly allowed
Eigbt Heads to their Figures, but we ordinarily divide the
Figures into Ten Faces from the Crown of the Head to the
Sole of the Foot, viz. from the Crown to the Forehead, one
Third of a face.
The Face begins at the Root of the loweft
Hairs upon the Forehead, and ends at the bottom of the Chin.———
The Face is divided into three proportionable Parts; the firft
contains the Forehead, the fecond the Nofe, and the third the
Mouth and the Chin; thence to the Pitbetween the Collar-bones,
two Lengths of a Nofe; to the Bottom of the Breafts, one
Face; to the Naval, one Face; to the Genitories, one Face;
to the upper Part of the Knee, two Faces; the Knee contains
half a Face; to the Ancle, two Faces; to the Sole of the Foot,
half a Face. A Man’s Arms ftretched out, is, from the longeft
Finger of his right Hand, to that of his left, as broad as he is
long; from one Side of the Breafts to the other, two Faces: The
Bone of the rm, called Humerus, is two Paces; from Shoulder
to the Elbow, thence to the Root of the Little-finger, the
Bone called Cubitus, with Part of the Hand, contains two Faces;
from the Box of the Shoulder-blade, to the Pit betwixt the Col-
lar-bones, one Face; the Sole of the Foot is the Sixth Part of
the Figure; the Hland is the Length of a Face; the Thumb a
Nofe, Ec. Thofe meafures are general, but liable to Exceptions,
varying


On the ART of DRAWING.
6
varying from the Quality of Persons and Movement of the Miaf
cles. Be careful to make a juft Symmetry and harmonious Cor-
38
respondence in the whole Figure, not one Leg of rm big
Ct
or longer than the other, not the fhrivelled Face of old Age
with the plump Lips of Vouth, the Body of a Bacchus with the
Limbs of an Apollo; or the Shoulders of an Hercules with the
Waift of a Fribble. It is proper here to take Notice of hew
great Advantage to a Perfon who would draw a Human Figure
well, it is to underftand fomething of the Anaremy of it; I
mean to much of it as relates to the Bones and the Mufcles;
and, as appears externally: More than this would be to him
mere Matter of Curiofity; but thus much is worth the Pains
of every one to become Mafter of, who is ambitious of Know-
ing the Foundation of the Art; for it will be a Means of piv-
ing Grace, Strengib, and Bearuty to his Figures, and he wilk
be able to exprets the proper Parts of the Limbs, which prin-
cipally operate in every Action, not blindly, and by Chance,
but with Truth and Certainty; which is efteemed by every
one, who is beft able to judge, one of the greateft Beauties in
a Figure: There is a proper Work for this Purpofe, entitled,
A Compendious Trearife of Hnatomy, adapted to the Arts of
Painting and Defign; in which to much only as is neceffary
to the Painter, with a concife Explanation of it, is collected
together from the more minnute Parts, which are neceffary to
the Surgeon or Anatomifl.
In Drapery, cleath your Figure properly and elegantly, and
neither with fome Moderns, by mafty Folds, lofe Sight of your
original Intention, nor by fervilely copying the Ancients, imi-
tate wet Linnen; and it will be a great Help to proportion, if
whatever is intended for Cloarbing be sketched naked; of which
preferve as much as poftible, yet carefully avoiding the above
Extremes.
Next in Courfe, tho' firft in Art, is the Expreftion of the
feveral Passions of the Soul, which is the moft difficult and beau-
tiful Parts of this Art. M. Le Brun, who has treated this
Subject


On the ART of D.R A WIN G.
7
Subject with great fuccess, fays, that Passon is a Motion of
the Soul, which makes it follow what it thinks good, and I
from that which it thinks hurtful; and what caufes any paftion
in the Soul, produces particular Aetions in the Body; in the
Face it more particularly fhews what it feels, which for that
Reafon is called the Mirror of the Soul. The moft capital Sub-
jets extant of this Kind are M. Le Bruns Expressions of the
Passions of the Soul, where the principal Paftions are beautifully
exprefted by that great Mafter, in Hleads almoft as large as the
Life, with an Abstract of his difcourfe on each of them: Thefe
Heads, befides their fefulness in this Particular, are likewife
Some of the beft Examples to draw after, either in red or black
Chalk, that are to be met with.
7
The Out-fine conquered, our Advice touching Light and
Sbadow might almoft be pared; fo shall only fay, in the
Examples before you, cover not the Light too much at firft, for
that will throw a Gloom over your Drawing, and cannot eafily.
be effaced: On the contrary, if your Lights are too open,
you may advance on them with Shade at Pleafure. In Com-
position to ditpose your Objects, that both Light and Shade may
fall in Mass, and be careful that your Principal be placed to
Advantage when you copy Nature (the nobleft School for Art).
Obferve the Operation of Ligbt, which, confidered and observ-
ed from its Fountain, will alone instruct, being unerring in its
Progrefs, and rendering the Beings moft confpicuous neareft to
our View.
Thus far relates to the Human Figure and it's immediate Ap-
pendages, which are the moft difficult and important Subjects of
this Art. Thereare, however, other Part which merit the Re-
gard of the Learner.
The drawing Flowers, Fruits, Birds,
Beafts, and the like, might be the Subject of fome of your firft
Attempts, not only as it is a more pleafing Employment, but as
it is an eafier Talk than the Drawing of Faces, Hands, Feet, and
other Parts of the Human Body, which require not only more
Care, but greater Exactnels and more judgment. There are
but


8
On the ART of DRAW IN G.
but few particular Rules for your Instruction on this Head
you have a Variety of Examples in this Collection, which copp
with great Care and Exactness, and be fure to make a correct
Out-line before you begin to Shade. Drawing of Land/capes,
Buildings, Cc. for a Gentleman, is the moft entertaining and
wfeful in the whole Art: To be able on the Spot (as is before
obferved) to take the Sketch of a fine Building, or beautifiel.
Prospect of any curious Production of Art, or uncommen Ap
pearance in Nature, or whatever elfe may prefent itfelf to view
on our Journies or Travels, in our own or Foreign Countries,.
may be thus brought home and preferved for our future Ofe,
either in Bufiness or Converfation; and is the beft Method of
bringing to Mind again thofe Beauties that have once charmed
us. Trees or Houfes, though of the fame Size, will appear
otherwife, according to their Nearness or Diftance; thofe at a
Distance appearing less than thofe on the fore Ground, and thofe
that are farther off, yet less. This Propertion you muft be care-
ful to repretent accordingly, becaute it is that which principal
ly gives the Appearance of Diftance, and is one of the greateft
Beauties in a View or Landscape, as may be feen by the Ex-
amples annexed, and are beft inculcated by the Appearance of
Objects according to their Situation in Nature.
The foregoing Rules are neceffary to be Known, and will rear.
dily advance a Student; therefore he who intends the imitative
Arts for his Profeffion, should well attend to them.—But the
Gentleman who means no further from his Purfuit than an Ac-
complishment, may be lets folicitous in the Dicipline of Rule;
fince, though he become no great Preficient, a. Taffe only will
enable him to judge properly of the Works of fuch eminent
Mafters who have, or may hereafter improve the GRAPHIC Arts.
2ili
7 NI) T
3.
r
7
F I N
I S.


