


THE
WORKS
OF THE LATE
PROFESSOR CAMPER,
The Connexion between the Science of Anatomy
AND
Statuary,
The Arts of Drawing, Painting,
&c. &c.
IN TWO BOOKS.
CONTAINING
A TREATISE ON THE NATURAL DIFFERENCE OF FEATURES IN PERSONS OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES AND PERIODS OF LIFE; AND ON BEAUTY,
AS EXHIBITED IN ANCIENT SCULPTURE;
WITH A NEI METHOD OF SKETCHING HEADS, NATIONAL FEATURES,
AND PORTRAITS OF INDIVIDUALS, WITH ACCURACY, &c. &c.
ILLUSTRATED WITH SEVENTEEN PLATES,
Explanatory of the Professor’s leading Principles.
TRANSLATED FROM THE DUTCH BY T. COGAN, M. D.
LONDON;
PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY
1794.











PREFACE,
By the Transtator.
THAT an intimate connexion subsists between the
different branches of the Arts and Sciences, by virtue
of which the one elucidates or reflects a lustre upon the
other, is a truth that has never been litigated. The Artist,
whose attention is solely confined to one particular object,
and whose knowledge is as circumscribed as his employment,
may become expert in the mechanic, or operative part of
his occupation, but we are not to expect from him any con-
siderable improvements, or peculiar indications of taste; nor
will he be qualified to propose rules, by which others
might be taught to excel.
To none of the fine arts are those observations more
applicable than to those of Painting and Sculpture ; for





none require a larger compass of knowledge, or a deeper
insight into Nature, if the Artist means to carry the pro-
ession farther than the mechanic delineation of an object
that is immediately before him.
As the Painter or Statuary, who has made the human
figure the peculiar object of his study, has doubtless given the
preference to the most interesting and the most sublime de-
partment; so it must be confessed, that he has chosen the
This branch demands
most difficult and comprehensive.
great extent of historical knowledge, an intimate acquain-
tance with national characteristics,
great attention to the
diversities occasioned by progressive years and peculiarities
of sex, observance of the effects produced by the passions
upon the human frame, in their various combinations and
different degrees of force; superadded to such a knowledge
of Anatomy as shall enable him to delineate the general
situation of the muscles in a placid and inert state, their
action in varied positions, and their influence in describing
every emotion or passion of the mind. It is also the branch
most exposed to the severity of criticism; as grosser faults in
the representation of the human form are readily detected,
and as numbers, presuming that they have a complete model



in their own persons, or competent knowledge from their
intercourse with their species, affect the refined connoisseur,
and attempt to support the character by searching for minuter
blemissies.
The delineation of different animals does not require an
equal extent and variety of knowledge; and those who have
made this branch their principal study, have in general con-
fined themselves to close imitation ; yet the ill success of many
painters in this department, the few masters comparatively
who have acquired celebrity, and the very few whose works
are exempt from grofs imperfections, too clearly indicate that
there are latent difficulties, which it is not in the power of
mere imitation to furmount; and also that the address ac-
quired simply by attention and practice in the delineation of
one particular species, has rather been an impediment than
an aid, in attempts to delineate animals of any other
species.
Much pains have been taken to remove those various
difficulties. Men of study and of genius have attempted to
introduce certain principles, and to propose invariable rules,




which they deemed conducive to the improvement of taste
in the higher branches of painting, and precifion in all.
Some of the principles advanced, and methods recommended,
have been of considerable service; while others, as they
were built upon false dogmas, are more calculated to mis-
lead than to direct into the right path.
The Work, which is now introduced to the English
reader, professes to remove several remaining difficulties of
no small moment; and to propose rules more conducive to
facility, grace, and accuracy, than any hitherto offered.
These professions are founded upon the discovery of a much
more immediate and intimate connexion between the sciences
of human and comparative anatomy, and of the natural
history of animals, with the art of delineation, than could
have been supposed to exist. Every idea in it, that is pe-
culiar to the Author, exemplifies in a very striking manner
the truth of our remark concerning the connexion that subsists
between different branches of the arts and sciences; by means
of which the one may be rendered, in various respects, sub-
servient to the other. The happy union, in the same person,
of profound knowledge in Anatomy, with a taste for Draw-



ing, has demonstrated that the minutiae of anatomical know-
ledge are much more conducive to elegance, character,
expression, and precision, than could possibly have been
imagined by any one totally ignorant of, or but superficially
acquainted with, the science. Whenever the attention of
artists has been directed to anatomical instructions, it has
hitherto been confined to the first series of muscles, or their
operation in the different actions or positions of the body, as
marked through the integuments ; but we now perceive the
great importance of Ofteology, particularly an intimate
knowledge of the bones constituting the cranium, and of their
relative situations in the delineation of national characters,
and in the changes made by advancing age; and also its
uses in the production of ideal beauty, or in marking the
eculiarities which characterise individuals. Neurology also,
which has not been considered as having the most distant
relation to the subject, is proved to be of high utility in the
representation of the emotions of the mind : an attainment
confessedly the most difficult, as well as the most interesting
and sublime.
The acumen with which professor Camper has criticised




the labours of the most distinguissied painters and delineators
of animals; the detection of their errors, and the causes of
them ; the rules given to avoid these errors, and acquire
greater precision in delineating animals of different species,
founded upon comparative anatomy, and the natural history
of the animal, indicate no less forcibly the great advantages
to be derived by these two sciences, which, united, promise
to point out an unerring road to excellence.
The Introductory Discourse will acquaint the reader with
the methods by which these discoveries were made. It will
also make him acquainted, in a pleasing and satisfactory
manner, with the progressive history of an inquisitive mind,
from early years up to manhood; the dissatisfaction that ac-
companied increased penetration and an improved taste,
the imperfections with which some modern productions
of
celebrated masters were chargeable; the means pursued to
avoid similar imperfections, and to imitate those excellencies
in the works of the antients which are the subjects of uni-
versal admiration, though the causes of this admiration had
never been investigated. The reader will further notice,
that the principles advanced are not the premature fruits of




à warm imagination; but that they were gradually formed
by the observations and experience of a series of years, until
they became the basis of sound criticism, and furnissied rules
for accurate execution. It may not be impertinent to add,
that the Professor’s remarkable proficiency in drawing, though
it was simply the amusement of his leisure moments, cor-
roborates all that has been advanced concerning the superi-
ority of his methods to those in common use. Of this pro-
ficiency the connoisseur may form some judgment from the
pecimens before him, which are faithful as well as elegant
copies of engravings from original drawings; the greater
part of which were executed under the inspection of the Pro-
fessor, and all of them by the first artist in the Seven Pro-
vinces. By this application of his professional knowledge
to his favourite amusement, he had acquired such a facility
and firmness in delineation, as astonissied every attendant on
his public Lectures; and artists themselves have acknow-
ledged, that his occasional and extemporaneous sketches, ex-
ceeded in taste and accuracy their laboured productions.
The First Book of this Work contains the substance of
several Lectures, which were read at different times, and







distant periods, before the Academy of Drawing, establissied
at Amsterdam. These were afterwards revised and digested
into à regular Essay, and carefully prepared for publication
by professor Camper himself. It may, perhaps, be thought
by those who admit the truth and importance of his leading
principles, that the distinctions given in the first chapter con-
erning the characteristic differences of different nations, are
too general, and not sufficiently adapted to assist the painter
in describing that vast variety of national distinctions ob-
servable in the different inhabitants of our globe. But we
are to recollect, that those are proposed simply as specimens
of a new study, the prosecution of which would promise the
greatest advantages to the national and historical Painter.
The grand object was to shiew, that national differences may
be reduced to rules; of which the different directions of the
facial line form a fundamental norma or canon;--that these
directions and inclinations are always accompanied by corres-
pondent forin, size, and position of other parts of the cranium,
the knowledge of which will prevent the Artist from blend-
ing the features of different nations in the same individual,
and enable him to give that true character to national figures
introduced into a composition, which has always been felt




as a beauty, and the want of it as a defect, though the cause
has lain concealed. This subject may justly be considered as a
new and interesting study in the natural history of man,
which requires the joint labours of physiologists to surmount
all the difsiculties attending it. It is alone by forming a
very large collection of the craniums of different people, that
a discrimination can be made between what is general, from
to the diversities observable in individuals, from that which
is national and characteristic of a particular people ?.
The other articles, minutely treated in this Book, relative
to a new manner of drawing portraits in profile, according
to certain rules deduced from the conformation of the cranium,
and the changes made by age, being founded upon indubitable
k Professor Blumenbach of Gottingen, is pursuing this study with great affi¬
duity. He has already published two Decades of differences in the craniums of
different people. The transtator has only been able to procure the first; from
which he learns, that the specimens in the possession of this Professor, led him,
in some sev instances, to differ from prosessor Camper, respecting characteristie
marks. As each has formed his opinion from the specimens in his possession,
thcse differences manifest the difficulties hinted above, and prove that further
investigations alone will enable us to distinguish between accidental forms and
iational marks.





principles, cannot be subject to similar incertitude; so that
respecting these, every Student has the means of making
great improvement completely in his power. The great
utility of the remarks concerning the beauties of the antients
will be self-apparent.
The Contents of our Second Book are the small remains
of Lectures upon other subjects relative to drawing; the
ideas of which suggested themselves, while the Professor was
engaged in the pursuit of his first object. They were col-
lected from imperfect manuscripts and detached hints, found
among the Profeffor’s papers after his decease, and publishied
by his Son in as complete à manner as circumstances would
allow. Of consequence they are merely to be considered as
Notes and Heads of Lectures, the substance of which was
given extempore. This will sufficiently explain the reason
why the scientific introductions appear so disproportionate to
the explanatory parts. It must also be noticed, that at the
time these Lectures were delivered, the audience enjoyed the
great advantage of seeing every part of the subject explained,
by a great variety of extemporaneous fketches, which were
successively effaced from the board to make room for others.




Those communicated to the Public, are the only ones to.
which the Professor had given permanency; and of these the
sketches, illustrative of the passions, were too imperfect to
be given as they were found ; the engraver was obliged to
supply some strokes that had been omitted. All the other
drawings were sufficiently accurate not to require additions
or alterations. We are informed that professor Camper had
range his ideas with more accuracy, form each Lecture into
a distinct treatise, and illustrate the positions advanced by a
regular series of drawings. But upon recess from the aca-
demy at Franiker, public affairs engaged his immediate at-
tention during the political troubles in Holland, until death
terminated every sublunary pursuit '.
Although, from the above causes, the Lectures on the
manner of delineating the different passions, and on the
points of similarity between Quadrupeds, Birds, and Fishies,
founded upon this similarity, are necessarily imperfect, and
have a claim to the indulgence due to fragments and rough
sketches; yet they may be deemed a valuable acquisition to
Professor Camper died at the Hague, in the vear 1789.




the Painter. They abound with sound criticismn, and furnish
hints which promise peculiar advantage to the delineator of
the human passions, or of objects in the animal kingdom;
and they will greatly assist the connoisseur in judging of the
accuracy and merits of a performance in this department of
Painting. In a word, the principles and hints advanced,
contain valuable germs, the development of which promises
an abundance of rich fruit to the intelligent Artist.
It was the celebrity of these Lectures in Holland that
made them attract the Translator’s notice; and a conviction
of the truth and great utility of the principles advanced in
them, made him wish that the artists and connoisseurs in
Great Britain should enjoy the advantages to be derived from
them. But he had every reason to apprehend, that they
would remain deprived of these, unless the Work was under-
taken by himself. To a competent acquaintance with both
languages, the knowledge of anatomy was also necessary for
the translation of a Treatise of this kind; and through the
presumption that every other person in the Seven Provinces,
possessing thefe requisites, might be engaged in more impor¬
tant employmients, or be destitute of leisure, he has imposed



siderations to submit to à labour which has not been very
agreeable. To translate has always appeared to him like
treading, with slow and tedious pace, over another man’s
ground, after the eye has been satisfied with the prospect,
and with looking at every object composing it. But in this
business he had to work his way through a very intricate
subject, an involved stile (for the Professors pen is by no
means equal to his pencil) and through the still greater dif-
ficulty of an erroneous edition, where the very numerous faults
in the references presented perpetual embarrassments. He
claims to himself some degree of merit, from this instance of
self-denial, and urges it as a plea for indulgence to any in-
cidental errors, from which it is scarcely possible for a work
of this kind to be totally exempt.
Great attention has been paid to perspicuity, and every idea
peculiar to the Author has been faithfully rendered; but the
Translator has thought himself at liberty to make some de-
viations of a trivial nature, in order to accommodate the
work to the Englishi reader; of which the following are the
principal:




Paraphrastical or explanatory descriptions are sometimes
added, particularly in the references to the five first Plates
of the First Book. The Professor had uniformly confined
himself to the concise algebraic mode; but this conciseness,
and a scientific appearance, were frequently purchased by
the loss of perspicuity and painful abstractions. Explanations
are therefore subjoined, until the reader, familiarized with
the subject and with the figures, will no longer require them.
In the Lectures, that complimentary stile which the Dutch
literati still retain in all their public harangues, particularly
in the exordium and at the close, is considerably retrenched;
as it would be displeasing to an English ear accustomed to
greater simplicity.
The two first Lectures are, in the translation, comprised
in one, since they related to the same subject. As they were
delivered, they were of the usual length; but from the causes
already mentioned, they were rendered too concise in the
publication to require à separation.
In the translation, two publications given at different




periods, are contracted into one volume, not much larger than
either of the original volumes. This has been effectuated
by the rejection of an Essay on the Principles of Beauty,
vhich contained the substance of three Lectures, which had
also been read before the Academy, and which the Editor
had subjoined to his second volume. This Essay would not
have conveyed the same information to the Englishi reader it
might have done to the audience, as Mr. Camper had
professedly adopted the theory of Mr. Burke; with which we
may suppose every Englissiman of taste to be familiar. Al-
though it displays considerable erudition, yet this is mostly
employed to exemplify the sentiments advanced in the Chap-
ter on Beauty. The Translator was therefore unwilling to
destroy the uniformity of a Work entirely of a Practical
Nature, and replete with Important Rules, by subjoining
speculations which had no immediate relation to practice, and
which would have appeared defective to every one who has
read the Treatise of Mr. Burke, or the more recent publica-
tion of the Rev. Mr. Alison.
The subject of the Notes will sufficiently sliew, whether
they were by the Professor or his Editors, excepting the one




in the 169th page. Should the remark it contains be im¬
pertinent, the fault is not to be attributed to the Professor.
If the principles advanced and illustrated in the following
pages should appear to English Artists and Connoisseurs as
important as they did to their Author, and to his Admirers,
in the Dutch Netherlands, the Translation cannot be unac-
ceptable in a country so renowned for its Painters as Great
Britain. They apparently open new sources of improvement,
and point out to younger Artists a new path for generous
emulation. It has been acknowledged by those who fre-
quent the many exhibitions of Paintings in the Metropolis,
that somethiing of a languor is taking place, from a kind of
uniformity that threatens to be prevalent. The eye of the
visitor is fatigued with viewing a repetition of the beauties
of the preceding year; and the most benevolent critic is
wearied of repeating the same accents of praise, in their ap-
probation of excellencies, which, being no longer novel,
have lost much of their power to charm. Will it be too
sanguine an expectation, if the hope be indulged, that the
following Publication will inspire Artists with fresh vigour,
by pointing out to them unbeaten tracts, enabling them to



infuse unusual spirit, dignity, and character into some
of
their performances; and by teaching them to avoid in others
those inaccuracies which have been perpetuated by an im-
plicit confidence in the rules and examples of the most cele-
brated Masters; May we not presume also, that some con-
of Painting, will be animated to pursue the subject to a
greater extent, and complete à study which professor Camper
has so happily begun; and thus procure honour and emolu-
ment to himself, by multiplying the sources of delight to
every man of taste,












































































































































INTRODUCTION.
PAINTING, and whatever is relative to the Art, have

been my favourite amusements from my earliest years :
and as the characteristic differences in men and animals ap-
peared to me the most interesting objects in nature, l was
disposed to pay more than ordinary attention to these. — To
draw, and to model in clay, were the recreations of my
childisn hours. As l grew older, 1 was particularly struck
with the figure and colour of the Moors; and with the dif-
ference in features and complexion between the East Indian-
blacks and the natives of Africa.
Whenever l copied after the best models of the ancient
Greeks,— drew the head of a Pythian Apollo, a Venus de
Medicis, a Hercules of Farnese; or placed before me the
beautiful figures of Michael Angelo, Quesnoi, and other cele-
brated masters of later date, lobserved a very great difference
between the faces of these and our own. I perceived also





that they were much more pleasing than any of the figures
of the Flemishi schools, without being able to ascertain in
what this preference might consist.
I had learned to make use of ovals and triangles, accord-
ing to the principles laid down in every treatise on the art of
Drawing; and yet when 1 copied from models in plaster,
from paintings, or from life, I always experienced not only a
difficulty, but an absolute impossibility of sketching heads to
advantage; nor was l satisfied with the proportions recom-
mended.
At sixteen years of age I began to paint in oil-colours,
chiefly after the Flemish masters: but as l was already cap-
tivated with the superior dignity observable in the antique
models, the style of these masters was not agreeable to me.
At the age of eighteen, my instructor, Charles Moor the
Younger, to whose attention and care l am indebted for any
subsequent progress I may have made in this art, set me to
paint one of the beautiful pieces of Van Tempel; in which
there was the figure of a Moor, that by no means pleased
me. In his colour he was a Black ; but his features were
European. As l could neither please myself nor gain any
roper directions, 1 desisted from the undertaking. By cri-
tically examining the prints taken from Guido Reni, C. Ma-
at, Seb. Ricci, and P. P. Rubens, 1 observed that they, in
painting the countenances of the Eastern Magi, had, like
Van Tempel, painted black men ; but they were not Moors.
The celebrated Engraver, Cornelius Visscher, was the only



one who appeared to me to have followed nature, and to
have properly characterized Moors.
As l advanced in years, my attention and penetration in-
creased ; and I imagined that, by a single glance of the eye,
I was able to distinguish antiques, and to mark, from the style,
the very period in which they were executed. The majo-
rity of prints taken from the most beautiful engravings on
representations of the Roman Emperors, by Hub. Goltz, pub-
lishied in the year 1645, which is otherwise a fine piece;
and in nis Græciæ ejusque Insularum and Asiae Min. Numis¬
mata; although in some few of them the Greek style is more
or lefs preserved. In the work of J. Tristan, Comment. Hist.
contenant en abrege les vies, eloges, &c. des Empereurs, &c.
jusques a Pertinax, the antique is entirely lost, through the
unskilfulness of designers and engravers. This observation is
applicable to L. Beger, Bonannus, &c. But the Numismata
in the Thesaurus Græc. Antig. of Gronovius, and those of
Sicily, Naples, &c. of Gravius and Burmann, are the most
intolerable of all.
In the works of Mountfaucon, J. Spon, &c. the designs
were made by artists of very moderate talents; and are ac-
cordingly very imperfect.
This could not offend the editors,
as their attention was totally
confined to the historical branch,
and they could neither
perceive nor relish transcendent
beauty ; which, however,
did not escape the notice of Baron







Stosch, notwithstanding that Picart has generally spoiled it by
his vicious taste. Count Caylus, though a good designer, has
failed in this respect. Barbault has, in a few instances, suc-
ceeded incomparably well.
It was not before I had formed the plan of this Treatise,
in the year 1768, that l enjoyed the opportunity of consult-
ing the excellent observations of Winkelman on the ' Imitation
of the Greeks in Painting and Sculpture ; his F Preliminary
Discourse concerning the Art of Designing among the An-
tients, and his 5 Monuments of Antiquity. I have since stu-
died his works with the utmost advantage, although his no¬
netrating observer terms ideal, is in fact founded upon the
of the human countenance. The dissertation of Tenkate upon
Ideal Beauty, has great merit; but it does not instruct us in
its true nature or principles. Following Lomazzo, he has
been missed by him. They are both embarrassed by adopting
the rules which constitute the harmony of music, and which
are not applicable to painting ; as the beauty of the latter
does not depend upon certain immutable proportions, but on
other circumstances.
The excellent letter of my esteemed friend, the profound
Hemsterhuys, teaches us the influence of the Beautiful upon
2 Gedanken uber die Nachahmung der Griekischen werke in der Mahlereij und
Bildhauerkunst.
F Trattato preliminare dell arte dell disegno degli antichi popoli.
5 Monumenti antichi inediti.




the mind; but it does not indicate in what beauty consists;
or propose rules by which we may trace or produce it in the
figure of objects.
I have examined the works of Natter, Mariette, and the
cabinet of the Duke of Orleans; and in all of these I have
remarked Manner, and also a deficiency of that taet which
it is the object of these works to inspire. Even Winkelman
is destitute of it in execution. So difficult is it to catch the
spirit of the antients, as long as the causes of their excellen-
cies are not investigated, and reduced to principles.
Although Albert Durer was in reality a great master (and
when we advert to the age in which he flourished, we must
allow him to have possessed extraordinary merit) yet he has
laid the foundation of a bad taste, which has diffused itself all
over Europe, not excepting Italy; and which continues to
exert its pernicious influence ; as is manifest from Lomazzo,
who follows him implicitly, excepting in the doctrine of mu-
ical harmony being applicable to painting. It is also obvi-
us that Lomazzo has consulted Pomponius Gauricus de Sculp¬
tura, and Dolce, as well as A. Durer. Blind at thirty years
of age, this man was obliged to seek à subsistence by his
ritings. Hence his numerous publications; most of which
fines the beautiful 1 Il bello per cosi dire, non e bello, che par
la sola sua bellezza ' e The beautiful, so to express myself,
4 Trattato della Pittura. 1584. pag. 196.



« is merely beautiful by its own beauty. — How extra-
vagant !
To return. I must further remark, that the excellent prints
from the works of Rafael, Poussin, Titian, and Pietra Testa,
pleased me much better than the finest pieces of Rubens or
Van Dyck; in both of which, the divisions of Albert Durer,
and the imperfections of his oval were very conspicuous.
This is particularly the case in the painting of the Holy Vir-
gin and Child, in the celebrated gallery at Dusseldorp ; which
is in every other respect an excellent performance.
By frequently modelling in clay, after the finest heads of
antiquity, I learnt that Albert Durer, by looking at the object
with both his eyes, had made them too broad; and I also
learnt that a painter, to excel, must be a proficient in model-
ling as well as in drawing. This will best enable him to
form a genuine idea of the real form of all objects. A
knowledge of optics is also requisite; as has been fully proved
in my Inaugural Dissertation ?.
In a separate chapter, on the constituent beauty of forms,
I shall hereafter show how much depends upon avoiding a
defective manner of viewing the object which is occasioned
by the refraction of the rays of light. In order to succeed,
it is also necessary to attend to the excellent rule of Lyfip-
Publishied in the year 1746. It treats of the construction of the eye, and the
nature of vision.


INTRODUCTION.
pus ; i. e. To make the head somewhat less, the body more
slender and delicate, than they really are, and they will be
represented to greater advantage than by the most scrupulous
exactitude.
When I gave lectures in the public college at Amsterdam,
as Professor of Anatomy, l found, by comparing bodies of va-
rious ages that were brought to me for dissection, that the
oval was not calculated for the delineation of the features
ith any degree of accuracy or expedition. With this idea
I sawed several heads, both of men and of animals, perpen-
dicularly through the middle; and l was fully convinced that
the ball of the head forming the cavity destined to contain
the brains, was in general very uniform; but that the position
of the upper and lower jaws was the manifest cause of the
most striking differences. The same observation may be ex-
tended from quadrupeds down to the finny race : and it has
suggested hints sufficiently numerous to form a separate
Treatise.
The above examination has also enabled me to discover
whence those changes arise which progressively take place in
our features, from infancy to the most advanced age. But I
still was unable to explain in what manner it was that the
Greeks should have acquired, at a very remote period, that
Capita minora faciendo, quam antiqui : corpora graciliora, siccioraque, per
quæ proceritas signorum major videretur : — ab illis factos quales essent homines, a
se quales viderentur esse. PlIN. Lib. xXXiV. Cap. viii. Sect. 19. Pag. 652. 5 6.
& 653.



singular and dignified expression which they gave to their
figures; and which I have never seen perfectly equalled.
I
erceived, moreover, that in the copies taken from these, the
facial line did not differ from our own. This will appear
by comparing the 5th figure of Plate X. (which is the head
of Augustus Caesar, engraved by Dioscorides) with the first
figure of the second Plate.
Having contemplated the inhabitants of various nations
with greater-attention, I conceived that a striking difference
was occasioned, not merely by the position of the inferior
form of this maxilla. This idea was confirmed by contem-
plating a considerable collection which l afterwards made of
heads, that acknowledged various countries for their parents ;
or of exact copies from them. Exclusive of several skulls of
my countrymen, and of the adjacent nations, I possess two of
English negroes (the one was a young person, the other ad-
vanced in years)— the head of a female Hottentot, of an
inhabitant of Mogul, —à Chinese,— a youth of Madagascar,
a Celebean,— and finally, the cranium of a Calmuck ; that
is, of eight different nations.
When l was at Oxford, in the year 1786, I also took a
sketch of the lower jaw of a native of Otaheite, that had been
brought over by Captain King. I have never been able to
obtain possession of the cranium of a native American, nor
even of an Anglo-American, which has, however, some pecu-
liarities that were pointed out to me by that celebrated artist




Mr. West; of which, as he was born in Pennsylvania, he was
the best qualified to judge. Their face is long and narrow ;
and the socket of the eye surrounds the ball in so close a
manner, that no space is allowed for a large upper eye-lid ;
which is so graceful to the countenance of most Europeans.
When in addition to the skull of a negro, I had procured
one of a Calmuck, and had placed that of an ape contiguous
to them both, l observed that a line, drawn along the fore-
nead and the upper lip, indicated this difference in national
physiognomy; and also pointed out the degree of similarity
between a negroe and the ape. By sketching some of these
eatures upon a horizontal plane, l obtained the lines which
mark the countenance, with their different angles. When I.
made these lines to incline forwards, lobtained the face of an
antique; backwards, of a negroe; still more backwards, the
lines which mark an ape, a dog, a snipe, &c.— This disco-
very formed the basis of my edifice.
The large and populous city of Amsterdam, moreover, af-
forded me various opportunities of collecting the skulls and
other bones of the deceased, in a regular progrefsion, from
arliest infancy up to decrepit age. By comparing these with
ach other, my thoughts were directed to the natural differ-
ence occasioned by the gradual growth of the parts in youth,
and their decay in advanced age; and also to the manner by
vhich this discrepancy of years might be most accurately de-
lineated. Hence arose the first stage of my edifice: the se-
cond was formed by a critical investigation of the line which





ancient masters preferred, in their best productions. Finally :
While 1 was scrutinizing the utility of the oval and triangle,
which are proposed as the furest direction for designing
a
human head, the examination and comparison of the skulls
and maxillæ which had been sawn through, discovered to me
a new and more simple manner of portraying any form of
head I pleased, either of men or of animals, with a much
greater degree of precision.
As I met with sew connoisseurs in painting, and still fewer
who enjoyed speculations of this kind, my pursuits were totally
neglected until the year 1767; when, being in company
with my much esteemed friend Mr. F. Van Hemsterhuys, at
the house of his Excellency the Count of Bentinck, Lord of
Rhoon, &c. we examined together a number of beautiful In-
ately the originals from the counterfeits, the Grecian from the
ciples of my knowledge; which I explained, with the addi¬
tion of the leading observations I had formerly made. The
Count, who was a distinguishied judge and sound critic in every
branch of the polite arts, was struck with the simplicity of my
discoveries, and urged me, with his usual politeness, to arrange
and more fully explain my ideas, as they appeared of utility.
Upon retiring to my country residence, in order to enjoy
a relaxation from my academical labours, I undertook this ar-
duous task. But numberless difficulties presented themselves.




It was not only necessary to make drawings of the different
bones of the face, but to do this with accuracy. This was
finally furmounted. The drawings were to be reduced to the
same scale, and properly arranged. The best antiques, and
also the prints taken from them, were to be examined and
studied. Ancient and modern writers on the Natural History
of Man, and on the Principles of Drawing, were to be perused
with attention, digested, &c. &c.
The Work swelling under my hands, not only became
more extensive, but promised to be more extensively useful.
I flattered myself that it would prove acceptable, not only
to those who admire the masterly performances of ancient
artists, but also to those who are engaged in the study of na-
ural history, and to all young pupils in the arts of drawing
and of sculpture. Employing every hour of leisure from
other occupations, I finished the sketch of the present Treatise,
towards the end of August in the year 1768.
Delighted with my discoveries, as is generally the case, I
communicated them to several admirers of the fine arts.
They imagined that considerable service might be rendered
to the science of Painting, and particularly to the Academy
of Drawing, establissied at Amsterdam, were l to deliver some
public lectures upon the subject, before the members of that
society. These I delivered on the first and second days of
August, in the year 1770, before a numerous and respectable
audience. The president and chief patron of the institution,





Burgo-master Huygens, and the other directors, were pleased
to exprefs their approbation of my endeavours, by presenting
me with a golden medal «
Not less than sixteen years elapsed before a convenient
opportunity of publishing this Treatise presented itself. Vari-
ous engagements prevented me from revising it with atten-
tion, in order to enlarge or abridge, as might be judged ne-
cessary. The difficulty I had to find out an intelligent and
skilful engraver, was another obstacle. At length, the cele-
brated Mr. Vinkeles was prevailed upon to engrave the
sketches: but the various occupations of this distinguished
artist were the causes of further procrastination. At length
it appears, accompanied with the wishies of its Author, that it
may meet with indulgence, and give satisfaction.

The Medal was presented after the Author had delivered some other lectures
which completed his plan. They treated of the subjects contained in the Second
Book of this Work. It was the usual medal of the academy ; on the reverse of which
vas the following inscription, in the Dutch language :—ee Presented to the learned
ee PETER CAMPER by the Directors of this Academy, as a grateful Acknowledg-
eement for the useful Lectures delivered before the General Assembly in the years
ee 1770 and 1774.1


BOOK I
PART THE FIRST.
CHAPTER
I.
CONCERNING THE CHARACTERISTIC DIFFERENCE OF FEATURES IN THE
MOST DISTINGUISHED PEOPLE ON THE GLOBE.
WHEN we observe a concourse of people assembled to-
gether in a large commercial city, from the different
quarters of the globe, we are able to distinguissi, by à single
glance of the eye, not merely negroes from white men,--but
among the latter we discriminate Jews from Christians, Spa¬
niards from Frenchmen or Germans, and thefe from the
English. It is also possible to distinguish natives of the south-
ern parts of France from those of the more northern, unless
they have been blended by intermarriages. The Scots are
also known from the English; and both from the lrishi In
the cities of Holland national physiognomy is lost; but
islanders retain the original features. The inhabitants of



Hindelopen, Molkwerum, and Koudum ; have still the small
Those also of the
face and long chin of their ancestors.
Bildt : are eafily distinguishable from their nearest continental
neighbours, by their short and compressed features.
Each country, therefore, has some peculiarity which is per-
petuated, until the accidental blending of different people
renders their distinguishing marks dubious, or entirely oblite-
rates them. Wars, colonizations, commerce, navigation, and
shipwrecks, have so completely intermixed the inhabitants of
the most distant countries, that characteristic distinctions are
only to be found among those of central provinces, that are
remote from the access of strangers. In countries that lie
contiguous to each other, and in islands adjacent to conti-
nents, the change is gradual, and scarcely to be perceived but
by comparing the different extremes.
People are distinguissied according to the grand division of
continents, into Europeans, Africans, Asiatics, and Americans.
The inhabitants of these principal parts of the earth, includ-
ing the islanders of the South Seas, inhabitants of New Hol-
land and New Zealand, have never been discriminated from
each other by permanent characteristics, or personal indica-
tions alonc. Some attribute peculiar to the quarter of the
world; or the specification of some singular ornament, pecu-
These are inhabitants of different districts in Friezland, on the borders of the
Zuyder Sea. They are remarkable for retaining the original simplicity of manners,
singularity of dress, and rejecting matrimonial connections with any of their neigh-
bours.



liarity of dress or custom, have always been added. Thus,
an Asiatic is distinguished from an European by colour and
dress: the African and American, being somewhat similar in
colour and dress, are known by the addition of a crocodile,
an elephant, a cargo of tobacco, incision of the skin, tatow-
ing, plumes of feathers, &c.
It is, however, a fact, that the inhabitants of Northern
Europe (the Laplanders for example) are of a more tawny
complexion than those of Java; nor are many of the Persians,
or the subjects of the Mogul empire, of a darker complexion
than the Spanissi. Even the Caffres, although they are in-
habitants of Africa, are remarkably different from the Ango-
lese and the Nubians.
Some of the American tribes seem to. derive their origin
rom the northern countries of Asia. The similarity of their
make, mode of living, manners, religion, &c. render this con-
The many journies also taken
ecture extremely probable.
from Russia, through Siberia,
Kamtschatka, St. Andries, &c.
to America; and more particularly the celebrated voyage of
the late Capt. Cook, afford additional proofs of the fact.
The possibility of making the passage, will be obvious to
every one who consults the excellent chart publissied by that
unfortunate circumnavigator, in his last Works; and he will
be convinced that it was not difficult for the Laplanders, Sa-
moiedes, Siberians, Kamtschatkans, and the savage nations



of Asia, to find their way to America through the same
passage.
No man who contemplates the whole human race as it is
now spread over the face of the earth, without a predilection
gle pair, that were formed by the immediate hand of God,
long after the world itself had been created and had passed
through numberless changes. From this pair all the habitable
parts of the earth were gradually propagated. The difference
varies, while the contexture of the skin is uniformly similar
in all men. I have demonstrated, upon a former occasion :
that it is immaterial whether the colour of our first parents was
black or fair, since a change from white to black is equally
great as the reverse.
I have in my collection of natural curiosities, several speci-
mens of the skins of Moors, Italians, and of the fairest Dutch
women, in which the membrana reticularis is to a greater or less
degree of a dusky hue; so that no essential difference exists,
whichever of the propositions be advanced. It sometimes
happens that this reticular membrane becomes as black in
our fairest women, during their pregnancy, as that of the
blackest negro or Angolese. Of this a curious instance pre-
sented itself in the year 1768. The abdomen and breasts of a
woman naturally of a fair complexion, had totally changed
In a treatise on the colour of negroes.




their colour. The celebrated Le Cat4 has also mentioned se-
veral instances of a similar kind. Darkness of complexion
begins also to diminisn in process of time: of which I have
preserved various specimens in the skins of Moors.
Thus it is evident that the fairest skin may become black,
and the darkest become fair, without our being able to afcer-
tain the immediate cause. The influence of the sun is uni-
versally acknowledged; but the above-mentioned changes in
regnant women, to which might be added instances of white
negroes, and of those who are rendered pale through various
indispositions, manifest that other causes operate upon this
membrane, as well as the sun’s rays. And wliy not; Does
not the blood throw off dark coloured particles to the inward
surface, and to the iris, of the eye, while the tunica albuginea
remains perfectly white, Many other instances might be
given, where different parts of the body acquire such a sur-
face that they do not reflect the rays of light: that is, they
appear dark. Every Tyro in philosophy knows, that objects
have no colour in themselves; and that the idea of colour is
excited in us according to the manner in which the rays of
light are refracted.
Since we are totally ignorant at what period after the
formation of the globe man was created, and the human
race began to spread over the earth, we shall confine ourselves
to the differences in the human species that now exist. The
Traité de la couleur de la peau humaine. Edit. Amsterd. Art. IV. p. 130.



great Buffon has anticipated and exhausted this subject, in his
excellent dissertation ee On Man, and the Varieties in the
«e Human Species æ, 1 shall merely select the peculiarities
that refer more immediately to our purpose, and take the
Calmucks as a specimen.
The Calmucks, compared with ourselves, and more par-
ticularly with the most celebrated figures of antiquity, are
deemed the ugliest of all the inhabitants of the earth. Their
faces are flat, and very broad from one cheek-bone to the
other; the nose is so flat, that the sight penetrates into the
nostrils ; the eyes are near to each other; the lips are thick,
and the uppermost lip is long. They resemble the inhabit-
ants of Siam, as described by Loubiere, whose faces are broad
acrofs the checks, while their foreheads and chins terminate
in a point ; so that their form is more rhomboidal than oval.
Compare Plate I. Fig. 4. with Plate III. Fig. 3. which repre-
sent the profile and front face of a Calmuck.
According to Buffon, the face of the Chinese is broad and
round. They have small eyes and large eye-brows. The
only Chinese I have ever seen was at London, in the year
1785. The smallness of the nose did not strike me. Upon
examining the cranium of a Chinese, in my possession, l ob-
serve that the cavities or sockets of the eyes, are situated near
together, but that they are placed obliquely; nor are they
high in the forehead. The os jugale, or cheek-bone, is not
See Nat. Hist. Part III. pag. 371.




broad, but prominent. The superior maxilla, from the bot-
tom of the nose to the teeth, is narrow ; as in the Otaheites,
and contrary to that of the Calmuck. Consequently they
cannot have a broad upper lip.
The greatest singularity that strikes me equally in a Cele-
bese, a Chinese, and an Otaheite, consists in the rectangular
form of the inferior maxilla. See Plate I. Fig. 4. : V. S.
I have also remarked the same in all the women born in Asia
of Dutch or English parents. This renders the lower part
of the face much broader than it is in other nations.
The whole form of the cranium of an Otaheite and a
Chinese is so very similar, that l might venture to conclude
that the inhabitants of Otaheite and the Friendly Isles were
a colony from China, notwithstanding the greatness of the
distance. On examining the cranium of a Moluccan that is
in my possession, I observe that the angle of the lower jaw is
not so large, but that the upper jaw projects more ; as in
the negro and the Calmuck.
1 readily agree with Buffon, that the inhabitants of the
northern parts of the Mogul empire and of Persia, the Arme-
nians, the Turks, Georgians, Mingrelians, Circassians, and the
inhabitants of Europe in general, are not only the fairest, but
have, however, seen many Armenians whose countenances
were not pleasing. The natives of the more southern parts
of France, particularly the females, still retain the semicircular



 
form of the upper maxilla, and that smoothness of countenance
which is so striking in the Pythian Apollo and the Grecian
Venus. Most of the northern French have very small heads
ind sharp faces, like the Scots and many among us: that
is, the os jugale recedes, and does not spread as in the Cal-
muck. Compare Plate II. Fig 1. Q. with Plate I. Fig. 4. 0
This difference is not easily discerned by one that is not ac-
customed to modelling.
But there is no nation so distinguishable as the Jews. Men,
women, and children, from their births, bear the character-
istic marks of their race. Mr. West, the distinguished painter,
vith whom I have frequently conversed upon the subject,
confessing my inability to discover in what this national
nose. l acknowledge that this contributes much, and that it
gives them a resemblance to the Lafcars, of whom I have
seen numbers in London; and have even taken the model
of a face in Paris-plaster. But there is still a somewhat un-
explained. It is upon this account that the famous De Wit
has so ill succeeded in the council-chamber at the Stadt-house
of Amsterdam. He has exhibited in his paintings several
men with beards, but they are not Israelites.
It would be impracticable to delineate all the characteris-
tic varieties that exist in nature. To avoid an expensive
multitude of plates, Ishall consider the Calmuck as the repre-
sentative of all Asia (from Siberia to New Zealand) and also
of North America; as it is more than probable that this



people are descended from the Northern Asiatics. We can
determine nothing concerning the Mexicans or Patagonians,
as they are not aborigines; and are most probably descended
from Europeans.
2. The head of an European shall be considered as a
specimen of all Europe, Turkey, Persia, and the largest part
of Arabia, as far as Indostan.
5. The head of an Angolese negro shall be substituted for
all Africa; also for the Hottentots (who do not materially
differ from the negroes); for the Caffres, and for the natives
of Madagascar. The Moluccans seem to have blended to-
gether the characteristics of the Asiatic and the African.
4. I have prefixed the cranium of the simia caudata, or
tailed ape, and of a small orang-outang, in order to demon-
strate the importance of the facial line, which is applicable
to all animals.


CHAPTER H.
THE OPINIONS OF ANCIENT AND MODERN WRITERS CONCERNING THE
DIFFERENT SHAPES OF THE HUMAN HEAD, STATED ANDREFUTED.
Herodotus Hippocrates, Suidas, Aristotle, Pliny,
H p. Mela, and many other writers of antiquity, have
uniformly maintained that the variety of forms observable
nd other natural causes, but also from some original artifice,
which finally gives birth to a determined form. This
opinion has been adopted by some of the most eminent
writers among the moderns ; as Cardan, Vesalius, Schenck,
and more recently Haller and the Count de Buffon; and it
seenis to be confirmed by the remarks of numberless travellers.
I have controverted the sentiment upon a former occasion’.
The whole of the present Treatise will manifest its absurdity.
I did not venture to oppose an opinion uniformly supported
by such respectable authorities, until, about thirty years ago, the
fotus of a female negro came into my possession. In this
faetus, which was of about six months, all the features were
so strongly marked, that every person could immediately dis-
tinguissi the negro child, although the colour of the skin was
not changed into black.
2 Sce Prijsverhandeling over de natuurlijke opvoeding des Kinderen. Haarl.
Verband. tom. VII. Deel I. p. 374.



In the year 1758, I dissected publicly at the anatomical
theatre at Amsterdam, the body of a negro lad, about eleven
years of age. This afforded me an opportunity of demon-
strating all those diversities in the cranium, which nature had
effectuated. By nature, I mean the influence of country,
nutrition, air, &c.
I do not affirm that artifice has never been productive of
hanges. When 1 was at London, in the year 1785,
Mr. Cline, Surgeon of St. Thomas’s Hospital, allowed me to
take a draught of the cranium of an aged man from St.
Vincent (one of the Carribean Islands) of which the whole
forehead was flattened, the crown peaked, while the pa¬
rietal bones remained convex; which gave a very oblong form
to the head. Hunauld has described and delineated one of the
same kind: and Winssow mentions another instance of a
similar nature. On my visit to Oxford in the same year,
made a drawing of the cranium of a young man that was
brought from Nootka Sound, by Captain King, which was
also compressed into nearly the same form. This is deposited
in the collection belonging to the anatomical theatre of Christ’s
College. 
If this be à national custom, it is à subject of wonder how
so strange a practice could have been introduced into three
countries, so very remote from each other; and it is a still
 Mr. Forster has observed, that the inhabitants of Malicolo have the forehead
very much slattened, without deciding whether this proceeded from art, or was na-
tural.— See Observ. faites pendant le 2d Voyage de Mons. Cook, Paris, Tom. VIII.



greater wonder that it does not prove injurious to their
mental faculties. It is most probable that these were singular
instances; for Captain Cook, speaking of the inhabitants of
Nootka Sound, in his last voyage, simply observes, that they
have the forehead rather low ; without making any other
remarks. Mr. Hughes also, who describes the inhabitants of
mention of such a custom; and extols the vivacity of the
Carribees. But to return to the antients.
Hippocrates J seems disposed to attribute the particular
form of the head to the conduct of midwives and nurses. He
observes that many persons, considering the oblong form of
the head as the most graceful, press them flat during infancy,
and that they thus acquired naturally the particular shape
which nations considered as the most pleasing.
Vesalius supports this idea, and also asserts that some mid-
wives have been bribed by mothers, to shape the heads of their
children into the form of a ball. He conjectures that the
flatness and breadth of the occiput in the Germans, proceeds
from the manner in which infants are bound in a portable
cradle, which the mothers carry on their backs when they
travel; and that the more oblong form observable in the heads
of Dutch children, arises from their being perpetually placed
on the side in the cradle. Neither of these eminent men has
2 Vol. II, Chap. 2. pages 288 and 3o1.
 De Aere & Locis, p. 289



taken into consideration the natural form of the pelvis ; which
in this country particularly, is frequently so narrow, that the
head of the infant cannot pafs, until the throes of the mother
have moulded it into an oblong form, by which the diameter
is lessened.
It is therefore not surprizing that the learned should have
acknowledged the influence of art, or that Scaliger’ should have
confidently asserted that the Genoese, having derived the custom
from their ancestors the Moors, should press the heads of their
sleeping children until art became nature, and the whole
race was born with heads and minds of a Thersites. Car-
danus J expressly says, that among the provincials of Portus
Vetus, in the West Indies, the people have no necks, but heads
of a quadrangular shape; that this originated from art, it
having been customary to compress the head between planks;
but that nature finally succeeded to art.
Count de BuffonJ relates from Raleigh, that there are
nations in Guiana whose necks are so extremely short, and
shoulders so elevated, that their eyes seem to be placed upon
their shoulders, and their mouths upon their breasts. The
Count properly compares these to the Scythians, and to the
Acephali of the antients. It is very probable that the anti-
ents considered apes and the orang-outang as belonging to the









human race; and also the modern travellers, seeing them at
a distance, have mistaken them for men.
Pliny, when he treats of Athiopia’, observes that the
Blemmyi have no heads,—that their eyes, and mouths are
placed upon their breasts; and that some who are destitute of
heads, have their eyes placed upon their shoulders. He also ad-
vances J, upon the authority of Eudoxus, that in some parts
of India the men have feet an ell long, while those of the
women are so small that they have the name of Struthopodes,
sparrowfeet; and also, that the ears of some are so long and
broad, that they can hide themselves behind them.
StraboJ relates, upon the testimony of Onesicritus, that the
ears of some men in India hung down to their heels, so that
they could snugly sleep upon them. However, he allows the
accouut to be fabulous. Pomp. Mela 5 asserts with confidence,
that the Otomegalos had such large ears that they could en-
tirely envelop themselves in them.
C. J. Solinus says s that there are men in India, meaning
thie Panotes, who cover themselves with their own ears.
In the voyages of Captain Cook x« mention is made of the
inhabitants of Easter Islands, whose ears are slit through
the middle, and hang down almost to their shoulders.









Count de Buffon enlarges very judicioussy upon the causes
of the national differences that take place in different people.
He reduces these to three: — ist, The influence of climate;
2d, Of food; 3d, Of manners and customs.
Respecting the first cause, that the colour depends upon it,
does not admit of a doubt; and yet it is a fact, that, in the
coldest climates, such as Greenland and Kamtschatka, the natives
are nearly as black as in Madagascar. However, the hottest
climates yield men of the deepest jet, unless they intermix
with the inhabitants of other nations.
The peculiar forms of the eyes, cheeks, maxillary bones,
and particularly of the nose, may safely be attributed to the
influence of climate.
As we are upon the subject, it will not be improper to ob¬
serve, that no great dependence can be placed upon the
portraits of different nations given in the voyages of Captain
Cook. The painter, Mr Webber, has in most of them, indi¬
cated too much of the mannerist: For example, In the women
of Otaheite, represented in the 27th, 28th, and zyth plates.
However, he appears to have been more exact in delineating
the upper eye-lids in the women of New Holland and
Diemen’s Land, in plates the 6th and 7th. The women of
Oonalaska have the same physiognomy and the same small
eye-lids as those of Kamtschatka. Mr. West informs me that
ahis is a peculiarity observable also in the English thaf are
born in North America.






The object of the painter seems to have been to represent
the heads and countenances of well-proportioned men and
pleasing women. This is remarkably the case in the young
females of Otaheite, particularly in the 28th and z9th plates ;
to whom he has given the features of Frenchwomen. On
the other hand, those animals which have nothing pleasing in
their figures, are always reprefented as monsters: as will
appear from the 52d plate.
The influence of food may be learned from our own
animals, the horse, cow, and sheep; although there is no
great diversity of climate in the different provinces of Holland.
A rich or a meagre pasturage changes the form, the horns,
and the wool of animals.
Under the article of Nutrition, I comprehend fluids and
peculiarities of atmosphere as well as food. But how these
operate, and why the upper maxilla of a negro, and the cheek-
bone of a Calmuck projects; and why the socket of the eye
is lower and more oblique in a Chinese and a Moluccan,
cannot be fully explained. To observe and point out parti-
climate frequently co-operate; but we cannot suppose them
productive of a different race. Black, tawny, and white men
are simply varieties; they do not constitute essential differences.
Our skin is precisely of the same contexture with that of the
negro; but it is not of so deep a dye.
It is probable that the hair becomes long and straight, or
curled or frizzled, according to the nature of the food,



chiefly. It is remarkable that the natives of Drent, and of
the bishiopric of Munster, have naturally sleek hair; but after
they bave resided some years in Amsterdam, it begins to
curl. Of this we have many instances.
Manners and customs indubitably operate with great force
upon the form and posture of the body. A polished educa-
tion renders the whole figure elegant. Of this we have daily
instances in polissied nations.
A particular manner of sitting, of lying, of standing, and
walking; various corporeal defects, and other circumstances of
the like nature, give a particular cast to the whole body.
This is so obviously the case, that the countenance of a de-
formed person will become deformed; that is, it sinks gradually
by the pressure of the brain, which has now lost its equipoise.
Thus the socket of the one eye sinks lower than that of the
other. Of this I have a very remarkable instance in my
abinet. In a person that is lame, the whole knee turns in-
wards by the twist given to the femoral bone. In those who
are formed awry, or are very round-shouldered, the clavicle is
straighter and longer. I shall not mention the pernicious
effect of stays, with which so many of our females spoil the
shapes of their children, without being admonissied by their
wn. We ridicule the Chinese for maiming the feet of their
females in so forcible a manner, and yet we are guilty of a simi¬
lar folly, as l have demonstrated upon another occasion’, Nay,
In a treatise concerning the best form of a shoe.



we exceed them; for we not only incapacitate the female
sex from walking, but we disable ourselves. The fillets that
bind up the hair of our ordinary women, leaves an impression
in their heads. Garters make a deep furrow under the
knee, as effectually with us as with the inhabitants of Brasil,
who consider it as an ornament.
Education, employments, and a suitable mode of living,
add a beauty both to the features and to the limbs. They
render the whole body more elegant. Such is the difference
between persons genteelly educated and those who have been
totally neglected, that it is scarcely credible that manners and
habits should be able to effectuate such changes in the same
being.
Various endemic diseases are not less influential. The
rachites, or rickets, may occasion numberless deformities of
body. By the way, it appears from the writings of Hippo-
rates, that the inhabitants of the most salubrious climate in
he universe were subject to this disease, as well as those of the
more northern or southern regions, otherwise he would not
have been able to describe the diseases which are derived
from this source in so masterly a manner.
In proportion as the indispositions arising from deformity
are subjects for commiseration, ought the cruel and inhuman
taste of the contemporaries of Longinus to be held in contempt.
He tells us’ that they took pleasure in keeping dwarfs locked
 Longinus de Sublimitate. 5 xiii. page 233.



up in confined chests, and in swathing them with bandages, on
purpose to give them some ludicrous deformity. This conduct
appeared to him so cruel, that he inclined to doubt the fact; but
we learn from Suetonius, that such deformed persons were kept
in all the houses of the great. Tiberius prohibited these ludibria
naturæ; but Alexander Severus, on the contrary, amused the
populace with them. In Russia they are still exhibited in the
palaces of the nobility.


PHYSIOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE DIFFERENCE OF FACES IN
PROFILE; FROM APES, OURANGS, NEGROES, AND OTHER CLASSES OF
PEOPLE; UP TO THE ANTIQUE.
THE assemblage of craniums, and profiles of two apes,
a negro and a Calmuck, in the first plate, may perhaps
excite surprise. The striking resemblance between the race
of Monkies and of Blacks, particularly upon a superficial view,
has induced some philosophers to conjecture that the race of
blacks originated from the commerce of the whites with
ourangs and pongos; or that these monsters, by gradual im-
provements, finally become men.
This is not the place to attempt a full confutation of so
extravagant a notion. I must refer the reader to a physiological
dissertation concerning the ourang-outang, publishied in the
year 1782. 1 shall simply observe at present, that the
vhole generation of apes, from the largest to the smallest,
re quadrupeds, not formed to walk erect; and that from the
very construction of the larynx, they are incapable of speech.
Further: They have a great similarity with the canine
species, particulary respecting the organs of generation.
The diversities observable in these parts, seem to mark the
boundaries which the Creator has placed between the various
classes of animals.



The proximity of the eyes to each other, the smallness
and apparent flatness of the nose, and the projection of the
upper lip, constitute the principal points of resemblance; and
these are much exaggerated by our modern naturalists, by their
heightened descriptions, and embellished plates; but they will
immediately diminish in our estimation, if we give attention
to the whole body, or minutely examine every part of the
head. This will evidently appear by comparing together
the different figures of the first plate.
All the figures in the first, second, and fourth plates are
sketched in profilex In this manner the differences may
basis of the features, which are immediately placed upon and
under them.
In each of these figures the greatest accuracy and preci-
sion have been diligently studied. For example: An hori-
zontal line has been drawn through the lower part of the
nose (see Plate 1. N.) and the orifice of the ear C. ; and the
four skulls were arranged with care on the line A. B. ; atten-
tion being also paid to the direction of the jugale, or cheek-
bone Q Fig. 5 and 4.
In order to preserve the true form and relative situations
of the parts, l did not view them from one fixed point, but
Pliny calls these side-drawings catagrapha, and imagines obliquas. He attri-
butes the invention to the celebraied Cimon Cleonæus.— See Lib. XXXV.
Cap. viii. p. 690.



my eye was always directed, in a right line, to the central
point of the object, in the manner practised by masons and
architects; avoiding the rules of perspective, by which
I
particular parts are always distorted and misplaced.
viewed the object with only one eye.
To facilitate this business, I invented a machine sufficiently
large to receive the largest skull. It consisted of an horizon-
tal quadrangular table, upon which was placed a perpendi-
cular frame, that was also quadrangular. In the laths which
completed this frame a number of holes were bored parallel
to each other ; so that threads could be drawn through them,
and be fastened in every direction required. By these l was
able to make horizontal, perpendicular, or oblique lines at any
convenient distance from each other.
The fore part of the square table is also divided into equal
portions, by means of brafs pegs, correspondent to the holes
made in the upper part of the frame, that lines may also be
drawn by means of threads obliquely downwards: thus may
the true point of vision be obtained, by placing the eye in such
a direction, that the oblique thread may perfectly coincide with
the perpendicular one.
The table before me being elevated to such a height that my
eye became parallel with the horizontal line A. B. I placed
the skulls, by the side of each other, on the table behind
the perpendicular threads of the frame. By extending the
oblique threads in such a manner as to make them pafs over



the principal parts, and by means of the perpendicular lines,
I was secure of all the points requisite to afford me an ac-
curate drawing.
It was in this manner l discovered in all the figures, that
the lines ND. and E F. intersect each other in C. before
the aprtune of the ear ; and also the point of contact of
the front teeth was at N. and of the occiput at D; by which
the size of ni
oportion of NC. to CD. that is, the relative
UI
distances from the extremity of the fore teeth to the aperture of
of the ear, and from thence to the extreme part of the
occipût, became manifest.
The great utility of this method will fully appear here-
after. I shall only remark at present, that the point C. gene-
rally coincides in the human species with the line of gravity
of the whole body (see Plate Second, EF. Or EF, e.-) and
thus in the centre of the head’s motion : which is in the place
of union of the condyles of the occiput with the first vertebrae of
the neck. See PW. in the third and fourth sigure of Plate
or W. in Plate II.
By means of the same instrument, the exact height of the
heads could also be ascertained (see EF. in all the upper
figures of Plates I. and II.) and also the proportionate size of
EC. that is, of the head from the vertex or crown, to the
aperture of the ear, compared with C F. or the distance
from this aperture to the lower edge of the maxilla: likewise






tances from the line of the vertex to that which passes under
the nose; and from this to the lower edge of the maxilla. It
lso marks the squares H, I, L, K, in which these heads were
delineated.
Further: As the closing of the teeth marks the mouth at G.
 was able to draw an oblique line from G. to M. along the
nasal bone à, and the forehead T. This, upon account
of its great use in discriminating the difference of faces,
may properly be termed the linea facialis, or the facial line.
The first figure of the first plate represents the exact pro-
file of a simia caudata, or tailed ape. 1 do not recollect
somewhat elevated above the rim of the eye-sockets: It had
five double teeth, and facculi; so that it was a native of Africa.
The facial line M G. makes with A D. the angle M ND. ;
which is equal to 42 degrees.


Or, in more familiar terms,
The distance from the mouth to the orifice of the ear,
was, compared with the distance of this orifice from the
bottom of the lower jaw, as 8 is to 23, or 16 to 5: and
the distance from the vertex to the orifice of the ear, was
precisely equal to the distance of this, from the basis of the
lower jaW.




The second figure is drawn from a sinall orang -outang,
reduced to one fourth of its natural size. It is the same
that I had delincated and described in a former Treatisex
It was very young, and had not more than two double
teeth.
The facial line M G. made with A B. or ND. an angie of
58 degrees : N C. compared with C D. was as 7 to 4.; and
E C. compared with CF. nearly as six to four.
The high forehead of this animal gives it a greater resem-
more elevated ; which communicates a more animated appear-
ance to the eyes themselves.
Edwards, who has but imperfectly delineated this species
of ape J, gives to the facial line an angle of 55 degrees. This
small difference may be overlooked, as much greater are per-
ceived in the human species.
The real pongo has been lately discovered in the Island of
Borneo; and a description of it is given in the Batavian Trans-
actions 4. This animal is, upon the whole, of a similar
sigure to the other; but it is about twice the size. I have in
my possession the skull of onc that was four feet five inches








in height; whereas the sinaller species seldom exceed two feet
and a half. This however has less of the human form, as its fore-
head is flatter, the cheek-bones are broader, and the jaw-bone
projects farther. The facial line makes with the horizon
an angle of 47 degrees.
The cranium of the young negro, represented in the third
figure of the first plate, immediately indicates the human
countenance. He was changing his teeth; as may be known
by the second grinder and a lower incisive tooth that were
He had only four teeth on each side. I dissected the body
of this youth publicly at Amsterdam, in the year 1758.
The facial line M G. made an angle of 7o degrees with
the horizontal line N D.
NC compared with C D was as 74 to 8, or as 31 to 32.



The projecting point of the jugal, or cheek-bone, Q was
in the centre between the mouth and the orifice of the ear;
that is, NQ:QC:4:A. ONQ2QC. It is
the projecting part Q which gives the degree of flatnefs
to the face. This is strongly marked on the medal of
Bocchus, King of Mauritania. See Plate X. Fig. 1. and 2.
Albert Durer, having occasionally delineated a Moor, in
his treatise on the changes of the facial line in different



countenances, has made the facial line correspond with that of
ours: its inclination being about 69 or 70 degrees.
The antients seem to have paid great attention to the fa-
cial line. This is particularly observable in the Recueil
d'Antig. of Count Cæylus '. In some of the plates, the head of
a negro is represented upon an ornamental lamp, with singular
accuracy.
The fourth figure of our first plate represents the head
of a Calmuck. As the teeth and under jaw were wanting,
I have been obliged to supply the deficiency from the cra-
nium of an aged negro, the size of which was nearly
similar.
The facial line M G. made also an angle of 70 degrees
with the horizontal line ND.NC : CD. was as 11 :: 74
or as 44 : 29. and E C;CF;; 103 ; 6. or
21 : 12. QC 215. And thus NQ: QC:7; 15.
That is,
The distance from the extreme projection of the teeth to
the orifice of the ear, compared with the distance of this
from the extremity of the occiput, was as 11 to 73, or as
44 to 29. The distance from the vertex to the orifice of
the ear, compared with the distance of this orifice from the
See Tom. VII. Pl. Ii. Fig. 1 and 2. and Pl. lxxxi. Fig. 5. also Part V. Pl. Xc.
Fig. 2.



lower edge of the inferior maxilla, was as 103 tO 6, or 21
to 12. The most projecting part of the jugal bone, from
the orifice of the ear, was equal to 15; that is, the distance
of the mouth from the process of the jugal bone, compared
with the distance of this from the orifice of the ear, was as
7
to 15.
From a large collection of European heads in my cabinet,
have selected the one represented in the second Plate,
figure the first. In this, as well as many other which I mea-
sured with care, the facial line M G. made an angle of 8o
degrees with the horizontal line N D. or A B. The pro-
portions were as follow :
NCwaS : CD:: 7I : 78, oras 30 : 31. EC;CF::9: SI.
or as 18 : 11. NQ : QC:; 34 :4. or as 7:8.
It follows from hence, that the angle of the facial line has
in nature a maximum and à minimum from 7o to 8o de¬
grees ; which describe its greatest or smallest degree of ele-
vation. When the maximun of 8o degrees is exceeded by
the facial line, it is formed by the rules of art alone : and
when it does not rise to 70 degrees, the face begins to re-
semble some species of monkies. This will be fully explained
hereafter.,&
To proceed with as much perspicuity as possible, I shall
place the facial line MG. erect in the perpendicular line




HI. See Plate II. Fig. 2. The angle is now become
10 degrees larger, and the cavities of the eyes, cheek-bones,
&c. are brought forwards and nearer to NM.
Imagine a cranium of a pliable consistence, and that the
occiput could be pressed forwards and upwards; then must
EC. or the distance from the aperture of the ear to the
vertex inerease, and again the space E Y. ; although the cavi¬
ties of the eyes, and the eyes themselves, will still remain
in the line T U.
The line S V. which marks the oblique direction of the
lower jaw, rises also in the same proportion, until it approaches
to D.; until it coincides withD. as in Figure 3. or rises above
it, as in Fig. 4. of the same plate.  On the other hand,
the distance between TX.; that is, between the facial line
and the perpendicular line that passes from the vertex by the
orifice of the ear, gains as much as XU. has lost. The
head becomes gradually narrower also in proportion as the
facial line rises and inclines forwards into the tooth degree ;
which is the maximum, or utmost that the artificial line will
permit. In this case the eyes, placed in the centre of their
cavities, are exactly in the middle of the head, or at an equal
distance from the vertex and the bottom of the chin. See
Figure 4. of the same plate.
If the projecting part of the forehead be made to exceed
the 1ooth degree, the head becomes mishapen, and assumes



the appearance of the hydrocephalus, or watery head. It is
very surprising that the artists of ancient Greece should have
chosen precisely the maximum, while the best Roman artists
have limited themselves to the 95th degree, which is not so
pleasing; as the comparison of the 3d and ath Figures of
this Plate will evince.
The two extremities therefore of the facial line are from 70
to 1o0 degrees, from the negro to the Grecian antique;
make it under 70, and you describe an ourang or an ape:
lessen it still more, and you have the head of a dog. In-
crease the minimum and you form a fowl, a fnipe, for ex-
ample, the facial line of which is nearly parallel with the
horizon; that is, both the maxillæ will be lengthened, and
the lower maxilla will gradually lose its angle CV S. No
pace is now left for teeth ; which explains the reason why
fowls are destitute of teeth.
I have sometimes amused myself with making these gra¬
dations upon a smaller scale, by sketching them on a long
It is
slip of paper; which exhibits a singular appearance.
not necessary to give a specimen, as they can be easily made
by every one skilled in drawing.
If attention be given to the angle MG S. which describes
the angle formed by the facial line and the lower extremity of
the chin (see the four Figures of the First Plate) it will be im-
mediately perceived that this becomes larger, i. e. more rect-
angular, in proportion as the facial line M G. ascends ; it is



therefore the largest in a European (as in Fig. I. Plate II.
GI.); and that it projects forwards with the facial line, which
it always follows, as in Fig. 2, 3, 4. of Plate II. In this
situation the angle of the lower jaw becomes more erect,
the distance from I. to F. becomes less, and V. is rounder. It
is this which makes the maxilla of the antique heads
rounder and more graceful; as will appear in the ath Fig.
of the second Plate.
The eyes, which are placed nearly in a line with the upper
edge of their sockets, gradually recede in an European and
the antique; that is, S r. or the distance from the eye to the
ridge of the nofe, gradually becomes greater. See the 2, 3, and
ath lower Fig. of Plate II. This gives a certain elegance and
dignity to the countenance of the antique, which cannot be
otherwise acquired.
It is plain, if the cavity of the eye remains at the same
distance from the perpendicular line 1H. and the forehead
be made to project forwards, that this depth or distance will
increase according to the degree of projection. See the same
Plate and Figures.
If l am not deceived, the size of the mouth is in propor-
tion to the distance of the dentes canini, or eye-teeth, in men
and animals, with only a few exceptions. Or, to speak more
properly, the angles terminate at the commencement of the
first double tooth, or grinder. Many animals have not the
eye-teeth.







In apes therefore, in the orang, and in the negro, the rim
or angle of the mouth must be more distended than in an
European, as the projection of the upper jaw enlarges the dis-
tance. For the same reason, the mouth of the antique will
be the smallest.
The central line of the ear is, in all persons, somewhat
inclined, as I have represented it in Figures 3. and 4. of the
sixth Plate. It is never parallel with the facial line in white
men. It is, however, in the negro; as is apparent from the
third figure of the first Plate.
I have placed the central line of the ear perpendicularly in
the second Plate, that the true distance of the eye from the
ear may be more accurately ascertained.


CHAPTER IV.
REMARKS CONCERNING DIFFERENCES IN THE FACIAL LINE, AND THE
CHANGES WHICH NECESSARILY ARISE FROM THENCE.
In the preceding chapter, I have simply shewn the kind
of angle which the oblique line MG. makes in all the
figures of the first and second Plate. Let us now pay attention
to the triangle T G S. of Plate I. Fig. 3. and 4. and it will
appear that this triangle is not remarkably large in the European,
represented in Plate II. Fig. 1. In the second figure of this
second Plate it is totally effaced: in the third the angle be-
comes minus; and in the fourth the minus is increased.
Let us now suppose that all these heads were of an equal
size, and that the nose of each projected to an equal distance
from the line or surface T S. (Plate 1. Fig. J. and 4. ) it is
manifest that the nose of the negro and Calmuck will seem to
be less, and, as it were, pressed inwards.
The nose of the European (Plate II. Fig. 1. ) will appear
somewhat bent, and also to project farther than the upper
lip. In the face of the antique
(Fig. 4. ) the nose will be nearly
in a perpendicular line with the forehead, and project but a
little from the lip.
The lower jaw, as well as the upper, is also much for-
warder in the negro, Caffre, and Calmuck; and therefore it is
that these people approach nearer to the figure of an ape



than either the European or the antique. The lines mgs.
are nearly the same with the lines MG S. Compare the
lower sketches with the upper, in Plate I. Fig. 2. and J.
In a Calmuck, the upper jaw is very flat before, because
the cheek-bone Q. (Plate I. Fig. 4.) being very large, nearly
advances to the perpendicular line TT. that is, directly over
the middle molaris or grinder. In the Chinese, Otaheites, and
other orientals, the cheek-bone Q corresponds with the di-
vision between the third and fourth grinder hindwards.
In the negro, C Q is obviously shorter, and the line falls
behind the third grinder. In the European, Q is behind the
fourth grinder; and in the antique head, it comes yet more for-
wards. Hence it follows that the features of antiques, those
of Apollo, for example, must be flatter than ours; and, on the
other hand, those of Asiatics and Africans still flatter; and
those of the Calmucks the flattest of all.
The distance from NtoG. i. e. from the undermost part of
the nose to the union of the upper and lower teeth, is greater
in a Calmuck than in a negro; and in him greater than in us.
On the contrary, NG. is very short in an Asiatic. The lips
must necessarily be longer and thicker in proportion to this
distance ; and therefore is the upper lip the longest and thickest
in a Calmuck, and the smallest in the antique.
If attention be paid to what may be called the Suspension
of the face, i. e. the distance of PF. (Fig. 1, 3, and 4. Plate 1.)



or the axis upon which the head moves from the line of the lower
maxilla IL. in a negro or Calmuck (Plate I. Fig. J. and 4. )
or the European (Plate II. Fig. I. W. ) it will appear that the
maxilla and the chin are deeper or lower in the two former
than in the latter. The condyle also, or prominence on which
the head turns, is in the same line, as the union of the teeth of
the upper and lower jaw. See Plate 1. Fig. J. W G. Hence it
follows that the neck of a Calmuck is shorter than that of an
European: or rather, that it appears to be shorter, because
the lower jaw, or chin, sinks so much lower. In proportion
as the chin is lower, the condyle of the neck shorter, and
the shoulders raised in consequence of the length of the cla-
vicle (as is the case with the orang, and with all deformed per-
sons) will the head sink more upon the breast; and the
stronger will be the resemblance to the people who are
denominated Acephali; and who are said to exist in
Guinea.
Again: As the foramen magnum of the occiput is not always
placed at an equal distance from the perpendicular line K L.
and as the condyles are placed in an oblique direction before
and on each side of the foramen, it follows, that the centre of
motion of the head will vary considerably in different peo¬
ple. The line N D. extended from the extreme point of the
mouth to that of the occiput, may be compared to a lever, of
which the centre of motion is in C. Now, in proportion as
the distance from NtoC. is increased, will the face project for-
wards, and the neck will appear shorter.





The following appear to be the different proportions. In
the Calmuck is NC. or the distance from the extremity of
the teeth to the orifice of the ear, compared with CD. or
the distance from this orifice to the extreme part of the oc-
ciput, as 123 to 6 : or nearly as 2 to 1.
In the negro is NC; CD::7;8E:;IS:17
In the European is NC: CD77I   I
In the antique is NC: CD;:7É;SÉ:;IS:II
The heads of the Calmucks must of consequence incline
forwards, and sink upon the shoulders.
The heads of negroes incline backwards, as the heaviest
part is behind the centre of motion.
The head of the orang -outang must be more for-
wards than that of the Calmuck, for the reasons given; and
the head of the ape, the dog, horse, &c. still more than
either of these.
The heads of the Europeans remain in an equipoise; which
gives them something of an haughty mien.
In the antiques the gentle inclination of the head, par-
ticularly in the statues, communicates the most state and dig-
nity to the countenance.
Since I began to compose this Treatise, I have been able
to procure the entire cranium of a Chinese, who died in the



flower of his age ':. The facial line was 75 degrees. The
cavities of the eyes were in breadth, compared with their
height, as 12. 8ths to 9. 8ths a 13d. In the European they
are equal. It is not surprising, therefore, that the countenance
of the Chinese should have à melancholy aspect, and that the
chinks or fissures formed by the upper and lower eye-lids are
naturally so long.
Their superior maxilla is narrow; that is, the space from
N. to C. is very small; so that they cannot have a large lip.
However, the lower jaw is of a more quadrangular form than
in the European or the negro. In the Chinese it makes an
angle of 110 degrees ; in the European, of 120; and in
the negro, 125. See SVW. in Plate II. Fig. 1. and Plate I.
Fig. 5. The lower jaw of the Chinese has, upon this ac-
count, something of the ape, and particularly of the orang, in
its form.
I took a fketch of the entire cranium of an Otaheite, who
was brought into Europe by Captain King, when 1 was
at
à In the Chinese, the length of the head, from N. to D. is equal to its height EF.
The difference between NCand C D, is as 4 to 3. The line EF passes through the
condyles of the occiput; so that NW is equal to WD.
Although the cranium of the Chinese is not delineated in these plates, yet the letters
have similar references, as in the first and second Plates. However, it must be re-
marked, that NCin this place denotes the distance from Nto the orifice of the ear C,
and NWthe distance of C from the middle of the condyles of the occiput.
M. D’Aubenton, Mem. fur les differences de la situation du grand irou occipiial dans
l'homme & dans les animaux, has many curious and just observations upon this suliject.
See Mem. de l'Acad. Roy. des Sciences de l'Annee 1764, imprime 1768. 8v0. p. 933.





Oxford, in the year 1785, which has a very great resem-
blance with that of the Chinese. The facial line was, how-
ever, perpendicular; which may have been incidental. In
the cranium of an islander of the Celebese, are the same pe-
culiarities as in that of the Chinese.
In the cranium of a man of the Celebese, and one of a
Macassaar, which I possess, there is a complete similarity;
more than with that of a Moguller; which has, notwith-
standing, much of the Asiatic in its form.
It is amusing to contemplate an arrangement of these,
placed in a regular succession : apes, orangs, negroes, the skull
of an Hottentot, Madagascar, Celebese, Chinese, Moguller,
Calmuck, and divers Europeans. It was in this manner that
l arranged them upon a shelf in my cabinet, in order that
those differences might become the more obvious which I
have described in the preceding chapter.
To perceive at once the great utility of these principles, let
any person sketch the profile of a negro, as in Plate Vl. Fig. 1.
resembling the one delineated in the third figure of the first
late ; the outlines of which are marked in the sixth plate
by the letters K A, B, H, I, L, M, then draw the facial line
of an European along the forehead FE, of 85 degrees ;
which will direct him to sketch from A to NE and O, and
to terminate in 1, and he will immediately have the face of
an European.




Or let the face of an European be first sketched; and by
inverting the mode, the physiognomy of a negro will be
obtained.
By covering the dotted line A BH, with the tips of the
fingers, the European face becomes more conspicuous: on the
contrary, by covering NEO, the negro will more perfectly
appear.


CHAP. V.
PHIYSIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF THE DIFFERENCE IN THE FEATURES,
WHEN VIEWED IN FRONT.
THE third plate exhibits, at first glance, the principal

differences between the Negro, Calmuck, and European,
as copied from Nature; and also the head of a Pythian Apollo,
drawn according to the principles advanced, and which will
be more fully considered hereafter.
The orang-outang that was represented in profile, in the
second figure of the first plate, is now placed in front, that
the breadth of the jugal or cheek-bones MN. may be more
accurately compared with the breadth of the head at PO.
and that the small space between the eyes Y Z. may be com-
pared with that in the Calmuck.
In the orang, the length of the head IH. compared with
ts greatest breadth, at PO. is in the proportion of 195 to
14: and PO. compared with the breadth of the cheek-bones
MN. as 14 to 14, that is, equal. MN. compared with the
breadth of the temporal bones XW. is as 14 to 103.
The reader will perceive that all the correspondent parts
are placed upon the horizontal line A B. and that the height
of each is also adapted to the scale of its profile.



Let us now examine the negro, Plate III. Fig. 2. This
head, in length, compared with its breadth, is as 27 to 20:
that is, I H : O P : : 27 : 20. But O P : M N : : 20 : 18
and MN:XW:: 18: 16. The lower jaW UV. is as 12.
Thus does the whole face gradually diminish from P. in the
direction of MV. to H. and ONU H, retaining much of the
oval form. The apertures of the nose are very wide, com-
pared with the length of the nose: so that EF. is to DC. as
2 to 3. It necessarily follows, that the pinnæ which are
formed to cover these apertures, will be expanded on each
side, and the nose will be very broad.
The distance of the cavities of the eye YZ. is as 5; so
that the eyes exceed in nearness to each other the breadth
of the nose: and the pinnæ, which are placed at the side of
EF. will be at least as 4 in breadth.
In this negro, the diameter of the eye-socket from the fore-
head downwards, was very large: that is, KL. was equal
to 6: so that the eye might have been large. In others I
have found the cavities smaller; as also in the Chinese. There
is also a great difference among Europeans in this respect.
When 1 drew lines from the upper edge of the small nasal-
bones at C. over the broadest parts of the nose at E F. down
to Qand R. the four dentes incisorii, and the two dentes
canini, or eye-teeth, were inclosed between them. Now as
the mouth always covers the eye-teeth, QR. will necessarily
limit the breadth of the mouth. In proportion as the distance



froin Qto R. is great, compared with the breadth of the
maxilla at VU. will the mouth appear ugly and dispropor¬
tioned; QR. is nearly as 8, and VU. a8 12.
Negroes have small ears; but as the mammillary processes
are the breadth of the cheek-bones MN. they stand off from
the head. This is observable in all negroes.
The Calmuck is very differently formed. (Plate III. Fig. J. )
The proportions are as follow:
The height of the head IH. compared with its breadth
at O P. is as 16 to 10, or 32 to 20.
OP. compared with MN. the projection of the jugal-bones,
is as 20 to 24.
MN. compared with X W. the temples, is as 24 to 19.
UV. the lower jaw, is as 8 or 16.
This face has also something of a lozenge or rhomboidal
form. It is narrow and pointed towards the crown; becomes
broad at OP. is the broadest at NM. and becomes suddenly
small at UV. This has been already remarked by La Lou-
biere.
The apertures of the nose EF. are as 24; so that the
pinnae cannot be very broad; but the openings in the nostrils



are very conspicuous; as will be obvious by comparing the
cranium with the face, in Plate I. Fig. 5.
The distance of the eye-sockets YZ. is very small ; so that
the eyes stand much closer together than in the negro.
The diameter of these cavities at K L. compared with IH.
lie upon the jugal-bone, the fissure must be oblong; at least
must appear so, as the pleats or wrinkles in the smaller can-
thus or angle seem to lengthen it. In the Chinese the eye-
sockets are broader than they are high: hence they have
long eyes.
The triangle CQR. drawn in the same manner as in the
negro, describes QR233; that is, includes the four dentes
incisorii, and the half of the eye-teeth. The other portions
being added, the mouth will become a 4 and seven-eighths,
or nearly 5.
Since the cheek-bones are remarkably broader than the
head; that is, MN:OP :: 12: 10. the ears are almost
hid behind them; as in apes, and particularly in that de-
scribed in Fig. 1. of this plate, which has also à striking re-
semblance to the Calmiuck, in the narrow space between the
eyes, breadth of the jaw-bones, and flatness of the face.
Very different from those in the Calmuck are the proportions



observable in modern Europeans; particularly in our own
countrymen: for
IH:PO:29 :23.
PO:MN;:23: 20.
MN: WX::2O17.
MN:UV::2O: 13.
our faces therefore have the form of an oval, which is shorter
in proportion to its breadth than that of the negro.
The distance between the edges of the eye-sockets YZ.
being equal to the breadth of the nasal apertures E F. our
eyes are placed at a greater distance from
each other: and
as the diameter of these sockets KL. are 2
5, there is space
for large eyes. But the pinnae of the nose are broader than
the space between the eyes.
The ears are closer to the head, in consequence of OP.
the parietal-bones being so much broader than the jugal-bones
MN. This will be clearly understood from what has been
advanced concerning the negro and Calmuck.
The triangle COR. being longer, and the distance from
the upper part of the nasal-bone C. to the junction of the
teeth at G. being greater; thus is the mouth QR. obviously
smaller; EF. in the European being equal to EF. in the
negro; that is, 3. The mouth QR. moreover is to UV.
equal to 6, compared with 13.



In antiques, the facial line MG. being made to project (see
Plate II. Fig. 4. Jthe crown becomes more elevated, and
rises from Y to E. which is equal to the degree of projection
at MH. Hence it is that in the fifth figure of this third
plate, the head of the antique is made so high, although it is
formed after the same model. Artists have also made MN.
(the jugal-bones) equal to PO. (the parietal-bones) in breadth:
the occiput is narrower, the maxillæ smaller, and the eyes are
placed at a greater distance from each other.
*
In the antique
the following proportions are observed :
IHPO:33:20.
MN WX::2O;I7.
MN; VU;:2O; 16.
consequently the face is in the form of a more oblong
oval.
The antients divided PO. into four equal parts; one
for each eye, and one for the distance between the eyes;
POAS AYZ; whereas it was only 2 in the modern head.
The nose also inclining forwards, as represented in the
lower sketch (Plate II. Fig. 4.) it is proportionably longer
see Th. ); and the upper lip becomes proportionably
shorter.
The nasal apertures remaining of the same width as in us,
the pinnæ are equal to YZ. or the space between the eyes;
and also to the size of the mouth QR.



Through the projection of the facial line, the eyes are
deeper seated; and the middle line which runs acrofs the
angles of the eyes O P. divides IH. into two equal parts at d;
but this takes place alone when MG. the facial line, makes
an angle of to0 degrees with A B. which is the maximum
of its inclination. See Plate II. Fig. 4.


CHAPTER VI.
DIVERSITY OF FEATURES IN THE COUNTENANCES OF DIFFERENT PEOPLE,
NATURALLY EXPLAINED.
E have already enumerated, in the second chapter,
all the causes alledged by ancient and modern writers
of the diversities of make observable in the human counte-
nance, and we have added our opinion to that of the acute
naturalist Count de Buffon, that the climate, under which we
include the influence of air, of food, and customs, is of itself
sufficient to give some particular and appropriated form to the
bones; and consequently to the softer parts. When we add
the different diseases peculiar to some countries, which co-
operate with the above causes, we shall not be surprised that
a similar diversity should be found in the human species dis-
persed over different parts of the globe; as may be observed
in plants, fowls, quadrupeds, &c.
It has, we hope, been fully demonstrated, that in the
negro, the upper maxilla naturally projects remarkably for-
wards; and that in consequence of that formation, the line
MG. inclining backwards, makes an angle of 7o degrees;
as represented in Plate I. Fig. 3 and 4. Hence it necessarily
follows, that the fore-teeth must also project; and that, to cover
these, the lips, particularly the upper lip, must be long, thick,
and broad; and the under lip must also be conformable to the




other. The nose advancing farther than the line TS. in a
similar proportion (see Plate I. Fig. 3) must appear, from the
jutting out of the upper lip, to be pressed inwards. No art
is required to produce this appearance; nor was it requisite for
mothers or midwives-to squeeze in the one, or stretch out the
other.
The width of the nasal aperture in the cranium, requires
the nose to be broad; and that the pinna, which are placed
xternally, should be proportionate to the apertures in the
bony parts. Why have not philosophers and travellers, who
suffer themselves to be deceived by idle tales, informed us
that the negroes made the sides of their nose spread, by means
of some compress: Their accidentally striking them against
the backs of their mothers might, perhaps, flatten the carti-
laginous part, but could not enlarge the nostrils on each side
with such perfect symmetry.
The flatness of the face depends upon the extention of the
jugal-bone, from C toQ. Plate 1. and II. Hence it is clear
to à demonstration, that the faces of the easterns were not
rendered flat by artificial compression, but that they are so
from natural causes; at least they appear flat when compared
with our ovn.
It has also been shewn, that in the negro, the back part
of the head is heavier than the fore part; that is, CDE is
heavier than E. T. G. S. P. C. Plate I. Fig. 3. The negro,
therefore, naturally throws his head backwards, particularly



young persons; while the neck is protruded forwards, and
the loins bent inwards, in order to maintain an equilibrium.
It is from this cause that they have small hips, and that
the pelvis is generally narrow. Its breadth, compared with
its depth, is in the proportion of 9 to 7; while in most other
men, who are well formed, it is as 11 to 7. As the
negroes with whom we are best acquainted have been
slaves, and been compelled to hard labour from their tender
years, their knees become bent in an inward or outward di-
rection; and hence it is that so many of them have crooked
Many other causes might be added, upon which I shall
not enlarge, as it is not my plan to give a minute description
of the whole body.
What has been advanced will sufficiently demonstrate, that
changing the colour, or in crisping the hair; and that to
Nature alone these differences must be ascribed.
For similar reasons is the face of a Calmuck, Chinese, and
Siamese, flat, the nose small, the nostrils open and exposed.
Their lips will be larger or smaller, according to the size of
the upper maxilla.
Let us admit for a moment, that the sides of their heads
were pressed between planks, according to the narratives of



ancient authors, whence is it that the jugal-bones spread out
so mucht They also must have been compressed. From
vhat cause is the distance between their eyes so small; lf this
proceeded from their being pressed closer together, the upper
aw, instead of being much broader than with other people,
must also have become flatter at the sides.
As CQ is so long (see Plate I. Fig. 4.) and the back
part of the head CDE so small, compared with its opposite
ETGSC. the head must necessarily hang over, and the
subject become round shouldered; that is, directly opposite to
the form of the negro. The head will also sink between the
shoulders, as in the orang, and other species of apes.
The head of the Calmuck is decidedly greater than ours,
while their body is small. Besides, they cannot walk per-
fectly upright, and their knees are somewhat extended in the
manner of our porters when they carry a heavy load on their
heads. This must render their figure disagreeable in our eyes,
who are accustomed to see tall persons 7 or 8 times the length
of their heads; whereas this people, the inhabitants of Lap-
land, of Brazil, and some other countries, are scarcely the
length of six heads in their stature. Most of these people sit
upon the ground, without using chairs, whence they naturally
stoop more; and not only appear shorter, but, according
to our ideas, more deformed.
In an European, the inclination of the superior maxilla
being the same with that of the facial line, which forms an



angle of 8o degrees (see Plate II. Fig. 1. ) the nose becomes
larger. Should we not deem it very ridiculous, if a travelling
or philosophic negro, or Calmuck, in describing the particular
forms of our features, were gravely to asfert, that our mid-
wives, mothers, or nurses, pulled us by the nose during our
infant days, in order to give it the requisite length,
It is observable, that the inhabitants of these Dutch pro-
bones during infancy and childhood. Hence it is that our
foreheads are frequently high, flat, and broad, while the
lower part of the face is small and delicate. Both the upper
and lower maxilla are with us extremely small. The hips
are broad in both sexes, which occasions a waddling motion,
and renders our countrymen less agile than those who have
smaller hips. Ancient artists followed in this respect the cha-
racter of their statue. In the Farnese Hercules, the breadth
compared with the depth, is made as 12 to 85. In the
Pythian Apollo, it is as 9 to 7. In the Antinous, as 115
to 83. The proportions of Alb. Durer are as 9 to 5. In our
females the proportion is as 12 to 7. The Greeks have made
it, in the Venus de Medicis, as 11 to 81; that is, they have
made the body smaller, thicker, and more rotund.
In a word, it would be absurd to acknowledge the influence
of art in making the hair straight or curled, the legs thick
or thin, the head large or small, among us; and surely it is
equally absurd to ascribe the particulars in the form of other
nations to the same cause.



lf any doubt should remain, the following experiment will
demonstrate the truth of my affertions. Sketch the figure of
a negro (as in Plate VI. Fig. 1. ); draw the parallel lines AC.
and BD. and the vertical line C.K. ; from the extremity of
the line DE. make the line EF. forming the triangle FED.
of 85 degrees ; delineate a mouth at Ea, and it will im-
mediately appear that the nofe of the negro has not been
pressed inwards, but that the maxilla projects too far. By a
similar process may an European be transformed into a negro;
and the figure will fully evince, that the negroes no more
compress the noses of their children, to make them smaller
and flatter, than we lengthen the nofes of ours by perpetually
pulling them.


PART THE SECOND.
CHAPTER I.
CONCERNING THE FORM OF CHILDRENS HEADS, VIEWED IN PROFILE.
7HE manner in which all the profiles in the first plate
 were taken, has been already explained. I shall merely
observe, that the profiles in the fourth plate were drawn by
means of the same instrument, and with equal accuracy.
The great difference which exists between the head of an
infant just born, and of one that is a year old, has determined
me to make choice of the first and second figures. The third
figure is delineated after the cranium of a well- formed adult.
It is the same that was given in the first figure of the second
plate. The foürth is drawn from a toothlefs old woman, that
the essential differences may become more conspicuous.
In the head of a new-born child, the skull OGUP. (see
Plate IV. Fig. 1. ) may be considered as an oval placed hori-
zontally; to the fore and under part of which the maxilla
are affixed. This shape is not so uniform as to exclude all
variations; but these are not very great. The lower part




of the chin and forehead are placed parallel to the per-
pendicular line A D.
In a child one year old, the forehead projects beyond the
line AD. and the back part of the head is much enlarged
dovnwards. The upper and lower maxilla are also enlarged.
QD. was, in the new-born infant, equal to one-fourth; but
in thisit is much more. See Fig. 2.
The diameter of the eye-socket GH, in the first figure,
is one-fifth compared with AD. and something more in a child
of one year. It is also as one-fifth in the head of an adult;
but this proceeds from the enlargement of the nose W. and
of the maxilla D. These cavities are in reality much larger
in the adult than in the child ; which manifests that a certain
ule is observed, although they are much larger in children,
in proportion to the difference of age.
As infants are born without teeth, the upper jaW QR. is
very narrow. In the space of a year, it grows nearly as
broad again. In the adult, the upper jaw is about three times
as large; and, if we include the teeth, it is four times. But
there are diversities in this respect, according to the natural
strength of the person, or national peculiarities.
The upper jaw also gradually projects forwards; and the
dentes molares are completely formed at about the age of
twenty years. Q. D. or the length of the lower part of the
face, is now to A D. as 13 or 3-8ths. In a child it is only




one-fifth, as in figure the first; and three-tenths, in figure the
second.
The lower jaw undergoes à similar change. TK. is not
only larger, but the point of the angle K shoots backwards;
so that it becomes nearly quadrangular with the condyle T.
particularly in the Chinese and other easterns.
The chin at the same time shoots forwards, as will best
It projects about one-twelfth before the facial line in W.
whereas it was about equal with the perpendicular line in the
nfant (see Fig. 1, 2, 3. of Plate IV. ); the upper and lower
same time, are regularly opposed to each other; yet in the
best formed heads, the lower teeth are placed within the
upper ones
In children, the small distance from Qto H. that is, of
the maxilla, and the nasal-bones, from the jugal, gives them
a flatnefs of countenance, which is well observed by Fla-
mingo. The antients always made the lower maxilla of
children too long, and therefore they did not succeed in the
pleasing, when they delineated children of a tender age.
The nose may be distinguished into two parts: the one,
which has its basis at W. and which forms the cavity under
the forehead O G. and the nose itself, from W to Q. Fig.-
2 and 5.




Infants just born have no cavity above the nose and the
eye-sockets (see W G.) and therefore they have a flat fore-
head; that is, the forehead O projects farther than W;
whereas in adult persons the part W projects farther than O;
and in aged persons still more, as in figure the fourth. It is
for this reason that the nose of a negro appears to sink so
deep, and also that it appears to have been much more com¬
pressed in an aged than in a young negro.
The nose itself is small in children, making about one-fifth
of the line A D. In adults it is one-fourth, and broad in
proportion.
The head of an infant is longer than it is high: compare
DC. with DF. which is equal to AD. In some this dif-
ference is very great. In figure the second, DC. is about
one-fifth longer than DF. but this length seems peculiar to
the children of thefe provinces, as has been noticed by Vesa-
lius: We have already observed, that the occiput is smaller
in antiques, from the great projection of the facial line. J. de
Wit, however, although he is justly celebrated for his paint-
ing of children, has not attended to this difference; of these
he has also shortened the occiput, and raised the vertex. The
real form of the head has not escaped the notice of Quefnoy ;
as shall be fully exemplified when we explain the fourth
figure of the fifth plate.




The centre of motion U, is not in the centre of the head ;
but it is placed more forwards. Hence it is that the heads
of our children cannot maintain an equipoise, are prone to
incline forwards, and yet more to fall backwards. As soon
as the line AD. is exceeded, the middle point is changed;
and this inclination of the head, somewhat forwards, gives
it à certain grace.
Alb. Durer has made the facial line of his children to in¬
cline forwards, having placed it at 95 degrees ; the same as
in the third figure of our second plate. Quesnoy and J. de
Wit have mostly placed it at 100. In this position the head
must be raised, until U W. become equal to ST. See
Plate V. Fig. 5.
The meatus auditorius enlarges also very considerably as the
infant advances, as well as the mammillary procefs behind
the ear. See Fig. II. Y. While the infant is very young, it
is seated about the condyle at U. and is scarcely visible; but
in adults the mammillary process is very much enlarged, and
it descends much lower; as in the third and fourth sigures of
this fourth plate. This is much more obviously the case in
men than in females, in whom none of the processes are so
strongly marked.


CHAP. II
THE FORM OF THE HEAD IN AN ADULT PERSON.
The form of the head in adult persons has already been

fully explained in the third chapter of the first part of
this Treatise ; we shall only observe at present, that the growth
of the nasal-bone L. (Plate IV. Fig. 3.) gradually commu-
nicates a pleasing form to the nose, and in some persons ren-
ders the whole countenance graceful. Negroes and Asiatics
are destitute of this grace; and the Greeks have omitted it.
Indeed they were compelled to omit it; for as they make the
direction of the nose nearly perpendicular, they could not give
his elevation without producing a degree of deformity.
The distance from the fore part of the nose to the jugal-
bone HV. being greater in us than in any other people, the
nose appears longer than it is in reality, particularly in thin
ersons; and this prevents our countenances from having a
very flat appearance. Our nostrils are just visible, as the bot-
tom of the nose hi. (see the lower sketches of Fig. 3 and 4. )
is placed horizontally, or parallel to the ground.
The projection of our teeth usually occasions a projection
of the lips, and the chin seems to recede. Every other par-
ticular may he collected from what has been already remarked,
and from contemplating the figures.


CHAP. III.
THE FORM OF THE FACE IN PERSONS FAR ADVANCED IN YEARS.
OBSERVATION induces me to believe, that, in this
country, the women generally lose all their teeth earlier
than the men; but as the men lose them also, the fourth
figure of the fourth plate is equally applicable to both sexes.
Aged persons not only lose their teeth, but their gums;
that is, the thick margin containing the alveolae or sockets, in
which the roots of the teeth are placed. The roof of the
mouth, which was arched in younger years, becomes entirely
flat. The lower maxilla also having lost both teeth and
gums, is no longer so broad. From thefe causes is the space
within the mouth so remarkably diminished, that sufficient
place is not left for the tongue. As it can no longer be
drawn up and adjusted to the arched roof of the mouth, and
not having its usual space, through the failure of the teeth
and gums, it is apt to protrude out of the mouth upon the
slightest attempts to move it forwards. The tongue appears,
therefore, to be longer than it was (as it is in reality) from
its being forced out of a curved line.
The nose having lost its support, QR. (Plate IV. Fig. 4. )
bends downwards, and hangs over the mouth: the fall under
the forehead W. becomes deeper, while the projecting part
is fuller; this renders the furrows, or wrinkles, deeper and



more visible. The whole of the upper maxilla becomes more
concave, and the fore part QR, which in younger years
rojected outwards, now contracts inwardly ; so that the upper
lip falls within the margin of the mouth, and the nose appears
much larger than it did in more youthful days.
The lower jaw, which had in its external circuit the form
described by TKD. of the third figure, is now, by the lofs
of the teeth, with their alveolae drawn upwards through the
action of the muscles, until the gums nearly meet. The tip
of the chin D. now shoots beyond the line QD. toX. Com-
pare figure the third with figure the fourth of this fourth
late.
The distance of the chin from the nose is shorter, by one-
sixth part of the length of the head: the nose and chin seem
almost to touch each other. This circumstance is totally ne-
glected by Rubens, De Wit’, and other celebrated painters.
Blomaart aims at following Nature, but he has not just ideas
of her operations. Lairesse, P. Testa, and the immortal
Raphael, have followed her with the greatest attention. J. B.
Greuze, the famous French artist, seems to have totally dis-
regarded the peculiarity. This is obvious from the plate
which has, in other respects, very great merit.
When the lower jaw rises to one-sixth, as we have already
observed, the angle of the mouth is drawn downwards, the
« See his Book of Drawings, Plate XI. Fig. 3.



like cords.
The wrinkles of the face always manifest themselves in a
direction contrary to that of the muscular fibres; hence they
are transverse on the forehead, are radiated round the eyes
and mouth, and run acrofs the neck parallel to the course of
the lower jaw XKT. By comparing the cranium with the
face (Plate IV. Fig. 4. ) it will be obvious that the distin-
guishing marks of age are placed in the bony parts, and not
in the wrinkles.
To be convinced of the importance of these remarks, let
the reader delineate a head, according to the first figure
of the second plate, forming the profile G, H,D, C,L,K.
together with the ear, as represented in the second figure of
the sixth plate.
Let the projection G,g, h. form the cavity h. above the
nose. By omitting the teeth, the mouth DE. will rise to
d, e. Draw from N. the facial line along g, h,O, P. Place
a limb of the compass at the point A. and describe from
AC. the line Cc. till it interfects the facial line at O. De-
scribe in like manner from the point A. the line Bb. com¬
plete the chin, and let the under lip prefs upon the upper
at d, e. Thus will the head of a young man be changed
into the form of an aged person. The ear M. must also
be raised to m. It is, however, to be observed, that as the
skin of the ear in aged persons becomes relaxed, the ear



itself seems longer. This singularity could not be noted in
The experiment may also be inverted, and the head of a
young person be formed out of an aged one. By alternately
covering the dotted and complete lines with the fingers,
these different faces will more conspicuously manifest them-
selves.


CHAPTER IV.
FORM OF CHILDRENS HEADS IN FRONT.
THE same heads of children that were represented in

profile in the fourth plate, are in the fifth plate re-
presented in front. Their proportions were taken into con-
sideration in the first chapter of the second part.
The eyes of new-born children are very large, which pro-
ceëds from the size of the cavities; and tliey stand at a con-
fiderable distance from each other; but this distance is not
quite the measure of an eye. The nose and mouth sufficiently
indicate themselves. The head is very flat, because the back
part of the head MM. is extremely broad; which is the usual
form of most children in this country. The different parts
of the face correspond with the general proportions remarked
in the heads of children.
In a child one year old (see Fig. 2. of this fifth plate)
the eyes are still very large; the lower part of the face is
longer, and the forehead is higher. MM. through the weak-
ness of the bones, continues to increase in breadth. That
neither of these countenances are very pleasing, will easily be
perceived.



The following proportions are observable in a child one
year old. See Fig. 2. of this plate.
The height of the head A B. compared with the breadth
at the external canthus of the eye KK. is as 2o to 12.
A B : MM::2O: 19.
AB : RR:;4O;19.
the breadth MM: KK :: 19: 12. PO2 S-4ths; so
that four times PO25, or one less than KK. supposing
the eye to be made larger than PO. that is as 13, that is
4 be PO6.
In the third and fourth figures I have placed the facial
ine as in adults, in the g5th and rooth degree of inclina-
tion. See SZ. Plate V. To find the angle of the chin,
I have made Z. B. equal to U W. Thus the head gains in
the height U W. which is equal to ST.
According to these limitations, I have also sketched the
face, in figure the fifth, in front. AB. is thus equal to 11;
and A G. divided into two parts. A D. DG. gives twice
DF. in breadth; which is the medium proportion between
MM. and KK. of figure the second x
The head is therefore only four eyes in breadth, which
is the true proportion, and not five, as De Wit has represented
The fifth figure is not perfectly accurate : A C. is too high; and DF. rather
too small.


predecessor, has done the same; and others have followed
their examples. A. Van Dyk has also given the proportion
of five eyes to the figure of an Infant Jesus.
The heads of Quesnoy’s children perfectly correspond with
the above rules; but the eye-sockets should have been within
the perpendicular line A E. (Fig. 5. ) as they project too much;
which is not graceful.


PART THE THIRD.
CHAPTER I.
ON BEAUTY, PARTICULARLY BEAUTY OF COUNTENANCE.
NO definition is more difficult than the definition of

beauty. Horace, who has treated the subject in so
masterly a manner, as far as it relates to poetry, considers it
in a comparative view, and not immediately and absolutely.
Boileau and Pope have also some excellent observations; but
these are confined to the elucidation of the style of poetry,
by comparing it with painting; or of the latter, by its affinity
with the former. Roman, and more modern writers, advise
us to take the antients for our models; but 1 recollect none
who have explained in what beauty, in itself or abstractedly,
confists. Longinus has afforded me the most satisfaction, as
he has treated the beautiful and the sublime in a more syste-
matic manner, and has illustrated his doctrine by pertinent
examples.
Crousas, Hutcheson, and Father Andre, have made occa-
sional observations concerning the beautiful. The remarks of
Hutcheson manifest taste and judgment; those of Andre indi¬



cate much learning. Formey has prefixed an excellent pre-
face to the works of Andre. Each of these authors has made
ust distinctions, and sensible observations, concerning the
beautiful; but none of them have informed us what it is that
constitutes the beauty of a painting, of a statue, or of a build-
ing. Like the preceding, they have merely treated the
subject in a cursory manner, or by way of allusion.
In every representation, not. merely of historical scenes,
landscapes, and sea-prospects, but of simple groupes, even of
single figures, it is necessary to distinguishi between poetry or
inventive, phyfical or natural, and mechanic or operative
beauty. The first species is subject to laws which are appli-
cable to poetry in general: the second respects the forms of
things, the beauty of which it is not easy to reduce to any
particular rules. Just ideas of operative beauty, or the beauty
of execution, can only be acquired by practice.
Philosophers have proceeded farther : they have enquired,
What is it that renders us susceptible of the impression of
beauty: What is it that renders beauty the decided object
of our choice; But although their investigations have ma-
nifested much depth of thought, the result has not been com¬
pletely fatisfactory. The celebrated Mr. Burke has clearly
demonstrated, in his excellent Treatise on the Sublime, that
whatever, both in nature and art, excites apprehension or
wonder, may partake of its nature. In this species no rules
of proportion can be proposed as the cause of beauty.



The starry heavens, the rising of the sun, or a calm sea, are
pleasing to all. Every one feels a pleasurable sensation
at
the fight of these objects, and he calls them beautiful. A
tempestuous ocean, a gloomy forest, or even the darkness of the
night, imprefs us with pleasing ideas of the grand and sub-
lime, as Mr. Burke has demonstrated in a striking manner.
The beautiful in works of art is not always distinguished
with equal facility. The more they are complicated, the less
are their beauties discernible by the vulgar. Poetic, natural,
operative beauty must be felt by every one who lays any
claim to taste; and he must be able to disciiminate what is
excellent in works of art, from every mixture of imperfection.
It is alone by study, by contemplating the best productions
of artists, and by forming comparisons, that à genuine know¬
ledge of these three species of beauty is to be obtained. In
academies of painting, skilful masters should instruct their pupils
to contemplate, separately, the poetic or inventive part, the
sketch or design, and the execution; and also in the manner
of correcting any defects that may be conspicuous.
This subject is much too copious to be enlarged upon in
the present Treatise. Our principal object is to contemplate
the beautiful, as manifested in the human figure, and particu-
larly in the head. I shall confine myself to the enquiry,
Why is a person whose height is equal to eight heads, deemed
a siner figure than one who is only six or less than six heads
in height: A Laplander is universally considered as à less



pleasing figure than a Persian or a Georgian. Is it because
the stature of the one will measure eight heads, and of the
other merely six ?
It must be acknowledged that this difference cannot be
ascribed to any determinate proportion of the parts, simply
and abstractedly considered ; for a child whose height is merely
qual to four or five heads, is thought as beautiful as an
adult equal to eight.
It is, however, acknowledged that the pleasing is often
confounded with the beautiful. We are pleased with the
playful vivacity, the perfect simplicity, the affectionate at-
tachment of a child; we also possess an instinctive fondness
for children; and it is possible that we blend all these cir-
cumstances in our ideas with the beauty of person. It often
happens that the figure of a child, abstracted from these con-
siderations, has nothing pleasing in it.
The idea of beauty is sometimes excited by a certain con-
formity or proportion of component parts with each other.
For example: We see with pleasure that the lower extremities,
measuring from the pubis to the feet, are precisely the half
of our bodies in length; that the head is one-eighth, the face
one-tenth, and the foot one-sixth.
The head of an Apollo, a Venus, à Laocoon, is universally
allowed to be finer, or more beautiful, than the heads of our
best propoitioned men and women. Whence does this pro-




ceed : Perhaps it is because, in antiques, the eyes are placed
exactly in the centre of the head ; which is never the case
with us. When the breadth of the cheek, from the nose to
the ear, is exactly equal to the breadth of two nofes (which
proportion was observed by the antients) it is the most pleasing
to us; and we prefer those models to others which make the
To whatever is beautiful in itself, and does not depend upon
external circumstances, or mere opinion (and of the existence
of this species of beauty there can be no doubt) some re-
lation and proportion between different parts of the subject
seems absolutely requisite.
The proportions given by the antients to their figures are
not beautiful in our eyes, merely from a weak prepossession in
favour of all that they have handed down to us, but because
they have corrected the defects which arise from the laws of
vision. For example :
When the object AB. (see Plate IX.) is viewed, so that
the observer shall always be at an equal distance in EG. or
D. whereby ECA GH A D B aa AB. (the height of its
surface) the angle of vision will always be larger in E. than
in G. or in D.
As objects are measured according to the angle of vifion,
they will appear the highest or most extended at the point
here the line of vision EC. forms a right angle with it;



that is, when EAC. and ECB. are equal, or rectangular.
In this case the angle of vision AEB. is the largest angle.
Suppose the eye to be placed at G. then is the angle AGB.
smaller in proportion as the radius AC, A H, A B, is larger;
A D B. being equal to one-half of a right angle of 45
degrees.
Thus, as the secant becomes greater, the angle of vision
becomes smaller in an inverse proportion, and diminishes the
apparent length; that is, EAB. GAB. compared with DAB.
must become proportionably less, until AD. the line of section,
being infinite, the angle D A B. becomes 2 0, or is anni¬
hilated; that is, until A D. falls into AB.
Moreover, there is only one point from which an object
can appear perfectly quadrangular. For whether the eye
ascends along the line DF. above E. or descends towards D.
A EB. become smaller, and therefore will ’the perpendicular
side of the object, though perfectly quadrangular, appear
broader than it is high.
Hence it follows, that to make the height appear equal to
the breadtb, the angle A DB. or a DB. must be made
equal to AEB. I mean, that A B. must be extended to,
or acquire the length of aB.; or, in other words, that the
surface A B. which was, we will say, eight feet in height,
and equal to its breadth DB. must be enlarged to io feet and
three-fifths.




Now, as we may suppose a head, or a complete figure, to
be formed of quadrangles, it follows, that a fimilar imper¬
fection in vision will take place, that must be remedied in a
Let A. B. divided into eight equal parts, be made to re-
present a stature standing upon a pedestal at such an height,
that the eye of the beholder at D. shall be in a line with the
upper edge of the pedestal; these eight equal parts will appear
to the eye under the following angles of vision :



A1. The upper part of the head, under an angle of



1, 2. The second portion from above, under an angle of


2, 3. The third portion



3, 4. The fourth

1. 5. The fifth





5,6. The sixth
6, 7. The seventh


7, 8. The eighth, or lowest



Hence it is manifest, that the head in the highest division
appears to be of about half the size of that portion of the
lower extremities that is contained in the lowest division.
This will explain the reason why the antients sometimes
gave more than eight heads to their figures. The Pythean
Apollo has eight heads and an half : a proportion which in
itself is consonant with all our ideas of beauty.



Were the figures always to be viewed standing upon
the ground, it is easy to perceive that the apparent short-
ening of the lower extremities must be remedied in a corres-
pondent manner, that the object may appear to be not more
than eight feet in height, although in reality it is longer; but
when it is placed upon a pedestal, or in a niche, the visual
shortenings of the upper part absolutely demand the attention
of the artist.
that was not constructed after the model of a well-propor-
tioned man5. He also limited the proportions of the human
body, and its various parts. These proportions are adopted
by A. Durer, P. Lomazzo, C. Van Mauder, and others.
Hoogstraaten seems to have allowed only seven heads and an
half; which differs a whole head from the proportions observed
in the figure of Apollo.
De Wit gave the proportion of eight heads to all the
figures of his own composition, to the Pythean Apollo, to the
Hercules of Farnese, and to the Venus de Medicis, with a
very small variation. If l am not deceived, there is some-
thing of a melancholy in all these figures, which is not
apparent in his own original paintings or drawings. The
figure of a female on the title-page of his book of drawings,
is nearly nine heads in length. He seems in this simply to
have studied effect.
Lib. I. Chap. i. p. 79.



Rubens has sometimes eight, but mostly seven heads in the
proportions of his figures; which is the cause of that heaviness
that is so conspicuous in most of his works.
P. Testa has given the proportions of eight heads, and
ight and an half to his figures. Bloemaart, whose designs
are mostly put into the hands of our youth, is so irregular,
that he sometimes gives seven, at others ten heads to his
figures. C. Van Mauder has proved, that in some of the
figures of Michael Angelo, the size is equal to nine, ten, nay
twelve heads; in order to communicate more grace to a
stooping attitude.
Most of the Italians seem to have made their figures, par-
ticularly those of females, too short. Modern French masters
render their females more graceful, by giving them the length
of eight heads. Watteau began this style. Probably our
ladies wear high heels to their shoes, and high head-dresses,
to produce a similar effect.
The proportion of eight heads pleases us, because this is twice
the length of the trunk. A door is not pleasing unless it be
twice as high as it is broad. The French make the doors
of their houses more lofty ; which adds dignity, without de-
stroying the effects of symmetry. For à similar reason it is
that we hold the Corinthian column to be more graceful than
the lonic. Considering the capital, as in the place of a
head, the whole length of a Corinthian pillar is eight heads
and an half.



Laplanders, Tartars, Hottentots, and Brasilians, whose
heads are very large in proportion to their bodies, cannot please
us or be deemed beautiful, no more than the Doric column
could be called beautiful upon the revival of architecture.
Architecture with attention, will learn that the columns were
were placed, and afterwards the capital, were raised until
the column, with capital and base, had acquired the pro-
portions of the human body.
But to return. It was not my design to enlarge upon the
subject; we must restrict ourselves to the dimensions and forms
of heads; and I shall now enquire what are the proportions
observable in the heads of European and other nations.


CHAP, II.
PROPORTIONS OBSERVABLE IN THE HEADS OF EUROPEAN AND OTHER
NATIONS, &c. COMPARED WITH THE ANTIQUE IN PROFILE.
In order to judge with more perspicuity concerning com-

parative beauty, in the form of the head, I shall give a
table of the proportions, as I have found them in the best
formed heads. I have divided the height of each into four
parts, that the length may be afcertained with greater pre-
cifion. The same letters are placed by each figure, that the
differences may be the more obvious.
See the sketches of all the profiles placed under the bones
of the cranium.


















































































































It appears from the above Table, that the antients observed
a medium proportion. For example: From the tip of the
nose to the ear, in a Calmuck, is 2 and 4.8ths; in an European,
2 and 1-8th; in the Antique, 2 and z-Sths. And the chin
nine-tenths, eight-eighths, and two-thirds. The beauty of the
face depends therefore upon the relative proportions which
the parts have to each other; as 114, or i : 3, &c. Thus
also, when the face is seen in profile, the breadth ough not
to exceed the height, as in the Negro and Calmuck : in us
they are nearly equal. The form which approaches to the
juadrangular, gives a certain flatnefs to the countenance.
The antients have removed this imperfection, by making the
head higher, which proportionally diminishies the breadth.
When the faces are contemplated in front, as they are
represented in the third plate, considerable differences will be
observable. For example :
The greatest breadth of a Negro’s head is equal to thrbe-
fourths of its height, and the cheeks MN are as

In a Calmuck, the cheeks MN are

In a European


In the Antique

The breadth of the
Negroe’s head PO is aa-


Calmuck's 

European


Antique-




Hence it appears that the countenance of the Antique is not
only more elevated, but that it is considerably less broad in
proportion.
From the form of the eye-sockets, it is obvious that the
temples cannot be broader than the bony parts, together
with the skin, &c.

NoW XW. in the Negro is as
in the Calmuck
23
European

Antique
To judge of the dimensions of the eyes, XW. must be
divided into three parts within the rim of the eye-sockets.
Thus there remains for XPXWO, only one-fourth of the
whole breadth PO.
All those who have written upon proportions, as Alb. Durer,
De Wit, &c. allow the size of five eyes for the breadth of
the face. In children, Durer has given six eyes. But l am
convinced that the head in no instance can be so broad. The
antients have never exceeded four; which corresponds the
nearestwith the breadth observable among us.
In children, the distance between the eyes (see Plate V.
Fig. 1, 2. PO.) is equal to one-third from KK, or the temples.
Although from the disease above mentioned, the head of the
child, represented in the second figure, is five eyes in breadth,
N2



by comparing this with figure the fifth of the same plate, it
will fully appear that the addition to its breadth is no addition
to its beauty. Painters in general seem to be much embar-
rassed concerning the breadth of the face, as appears from
De Wit, Alb. Durer, and Le Brun, who never give lefs than
the measure of five eyes. The celebrated Quesnoy has been
much more careful and fortunate in giving not more than
four eyes as the breadth of his heads. If I mistake not,
Testa has observed the same proportion in his children.
The breadth of the nose is always determined by the dis-
tance of the lateral processes of the upper maxilla (see
Plate III.) EF. in proportion to the distance between E and
F, will be the width of the nofe. It is because the triangle
COR. forms so large an angle, that the disproportion appears
so considerable in the nose of a negro. In us the nose is
generally broader than the distance between the eyes. The
antients have observed the same proportion.
The mouth must completely cover the dentes canini, as
has been already shewn. It must therefore be broader, as
these are placed at a greater distance from each other. But
suppose the distance to be in reality the same; that is, sup-
pose QR. (in figures the fourth and fifthy to be perfectly
equal, yet the mouth will appear smaller when the two
sides of the triangle rise high. Compare YZ. in each figure.
In antiques the mouth appears smaller than with us, from the
greater depth of the chin. The antients have made the
mouth but à little wider than the distance between YZ.; and



the nose to incline downwards. This position of the nose
makes the upper lip small. Thus it curis, as it were, up-
wards, which gives it a more graceful form. The upper lip
of the Calmuck and of the Negro is directly the reverse.
The antients made the neck twice the length of the nose;
but in Apollo it is as 13; this proceeds from the size of the
nose ; which being longer, the neck has still the usual length.
In children, De Wit has not given more than one-third of
a nose for the neck; Quesnoy, somewhat more: about the
or a double chin to his young children ; which always takes
place, and makes the chin about one-fourth of the nose longer.


CHAPTER III.
TO FIND THE PROPORTIONS OF THE HEAD.
MOST of the painters and drawing-masters, who treat

of proportions in their publications, take Vitruvius
among the antients, and Albert Durer among the moderns,
as their guides; and to establish their own principles, they
repose upon the authority of ancient statues, without paying
any farther attention to the human body, or measuring any
particular parts af it with care and accuracy.
The portrait-painters of the present day, generally de-
scribe an oval upon their panel before the person to be
painted sits to be drawn; make a cross in the oval, which
they divide into the length of four nofes, and the breadth
of five eyes; and they paint the face according to these di-
visions to which it must be accommodated, let the proportions
themselves be ever so much at variance.
I mean not to insinuate that eyes, nose, and mouth, or the
curls of a wig, are to be measured with precision, which I
have seen done by a celebrated master, and with very ill
success; for it is impossible to adapt this mensuration to the
panel, because every part has a distinct surface, and cannot
be brought upon a correspondent surface on the panel. It
is simply my opinion, that every good painter or designer
should commence upon the proper basis; that is, should pay



attention to the varieties which exist in the skeleton, and
particularly in the bones of the head, in national characters,
and circumstances of the like nature; and then let him sketch
his oval, or any other figure, not according to his own fancy,
but according to his model.
Perhaps it would not be improper to make use of the an-
cient method of drawing, which Pliny has ascribed to the
daughter of Dibutades of Sicyonia, and which is now prac-
tised for amusement by persons of fashion; that is, to trace
the shade of any one intended to be painted, by means of a
lamp, if the portrait is to be in profile, and then ascertain
the precise situation of the principal parts, as eyes, nofe, mouth,
and chin.
But, in fact, the nicest proportions must in general be
obtained by an attention to multitudes, and by imitating the
example of Zeuxis, who selected, from a great variety
of
persons, some minuter graces, which enabled him to compose
the proportions that were the most pleasing.
As the skeleton and the cranium served my purpose the
best in drawing a head, it has been my practice first to
sketch the cranium with as much attention and accuracy as
possible; upon which, l afterwards placed the softer parts.
This method has been omitted in the present Work, as it
would have rendered my principal object more obscure and
intricate, although it would have enabled me to render my
figures much more graceful and pleafing.






Some of the bony parts are always marked on the coun-
tenance; they are never covered so as to be totally effaced.
Such as the rim round the cavities of the eyes, the jugal
bones, or Q of Plate I. Fig. 3 and 4; and H in Plate V.
Fig. J, 4.. the elevation above the nole, and the deprefsion
immediately under it, the ridge of the nose or the termi-
nation of the nasal-bone. See Plate IV.. Fig. I, 2,5, 4.
The lower edge of the inferior maxilla, in the region of
the chin, and at its foremost angles, manifest themselves, and
point out divisions: the temples approach to the cavities of
the eyes, which always limit the breadth of the face. The
orifice of the ear also gives a determinate point, and indicates
of itself the seat of the lobes, which are to be placed imme-
diately under it; and of the ear itself, to be placed imme-
diately above it.
In a word, the bories of the cranium are simply covered
with skin and a dipose membrane; and these are no impedi¬
ments to our taking the cranium as the truest basis of the
intended portrait.
It was in this manner that l obtained the profile of the
modern face, in the first figure of the second plate. This was
very similar to many other sine heads that have been dis-
sected by me, in my professional character, and were after-
wards sawn through the middle perpendicularly, that l might
be able to obtain a perfect profile. I have drawn several of
these with a pen and thick ink, upon a plate of glafs placed



over them, and the sketch has afterwards been taken upon
varnishied paper. It was by those means that l formed no
small collection ; which was of considerable service in the
course of my Lectures, and of which I have made use in the
right line upon every spot, the above method is much more
files; for the rays of light proceeding from one point, di-
verge in an unequal manner. Yet it must be allowed that a
death’s head does not accurately resemble the living; and also
that by being sawn through, it is less perfect than when
Observing that the linea facialis inclined backwards (see
Plate II. Fig. 1. ) MG. making an angle of eighty degrees
with NC. I have preserved in the second figure all the pro-
portions of the under jaw, and placed M G. perpendicularly,
forming the angle MND. equal to ninety degrees; that is, a
right angle *
Every part which touches the facial line in the first figure,
as TNG. touches it also in the second. The cranium re-
tains its depth; that is, TD. in the second is equal to TD.
* Albinus makes the line oo degrees. Alb. Durer has made it in a man 88, in
a woman 96, and in a child 94. De Wit has made it in women 100 degrees
(see Tab. XI. XII.) in Apollo 94 (see Tab. XII. ) in a man 92, and in a child 96
see Tab. X.)



in the first figure; but the space CD. is diminished in pro-
portion as ME. is increased: CD. is now lefs than NC.
although it was much larger in the first figures; and the height
CE is increased from E to Y.
l afterwards made MG. incline sive degrees more for-
wards (as in Plate II. Fig. 3. ) so that MND. formed an
angle of 95 degrees. C D. is still more diminished, and CE.
becomes larger; that is, EY. is equal to HM. the projection
beyond the line HG.
The lower maxilla is smaller, and becomes more under
the ear, yet hk, or the distance from the tip of the nose to
the ear, remains the length of two nofes; and the neck is
more graceful. Finally : I let the line MG. fall to 100
degrees, by which the height E Y. equal to HM. was gained
see Plate IV. Fig. 4. ); by these means the line that crosfes
the eye at m 2, passes exactly over the centre, and gains a
proportion correspondent to that of the antique: that is, a
form of head which is four noses in length, every other part
being in proportion. It is to be remarked, that the external
rim of the eye-socket m, remains in the three last figures at
an equal distance from the perpendicular line HG.
This projection constitutes the maximum. Place the facial
line more forward, and E Y. becomes too elevated; the head
is more than the proportion of four noses; the upper lip too
small, and the face deformed.



If it be now askced, What is meant by a fine countenance?
we may answer, That in which the facial line MG. makes
an angle of roo degrees with the horizon. The ancient
they have gained the proportions of the different parts from
the principles which I have advanced, I am not able to decide.
It is certain that such a form is never to be met with among
moderns; and l doubt whether the ancient Greeks themselves
had living models of the form; for neither the Egyptians,
from whom they were probably descended, nor the Persians,
nor even the Greeks, have ever given such a form, when they
simply aimed at delineating portraits*
This antique beauty therefore is not in nature; but to use
the term of Winckelman, it is an ideal beauty. Thus, when
the Greeks formed medallions of the Roman emperors, although
hey were obliged to observe a resemblance, yet they added
something of the ideal beauty. This characteristic will easily
enable a connoisseur to distinguish a Grecian from a Roman
medal. I have never found this characteristic so conspicuous
as in the Museum Odescalcum, where not only the counte-
nances of several women, but even the larvae, or faces of the
masks, manifest the line.
As there is a maximum on the one side, so is there a
minimun on the other. As soon as we recede to 70 degrees,
« See the portrait of Augustus Caesar, Pharnaces, and others. Plate IX.
Fig. 4 and 5.
O 2



we give the countenance of a negro (as in the third figure
of the first plate). Lower than 7o gives the features of an
ape; still lower, the resemblance of a dog, &c.
The utmost extent that can be allowed for the face of an
European, is ten degrees behind and ten degrees before the
perpendicular line HI. All that exceed in either direction
lose their beauty, and even become mishapen. But the ne-
groes have also their maximum and minimum of comelinefs.
Of these l cannot speak with precision, as a competent num-
ber of heads are not in my possession; nor have I enjoyed
sufficient opportunities of comparing them. However, the
facial line must not sink much lower than five degrees; that
is, to 65; as the countenance would too closely resemble
low, it would approach to that of the dog, &c.
I have observed, that in all quadrupeds, both genus and
species may be distinguished by the position of the bones of
the upper jaw, immediately before, above, or obliquely under
the ball of the cranium. I have drawn the heads of many
different animals upon the same line; which exhibits an ap-
pearance that not only would be of inconceivable service in
natural history, but of infinite service to the painter. But
this subject is foreign to our present purpose; and to do it
ustice, would be to write a volume.
What has been remarked concerning adult persons, is also
applicable to children.



In the fourth plate I have faithfully copied after the ori-
ginals before me. In both, the facial line was perpendicular,
which has not been favourable to beauty, or to a pleafing
countenance. The fourth figure of the fifth plate exhibits
a much finer face, although the eyes are not in the centre ;
the upper rim of the socket of the eye being about the central
point, according to the rule observed by J. de Wit, in imi-
tation of Quesnoy and Fiammingo; only the occiput is too
long. Respecting this article, I have not been able to find
out any determinate rule for infants. When the child arrives
to the age of three or four years, the lower maxilla shoots
downwards, and the occiput becomes less. It does not appear
to me that we are under any obligation servilely to copy
this unpleasing shape in our figures of young children, parti-
cularly as in this country it proceeds from weakness; which
renders the heads of children larger with us than in any
country in Europe.
When the facial line falls more forwards (see SZ. of
Plate V. Fig. 3 and 4. ) the whole form becomes destitute of
regular proportions; and the head assumes an hydrocephalous
appearance. Therefore, the utmost extent with children, as
well as with adults, is from 100 to 8o degrees.
Réspecting the mouth, it is to be observed that children
having neither teeth, nor projecting alveolae, in either the
upper or lower maxilla, the tongue cannot easily be confined
within the mouth; so that they have generally the mouth
open; that is, the lower jaw is kept at a distance from the



upper; and this gives something of an oblique direction to the
lower part of the face. (See D B. in the second figure, and
XEB Fig. 4.) We may add, that the lower jaw is shorter
than the upper; and as it does not make a large angle with
the hindmost part (see K. in all the figures of Plate IV. ) the
mouth opens more easily and wider. But still the orifice of
the ear (see l. of Plate V. Fig. 3. ) remains the central point,
by a line from which to the point B. the inclination of the
child is to be limited. Quesnoy has been very attentive to
these peculiarities, and he has made the line DB. describing
the distance from the tip of the nose to the tip of the chin
very long. See Plate V. Fig. 4.
The under or double chin is more strongly marked by this
position; the neck is shorter, and the whole is more pleasing.
De Wit, on the contrary, has taken his proportions from
under the nose to under the chin, as being equal to one-
fourth of the height. For this reason has he frequently given
a closed mouth to his children; which renders them less
pleasing than the children of Quesnoy :
In most persons the ear is of equal length with the nose;
that is, one-fourth of the height of the head. It seldom
stands higher than the middle line, and the lobe generally
sinks lower than the nasal line. Alb. Durer makes the nose
a Preisser’s figures of childrens heads are taken from Alb. Durer, and have
the same faults. In Table I. Part III. the chin comes too forward, and is too long;
his, connected with the general smallness of the features, makes a mixture of infancy
and manhood in the same face.



of an adult about this size. De Wit makes them larger, and
seems careless about proportions. In his Twelfth Table, the
lower part of the ear is on a line with the nose, and the
upper even with the rim of the eye-socket, and thus more
than one-fourth. In Fig. 5 and 6, of the same Table, the
lobes are not placed so low. In general, he has placed the
ear too high, and even the orifice, which never varies, being
always parallel with the line of the nose. Alb. Durer, and
all his followers, have done the same. The propriety of my
remarks is demonstrated by the accurate figures of ofteology,
in the tables of Eustachius, where the ear is represented pa¬
rallel to the nasal line.
Attention must also be paid to the breadth of the ear.
De Wit generally makes the breadth too small. The antients
have avoided representing the ear naked, as much as it was
possible; in which they are to be commended, as in itself it
is not a pleasing figure. The cavities, the rim, the- lobes,
and other parts, are too small and insignificant to suffer a
to cover the ear itself, and to make the lobes alone visible.
However, in some cases they must appear totally; as in the
representation of a bald head. In this case the breadth should
be equal to half of the height. It should be drawn in an
oval, the long central line of which should be made to incline
à little backwards. But if the facial line be made to project
forwards to the 1ooth degree, then should the central line
be perpendicular; as, in this case, the upper part is already
at à greater distance from the nose than the lower.



In Negroes, Calmucks, &c. this line must be made to run
parallel with the facial line.
Few painters have attended to the real structure of the ear.
Almost every treatise on the principles of drawing that I
have seen, is defective in this article. The French appear
to be the most attentive to it. In the Dictionnaire Encyclo-
pedigue, the writer of the article upon the principles of
drawing, has given a very accurate representation of the
ear. In the book of drawing, by Bloemaart, there is not one
figure of the ear that is natural: nor even in that by Preisser,
notwithstanding he has taken more pains than any of his
brethren to ascertain its exact proportions .
In children the ear is very broad and large, as well as
the head. It is therefore best to conceal it, as has been al-
ready observed, since the ear cannot add to the beauty of
countenance.
In the above disquisitions I have endeavoured to draw
from Nature herself the constituent principles of beauty, in
the form of the head. I am far from asferting, that a rigid
conformity to the rules laid down will always enable us to
k Aug. Carrache disoit que l’oreille etoit la partie du corps la plus difficile a
dessiner; il en modela une plus grande que nature, pour en faire connoitre la
structure. Il en fit des etudes infinies, et l’on construisit un grand modele en
platre appelle L’Orecchione d’Agostino. Bibl. de Peinture, Tom. II. p. 484.




catch the beauties which nature is perpetually presenting to
our vieW.
Horace says,
Non satis est pulchra esse poemata, dulcia funt.
The pleasing effect, should always be our primary object;
and in some cases it is better to deviate à little from the strict
rules of proportion, in order to increase the beauty of a
piece, than to render it less pleasing by a servile con-
formity.


APPENDIX to the preceding Chapter.
IT was the original design of Professot CAmper to give an additional
chapter concerning the distinguishing marks of the antique in statues, medals,
intaglios, &c. But it appears that the difficulty of free access to a competent
number of specimens in these provinces, has prevented him from executing the
design. The sew coins and intaglios, represented in the tenth plate, though so
trivial in themselves, may serve to corroborate what has been remarked in the
Author’s Introduction to this Treatise; and also what has been advanced con-
cerning the superior beauty of an antique head; and the explication of the
cause of this superiority given in the preceding chapter.
Fi6. I. Represents Bocchus, King of Mauritania, in his youth.
This was a copper medal. On the reverse was the figure
of an Elephant.
Tis. II. Bocchus, more advanced in years. On the reverse, the
Elephant. This was of copper.
Fis. III. Alexander the Great. A silver coin, with the Greek inscription
AAEEANAPoT. On the reverse was à Castle; above it, the
Thunderbolts of Jove.
Fig. IV. Pharnaces, King of Pontus, with the inscription Ba2i4.
DAPNAKOT. A silver coin. On the reverse of which
was Peace with the Cornucopia, a Dog, Half Moon, &c.
The above coins are in the cabinet of the Prince of Orange. The two
figures of Bocchus are about twice as large as the coins, that the contour may
be more conspicuous.



FiG. V.
ls the representation of Caesar Augustus, mentioned in the
Introduction as well as in the preceding Chapter, as an
example that the antients, in their portraits of distinguissied
personages, paid attention to the direction of the facial
line.
The Medusa of Sosicles.
FiG. VI.
The Head of Alexander, engraved by Pyrgoteles. It is
FiG. VII.
obvious that, both in this and in the third figure, attention
hath been paid to the facial line; and they serve as
instances of the ideal beauty; which, indeed, is also
conspicuous in their representations of the Divinities.
FiG. VIII. Theseus, with his Club; by Gnaeus.
The four last figures are taken from the Treatise of the Baron De Stosch,
published in the year 1724, at Amsterdam. Plates 23, 25, 45, 55.
The facial line is too obvious to require further enlargement.



PART THE FOURTH.
THE PROPER MANNER OF SKETCHING THE OUTIINES
OF A HEAD.
CHAPTER I.
CONCERNING THE OVAL.
A LL writers, on the principles of drawing, propose the
 oval, as the best method of obtaining a sure hand in
sketching heads in every position, and of every age. No one
has ventured to deviate from the method, notwithstanding
every one must have been convinced, from experience, that
this figure is frequently defective, and merely applicable in a
few instances. This I shall endeavour to demonstrate :
Plate VIl. Fig. I. Let the height A B. be divided into four
equal parts, AH. HI. IF. FB. Of these take two-thirds,
or A F. equal to KL. for the largest dimensions, and describe
the circle AKFL. The ears are to be placed between the
parallel lines KL. and MN.




Divide KL. into four equal parts, and take one-fourth for
the breadth of the templesO P. extending the compasses from
F to 1. or to the half of A B. draw from the point F. in the
central line AB. the circle BNIM. Complete the oval from
K to M. and L to N. Thus is the point L obtained, and
also the central line of the eyes KL. *
Finally. Divide AB. into four equal parts, of which one
is destined for the nose; and EF. into three, of which the
uppermost gives the seat of the upper lip QR.
This method corresponds with the proportions given in the
second chapter of the third part of this TreatiseF. This oval
is a good one, and seenis well adapted to all those cases where
ovals can be applied with advantage.
But when the features are to be delineated in profile, as
in the second sigure of the same plate, the manner appears to
me totally destitute of the least advantage. Let IR. be the
length of the head, and A B or UV. the height; form-your
oval as in the other figure. This oval limits nothing; neither
the situation of the ear, nor the direction of the facial line XY.
nor the seat of the eye P. All these must be placed according
« C. Van de Pas has formed the oval in this manner. Sce page 21. The
manner which Alb. Durer followed in his first book of Geometry, is more complex
and less perfect. See the Latin edition. Paris, 1532. p. 20, 21.
F Page 89.


KIXTZ.
KOOPL
FE



to fancy, or by guefs. Besides, the cranium itself is not
of a circular form.
Books on drawing recommend the oval also for a face that
is placed sideways, between the profile and a front direction,
as in Fig. 3. Well, draw the oval as before, and describe
the central line A DEB. in the direction of the oval, then
divide the oval into four parts, and the lower division into
three parts, and you will find the points of incidence in the
four divisions, viz. S, D, E,F. in the line ADB. This is
the manner laid down by Preisser :
Most portrait-painters follow this rule, and they always
place the mouth on the middle line A D B. which is too near
to the ear. It would not be difficult to demonstrate this, or
to prove that all the figures formed according to thefe rules
of Preisser are defective. The same error is observable in
faces. And, if 1 recollect rightly, Goltzius has also com-
mitted it.
In order to be convinced how much this method is de-
fective, draw the facial line DQR. upon your oval, accord-
ing to the third figure of the fourth plate, either inclining or
erect, as may be required, then you will sind the points of
 It appears from the Author’s notes, that he had intended to treat this subject
more amply.
See Part I. Plate V.



incidence to be D, Q. S, R. Let these be considered as the
middle points, and the countenance becomes natural.
A. Van Dyk has paid due attention to this, and also many
of the Italian masters.
It appears, therefore, from the above example, that in
such cases the oval is a deceitful guide. Drawing-masters
ought not to sketch these lines upon a flate, or any flat sur-
face, but on a ball of wood or clay, properly modelled.


CHAPTER II.
OF THE USE OF THE TRIANGLE IN SKETCHING A PROFILE.
TYOET, A. Carrache, and some others, teach us that to
I draw the face in profile, an equilateral triangle must
first be formed (as ABC. Fig. 4. of Plate VIl.); that the
foremost line AC. must be divided in three equal parts fof
the face; that is, the forehead, nose, and chin.
But the point B. is of no use, unlefs to place the ear within
it. Then, indeed, would the space between D and F. be
equal to two noses, measuring from the lobe to the line inter-
secting the nostril. But the lower maxilla would be thrown
backwards, as in Cand F. which is a disproportion never to
be met with in Nature.
However, it is allowed that by this method the facial line
A C. is admirably well preserved. Thus far is the triangle
preferable to the oval.
Some artists, and particularly Le Clerc, in his copy of
Le Brun’s figures of the pafsions :, have used the small equi-
lateral triangle DEC. When one side of the triangle lies
on the facial line, the point E. will mark the orifice of the
*




ear with accuracy; so that the distance from I. to E. or
rather 1H. shall be equal to two nofes. But he has not
applied it in this manner, and therefore it neither marks the
proper boundaries of the facial line, nor of the ear. Besides,
this triangle only gives half of the face, with the ear. For
these reasons l think it of no great use.
J. C. Vischer, in his Fundamentales regula artis pictoriæe et
sculpturae, uses the larger triangle marked by our A BC.
Parizet, in his Treatise, entitled Nouveaut Livre des Principes
du dessin, has adopted the triangle of Le Clerc, and with no
greater advantage.
The great uncertainty and imperfection of the common
methods, made me desirous of inventing some other, which
should promise to be more certain, and more generally appli-
cable. This object had long employed my thoughts, and, I
think, with success.






CHAPTER III.
A NEW METHOD OF DELINEATING THE HEAD.
DEING perpetually conversant with the skulls and faces
D of the dead, and having attentively examined them
after they were sawn through, for anatomical uses, in the
manner already described; and having also diligently traced
the growth of the maxilla, and of the nose, in the heads of
infants that were but a few weeks old; an idea suggested
itself, that in drawing or painting of the head, the best method
would be to imitate the process of Nature; first to form the
cranium or skull, then mark the facial line in the direction
required, and afterwards arrange the other parts according
to given proportions.
The skull is an horizontal oval, of which the hindmost
parts are the largest, and the fore-part rounded like the section
of a ball or globe. I first draw this oval by means of two
circles, the one is SLVEW. which contains about three
parts of the head; the other, KUZ. which is in size eight-
ninths of the other circle. Draw the horizontal line ST.
which extends from the centre of the large circle S. to T.
the centre of the smaller; and is one-fourth of the larger
circle. From the centre S. I let fall the perpendicular line
SQ; this marks the seat of the orifice of the ear, and of its
lobe at E.



2. I draw PG. the facial line, in the degree of inclina-
tion required: K. marks the place of the forehead; F. the
line of the eye; I. the nose; H. and a third of 1B. or 1G.
the mouth.
5. I complete the oval ZVE. which marks with sufficient
accuracy the lower edge of the eye-socket.
4. I take GN. which may be equal to the size of the
nose, or less, according to the inclination of the facial line,
and thus I mark the commencement of the neck.
This manner is perfectly simple, natural, and indicates all
the principal parts in the proportions required. Not to observe
that it is easier to strike an horizontal oval than a perperi-
dicular one.
To delineate a person advanced in years, I first draw the
oval KLVE. and the facial line PKHG. See Plate VIII.
Fig. 2.
2. As in every aged person the teeth are wanting, and
the alveolae are obliterated, by which the maxillæ have lost
about one-third of their size, I pursue the method recom-
mended in describing the second figure of the sixth plate, to
ascertain the present place of the chin, &c.
5. Considering G. to be the seat of the chin, in its more
perfect state, I place the compasses in E. and draw from G.




the curved line gG. and place the tip of the chin at g. which
is about two-thirds from IB.
4. I next divide GI. into three equal parts, the upper of
which is for the mouth.
5. I also draw the protuberance KF. as this generally
projects considerably from the facial line, in very aged persons.
6. Finally. I take the length of a nose at GN. and
sketch the neck NO.
Thus l obtain an aged face, with all its characteristics, in
the most perfect manner.
In children, the form of the cranium being similar (see
Plate VIII. Fig. 4. ) the oval must be drawn as before, then
the perpendicular line NQ next the facial line PG. Since
children have not the protuberance on the forehead, as has
been remarked: the F. (see Fig. I and 2.) must be placed
within the perpendicular line ; whereas in the first figure it
touches, and in the second it projects beyond it.
2. The eyes are two-fifths of the whole height, meafur-
ing from under the chin, and three-fiftbs from the top of the
forehead. This agrees with the proportions of De Wit and
Alb. Durer.







5. The distance from i. to e. the place for the nose, is
equal to one-fourth of the line LQ but as the upper and
lower jaw are, from causes asligned already, one-third nar-
rower in young children, as well as in aged persons, the line
a b. must be drawn from AB. to LQ and the oblique line
cd. as was explained when we considered the fourth figure
of the fifth plate. Thus is the point of incidence g. for the
tip of the chin, and G. for the mouth. A a. is now divided
into five parts also; three-fifths of which will indicate the
line of the eye, and two-fifths are destined for the face.
In drawing the sketch, first strike the oval, then draw the
facial line PG. let G g. be noted upon the line dc. and then
draw a line from g. to h. the origin of the neck behind; and
all the principal points will be accurately noted. When the
mouth is to be represented more open, G. must be placed pro-
portionably lower and more backwards.
A sketch drawn in this manner gives the most natural re-
presentation of a child’s face.
To delineate the negro (see Fig. 5. of the eighth Plate)
a similar method must be observed. After the oval is formed,
draw the facial line PG. inclining backwards, according to
the rules laid down in the Third Chapter of Part the First;
then draw à line from B. to H. and you have the point of
incidence at K. which limits the mouth. Thus you obtain
the particular form of countenance. B N. being equal
to one-fourth of A B. points where the neck commences.



The other parts, and their proportions, have already been
too fully described, to render a more circumstantial detail
necessary.
Thus is the remark of Philostratus verified, that lines sim-
ply drawn with chalk, may characterize the Indian, by a flat
nose, stiff hair, prominent jaws, &c. *
This manner of sketching is acquired with equal ease with
the one in common use. It is also perfectly applicable to
the representation of the passions of the mind. In the ex-
pression of astonishment, fear, &c. when the mouth is open,
the chin must be placed lower and more backwards; the
concomitants must be expressed by the action of the muscles;
and this action of the different muscles in the excitements of
passion, may also be explained in a physiological manner, with
as much accuracy as, I flatter myself, has been observed in
these delineations of different nations and ages.
The diversity of countenances is made by varying the
proportions, and changing the position of the facial line.
These give a large scope within the limits of resemblance,
and also of beauty.
The rules given by Alb. Durer, in his Treatise concerning
the manner of changing statues, and the features of the face,
Life of Apol. of Thyan. Cap. X. See also Junius, on the Knowledge of
the Antients in Painting. Lib. III. Cap. II. p. 259.



are mostly productive of a caricature, which is seldom appli-
cable to the art of drawing, although it is not totally destitute
of utility.
It were to be wished that artists would apply themselves
to the ascertaining of the true figure of the human body upon
would at least be equal to these my labours respecting the
head and countenance. May I entertain the hopes, That a
study begun by myself, will be brought to perfection by some
other admirer of the art:


BOOK II
LECTURES
ON THE MANNER OF REPRESENTING THE DIFFERENT PASSIONS--
ON THE POINTS OF SIMILARITY BETWEEN THE HUMAN SPECIES, QUADRUPEDS,
WITH RULES FOR DRAWING, FOUNDED ON THIS SIMILARITY.



BOOK II
LECTURE I.
THE MANNER OF DELINEATING THE DIFFERENT PASSIONS.
THE art of painting was, in times the most remote, not

only valued as a pleasing, but as a very important art.
Aristotle informs us, that the Greeks made it an essential part
of their education; and that it was universally expected of
the children of richer citizens, that they should be able to
criticise the works of their renowned artists with judgment,
and be qualified to furnish their own mansions with taste and
elegance.
Their laudable example was once imitated with zeal and
success by the inhabitants of this country. In almost every
town the citizens of distinction were educated in some know-
ledge of the arts. We must now lament the change that
has taken place in most of the towns which were once the
residence of celebrated artists. Your city alone shews itself
to be the patron of this amiable sister of poetry; and its
fostering care not only promises every advantage to rising




youth, but inspires à spirit of emulation in the bosom of artists
themselves, that has been productive of works which reslect
an honour upon the country at large.
I will not expatiate upon the excellent lessons and judicious
dissertations which have been delivered in this place by several
members of our society, as I fhould offend the modesty of
those who are present; but the great attention that has been
paid to my feeble endeavours, upon former occasions, ma-
nifests the zeal of its members, and their predilection for this
delightful art. The approbation with which my attempts to
sliew the intimate connexion subsisting between the science of
anatomy and painting were crowned, have encouraged me
the principles of which I have long desired more deeply to
investigate.
In the year 1770, I had the satisfaction of demonstrating
before you, with what taste, and with how much certainty,
the different features in persons of various ages and nations
may be delineated. In the present Lecture I shall endeavour
to explain to you, in what manner the different pasfions in-
scribed upon the countenance may be expressed with the
utmost accuracy. But as this science is more refined, so are
the principles of it more difficult. They require an accurate
knowledge of our make, not merely respecting ofteology, or
the arrangement of the bones, but also respecting the muscles
and nerves, in order to judge with precision concerning the
rules I shall propose.




The skilful representation of the passions of the mind, by
painting or by statuary, has been admired from the remotest
times. Pliny informs us, that one Aristides of Thebes was
the first who delineated with success the various emotions of
of the body co-operate in the expression of certain emotions,
vet the face has always been considered as their principal
seat. Cicero terms the countenance the mute interpreter of
the heart; and Seneca, who had made great progress in the
knowledge of the human mind, justly remarks, that violent
emotions, of every kind, cannot escape manifesting themselves
in the countenance. To these general observations the an-
tients have also added, that the eyes are most expressive of
these emotions. Pliny, that proficient in all the polite arts,
says, ee the mind dwells in the eye. He also knew, that the
motions of the eyebrows contribute a considerable share to
the oftentive effects.
I must refer you to the Treatise of Junius, on the know-
ledge of the antients in painting, if you wishi to be informed
concerning the extent of this knowledge. It is true, the
principal performances of their renowned masters are lost; but
had investigated the influence of pain. Not merely does the
face, but the arms, legs, in short all the muscles of the body,
indicate anguish.
The lovelinefs of the Venus de Medicis--the dignity of
the Pythian Apollo--the deities, male and female, engraved



on precious stones--the different mafks--the sportive fawns,
manifest that expression of countenance constituted no small
part of the excellency which is so much admired in the
statues, paintings, and engravings of the antients.
The fine arts were buried under the bad taste that pre-
vailed during the middle ages, until from the fourteenth cen-
tury every branch of science began to revive; and in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries they flourissied with such
vigour, that Europe seemed to require a pause to rest from the
fatigues of producing so many eminent characters.
But to return. Paullo Lomazzo, in his valuable work
Dell' Arte della Pittura, published so early as in the year
1551, describes the influence of the passions upon the mus¬
cles of the face, and still more minutely the different
postures and contortions of the body. He relates, that Mi-
chelino, a Miianese artist, had painted two peasants, and two
country girls, who laughed so heartily, that no one could
look at them without laughing. He tells us also, that to draw
latghing features was the great amusement of Da Vinci. But
I need not inform you, that, at the period referred to, cari-
catures were so much the mode, that at length they became
disgusting. Leonardo also, who flourishied at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, very naturally describes, in his im-
mortal work on painting, all the various changes of counte-
nance; but, like Lomazzo, he has chiesly studied the different
attitudes of the body. Both these great men seemed more
attentive to general effect than to particular features.



To the list of great men who have distinguished them-
selves in this department, may be added the names of Michael
Angelo and Raphael, who seem to have made the different
expressions of countenance their principal study. I well re-
member the astonishment l felt, when I first contemplated the
Penitence of Peter, painted in one of the cartoons; and who can
remain insensible to the anguishi of Proserpine, when forced
away by Pluto, as it is chiseled out in stone by Buonarotil
However, no one has arranged the expressions of the dif-
ferent passions upon the countenance more systematically than
Le Brun, who flourished about the middle of the seventeenth
century. He has executed this work in so masterly a manner,
that every nation has followed his lessons, and copied his
examples. The great Buffon alone has ventured to deviate
from him; but not with the greatest success. I shall leave
every connoisseur to decide whether I be to blame in placing
a much inferior value upon his drawings than upon those
of Le Brun.
All the authors I have mentioned, have either confined
themselves to appearances, or, like Le Brun, have reasoned
metaphyfically concerning the operations of the mind, with-
out attending to the phyfical causes of the changes produced
by these operations. But in my opinion, speculations concern-
ing the manner of the soul’s working, or concerning the seat
of the soul, are of no use to the artist. These belong to
metaphyficians, who by the way lose themselves in a laby-
rinth of terms, or words with no desinitive meaning, without



having in the least explained the action of this immortal prin-
ciple upon the corporeal and mortal frame.
Pliny, Da Vinci, and Junius, have particularized the prin-
cipal appearances, but have mentioned little concerning the
connexion that there is between the parts affected; and still
less have they particularized the changes which necessarily
arise from. the various affections of the nervous system. Wat-
telet also has described the passions, and their influence, with
much good sense, and in a strain of eloquence. It shall be
my object not to speculate concerning the workings of the
soul, but to enquire what changes take place in the body, in
consequence of its operations. We shall investigate the ap-
pearances produced, the uniformity of these appearances,
and their influence upon the features of the face.
The first thing requisite, is to acquire an accurate know-
ledge of the form of the skeleton, and particularly of the
cranium; the second, To be well acquainted with the prin-
cipal muscles of the face, and their action; thirdly, To trace
the nerves in their divisions and connexions with these muscles.
A few examples will illustrate my plan, and indicate. its
importance, however novel it may appear.
An oppressed, sorrowful, and melancholy person, lets his
head sink downwards, or he supports it with his hand ; the
equipoise is no longer maintained by the muscles of the neck ;
that is, the nerves belonging to those muscles are rendered
inert.



A lively contented laugher, on the other hand, raises his
head, and his breast is agitated. In the excess of the emotion,
he places both his hands to his sides, as it were to support his
body. At length his legs begin to refuse their office; and
he would fall to the ground if the fit continued.
A person in the impetus of rage, beats with hands and
feet, stamps till the ground shakes under him; and his face is
convulsed in a thousand forms.
Deep reverence makes the tongue to falter, an inward
trembling impedes the motion of the body; the most lively
and expressive eyes are abassied, and look downwards; the
heart slutters; if shame accompany this emotion, as is fre-
uently the case, the face, neck, and breast are immediately
painted of a crimson colour.
It would be endless to particularize every emotion in a
similar manner. The observation deducible from these effects
is, that in every emotion of the mind particular nerves are
affected; consequently every painter ought to make himself
acquainted with the construction and connexion of the nerves
productive of these changes; at least every one who under-
takes to write systematically upon the subject, should acquire
such a portion of anatomical knowledge, as to be able to
instruct his disciples in the general rules that slow from it.
The palenefs arising from fear, or à sudden alarm, depends,
equally with blusliing, upon the action of the nerves. These




changes of colour may be accurately expressed by the painter;
and in this he has the advantage over the statuary, engraver,
&c. But orators and public actors have the superior advan-
tage of giving the greatest force to the expressions of the
features, by exciting the requisite movements in the parts
themselves.
As dissecting of human bodies has been my constant occu-
pation, Ihave had frequent opportunities of examining which
of the nerves, communicating with these more active parts,
must have been particularly affected; consequently, which of
the muscles must have been excited to action by those nerves;
and from the action of these muscles depending upon their
origins, infertions, course, and connexions, we may easily
learn what pleats in the face, what kind of action in the hands,
&c. they must necessarily occasion. It is these appearances
alone that I propose to elucidate in the present Lecture.
It may be objected, that according to the above represen-
tation, the antients must have been acquainted with the ana-
tomy of the paffions; or that they, together with Raphael,
Callot, Le Brun, and others, have succeeded wonderfully
without this knowledge :-that Hogarth himself, who excelled
in representing the passions, was ignorant of all that I have
advanced to be so necessary:--that John Steen, who was fre-
quently so inimitable in the delineation of the passions, never
dreamed of studying the muscles stript of their integuments,
or of acquiring an intimate knowledge of those nerves which
so many anatomists themselves know but imperfectly.



Notwithstanding these objections, l am well assured that
my remarks will prove both important and acceptable to this
audience. Tracing the operations of Nature is always an
useful employment; vou will also see and admire her
wonderful address; and finally, we shall point out a method
by which not only youth, but painters themselves may make
a speedy progress in this most enchanting branch of the art.
We shall confine ourselves to the face.
I shall first enable you to recollect the constituent parts of
the cranium, its form, cavities, connexions, proportions, &c.*
Secondly, I shall delineate the principal muscles of the
face, and mark the true situation of the eyes, that you may
be convinced that Le Brun has placed them too much inelin-
ing downwards; and that, in his representation of Laughter,
he has given an improper bend downwards to the inward
angles of the eyes: he has committed a similar fault in
Weeping.
Thirdly, I shall demonstrate that the pleats or wrinkles
of the face must necessarily run in a rectangular direction,
according to the course of the muscular fibrillæ.
Fourthly, I shall exhibit before you some of the nerves,
in order that you may understand the immediate connexion
Several of these sketches were extemporaneous, and have not been preserved.




which takes place in the action of some of the muscles in the
same passion.
The sixth pair, as they were denominated by ancient
anatomists, or the eighth of the moderns, has long been termed
the Pathetic. This pair communicates with the throat, breast,
abdomen, and, by the intercostal muscles, with the nerves of
the arms and legs.
The fourth pair, or the lesser pathetics, produce wonderful
effects in surprise, in love, in dying.
It is by the action of the seventh pair, that we laugh,
blushi, or look pale.
Finally. I shall delineate the muscles of the èyes, that a
just idea may be formed of their motion in the full vigour
of life, and in the article of death; and subjoin some
observations concerning the synchronous and alternate motion
of the oblique muscles in friendly greetings, and in tokens
of respect.
In Dying, the eyes are drawn towards each other; be-
cause the power of the will ceases, and the muscles act in
consequence of the remains of life seated in them.
Such are the principles we shall lay down; the right
study and application of which, will enable the artist to ex-



press the passions of the soul with the utmost accuracy, and
in their full energy.
EXAMPLES.X
I SHALL first sketch a Death’s Head. See Plate I. Fig. 5.
Secondly, The principal Muscles of the Face. Fig. 2. Thirdly,
A countenance perfectly PlAcip. Fig. 3. Fourthly, Express-
ing SURPrISE. Fig. 4. Fifthly, CONTEMPT. Fig. 5. Sixthly,
COMPLACENCY, FRIENDLINESS; TACIT JOY. Plate II. Fig. 6.
Seventhly, LaugHTER. Fig. 7. Eightly, SoRRow. Fig. 8.
Ninthly, WEEPING. Fig. 9. Tenthly, Vexation and
WRATH. Fig. 10. Finally, The DyiNG. Fig. II.
The quick transitions from one passion to another, which
I am about to exhibit, may not, perhaps, excite less surprise
than that which the great Ferdinand of Tuscany experienced,
when he saw Peter of Cortona working with his pencil at
Florence. The painter perceiving that the Duke was parti-
ularly struck with the figure of a child crying, convinced
him that a very few touches of the pencil would exhibit
laughter. He then restored the former strokes, and the child
was made to cry again; to the no small astonissiment of the
Prince. I hope that you will experience something of a
* The Professor in demonstrating these changes, made the requisite alterations
on the same face ; and also pointed out the defects of other painters in a fimilar
manner. This had a powerful effect upon the audience, which cannot be produced
to an equal degree by distinct figures.



similar emotion, although it is not a Peter of Cortona that
handles the pencil, but simply a lover of the arts.
Contemplate first the pLacID countenance. Fig. 3. Every
feature is at rest; no one muscle is brought into particular
action; all are in a state of repose, without appearing relaxed
or inert. There is a tranquillity in the eye void of languor,
and the lips are in unconstrained contact.
Let us suppose something to present itself which excites a de-
gree of sURPRISE or WONDER. Fig. 4. The intercostal nerves
are immediately affected, and act upon the third pair; hence
the eye-lid is opened, and the eye stands motionless in the
socket. The same nerve acts upon the eighth pair at the
same time; respiration is suspended, the free motion of the
heart is impeded, and the mouth is opened, as the maxillary
muscles destined to this purpose are affected; but as these act
alone upon the lower maxilla, the teeth are not discovered.
The hands are extended, and more particularly the fingers,
from the action of their muscular plexus.
The effects of contemPT are very different. Fig. 5. The
fifth pair of nerves are put in motion. Thus are the eye-
brows drawn inwards and downwards; the mouth is firmly
closed ; but as the lower lip rises in the middle, it becomes
arched. The eyes are drawn sideways, the musculus abducens

and adducens acting togetber by the force of habit.-
By making the head to turn towards the right, and the



eyes toward the left hand, the passion is rendered more
expressive.
Fig. 6. In COMPLACENCY, FRIENDLY GREETINGS, and
TacIT JoY, those parts alone act which have an immediate
communication with the seventh pair of nerves. The angles
of the mouth must never be drawn up alone, without other
tokens of an incipient smile. Great care should be taken to
avoid drawing the eyebrows inwards: an error frequently
committed by the French in their portraits.
LaUGHTER. Fig. 7. In laughter all the effects produced
by the former affection are greatly increased, and others are
superadded. The whole countenance inclines forwards, but
without the attention being fixed upon any determinate object.
The outward edges of the orbicular muscles of the eye are
contracted, producing wrinkles and folds around the eyes.
The lips are opened by the action of the orbicular muscle, on
the external sides; hence the teeth, particularly the upper,
are made to appear; small wrinkles arise at the corners of the
mouth, and the cheeks become fuller, &c.
lf you would add an arch, or a wanton look, place the
eye sideways, and contract the upper eyelid expressive of a
wink.
In a soRROWFUL countenance (Fig. 8. ) the fifth pair
of nerves are principally affected; the mouth is drawn down-
wards by the descent of the upper lip. To add DESPAIr to



this emotion, the face must be made to look upwards, and
somewhat obliquely; the brow must be furrowed with
wrinkles; and the middle of the eyebrows be drawn up-
wards.
In Weeping (Fig. 9) all the muscles which receive the
fifth pair of nerves, act in a very forcible manner. Hence
the corners of the mouth are drawn downwards, the lower
part of the nose upwards, the eyebrows descend, the eyes
are nearly closed, and tears are pressed out of the lacrymal
glands.
If AngER (Fig. 10. ) accompanies the emotion, the action
of the muscles draws the eyes wide open; the eyebrows de-
scend still lower, and the teeth are violently compressed to-
gether.
DYING. Fig. 2. In dying it is to be observed, First;
That all the muscles of the neck open the mouth, and
elongate the chin. Secondly, That the pathetic nerves draw
the eyes towards each other. And thirdly, That all the
ther muscles cease to act.
What Le Brun terms Veneration, is not well expressed ’,
as the eyes are represented drawn upwards by the action of
the two oblique muscles alone; whereas the upper and under
musculi obliqui must act.



Accept, Gentlemen, these short specimens, by way of
elucidating my principles. To represent every passion and
possible emotion of the mind, would require more time than
could be allowed by one who professes to be an anatomist,
and not a painter. My sole object has been to awaken at-
tention, and excite a spirit of enquiry; that you may be in-
duced to consult Nature herself, without indulging implicit
confidence in the rules and examples given by the most ce-
lebrated masters, which are frequently imperfect. If in these
specimens I have not answered your expectations; if my ex-
pressions have not been sufficiently explicit; and my hand
has failed in giving the requisite strokes of the pencil, I can
still perceive, by the satisfaction painted upon your counte-
nances, that my endeavours to please you have proved suc-
cessful.


LECTURE II
CONCERNING THE POINTS OF SIMILARITY BETWEEN QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS,
AND FISH.
THE object of the prefent and following Lectures, fhall
be to shew the great similarity there is between
Quadrupeds, and the resemblance of these to Birds and Fishi;
and also to indicate a very easy method of delineating all these
animals in the most exact manner.
Should my audience deem the undertaking of little mo-
ment, or confider the precife form of animals as beneath the
attention even of painters themselves, l could justify the design
by quoting the laudable example of the antients. The Greeks,
the Romans, and before these the Egyptians, were obliged
to pay the most minute attention to every species of animals,
not merely as emblems of their different idols, but as insepa-
rable from their sacrifices, races, triumphs, &c. but these could
neither be painted nor represented in stone or metal, without
the knowledge of what constitutes the beauty and perfection
of the animal creation.
The high value in which this art was held by the antients,
will moreover appear from the Dog cast in metal, which
Plinye informs us, was preserved in the Capitolium, as an




exquisite piece of workmanship, with so much care, that the
superintendents were threatened with death in case of ne-
gligence.
We read also that Myron: had formed so beautiful a Cow
in metal, that it was not only celebrated by the poets, but
copied by the most skilful engravers with equal zeal, as a
Venus, or any other sine workmanship, of the greatest masters.
Count CaylusF has this cow engraved on a Cornelian; which
is no inconsiderable addition to the cabinet of that celebrated
connoisseur. Canachis acquired no less honour by a Hart,
which he had formed in copper, that appeared so light and
swift, that a thread might apparently be made to pafs under
the feet. Tisicrates is immortalized by his Lion ; Simon, by
a Dog; Nicias, by his paintings of several species of animals;
and Androcydes, by his skilful representation of Fishi.
Whoever consults the Monumenti Antichi Inediti of Win-
kelman, and particularly the Introduction t, will be made
acquainted with the high value which, in the present day, is
placed upon the Lion in the Capitol; the Sphinx in the palace
of Borghese; and also the other animals by the fountain Deli
Aqua Felice.
The Horse has excited still greater ambition. I stiall not
mention the story of Apelles, nor of his follower Lysippus.







Their successor Calamis obtained such renown for his horses,
that he is not only celebrated by Pliny’ and Cicero, but
Ovid has immortalized him in his verses. Pliny says, that
he was unrivalled in his representation of Cars drawn by two
or four horses, notwithstanding that Lysippus, and his disciple
Euthycrates, had distinguissied themselves in this department.
The valuable cabinet of StoschJ manifests how great a
master Aspafius was in the engraving of Horses. Hylus has
also excelled in Steers, and Lucius in Horses.
Many triumphant cars, with four horses abreast, are repre-
fented in bass-relief; and engraved on precious stones, in a
manner that exceed all imagination. They are mostly repre-
sented with two, and with four horses. I have never seen
them with ten; though Nero introduced hunting with this
number. In the cabinet of Count Caylus, there is an engrav¬
ing, on Cornelian, of a conqueror with twenty horses by the
side of each other, which can be minutely distinguished, and
of exquisite beauty.
It would be endless to enumerate all those who have ac-
quired celebrity by depicting of animals. Let me recommend.
to you the Catalogne of Ancient Artists, arranged with so
much judgment, by Franc. Junius. This will inform you of
the number of artists, who have acquired immortal fame by
their reprefentations of various animals.





We will now direct our attention to those great masters
that were your immediate predecessors, whose admirable per-
formances must have made an indelible impreffion upon your
minds. Who, of the present asfembly, does not pant after
the immortal fame, so justly acquired by a Van Berchem, a
Potter, a Wouwerman, a Wenix, an Adrian Van de Velde,
a Houdekoeter, and other great men which this country has
produced; So superior and so manifold are the excellencies
of these masters, that it would require too much of our time
to particularize them; yet I do not recollect that any one,
except the indefatigable Crispin Van de Pas, has professedly
written on the proportions of animals; or has given, to the
ambitious student, any rules to forward his success.
What Da Vinci has advanced upon the subject of horses,
is not adapted to give general ideas. All that is commu-
nicated by P. Lomazzo, is merely a poetic description of the
beauty of some animals. Charles Vander Mander amuses
himself with trifles; and Lairesse passes over the subject in
total silence.
My undertaking must consequently appear to you the more
bold and hazardous. But although the imperfections of the
attempt cannot escape the observation of this intelligent au-
dience, yet I am persuaded they will sind an apology in its
difficulties. You will readily perceive that the idea could
alone suggest itself, by my attention to the close connexion
there is between the tedious and indelicate employment
of dissecting animals, and the most elegant of the artsl To



the accidental union of these two useful pursuits in the
same person, may be ascribed all that may be deemed
useful in the following remarks. 1 will add, that a
very large collection of the skeletons of different animals, in
my cabinet, has given me frequent opportunities of comparing
together their specific forms. I shall deem myself abundantly
recompensed, if my labours should awaken and direct Genius
to bring this part of the science to the perfection of which it
is capable.
I propose to give two Lectures upon the subject. In the
first, I shall point out the similarities that exist between qua-
drupeds of every kind ; between these and fowls; and
also fissi; and, finally, indicate those peculiarities to which
the painter, or statuary, should direct his principal attention.
between quadrupeds, fowls, and fishi; and propose an infal-
lible method of sketching all these animals; and shall con-
clude with demonstrating, that, like another Proteus, we may
with a few strokes of the pencil, change a cow into a horse,
à stork, or into any kind of fish we please.
I will not waste your time by attempting to delineate ani-
mals in the most perfect manner with the pencil of Zeuxis,
but rather, like Agatharchus, hastily draw the outlines, and
leave it to your taste and judgment to supply the minutia
which add elegance to a figure. Ishall be amply satisfied if
you should be able to discover, amidst these imperfect essays,



principles that may serve as the foundation of more perfect
attempts.
No one who holds the art of painting in due estimation,
can doubt that it is the grand object of the artist to delineate
his figures after the life, and with the utmost accuracy; or to
represent, by the closest imitation, the different objects which
all-bounteous Nature has bestowed upon us in so rich an abun-
dance ; yet it is highly advantageous, and, to excel, abso-
lutely necessary for the painter to acquire an intimate know-
ledge of all those created beings he wishies to represent; and
to penetrate, as it were, into the plans and designs of the
great Creator, in the formation of the astonishing variety
which strikes us in the animal creation, and which excites
within us the pleasing emotions of wonder and admirationl
I shall begin with Man, whom we will confider as the
most perfect quadruped, and gradually descend to apes, dogs,
the yerboa, &c. thence proceed to fowls, and then pass over
to the finny tribe.
Perhaps you will consider the undertaking as extravagant,
and the expression unguarded; but I hope soon to convince
you, that fish and fowls, as well as horses and cows, may justly
be deemed quadrupeds, although they are differently formed,
that each may be able to exert the requisite movements in
the most easy manner, according to its particular station. Fach
animal differs also in the form of its head, body, feet, tail, &c.
according to the design for which it was created ; yet, extra-



vagant as the position may appear, I shall prove that the
oyster, bound to a particular spot, contains the first principle
other quadruped, up to man himself!
I would willingly give you ocular demonstration of the
fact, by placing before you a sketch of each; but this would
be impracticable, within the limits of the hour. I shall con-
sine myself, in the present Lecture, to the close resemblance
that subsists between the different parts of these animals.
I
shall therefore delineate before you, the skeleton of a man,
of a dog, an eagle, and a penguin, that you may be con-
vinced of the likeness that subsists between them. The fishi
we shall reserve for the next Lecture *
You perceive by this general comparison, that man is the
most perfect of all animals; not because he walks with an
erect countenance, as Plato, and after him Cicero and Ovid,
have remarked ; as if it was a peculiar privilege in a man
to look towards the heavens ; for, as Galen has justly observed,
several species of fish enjoy this privilege in a more perfect
manner. The grand corporeal advantage enjoyed by man
is, that he can walk, and even sit, in an erect attitude.
 The publication is necessarily imperfect concerning this very interesting article,
as the Professor’s principles cannot be illustrated by the diversity of examples he
delineated before the audience; in which he demonstrated the grand points of
resemblance, and traced progressively the kinds and degrees of deviations from
them.



may also add, that man alone is able to repose upon his
back; and that, by the centre of motion being placed in the
middle of his body, he is enabled to turn himself, to bend
peculiar facility. All these advantages necessarily flow from
other advantages, which it would be foreign from our pur-
I. Every one that contemplates a fine horse, is struck with
the beauty of his neck. When we view a camel, the length
of his neck and the smallness of his head strike us the most.
In the elephant, its long trunk, or proboscis, is the principal
object of admiration. In the cow, the thickness of its body
is most remarkable. In the greyhound, on the contrary, it
is the thinness of body and slenderness of the feet that
attract our chief attention. In the mean time it is extremely
obvious, that these forms of particular parts are à necessary
consequence of the ends to which these different animals are
destined. Cicero has given us a beautiful description of these
singular differences, which manifests his deep penetration into
the designs of Nature. « Some animals, says he, ce are
low of stature, that they may the more easily reach from the
earth the food it affords for their nutrition. But those animals
which, for wise reasons, are taller (as cranes, and also the
camel) are assisted by the length of their necks. Elephants
are furnishied with a species of hand, by which those ani-
mals gather their food from the ground ; as the immense



bulk of their bodies renders it impracticable for them to bend

or stoop.
This idea is exemplified in the shark; which, although it
has long teeth, is destitute of a snout, which would be useless,
as that animal seeks and dévours its food while swimming in
the water. Many are the instances of the necessity of a fnout
in some animals, and its uselessnefs in others; and Nature has
wisely made their forms correspondent. Galen has moreover
justly remarked, that in those animals which gather their
food from the earth, the neck is the length of the feet F.
However worthy these observations of Cicero and Galen
may be of their authors, and applicable to our present purpose,
l confess that I had not an adequate conception of their im-
portance, until my remarks concerning animals were brought
to some degree of perfection, and those further discoveries
were made which shall be hereafter explained.
That distinguissied naturalist Ray, has, in his Preface to
Willoughby s Treatise on Fish, expressed the thought of Cicero
in other terms. He has further observed, that fish are destitute
of necks ; not merely because they have not feet, but because
they can procure their food in every part of the watery ele-
ment without them. Aristotle has likewise remarked that sish
are destitute of necks. Snakes are also without them; and
in this respect is their form very similar to that of fifh.





2. Respecting the feet, it is to be observed that the wise
Creator has uniformly made the fore feet of those animals,
whose stature renders a long neck necessary, lower than the
hind feet, as in the sheep, the deer, and camel; and in
such animals the dorsal vertebra gradually descend from
the hips. The giraffe is an exception, being destined to
other purposes.
3. If we attend to the belly, we shall perceive that it is
much larger in those animals that feed upon grafs, than in
the carnivorous class; and in those which chew the cud, than
in those which do not. The reason is evident ; the organs
of digestion, or, in other words, the intestines destined to con-
vert animal substance into animal substance, need not be so
ample and voluminous as those whose office it is to trans-
mute grafs into animal substance. In this kind of vegetable;
nutritious particles are diffused over a large surface, while it
is comprised in a much smaller space in animal food.
The cow eats à large quantity at once, and afterwards ru-
minates. The horse eats continually. The cow must conse-
quently have a much larger belly than the horse, and this
a larger one than the dog, &c.
4. The comparative length of animals is also proportionate
to the number of the vertebra of the loins. Some, as the
elephant, have only three ; the horse, has five; the cow,
six; the lion, cat, aud camel, have seven.
U2



5. In animals that live upon gramina ; as elephants, horses,
oxen, deer,
camels, and in all that chew the cud, also in
swine, the feet are horned, whether they be whole as
in the horse, or cloven as in the cow and sheep ; because
the others are divided into two, three, four, or five fingers,
as in man. More than five fingers are never found in any
quadruped.
6. In fowls, the wings terminate in fingers. All have
a thumb to each wing; in the majority two fingers are super-
added. Many are furnissied with nails; as the ostrich and
the spurred water-hen.
The above remarks are sufficient to evince this truth: The
more perfectly an artist is acquainted with the nature of
animals, and the designs of their particular formation, the
better he will succeed in his attempts to delineate them.
But as verbal descriptions may not be sufficiently obvious,
we will call in the aid of sketches; the explanation of which
will clearly indicate the truth and importance of my obser-
vations.



EXAMPLE I.
THE HORSE. See PLATE III. Fic. I.
1. Let BCDEF. limit the body and feet of the horse.
For the animal to move itself properly, the feet must be as
GE. and HD. in length.
2. Trace the course of the spine with its cavity. Let
A Y. be the foremost rib; and A. the moveable point of the
first vertebræ of the neck. All quadrupeds have seven of
these vertebræ.
INFERENCES.
I. The neck and head of the animal must be so long, that
he shall be able to reach his food; that is, as A Y --Y Z.
2. When the head is small in proportion to the height of
the animal, the neck must necessarily be longer; as takes place
in camels, sheep, &c.
3. When the head is erect, the neck must necessarily be
curved; either externally as ner, or inwardly, as in aged
horses; and the neck is more or less in the direction of sar,
in proportion as it sinks.



4. In order to support so long a neck, the processes of the
vertebræ nearest ’to the prominence of the neck, or withers,
must be very long, as in the horse. See A B.
They are of consequence shorter in the animals whose
necks are differently formed; and the shortest in the human
species, as man carries his head erect.
It is to be remarked, that the horse is furnishied with a
large muscle which runs over SC. to R. and unites with the
Soleus at a, which empowers him to kick backwards with
so much force, and which is peculiar to this animal. The
cow being destitute of it, this part of the body is consequently
hollow.
by the way, the head of Bourgelat’s horse in the Hippi-
atrique is too small; the length from E to S, or from the
extremity of the shoulder to the extremity of the buttocks,
being two heads and two-thirds, whereas it must be two and
one-half, as in the painting of Stubbs, and other good masters.
In the English model of a horse stript of its integuments, the
head is only one-third of the length from F. to S. that is,
considerably shorter. Unlefs these animals were furnished
with extraordinary long necks, they would not be able to
graze.
The height BE. from the withers to the hoofs, is gene-
rally equal to F S. and mostly five feet. I have found the
majority of heads to be two feet in length, even in foals; but
the necks of these are proportionably longer.



EXAMPLE II.
THE COW. PLATE III. FiS. 2.
First, Draw the outlines of a horse as before. Secondly,
Shorten the feet from E to e. and from D to d.
INFERENCE.
In consequence of this considerable difference in the length
of the feet, the neck of the cow need not be longer than
from A to l. and when stretched in stooping to graze, as
from A toY. Hence the neck cannot be arched, as in the
horse, nor is it necessary, but it gently inclines upwards. The
weight of the head always sinks it, and also the horns, lower
than the prominence B. This is always the case in that
species of cattle that is mostly known in Holland. It is for
this reason that the withers, or prominence B. is not so elevated
as in the horse.  Other peculiarities will manifest themselves.
EXAMPLE III.
THE DOG. PLATE IV. Fig. 3.
1. Draw, as before, the outlines of the horse, and the line
of the vertebræ.
2. Contract the belly from GH. to GZ. this difference
being occasioned by the nature of the food, as has been
explained.






The neck of this animal is of various lengths, as it fre-
quently eats and gnaws its food lying, as well as in a standing
posture.
4. The feet must be made slender, in proportion to the
swiftness of the animal.
5. As the thigh bone from H to a, is longer than in a
horse, the leg a x becomes proportionably shorter.
6. The tail must be made to spring upwards.
EXAMPLE IV.
THE CAMEL. PLATE IV. Fic. 4.
1. Sketch as before; but the feet must be made longer,
and the belly thicker. In consequence of this difference,
2. The neck must necessarily be longer than that of the
horse; and the head, though it be of equal size with that of
the horse, will appear smaller, from the same cause.
5. When the head is erect, the neck must be made to
curve from beneath upwards, contrary to that of the horse;
and in such a direction, that the position of the head may
correspond with the centre of gravity.
4. In this animal, as well as in the sheep and deer, the
ine A F. must have only a small degree of inclination upwards.



EXAMPLE V.
THE ELEPHANT. PLATE V. Fio. 5.
1. Draw the horse as before.
2. Were the neck of this animal to be as in the horse,
from A toI, that is, long enough for the mouth to reach the
ground, high and prominent withers would become re-
quisite, proportionate to the weight to be supported. But
this form could not take place according to the general con¬
struction of the animal. Therefore must the neck be short-
ened, as from 4 to r. But the animal not being able to reach
the ground, a trunk, or proboscis, becomes necessary.
3. The vertebra of the breast and back must now be
made to form an arch.
4. The elephant has only three vertebrae of the loins, and
becomes proportionably shorter.
Other peculiarities shall be left to your own observation.



LECTURE III.
THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.
It has been observed in the preceding Lecture, that no

one, excepting Crispin Van de Pas, has given us particular
rules for delineating every species of animal, with any degree
of precision. 1 will now add, that the skeletons which lay
the foundation of the whole superstructure, and direct the
form both of men and animals have generally been repre-
sented in so imperfect a manner, that they are of no use to
the painter.
All the skeletons represented by Coiters, are extremely bad;
those of Meyer are still worse. Nor is there à single one in
the costly, and in other respects, excellent work of Buffon,
that can be of the least service to the artist. In all of thefe,
as in the productions of Coiters, the dorsal vertebra, or back-
bones, are in a right line: the shoulder-bones, with the bones
of the fore arm, the bones of the thigh, with the shanks, are
also in a right line. Thus are the feet, in proportion to the
length of the neck, so long, that not one of these animals
would be able to reach its food from the ground.
Cheselden, in his valuable Treatise on the Bones, has given
us a very large collection of the skeletons of different animals;



which are beautifully executed. These have been engraved
by Vander Gucht and Schynvoet in a masterly manner; but
after imperfect models. Those of the lizard, the turtle,
the crocodile, and the eagle, are beautiful; those of the bear,
rabbit, and swan, are inimitable. The skeleton of the
ostrich may serve; but that of the hog is entirely useless.
Upon the whole, the skeletons of animals left us by Cheselden,
are the most beautiful and accurate of any.
You will naturally suppose that the skeleton of the horse,
which is the most beautiful and most useful of animals, must
have been delineated with peculiar care and exactness. But
alasl exclusive of those painted by the great master in this
department, Stubbs, and engraved after his paintings, I know
not of any that deserve commendation.
The representations of Carlo Ruini, who led the way, are
ufeful to convey a general idea of the anatomy of the parts;
but they cannot serve the painter. What then is to be ex-
pected from the works of Sannier and Snape, and of others,
which are merely bad copies from the imperfect engravings
of Carlo Ruinil It is a subject of still greater astonishment,
that in the celebrated Royal Veterinary School at Charenton,
near Paris, there is not à single skeleton of a horse that I
would admit into my cabinet, although they were all mounted
by Bourgelat himself. In every one of them the shoulder-
blades and bones of the arms are badly placed. The skeleton
of the horse given us by Buffon, and that by La Gueriniere,
are still worse than the preceding.




That of Stubbs is masterly and accurate; all the parts are
properly placed, are in just proportions, and well delineated.
In his finissied pieces the muscles are represented with an ac-
curacy that cannot be exceeded. In a word, his skeleton of
a master-piece, that the author deserves the highest honours
that were ever bestowed upon an artist.
If artists in general succeed so ill with the horse, whose
extensive utility places him perpetually before our eyes, what
is to be expected in the figures of other animals that have not
been imitated by a Stubbs,
It is acknowledged, that a minute acquaintance with the
anatomy of every animal would require so much time, that
no artist could possibly attain it. Observation also manifests,
before they were thirty years of age. But an accurate know-
ledge of the principal parts, particularly of those which I have
demonstrated to possess a general similitude, is absolutely ne-
cessary, both to sketch the different animals with more expe-
dition, and with a greater degree of precifion.
This seems to have been the method followed by Potter,
Berchem, Wouverman, Snyders, Castiglioni, and the
inimitable Testa, whose works l can recommend for their
peculiar accuracy. I shall not mention Reidinger, because
all his animals, a few of his dogs and deer excepted, are



absolutely caricatures, and have nothing but the execution to
recommend them.
Van Berchem is not perfectly accurate in the disposition
of the parts in his cows, asfes, &c. The shoulder-blades are
mostly imperfect, particularly of those represented in a front
position. The heads of his apes are bad. Many of his sheep
are ill delineated, though etched by himself. The skeleton
is uniformly imperfect; yet his books for drawing are the
least erroneous. Those engraved by D: Vischer have the
imperfections of their originals; and the hairy covering is much
inferior.
In the hunting of the deer, by Dankerts, is a beautiful
horse; but the body of the deer is too slender.
Adrian Van de Velde has well delineated most of the
cows, in his Book of Horned Cattle. The bull, in a stand-
ing posture, is remarkably well drawn; and also a grazing
neifer, although its feet are somewhat too long. In some,
the hip-bones are too long, particularly in the walking cows.
His eating horse is bad. The head is one-third too small for
the height. The prominence on the neck, or withers, is
not high enough; and, on account of the smallness of the
head, the neck is of an unusual length. Some may think
hat the painter should avoid, as much as possible, represent-
ing a horse in the act of grazing, as the extreme length of
the distended neck is no pleasing figure. Great address is re-
quisite to make it graceful.



A grazing cow, which Van de Velde has etched himself,
is remarkably beautiful.
Paul Potter has etched a bull, which is much inferior to
that of Van de Velde. Many of his cows are very imperfect
in their form. He is always embarrassed with the shoulder-
blade. This appears principally to be the case in those that
have been etched by M. de Bije.
But you will enquire, Why then do we consider the pieces
of all these celebrated masters as so beautiful? The expla-
nation is not difficult. Our own imperfect knowledge of
the exact form of animals, renders us contented with what-
ever is agreeably executed upon the whole. We are en-
chanted by a graceful attitude, by a masterly stroke of the
pencil, or by the high finishing of the whole; and this con-
ceals our own ignorance, as well as the imperfections of
the artist.
The works of D. Stoop are in some estimation by con-
noisseurs; but all his horses are ill drawn. The feet are too
clumsy, the heads and necks are too small. All his grey-
hounds are inaccurate. In short, he scarcely deserves the
name of a master.
What shall we say of S. de Vlieger; His landscapes
indeed are picturesque; but his fowls are bad; his hounds are



imperfect in their shoulders and foré legs. Neither are his
hogs or sheep accurate.
Peter de Laer has sketched his goats, dogs, affes, and
hogs, tolerably well; but his horses have the same imperfec-
tions as those of Stoop; and his cows are bad.
Joan Vanden Hecke deserves no commendation, although
he is not unknown to connoisseurs. His horses, cows, asfes,
dogs, in a word, all his animals are badly delineated.
A. B. Flamen has succeeded very well in his fishes; but
his quadrupeds are very inferior to most others.
Picart le Roman has left behind him a large collection
of lions; most of which are ill drawn. Some by Rembrandt
are extremely fine; and that by Alb. Durer is beautiful upon
the whole; but the heads of all are defective, excepting those
by Rembrandt.
Many painters give à disagreeable physiognomy to their
animals, through inattention to the pupil of the eye. Al-
though the pupil is round in multitudes, yet in all animals
that graze, it is oblong in an horizontal direction. In lions,
tygers, cats, &c. it is perpendicularly oblong. In dogs the
pupil is not in the centre of the eye, but approaching to
the nose.



Respecting the teeth, most artists are guilty of great
errors.
Ph. Wouwerman has not only painted his horses in a
very spirited manner, but with more accuracy than I have
observed in most others.
Those engraved by Dankerts, and Joh. de Vischer, I place
in the superior class of engravings.
To enumerate every particular would be an endless
task. Let it suffice, that I have pointed out to you all such
defects in the greatest and most celebrated masters as
might have been avoided, by the manner 1 am about to
explain. But we will first examine what C. Vander Pas
has done.
This artist, in the fifth part of his work, page the sixth,
has proposed what he deems an easy method of sketching
the figure of a horse, without the rule or compass.
He draws a square by the eye (see Plate VI. Fig. 6.)
A BCD. This he divides into nine equal parts, see 1, 2, 3,
&c. He then makes three circles; one for the breech, one
for the belly, and one for the breast and shoulders.
C. Van Mander has also recommended three circles; and
it is possible that Van de Pas, who publissied his work in the



year 1665, has copied the method of C. Van Mander, which
was published in 1605.
V. de Pas gives a third part of the fourth and fifth
squares to complete the shoulder, and the lower part of the
belly. A tenth square he destines to the neck; the diagonal
of which limits the length of the neck and head.
To the above method it must be objected, First, That
very few persons would be able to form these squares with
sufficient accuracy by the hand. Secondly, The author has
not explained the reason why the centre of these circles
should be placed on the oblique lines FG. nor how they
are circumscribed. According to this rule the crofs, or crup-
per b. rises higher than the withers at H. whereas the latter,
according to Bourgelat, should be one-tenth higher; and,
according to Stubbs, it is at least of an equal height. This
proportion differs also from his own drawings (see p. 7, of
his Treatise). Thirdly, By this method the head of the
horse cannot be one-third of its height; for the height of
the withers H. to the bottom of the foot I. is two heads and
an half; or rather, the head is equal to one-fifth of the
height and length of the horse. Fourthly, He makes the
heel M. and the fore hand N. of an equal height; whereas
the latter is the length of one head from the groun and
the former 1and 1-6th.
Thus it is manifest, that the method proposed is imperfect




and uncertain; particularly when the animal is to be deli-
neated in any other posture.
The proportions given by Bourgelat are not bad; but the
head of his horse is too small.
The directions of one Heinrich Lauten Saks ’, for delineat-
ing the proportions of men and horses, are highly praised
by Chr. Theoph. Murr. But I have never seen that pub-
lication.
Vander Pas, in the twenty-fourth page of his Treatise,
gives the following directions for drawing the cow:
Divide the length A B. (see Plate VI. Fig. 7. ) into three
parts; twice one-third of which, or four parts out of six,
describe the height of the animal, and one-third its thick-
nefs. The head is made one-fourth of this line. The other
parts are not determinate: nor does a cow ever stand with
its head so high. Thus the method proposed is of little use
to the artist; for it neither describes the height or shape of
the withers, back, or loins, nor does it limit the neck.
The same author, in his twenty-third table, proposes the
following rules for the elephant. He divides a square into
twelve equal portions, and makes an oval for the rump, with-
out giving any determinate size. But the whole figure is
: Unterweisung der perspectief und proportion der Menchen und Rosse.



void of proportion. Nor has he delineated the feet in a
proper manner. He has made the hind thicker than the
fore feet; whereas in elephants, camels, and horses, the
reverse is observable.
The skeleton given by Perrault is very imperfect, and out
of all proportion. The same may be asserted of that by
Buffon. His representation of the elephant, in Plate I. p. 142,
is made after a model that is by no means satisfactory.
I am positive that the model which I had taken of an
elephant is accurate in all its proportions: but it was only a
calf, and its head was in reality lower than its back. The
head of the elephant delineated by Buffon, has the promi-
nence, or withers, higher than the rump. I was surprised
at this difference; but when I was at Paris last summer, I
saw a much larger elephant than that I had modelled, and
perceived that the head and withers were higher. This
animal was in size, between that of Bufson and mine. Thus
the proportions I have given are only applicable to younger
elephants.
In his twenty-fifth table, Vander Pas has delineated a
camel, and he has given an oval for the form of its belly.
Every other part is also badly drawn. The dogs, represented
in his thirty-first table, are universally defective; and also the
rules he proposes for drawing the cat.




He also proposes in his forty-third table, three circles for
the deer; the first smaller than the second, and the second
than the third; but without explaining the reason, or limit-
ing the size of either circle.
Since this artist is the only one who has attempted to give
us rules for delineating different species of animals, and I
have demonstrated the imperfection of thefe rules, though
it is acknowledged that the attempt was highly laudable, I
shall now proceed to indicate a method that is more simple,
and much more certain.


GENERAL RULES,
APPLICABLE TO ALL ANIMALS.
See Plate V. Fig. 8.
RULE THE FIRST.
1. Draw the line A BC. according to the proposed length;
or rather, according to the nature of the animal to be de-
lineated; of consequence inclined, less inclined, or more in-
clined; as in sheep, camels, &c.
5. Draw the line FE. to mark the shoulder-blade; and
CH. for the hip-bone; which, for a horse, must be made
equal to two-thirds of the head in length; and for a cow,
equal to the whole length of its head. Sketch also the bone
of the arm by EG. and that of the thigh by IK. so that
the elbow and knee in a horse, cow, &c. be exactly of a
height, and even with the belly.
4. Complete the fore and hind legs; that is, draw KL,
MN, NO, OP; and GR, RS, ST.



When Rand L are of equal length, the heel ML. natu-
rally rises higher. 
5. Sketch the neck according to the nature of the animal,
and afterwards the head, paying attention to the rules al-
ready laid down. See the preceding Examples, Lecture II.
p. 110. 
By recollecting the observations made respecting the dif-
ferent forms of animals, according to their destination; and
also the difference in the length of the loins, the above sketch
may be made applicable to every case k.
RULE THE SECOND.
By sketching the muscles of the shoulder and fore arm
a, Q g, t, G,f, R. the form of the fore leg will be obtained;
and by sketching c b, H, c, d, M, &c. the form of the hind
leg.
RULE THE THIRD.
The foremost rib is always rectilinear, and covered by the
shoulder-blade. The hind ribs always incline obliquely back-
wards. In a horse, they run near to the hip-bone; in a
cow, the loins are longer. Hence proceeds the triangular
cavity (Plate III. Fig. 2. )EFG.
1 See Page 146. No. 12, &c.



RULE THE FOURTH;
In all animals with hoofs, or horny feet, the arms and
legs, from the middle to the lower joints, are the longest.
Fig. 8. RS. and MN.
In all animals that spring forwards, as lions, hares, dogs,
&c. the thighs are much longer than the legs. See the Grey-
hound, Plate IV. Fig. 5.
APPLICATION OF THE ABOVE RULES IN DELINEATING
FOWLS.
PLATE VI. FiG. 9.
1. Draw the oval as before, and place the arm in A B.
which is now folded up, as the bird is in a state of rest.
Draw, in like manner, CD. which may be termed the hand,
and DF. which corresponds with the thumb, and DE. the
remaining fingers.
2. Draw next GH. the hip-bone and the rump; IK.
the ham; KL. the thigh; LM. the leg; and M. the claws.
5. Draw the neck QN. proportionate to the height of
the body, and complete the head GR. In some fowls the
upper jaw, or beak, is very moveable, to the extent of RS.
as in ducks, &c.



4. If it be a flying fowl, the breast-bone must be fur-
nishied with a large rib, destined to the insertion of muscles
(the oftrich and cassowary are destitute of this) and also with
an arched bone (the merry-thought) NO. for the same
purpose.
By filling up with muscles, the form of the thigh, &c. is
obtained; by placing the feathers upon these, the whole form
of the fowl. Cover first the wings, then the thighs, &c. 
OBSERVATIONS.
I. In order to place the centre of gravity forwards,
Nature has formed in all fowls the back very short, and
made them destitute of loins. Many fowls have only six
vertebræ, and consequently not more than six ribs on each
side; which is scarcely more than one-third of the seventeen
vertebræ with which the human species is furnisnied. In the
frog, in which the centre of gravity is necessarily thrown back-
wards, the reverse takes place. It was necessary that this animal
should retain the loins, in order to throw the strength of the
muscles into its thighs and hind legs. Thus has the Supreme
Creator rendered it almost destitute of a back, and placed
the head contiguous to the loins. For the same reason it is des-
Belon de Mans has given two fkeletons, tlie one of the human form, and the
gther of birds; in which he has represented the resemblance of all the bones from
the head to the feet, in a very satisfactory and elegant manner. I had not taken
notice of this before the year 1779. See Histoire de la Nature des Oiseaux, pub-
ished in 1554. pages40, 41.



titute of ribs, and hence does its body appear so extremely
shiort.
II. Since it has been shewn that the fore feet of all ani-
nals are correspondent with the wings of birds, and also
with our arms, it is to the highest degree absurd to give
wings to the human form; as is the practice in the repre-
sentation of angels, Cupids, &c.4 In like manner the ex-
istence of a centaur is impossible. For this quadruped would
in reality have six feet, double breasts, and two distinct bellies.
That neither tritons nor mermaids can exist, will appear from
the above remarks concerning the form of birds.
« It is observable, that in all the birds which sly, the pectoral muscles constitute
the principal part of their bulk: peculiarly strong muscles being necessary to com-
municate such force to the wings, that they should be able to suspend the body in
the air, and to propel it forwards. Were the painter to furnishi his angels with
these muscles, they would become monsters; without them, he supposes an impos-
sibility. This idea might be extended much further. In the human form, a mass
of pectoral muscles, infinitely larger in proportion to that in fowls, would be
requisite, in order to overcome the weight of man’s posteriors ; which being intended
to enable him to walk firmly upon the earth, prevents him from springing more
than a few feet above it. Would not painters therefore do wisely to leave those
unmeaning fans, and, in their representation of celestial beings, trust to the lightness
and elegance of their forms, and divinity of their countenances; lf custom has so
far consecrated wings, that they cannot be dispensed with, surely much more care
should be taken than is generally observable, that they be not made to carry a
greater weight than is absolutely necessary.
2



APPLICATION OF THE ABOVE RULE IN DELINEATING
FISHES.
PLATE VI. Fic. II.
The similarity of fish to quadrupeds may be demonstrated
in the following manner:
1. Draw as before the oblong oval BACG. as in
Plate V. Fig. 8. Since the fish neither have nor require a
neck, excepting those that respire, which are furnishied with
a fhort one, place the head D A BE. immediately upon the
back-bone A. 2
2. As the rump has no distinct and separate motion,
though it is in equipoise with the water, a power is required
similar to the oar of a boat (see ane of Fig. 11. ) to which
the fish may now be compared. As great mobility is requisite
in a fish, it is obvious that the tail CH. becomes necessary;
and also the large transverse bones for the insertion of the
muscles. In proportion as ne, or the tail, is long, will the
fish be able to move itself with the greater velocity.
4 In all fish the head is joined to the first vertebra, through the medium of
cartilage, in like manner as the vertebrae are united with each other.



INFERENCES.
INFERENCE I.
The boat would be the most steady, were the centres of
motion and gravity to unite in the same point. This is
impossible in a boat, but it always takes place in a fishi.
Hence it is that fish are able to swim in a right line; whereas
the fore part of the boat must move from side to side. But
the fishi must keep itself in a straight line, and it is furnishied
with fins for this purpose, both upon the breast BF. and under
the belly at G. Take away BF. and the fish will fall upon
its side.
INFERENCE II.
1. Since fisli are naturally in equipoise with the water,
and they all swim, or row themselves forwards by means of
the tail, it follows, that their position in the water must be
horizontal.
of the head; and upon this circumstance will depend the
length of the tail.
5. Since greater diversity of form can take place in fishi
than in quadrupeds, there is space for a much greater diver-
sity of species in the first than in the last.




4. The existence of such sea-monsters as mermaids and
tritons is impossible, and the idea of them absurd; as these
animals must be supposed to, swim in an erect pofition, the
tail forming an acute angse'with the back ; whereas the
centre of gravity would unavoidably force them into a right
line- But to return.
Since fissi move by means of the tail, they have no occa-
sion for thighs, legs, or feet. Also, from the nature of their
food, they do not in general require an offified jaw, as in
quadrupeds and fowls.
The Natural History of the Frog affords us a curious and
striking example of the changes respecting these circumstances,
appointed by the wise Creator, in conformity to the exigencies
of the animal. The frog is provided with a tail, as long as
it is destitute of feet ; but when these protrude, and have
acquired sufficient force, the tail gradually contracts, until it
totally disappears. This singular phaenomenon might be con-
templated every spring, were not the animal too common,
and deemed too insignificant to attract our notice.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF QUADRUPEDS INTO BIRDB.
PLATE VII. Fic. 12.
To change a cow into a crane.






1. Draw the skeleton of the cow as in the Second Ex-
ample, p. 151.
2. Raise this upon the rump,&ae in GC. and the fore feet
must necessarily rise from the ground.
J. As the centre of gravity can no longer be supported
by the affistance of the fore feet, the hind feet EF. must be
brought forwards to FI.
4. The carcase, or body, being raised so much higher
above the ground, the neck must be extended to GH. and
the head must be placed backwards to be supported in HI.
the line of gravity.
5. The fore feet not being any longer necessary, are
changed into wings, which are to be formed according to the
Fourth Rule, p. 66.
6. As fowls are protected by their feathers, from being
teased by flies, &c. à long tail is not necessary; for this, a
short and very moveable tail is substituted to assist their flight.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF A QUADRUPED INTO THE
HUMAN FIGURE.
PLATE VII. FiG. 13.
In order to avoid a multiplicity of lines, which would create
confufion, it is best to represent any quadruped upon its four



feet ; the horse, for example; and afterwards to place him
erect upon his hind feet. The following changes will natu-
rally follow:
I. The hips will be compressed into a right line with the
2. The fore feet will hang downwards, close to the sides
of the animal; hence a clavicle will become necessary.
5. The thighs and legs will now be rectilinear.
4. The head need not be placed upon a long neck, as
the animal cannot graze in this position; and therefore the
prominence above the shoulders, or withers, becomes unne-
cessary.
5. The back, in consequence of these alterations, is flatter.
6. The brains being of a larger volume, and placed before
each other, require the head to be of a rounder form; and
the centres of motion and of gravity must unite in the same
point.
7. The maxilla being necessarily drawn inwards, the nose
projects beyond them.
3. The feet become shorter, and terminate in five toes.



N. B. It follows, from the Third Rule, that the thighs
and calves, as well as the posteriors, must be made propor-
tionably thick to support the body in an erect position. This
has been judiciously remarked by Aristotle, ec Homo unus cauda
vacat, nates habet, quod nulli quadrupedum datum est. Crura
etiam homini femore suraque carnulenta funt.— Quorum
causa una est omnium, quod homo solus animalium erectus est,
itaque nates carnosas fecit, et femora et furas.
Thus, Gentlemen, have l accomplished the tafk which I had
imposed upon myself, by pointing out to you the analogy that
runs through animal nature. If I have not succeeded to your
expectations, in presenting the rules so clear and decisive as
might have been wishied, I hope I have awakened your curi-
osity, by having made you more acquainted with the general
plan of the Creator, in the formation of animals; and de-
monstrated that a minute acquaintance with this will best
enable the statuary and painter to excel in the different branches
of their art.
THE END.


