
F HI E
y



A.8
18
31
OF
DRAWINC, and PAINTING
-
N

A T E R -C O L OU R S.
W HE K E E 7
A Stranger to thofe A RT S may
be immediately rendered capable of Deli-
hneating any View or Prospect with the ut-
moft Exacdnets; of Colouring any Print or
Drawing in the moft Beautiful Manner; and
of taking off MEDALS inftantly, by various
Ways,, never before made publick: Inter-
mix’d with feveral curious Receipts for the
Ofe of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, Cor.
WV I T H
INSTRUCTIONs for making Tranfparent
Colours of every Sort partly from fome Cu-
rious Perfonages in Holland, France, and Italy;
but chiefly from a Manuscript of the Great Mr.
BOYLE, particularly a Reccipt of that Gentle—
mans, for making a blue Colour equal to
Oltramarine.
The FOURTH EDrTroN.

L O N D O N
Printed for J. PEELE, at Locks-Head in Ameya
Corner, Pater-Nofter Row. MDCCNKY.
Price One Shilling.






6
3
5


Re
A.C H
r
IIE. following Papers
are the Effect of some
Fears Study and La-
bour, collected in my

Travels, and at length put toge-
ther, at the Instance of a noble
Friend, for his Instruction in the
Art of Drawing and Painting in
Water-colours.
Among other
Particulars which they contain.
are several Receipts for making
and preparing of Colours, from
a Manuscript of the late fa=
mous Mr Boyle, which bas ne-
ver yet appeared in Publick, and
was communicated to me by the
late





1
5
nom   y p 

n  iy 
D. R4 a
Cd A Mnes

2


5


2


i
late Lord Carleton. r as. I bave



experienc’d what is related in
this Tract to be curious and ex-
trgerdinary, 1 make no Apology
for offering it to the View of the
World: And on my own part
shall think my Time well spent.
my Readers reapany Delight
or Advantage from what I Bere
rom my own Obsereg=
publist
tion; since I can affure them,
that it was calculated for the
Entertainment and Diversion of

those who have a Genins for juch
pleafant Amusements, as well
as for the Improvement of those
who have already made some
Progress in the delightful. res
s  it
above mentioned.

Te

is

3


TH E






5

3910
2
45
C3
£
E


4 
 



O F
DR AINC, and PAINTINC
IN
1
VY ATER-COLOUR S.
31/31

34
Is VII Vij Vij ij eix 8I) a
11
vif vij xij Cij vI VIj VIj Vij SII
23

45 
3.
4
3
5232
2
Tie 1o te Jast 1 Tetw swiierid tee seid te Lite i itls& Tiied
CH A P. I
Rules for Draeino any Object in its Out-
vines, as exact as the Liye or lrature.
    

A K E. a Sheet of the thinneff, or

 



5

Hrgs
&
whiteft brown Paper, and brufh it


Ca
ny
2
3


overwith Oilof Turpentine, which

to
60
1
will immediately render it tranipa-

5



rent, and then put the Paper to dry
bng 
F 
22
 


in the Air; when tis dry, ftrain it




upon a Frame, and hk it againtl any Object youde-
Sign to draw; as an Houfe, or Hill, or Tree, Esc.
then jutt before it, place a piece of Wood with an
Hole in it, fit for one Ryc to look through; and
as you meet any Out-lines of the Object you de-
fire, upon the tranfparent Paper trace them over
with a Pencil to will you be fure thatyou cannot
err for there will be nothing but juft Proportion,
and a true reprcfentation of Naturc.
To
B
1


.


6
.
To make this Htill of more Elegancy, obferve
the Tracing of your Draughts where the Shades
are, and mark them with your Pencil; for all
the Art in the World can never difpofe the
Shades fo regularly as one may touch by this
Method: But the Shades muft be done quick-
ly after the Out-lines are drawn, and not at
different Times, becaufe every Inftant the Sun
changes them.
IN this too obferve, that in certain Objects you.
will have fainter, flronger, and yet more dark
Shades; and in your Remarks of them take fuch
Memorandums, as may direct you how to finith
them, with Indian Ink, or other Colour, when
you lit down to compleat your Work.
THE beft Way that I know, is to prepare three
Shells or Gallipots of Indian Ink mix’d with
common Water, before you attempt to trace out
your Object, viz. one of a very faint Black, the
next of a middling Black, and the other of an in-
tenfe Black. Number them 1. 2. 3. from the
lighteffto the darkeft; and as you make your Ob-
servations of the Shades on your Object, mark
upon your Draught the fame Numbers as they
happen to appear, fo that afterwards you may
finith with Certainty.
A GATN, it is neceffary in the Drawing of any
thing after this Manner, to obferve, that the
Lines on the fhady Side should be thick or bold,
and thofe on the lighter Sides should be thinner
or finer, in proportion to the Light that falls up-
on them. s for Fxample. In the darkeff Part
a Line may be of this Thickness; & in the next
dark Partfomewhat thinner iland ink the other thust
unlefs in things at a greatf Diftance, hardly to
be underftood, or to faint, as hardly to be per-
a mere Shadow as it werc.
ceived, thus s
3 OM E



So ME have been guilty of a great Fault,
though they have taken the Out-lines very exact,
to make all their Lines of an equal Thicknels.
Is an Object be reprefented, well fuppofe two
Milesoff, and the Drawing be as frong in that
Part of the Picture, as if it was next the Kye,
or not ten or twenty Feet from the Draughtf-
man, it would not appear pleafant or natural
to the Eyc. We muft not express a Man with
Buttons on his Coat at two Miles Diffance, no
nore than we muft have them omitted in a Per-
fon fo near the Rye as ten or twenty Feet;
Though this has inadvertently been done by fome
who have paffed for great Men. And the Shades
in thofe diftant Appearances muft be in propors
tion to the Strength of the Objects, as they ap-
pear to us, i. c. imperfect. Three or four well-
directed Touches of the Pencil, on the Shady Side,
will reprefent a Figure at the Diffance we can
difcern it, as lively as fome hundreds will of the

Same Figure near the Eyc.
Bor the tranfparent Paper 1 (peak of, is of
another Ufc; for, if we lay it upon any Picture;
or Print, in a loofe Sheet, you will fee all the
Lines through it, and may then draw or copy it
You will then, if
with the greateft Pleafure.
the Print or Picture be done by a good Mafter,
fee which Lines are ftrong, and which are tender
and foft Imitate them.
THERE is yet another Way to take Views and
Landicapes, which fome prefer to the trantpa-
rent Paper; that is, either with white or black
Tiffany, or Lawn, ftraind upon a Frame, and
us’d in the Jame Manner as the Paper; Cxcept=
ing that the Black-Lead Pencil is ufed to the
Paper on the white Tiflany, and on the Lawn,
we ufe Charcoal finely pointed, and very foff
piit
B 2



8.
but on the black Tiffany we ufe white Chalk of
the tendereft fort.
or ooo 
eretif
15
tots
0.
91
87
Cll fote of Cooeldelles n hee e lolel Cence oile (ellele l   Cle

C H A P. II.
Hore to bring these Drawings to Use; and
to copy from Prints, Paintings, &c.
I we make a Drawing upon tranfparent Pa-
per, to take a Drawing from it regularly,

get a piece of Paper of the Jame Size, and rub
on ope fide of it fome Powder of Black-Lead,
till tis well and equally black’d, and fo well
rubbed, that a Touch of a Finger will hardly be
tinged with it.
THEN take the Drawing you have made, or
Print, and lay the black’d Paper under it, with
the black Side downwards, upon a piece of white
Paper, and pin the three together in two or three
Places, take then a Pin or Needle a little blunt
at the Point, and trace it over the Out-lines of
your Picture; which, with a little preffing, will
direct the black’d Paper to impress the undermoff
white Paper, to as to receive every Stroke you
draw.
WH E N this is done, you muft with your
Black-Lead Pencil correct what Errors you find,
and Hlightly clean the Draught new made with
Lorme Htale Bread Crumbs. The Black-Lead Penr
cil is fo hard to be found tolerable, that I know
not above one Place, where we can get one that
will do the Service we require. If we find a good
piece of Lead in the beginning, when we have ufed
an Inch or two, the reft generally proves hard;
gritty; and full of Knots.
T HE
1



1
THE beft I have met with are at the Joyners
Arms in Broad St. Giles's, or Holborn, juft turn-
ing out of Drary-Lane; at that Place one may
have them of foft or hard Lead, and ufe them
till they are reduced to two or three Inches.
Tis a great Pleafure to a Draughtiman to work
with a good Pencil, and as great a Plague to have
a bad one.
So the Camels Hair Brufhes are generally
very bad ; they are indeed cheap enough to buy
them in common but if one would have the bett,
which should be full of Hair, the Price ought to
be accordingly, as they can be made to hold
a Quantity of Colour, and be brought to fine
Points Tis better to give Six-pence or a Shil-
fing for a Pencil, than to have a Dozen for a Groat.
As for the Draughts drawn on Tiffany or
Lawn, lay them only on Paper, i. e. that which
is drawn with Charcoal upon white Paper, and
that drawn with Chalk on black or bluc Paper;
then, giving each of them a Knock or two with an
Hammer, the Charcoal or the Chalk will fall
through them, upon the Papers, directly in the
Lines they were drawn, and give you the true
Reprefentation of the Object you drew from the
Life. Upon the black Paper you will fee it in
White Lines, and to the contrary.

THEN frengthen thefe Shadows of Drawings
with your Black-Lead Pencil, or Chalk, or red
Oker, on the Spects of Paper, where they have
made the Marks; otherwife, the Lines would ea-
fily be rubbed out. But take carc, as I have
obferved before, that this Amendment be made
fuddenly, for thefe tender Draughts are foon va-
nithed, if one does not take care to frengthen
them immediately. Begin firt at the bottom of
the Drawing,
ANO-
1


10
NOTHER Way is to take a thin piece of Paper,
and hold it againft a Glais-Window, principally
at fuch a Window as is fath’d; for the Interrup-
tions of the Lead in the fmaller glazed Windows,
will hinder part of this Prospect, the Point is,
draw what you fee from the Glats, and then the
Black-Lead Paper is to be ufed, as directed before.
THERE is another Way Hill, which may be
more eafy to the Hand or Arm of a Perfon not
accuftomed to drawing upon a Paper or Lawn
placed upright, which is by the Ufe of a portable
Camera Ofcard; though to help the firft, one may
hold a Baguerte, or fuch a Stick in the Left-
hand, as the Oil-Painters ufe to reft the Right-
hand upon or have fome other Reft made for
the Right-hand, as may be fcrewed up and down
at ones pleafure. But there is this Difference
still between drawing a piece of Perspective, or
View, on a tranfparent Paper or Lawn placed up-
right againft any Object, that fuch a Piece will
take in more of the View or Object, and from a
greater Distance than the portable Camera Ofcura
will However, as the portable Camerd will at
firft be moft eafy to the Arm for the Beginner,
by Reafon the Objects appear upon an Horizontal
Plane, fuch as a Table, the Hand will have a
proper Reff, and more readily follow the Lines
reprefented on the Plane with that Exactnels.
Indeed fuch a portable Camerd, as I mention, is
of fome Expence, and to fuch as can afford it,
they may have them to any Price, from thirty
Shillings to five Pounds a picce, according as they
bespeak them, at Nr. John Fowler's, Mathematical
Inftrument-maker in Swithins-Alley, near the
Royal-Exchange.
Whar will make the Difference in the Prices,
will be the Largencts of the Sizes of the Glaffes,
which lye horizontally, and receive the Objects
7
which



27
which we are to trace out with our Pencil: The
smaller of thefe Glaffes may be perhaps four Inches
Square, and the larger fitteen Inches. On fuch
Glaffes you will meet the exact Reprefentation
(Lmaller or larger, according to the Bigness of the
Machines) of the Objects we point or direct them
to, each one adorned with the natural Colours
agreeable to the Point of Diftance, ffronger nearer
the Rye, and gradually declining, as the Objects
are more remote from it: The Shades of the fe-
veral Colours are in this Way exprefied in a very
lively Manner. A few Leffons, with good Confi-
deration, will be of good Information, not only to
a Beginner, but to a Mafter of the Pencil.
Bor Hill, to advance the Knowledge and Ufe
of this portable Camera, 1 Tuppofe, that inftead
of the Glaffes, which receive the Objects 1 speak
of, there should be placed Frames of tranfparent
Paper, to receive the Objects we have a mind to
take, upon which one may ufe the Pencil Hill
with greater Freedom. One may have a Do-
zen or two with each Camerd; or one Frame will
ferve for as many Papers as we pleafe to Itrain upon
it, if one has Patience to pafte them on.
THERE is another Way of drawing Objects
in the Camerd Ofcura Way, which is by making
a Room as dark as may be, only leaving an Hole
in one of the Window-fhutters, as low as poffible,
to receive an Ox-Ryc Glafs, as they call it; which
is fold by the Mathematical Inftrument-makers.
Thisturns in a Socket, fo as to direct every Ob-
jeCt, within a certain Reach, to a Sheet of Paper,
placed at a proper Diflance within, the Room, to
receive thofe Objects, upon which Paper, you
may draw them in great Perfection, but they
all appear revers’d, or the wrong End upwards:
However, they are in as cxact Proportion and
Bcauty, as thofe reprefented in the former. In
this
3



12
this Cale; tis not however more difficult to draw;
or father copy the Objects, though they are re-
vers’d, than to draw or copy the feveral Things
which we fee upright, on the Frames of trant-
parent Paper, Lawh, or Tiffanv. for to trace
Lines, will be as eafily done one Way as the other
And though the Objects, falling on the Sheet of
Paper, will, when we are drawing them, be re-
vers’d, tis but turning the Sheet of Paper upfide
down when they are done, and our Drawing will
be right to the Eyc.
WH E N we thew this by way of Curiofity, to
thofe who are unacquainted with the Reafons why
the Images reprefented on the Sheet of Paper
appear uptide down, it would not have fo delir-
able an Effect, as if they could be viewed in their
natural Situation. But to obviate this Difficulty;
let the Sheet of Paper, which is to receive the
Objects, be placed againft the back of a Chair;
and let them look on the feveral Objects, repre-
fented on the Paper, over the back of the Chaif,
which will fet them upright to the Ryc. This
Way in bringing them to rights, is thought on by
very few, though at the firft Proof every one will
wonder that he did not find it fooner.
TiI vs far is shewed, how any one may copy
or Piece of Painting;
either a Print, Drawing,
or even make an exact Reprefentation from the
Life. But I muft yet add, concerning the Taw
King-off of Prints or Drawings, a Method or two
which are eafy and diverting, not before men-
tioned. One is, prick with a Pin any Out-
lines of a Print or Drawing one has a mind
to copy, and then, laying the faid Picture on a
Sheet of Paper, take a Powder-puff, or a Tuit
of Cotton, dipping it now and then in Charcoal-
duft, or red Chalk-duft, and beat it over the
prick’d Lines, through the Picture, renewing it
with


13
with Duft frequently by dipping, and then you
will have full Directions marked on your Cloth,
or Paper, fufficient to finith a juft Drawing.
. B. Such a prick’d piece of Work will give
many hundred Proofs of its Ufc. Though it poil
the Print or Picture, it laves a vaft deal of Trouble
to the Painter on the drawing part.
A NO THE R Way there is to make an Impref
fion from the Print, which shall give a juft Copy
of it: This is of great Ofc, when we want to car-
ry every Stroke of the Engraver along with us.
It will indeed fully the Print a little, though very
little, if you are careful; and this Method will
perhaps coft you two Minutes Tine,, when the
drawing of it with every Stroke the Engraver has
made, would keep you bufy a Month.
Fok this take fome foft Soap, either white, or
of the green fort, but, for my part, I always ufed
the green Soap; mix this with Water near an
equal Quantity, till tis near the Confiffence of a
Jelly: Rub fome of this Mixture on the Print,
and gently wet the Paper, you would have to re-
ceive the Impreftion from it, with a wet Spunge;
then lay it on the Print, and cover all with two
or three other pieces of dry Paper, and rub it very
hard all over with any Thing that is finooth and
polifhed, and the wetted Paper will have upon it
the reverfe of the Print you rubbed it upon, with
every diftinct Line in the Original, if you have
been careful to rub it equally.
CHAP
C




(12
this Cafe, tis not however more difficult to draw;
of father copy the Objects, though they are re-
vers’d, than to draw or copy the feveral Things
which we fee upright, on the Frames of trant
parent Paper, Lawh, or Tiffany; for to trace
Lines, will be as cafily done one Way as the other
And though the Objects, falling on the Sheer of
Paper, will, when we are drawing them, be re-
vers’d, tis but turning the Sheet of Paper upfide
down when they are done, and our Drawing will
be right to the Ryc.
WH E N we thew this by way of Curiofity, to
thofe who are unacquainted with the Reafons why
the Images reprefented on the Sheet of Paper
appear uplide down, it would not have fo delir-
able an Effect, as if they could be viewed in their
natural Situation. But to obviate this Difficulty,
let the Sheet of Paper, which is to receive the
Objects, be placed against the back of a Chair;
and let them look on the feveral Objects, repre-
fented on the Paper, over the back of the Chaif,
which will fet them upright to the Ryc. This
Way in bringing them to rights, is thought on by
very few, though at the firft Proof every one will
wonder that he did not find it fooner.
T  vs far is thewed, how any one may cop
either a Print, Drawing, or Piece of Painting;
or even make an exact Reprefentation from the
Life. But I muft yet add, concerning the Ta
King-off of Prints or Drawings, a Method or two
which are eafy and diverting, not before men-
tioned. One is, prick with a Pin any Out-
lines of a Print or Drawing one has a mind
to copy, and then, laying the faid Picture on a
Sheet of Paper, take a Powder-puff, or a Tuft
of Cotton, dipping it now and then in Charcoal-
duft, or red Chalk-duft, and beat it over the
prick’d Lines, through the Picture, renewing it
with


13
with Duft frequently by dipping, and then you
will have full Directions marked on your Cloth,
or Paper, fufficient to finith a juft Drawing.
N. B. Such a prick’d piece of Work will give
many hundred Proofs of its Ofc. Though it tpoil
the Print or Picture, it faves a vaft deal of Trouble
to the Painter on the drawing part.
A NO THE R Way there is to make an Impref-
fion from the Print, which shall give a juft Copy
of it: This is of great Ufc, when we want to car-
ry every Stroke of the Engraver along with us.
It will indeed fully the Print a little, though very
little, if you are careful; and this Method will
perhaps coft you two Minutes Time,, when the
drawing of it with every Stroke the Engraver has
made, would keep you bufy a Month.
FoR this take fome foft Soap, either white, or
of the green fort; but, for my part, I alwaysufed
the green Soap, mix this with Water near an
equal Quantity, till tis near the Confiffence of a
felly. Rub fome of this Mixture on the Print,
and gently wet the Paper, you would have to re-
ceive the Impreftion from it, with a wet Spunge;
then lay it on the Print, and cover all with two
of three other picces of dry Paper, and rub it very
hard all over with any Thing that is fmooth and
polifhed, and the wetted Paper will have upon it
the reverfe of the Printyon rubbed it upon, with
every diffinct Line in the Original, if you have
been careful to rub it equally.
C
CHAD


14
ou

to
88
218
104
 t

To
17

Soel(Coll
1578
lee te a l ec in ee lil  C o Chila
C H AP. III.
Secrets for Copying of Drawings, &c. con-
tinned.
To take a Drawing with sixt Ink.
N E Way is to take a thin Sheet of Paper,
s and rub it all over with freth Butter, as
equally as poftible then dry it well by the Fire
and rub the butter’d Side with Carmine, till tis
all equally colour’d, or elfe rub it over with Lamp-
black, or Black-lead-powder, or with blue Bice
finely grounds take care in the rubbing on any
of thefe that the Colour will not come off by a
very flight Touch of the Finger, and they are
then fit for your Work.
WHEN you have chofen a Print, or Defign, that
you would copy, lay the cclourd Side of your
butter’d Paper upon a Piece of clean Paper, and
your Print upon the butter’d Paper, and then with
a fine Pen or Needle, blunted a very little at the
Point, trace the Out-lines of your Drawing carc-
fully, and you will have a good Copy of it upon
your white Paper, which may be touch’d up af-
terwards by Crayons of the like Colour.
A red Ink for making an Impression of a Print.
ON E may likewife ufe the following Mcthod
for taking off or making a Copy from any Print;
which is, to mix fome Vermillion, finely ground,
with Linfeed-oyl, but to liquid that it will run or
llow in a Pen; with this trace the Lines of your
Print, and as foon as all is done, then with a
Stange and Warer wet the backfide of the Print,
and turn the printed fide down upon a piece of
White


15
white Paper, fo as to lye finooth, then lay over
that a piece of dry Paper, and prefs it hard in
every part, and the lower white Paper will receive
the Impreffion. But if you have a Linnen-prels;
3
tis better to put your Papers between two of the
wooden Leaves, and skrew the Press as tight as
may be, for you will then have a fine Impreftion.
Taking Draughts with red loofe Ink.
Tow may likewife take fome Vermillion finely
ground, and mix it with fair Water in a Gallipot,
with fome Cotton, and it will run very freely in
the Pen, to that one may make the fineft Strokes
we defire; then, with this Mixture draw over all
the Strokes of your Print, imitating both the finer
and ftronger Lines. When all is done, then with
a Spunge dipt in Gum-water, with a clean white
Paper, and while it is wet, turn the Print upon
it, and prefting it well, take off the Print, and all
the Strokes will remain on the clean Paper, and as
foon as tis dry the Vermillion will be fixt to it.
THTs fort of Ink is what a famous Writing-
mafterufed, when he had a Book of Writing cn
graving for him he writ with this, and, having
his Copper-plate covered with white Bees-wax, or
white Ground, he turn’d the written fide down
on the waxt side of the Plate, and rubbing it very
equally, the Impreffion will be upon the Wax.
Taking Draughts with blue loofe Ink.
Tow may likewife make fuch a fort of Ink of
blue Bice and common Water, which will run
very finely in a Pen, and ferve for the fame Ufc as
the above ink.
To take off a Drawing in a standing red Colour
by Tracing.
T A E Vermiltion finely ground, and mix it
with a little freth Butter, then rub a clcan Sheet
Of
2


(16
of Paper with it on one fide, till it will bear a
Hlight Touch of the Finger, without leaving the
Paper too freely; then ufe this coloured Paper, by
laying the colour’d fide upon a clean Paper, and
upon the colcur’d Paper lay on your Print, and
frace every Line you think proper, as directed
before in Tracing, but be fure you pin the three
Papers together at the Corners to prevent their
llipping; for if any one should flip, your Work
will be fpoil’d, or fome one or other may inadver-
tently take up the Print when you have half traced
it, and then tis impoffible you can ever place it
right again, to that your Labour will be all loft.
This Impreffion made by Tracing will hold with-
out rubbing. In Tracing, the Ouills taken from
a Swallow’s Wing are very good, after they are
thoroughly dry.
Ir one has Carmine enough by one, we might
mix it with a litrle fresh Butter, and colour a
Paper with it as before directed, and then your
Drawing will be of a more beautiful Colour; or,
it we would have the Drawing blue, we may
colour a Paper with blue Bice and Butter.
3
A speedy Way of Printing the Leaf of any Tree or
Herb, as exact as Nature itself.
TAKE the Leaf of any Plant you defire, and
rub the Veins on the Back-fide a little, with a picce
of Ivory, or a Dog's Tooth, to bruife them a
little, then rub it genrly with a piece of Woollen,
dipt Hlightly in Oyl of Linfeed; when you have
done this every where on your Leaf, put the oyld
side on a piece of white Paper, and preffing it
cqually in every part, the Paper will remain a
perfect Imprettion of it, which may be afterwards
goloured  Yis foon doue, and is afeful to fuch as
would remember Plants.
Another


I
Anotber Way of Printing the Leaves of Plants, so
that the Impression sball appear as black as if
it had been done in a Printing-press.
TAKE any Leaf, and when there is no Wet
upon it, take fuch a Ball as they ufe at the Printers
for laying the ink upon the Letters; and when
your Ball is equally covered with Printer's Ink,
Rtrike it gently four or five times on the back of the
Leaf, till all the Veins are black’d with the Ink;
then lay your Leaf on a Trencher or fmall Board,
with the black fide upwards, and then wet a piece
of white Paper to be fomewhat more then moift,
and lay it on your Leaf, and upon that lay a finooth
Trencher, prefting it very hard, but not fo much
as to break the fine Fibres of the Leaf; by this
Means you will have a fine Impreffion.
Bu r it would be still more cafily done, if you
could get a piece of Wood, made like a Cylinder,
about a Foot long, and an Inch and half Dia-
meter, and cover the middle part of it about fix
or eight Inches long, with Woollen-cloth rolled
three or four times about.
WI TH this Rollerroll the white Paper thatlyes
upon your Leaf backwards and forwards four or
five times, and you will have a very curious Im-
preffion.
THE Neceffaries for this Work are a Gallipot
of Printers Ink, a couple of finall Balls, fuch as the
Printers ufc, to lay the Iak equally on the Leaf,
and the Roller I mention. But where Printers Ink
cannot be got, then take the following Mcthod.
To take the Impreffion of any Leaf, as certain as
the former Way, only afing such Things as may
be bad in any part of England.
WHEN you have no Printers Ink, rub the back
of a Lcaf, as before mentiened, with Linseed ogt
varnt, and then, drewing fome Powder of black
Leal


18
Lead, or for want of that, fome Charcoal or Small-
coal Duft, or the Powder of burnt Cork, equally,
upon a finooth Board juft to cover it, ftroke it over
Imoothly with the Blade of a Knife, and when the
back of the Leaf is oyl’d, clap it upon the Board,
and then putting your white Paper upon the black’d
Side of the Leat, either prefs it or roll it as before.
Bur if none of thefe Ingredients should be
found, Vermillion may always be found at an Apo-
thecarys and, mixing this with freth Butter, to
the Confiffence of Printersink, cover your printing
Balls with it, and dab them upon the back of the
Leaf, and to take off your Impreffion as aforefaid.
NV. B. The Reafon why the back of the Leaf is
the proper fide to make the Impreffion from, is,
becaute the Ribs or Veffels rife on that side above
the flethy part of it; and therefore, when they are
colour’d with any of thefe Inks, will give an Im-
preffion but in the Front, Fore-fide of a Leaf,
the flethy Parts rife, and thefe fine Fibres are funk
below them.
Memorandum. Where Vermillion is uted, blue
Bice may be ufed either with Butter, or with Oyl,
as follows.
A fine red or blue Printers Ink, for making im-
pressions of this fort.
GRIND either Vermillion, or bluc Bice, with
some burnt Linfeed-oyl, and ufe it as you would
do the other printing ink, the blue I should chufe
for this Work, becaufe, if we should colour the
Leaf, the biue would be an agreeable Colour to
the green forts.
The Method of Taking-off the Leaves of Plants in
Plaifter of Pavis, so that they may afterwards
be cast in any Mctal.
T HO SE Perfons who caft in Metal, have frea
quent Occation to ufc Leaves of feveral Sorts to.
cinbelliff


19
embellifh their Works, which are generally made
from Models done by the Hland, which take up
a great deal of Time, and at laft are impertect
but the following Way, which I learnt from a
Gentleman in Itaty, is much cafier.
WHE N you have gathered the Leaf, you de-
fire to take an Impreftion from, lay it between the
Leaves of a Book till it will lye flat, then upon a
Lmooth Board with frong Gum-water (made of
Gum Arabic) fix the Fore-fide or Front of the
Leafto the Board; when this is done, raife about it
a little Wall of courfe Paffe, half an Inch high; or
if you can conveniently furround your piece of
Wood with Pafte-board or Card paper fo clofe, that
it will hold a Liquid for fome time, then oyl the
back of your Leaf, as is recommended in the Chap-
ter for Cafting of Medals, and pour on Waterand
Plaiffer of Paris as is there directed, which when
1
isdry, will give you an exact Impreftion of every
Vein of the Leaf, and from which you may eafily
make a Mould to caftin, as your Fancy directs you.
The Manner of making the Impreffions of any But-
terfly, in a Minate in all their Colours.
WH EN you have taken a Butterfly, Kill it
without fpoiling the Wings, and contrive to (pread
them in a flying Manner as regularly as may be
then take a piece of white Paper, and with a small
Bruth or Pencil wath a part of the Paper with Crum-
water, a little thicker than ordinary, fothat it may
dry at an cafy rate then lay your Butterfly on the
Paper, and when tis well fixt, cut away the Body
clofe to the Wings, and throw that away, then lay
the Paperon a linooth Board with the Flyupwards,
and on thatanother Paper, upon which puta fmooth
1
Frencher, and a great Weight upon that or eife
put your whole Preparation into a Screw-prefs, and
lcrew it down very hard, letting it fo remain for
211


20
an Hour; then take off your Butterffy’s Wings, and
their perfect Impreffion, with all their beautiful
Coloursmark’d diffinctly, will remain on the Paper.
I have done feveral this Way, which antwers very
well. and to explain the Reafon why it can be fo,
you muft underftand, that all the fine Colours ob-
served on a Butterfly's Wings, are properly Fea=
thers, which ftick to the Gum to fatt, that, when
the Gumis dry, they leave the Wing.
WHE  you have done this, draw between
the Wings of your Impreftion the Body of your
Butterfly, and colour your Drawing of that Body
afterthe Life.
   tor   tl l for essert

C H A P. IV.

off Medals instantly, by various
Of Taking
Ways not known.
I may be ufeful to some People to learn another
Way of preferving to themfelves good Speci-

mens, and fine Defigns of Medals, that is, fuch as
may ferve to draw from at any time and many
Chollands of thofe Specimens may be taken in one
Dav, at a trifling Expence.
ONE Method is, to take Ichthyocolla, i. c. Hin-
glafs, which is fold at the Druggifts, and is call’d
likewife Fith-glue, it is made up in Rolls twifted
in the Form of a Figure of eight. This being
broked to pieces, take about an Ounce, and dif-
folve it in Water enough to cover it, over the Fire,
stirring it gently till all is diffolved; then, with a
Camel's Hair-bruth, froke fome of this Glue over
the Medals you want to take off; after the Mc-
dalsare laid as horizontally as poffibie, and when
all the Surface is covered, let them lie till the Glue
is hardened; and then with the Point of a fine
Needle,


28
Needle, or Pin, raife the Edge of the Glue from
each Medal, and the whole Impreffion in Glue
will fly off as hard as Horn, with all the fine
Sharpnets of the Medal, as if it was ftruck. This
Gilue may be made of any Colour we pleafe, by
mixing the Colour we want in the Water we melt
the Glue in. Five hundred of thefe Impreffions
in Glue will not weigh above half an Ounce, if
each Medal be an Inch Diameter. Thefe muft be
dry’dimmediately, not in an hot Sun, nor in a
damp Place, but regularly.
Ir we ufe the Ifinglats without any Colourmix’d
with the Water, we may, when we take our Copies
from the Medals, breathe gently on the concave
side of them; which in fome Meafure will moiften
our Medal, and then lay it upon a piece of the
thickeff Sort of Leaf-gold, which will stick to it,
and, by thining through the Ifinglafs, will appear
like a Gold Medal; and if we would imitate
a Copper Medal, we should mix Carmine with the
Water we diffolve our Linglats in.
WHE A I prefcribe Water for this End, it is
becaufe it will do well, and may be had any
where; but Brandy or Spirits of Wine, will give
Glue a much greater Strength, fo as to be less
subject to fofren by damp Air. When I mention
this, tis from an Experiment I made for preferving
the natural Colour of Flowers feveral Vears, which
ndy be ufeful to the Curious, who ufe this Glue
0.1 any Occation, and is as follows.
To preserve the Leaves of Tulips. Make fome
Card-paper into the Figure of Dripping-pans, and,
with a ffrong Mixture of Cum-Arabick and Water,
fix them to the Card; then pour on gently warm
some of the Iinglatsprepared with Brandy, or Spi-
rits, till the Leaf is quite covered, and in an Hour
or two the Liquor will become hard, and, by Kcep-
ing the Air from the Flower, will preferve it in all
its
D


2.2
its Colours for feveral Years. The fame may be
done with the Bloffoms of the Auricula, which will
preferveall their Coloursas if they were painted.
1 SHALL, now mention the Manner of taking off
Medals of the largeff fort, which will still preferve
to us the Delincations of man
curious Pieces, and
Valuable Defigns. For this Ufe, with a. Tuft of
fine Cotton a little greafed with Sallad=oyl, rub.
the Medals gently over, and melt forme Stone
Brimftone, enough to cover the Medal half an Incty
thick, then put an Hoop of fiff Paper round the
Fdge of the Medal, and when the Brimffone is
melted, and not too hot, pour, it on the Medal,
and as foon as it is fixed and hardned, if you untic
the Hoop; the Imprettion on the Brimftone comes
clean from the Medal; which will produce a fharp
and correct Mould to caft another from in Plaifter
But this should not be ufed on Silver
Of Paris,
Medals; becaufe it will change their Colour.
If the Medals are Silver, nfe the same Method
of binding them round with Paper, and oyling
hem, mix a little Plaifter of Paris with Water,
and fill the Hoop with it, then immediately fill
the Cafe in a prinkling Manner with the same
Plaifter till it hardens; and when it is dry take it
from the Mcdal.
Bor from the Moulds caft in Brimffone, which
are concave, we again caft fuch Medals in Plaifter
of Parisas are convex, oyling the Mould as before,
and uting the Plaiffer of Paris as above directed;
fo you may take off any Medal, or fine Bass-relie
with a great deal of Exactness, even fo as to form
Ricdals from them in any fort of Metal. Bur
there is no one that I know fo curious in the Ma-
pagement of this Affair, as Mr. Pingo, in Newr
Strect-Square, ncar Shoe-Lane, London,
CHERE is a Wicthod of taking off Impreffions
In Pluider of Paris from Copper-plates, by oyling
211


23
in a minute Degree the Plates, and then binding
them about either with Cardspaper, or other Pafte=
board, and pouring on fome of the finelt Plaifter
of Paris and Water you can get; and finithing
the Work with Plaifter, till it becomes dry; and
hardens; you will then have a fine Impreftion, if
one may. to call it, of the Lines of the Place, in
the Plaifter, which will ferve to draw from, when


you have occation.
WE may add Htill the Manner of taking off any
fine Engravings from the Tops of Snuff-Boxes, of
Watch-cafes, which is only holding them over the
Smoak of a Candle, till they are quite black; then
wipe off the black with the foft part of the Palm
of the Hand, and lay on the Engraving a piece
of white Paper a little weited with a Spunge, and
over that a thin piece of Flannel, or a piece of
brown Paper held hard down over the engraved
Part, and being hard rubbed, the Paper next the
7
Picture will receive a fine Impreftion, as if it had
been pafted through a Rolling:prefs.
WE may yet recommend another Method of
taking off Medals in great Perfection, which is by
getting thin pieces of Lead, and placing the Mcdal
horizontally on the top of a firm Poft, or any fleddy
place; lay over the Lead a flat piece of harder Me-
tal, and over that place a piece of a round turn’d
Stick, fuch as is uted in the Staff of a Broom, fawn
off about five of fix Inches in length, and, holding
that tight with your lefe Hand on the Lead and
flat piece of Mctal, frike the top of the Stick a
fmart Blow with a large Tiammer, and the Lead
will be perfectly impretted with the lmage of the
Medal; this Blow muft be done at once, to ren-
:derthe Impreffion perfect: Rven this may be done
on any Impreffion made on Scaling-wax.
WE may likewife take off a Medal, by laying
over it a piece of thin Sheet Block-tin, otherwife
called
D) 2


24
called Foyle, which is fold at the same Places where
the Plaifter of Paris is to be had; or at fome Pew-
tcrers Shops, and rubbing it hard upon the Mc-
dal, it will give us a very good Likeness of what-
ever Medal we rub it upon. The Block-fin Sheet
I mean, is fuch as is laid on the Backs of Glaffes,
when they are to be filver’d, to render them
Looking-glaffes.
WE may alfo take Impreffions from Medals
with Putty, fuch as the Glaziers ufe, although the
Medals or Bass-reliess are under-wrought.
ANOTHER Way of taking off Medals is to pro-
vide the Scraps of Shavings of white Paper, which
you may have at the Book-binders; you muft boil
them well in common Water till they are tender,
then bruife them well in a Mortar till they come
like a Pafte, and boil them again in Spring-water,
with a little Crum-Arabick; and, letting this mix-
ture fettle a while, pourthe Water from it through
2 Sieve or Linnen-cloth, and what remains is ex-
traordinary good, to either prefs into any Mould,
or upon any Medal, and when the Pafte is dry it
will come off very fharp.
SoME Medals that are under-wrought cannot be
taken off this Way therefore in such Cafes, we
muft take common Glue with Water, melt it, and
when we have fixt a Hoop of Pafte-board round the
Edge of our Medal, pour on the Glue hot, having
firft oyl’d the Medal with a Lump of greaty Cotton.
WHEN the Glue is dry and hard, we must take
off the Hoop, and the Glue will fly from the
Edges of the Medal; and it will then eafily come
off, being subject to bend and give way, which

the other Things before mentioned will not do.
We should mind to make our Glue flrong enough,
and pour it on one third of an Inch thick.
WHE N we have taken the Impreffion by this
Means, we muft hoop round our Mould of Glue
with


25
with Card-paper or Pafte-board, as before; and
oyl it, fo that no Bubbles or Blifters may be feen,
that is to fay, juft make it greaty ; then we may
caft fome Plaifter of Paris in it, and we shall have
a good Copy of the Medal: When this is dry the
Gilue will fiy off, or may be broken off, and we
shall have a good Pattern to caft from.
We may likewife make a Putty of Linfeed-oyl
and fine ground Starch, which, being well work’'d
together into a Pafte, will take a good Impreffion
from any Medal. This is much better than the
common Putty.
WHEN we have thefe Moulds, we may caft in
them good Medals in Bees-wax; but they will
come off much fharper if the Mould be in Brim-
Rtone, than if it be in Plaifter of Paris. But when
we do this, our Wax should be as well blanch’dor
whitened, as one would ufe for Wax-candles; it
is however necefiary to greafe the Mould before
we pour in our Wax, as I have directed before.
HOwEVER, tho' I recommend white Wax as
preferable to the other, I would not chufe to have
the Copy of the Medal white, for the darker Co-
lours thew the Figures much better.
Ir we would have our Copy of a red Colour, we
muft mix Vermillion with our Wax when tis
melting; or if blue, put into our melted Wax
Some Stone-blue well beaten or ground.
s foon as our Wax Medals are cold enough
to take off, we should lay fome Leaf-gold upon
them, and with a piece of Cotton prefs it down
gently, without rubbing it backwards or forwards,
and that will gild our Medal.
WHEN we have caft Medals in Plaifter of Paris,
to make them look like Steel or Metal, we muft rub
them over with a Picce of Cotton dipt flightly in
Oyl, and then put on them fome Powder of black
Lead, and rub them well with a Brush, fuch as is
15d


26
usd forthe Teeth, till the whole is equally covers
ed; and they will have a fine Gloss upon them.
B.w 7 we may make the Plaiffer of Paris Mes
dals of the Colour of Box, by bolling them in Lin-
feed Oyl; and it will harden them, fo as to bear
the Brush to be cleaned if any Duft gets at them.
IF we would have our Plailter of Paris Medals
of a yellow or golden Colour, we muft take a little
Pearl-ash, and boil it in a Pint of Water, till it
makes a ftrong Lixivium; then put in about half
a quarter of a Pint of French Berries, and boil
them till the Liquor is of a very strong yellow,
and ufe this Liquor with our Plaifter of Paris in-
sead of Common Water.
Ix we would have our Plaifter of Paris Mcdals be
of a blue Colour, we muft boil fome Lacmus or Lit.
mus in River-water, ill the Water is as blue as
we think proper; and muft ufe this Water with
our Plaiffer, when we caft a Medal, to render it
of a fine Colour.
Ir we would have our Plaifter Medals of a red
Colour, we should boil a little Rafpings of Brafil-
wood in pale ftale Beer, and when it is ftrain’d. off,
ufe it as common Water with the Plaiffer.
THAVEot, yet try’d, whether the fine tranipa-
rent Cum made of Verdegreafe will mix with
Plaifter of Paris, but I have good Reafon to judge
that it will; and as it is cheap enough, I fuppote
it would not be unworthy any one's Tryal.
I HAVE often thought, that by thefe Means one
might cafily collect agset of all the Coins of our
Nation, and to diftribute them as one should, in the
feveral King's Reigns, they would make no dife
agreeable Furniture, being plac’d in proper Order;
the Gold by themfelves of each King'sReign, with
his Figure and the Reverfe by one anether, and
under it the Value of the Coin; then the Silver in
their proper Order; and the Brass, or Copper, or
Pewter,





27

P.
eyter, (for fuch we have had) and even the Lea
ther Coins should not efcape our Notice.
OR, to improve this, if we had Time to spare
and good Oppertunity; we might have the Re-
Temblance of the Coins of every Country. and by
writing the Value of each of them, fuch a Col-
lection would be of ufe to Travellers, as well as to
Hifforians.
THE eafieff Way of doing this would be with
the Ichthyocolla or Fifh-glue; and to for the Gold
Coins ufe Leaf-gold, as, before directed; for the
Silver, Leaffilver; and for the Copper, Leaf-
copper, which is made in Germany: Or elfe for
Silver we should make our Medals with Foyle, as
before directed; and for the Leather Coinsmix a
little Fullers Earth with the Water or Spirit, be-
fore we melt the Fith-glue or Iinglass in it.
So far I have given Inftructions how we may ei-
ther make Drawings from the Life; or copy what-
ever we think proper from Prints, Paintings, Me-
dals, 68c, tho' we knew nothing of Drawing before.
7
IISII PI EI) VII SII VII SII
45
311 VI1. 81
by snoy ej vj 8I hrSaDrytixi4z
5

5


49
325
 n t tlie l o teistertaetatone slteteeiste se t s t se  e t 
C H A P. V.
vints in the
Of Colours for illuminating of F
best Manner; or of Painting in Water-
Colours.
YOLOURS are to be diffinguished in the fof-
1 lowing Manner; we muft firft take White,
the next Vellow; the next Orange, and then pro-
ceed to the Red, after that the Purple, then to the
Blue, and after that to the Black. Obferve, White
and Blackare the Extremes of Colour; then in the
84
ext Place, aellow is the leffer point of Colourto-
wards the White, and the next to that is the
Green, and after that the Blue. I speak of this,
becaufe
"


1o


28
becaufe every one who has a mind to know the
Manner of Colouring of Prints, or painting in Mi
niature may profit by it.
I sHALL begin then with regard to Colouring
of Prints. If the Paper be pure white, ufe no
Colour upon it, unless in the shaded Parts; and
then in painting of Flowers, if they tend towards
a reddith Colour, ufe a faint Colour of Carmine
with Gum-water, upon the Shades only; if blueifh,
afe a little faint Indigo in Cum-water, flightly
pass’d over the Shades, eafily touching upon the
Lights; where there is a yellow Tinge, either
wfe a faint Tincture of Gamboge, or of French Ber-
ries, which will be defcribed among the Yellows;
or if the White have a purplith Caft, ufe a thin
Lake on the fhady Side, fuffering the Colour only
to thine a little into the Light, it will give a Lu-
fre to the Whites; and if a greenith Caft should
be there, ufe either a faint Colour, hardly to be
difcern’d, of the fap Green, or in proportion, of
the fap Green mix’d with the Verdegreafe Green.
. B. All thefe Coloursmention d to shade the
Whites, may be found in the following Directions.
o o ono o
O AAMUUUAUUJUNTYOVMUYYTF
e f
8
1371
the
5
fooil Colonce  fote Cate) Cote Cohe Cose Coed Coc 125)
Co (o) Cote) Colon f e
HlC  
C H A P. VI.
Of Waires for Painting in Miniature.

IIE beft White that is pretended to be fold
in the Water-colour manner, is the Flake-

white, which is better than the White-lead ground:
This, if it is pure, far exceds the White-lead in
27
seauty; for the White-lead is apt toturn blackith,
especially if you ufe it with hard Water.
Bur the beft White that I Know, is made of
Pearl, or the finer Parts of Oyfter-shells, made
into an impalpabic Powder, that is, fo foft as to
fcel





29
feel like Grounds of Starch, or Powder for the
Hair, when we touch it with the Fingers; this is
called by fome of the Colour-men Pearl-white, but
tis hard to be found. If we have occafion to ufe
it, this white will mix well with any Colour but
if we ufe White-lead, let it be firft rectified with
white Wine Vinegar, which will caufe a Fermen-
tation, and foon make the white fettle, then pour
off the Vinegar, and wath it with common Water.
that is, put the Powder into a lass of Water, Hir
it about, and prefently pour off the Water, while
it is whice, into fome clean Receiver; and when the
white Parts are fettled, pour off the Water from
thence, and they will be extremely fine. I mention
this, that every one may make their Colours of the
fineff Sort. It may be perhaps a little Trouble; but
who would not ufe fuch pains to be fuperior to any
Thing that has been before in the fame Way ?
WHEN the White we speak of is fertled, add toif
as much Crum-water as is neceftary to bind it, or
give it a Glaze; but take Notice that I would not
have any white ufed in colouring of Prints, but
only with dry Colours, when we paint in Miniature.
Ir is remarkable that White-lead will change
black, if the Water we ufe with it comes from Iron
or Clay: When I fayblack, I mean that in a Month
or two you will find the Places where it lies the
thickeff, tinged with black, and when tis mix’'d with
any other Colour, it will foon change, or alter it.
Fo this Reafon, I have try’d divers forts of
White, among others, the Powder of Egg-shells,
of the brighteft Colour, and well clean’d and
wallr’d, is very good to be ground with Gum-water,
or elfe put about a twentieth part of clear white
Sugar candied to grind with it in Water; reduce
this as fine as poffible, that is to the state of what
we call an impalpable Powder, and ufe it. A Gen-
fleman, whom I have given this Reccipt to, tells me,
that
B


30
that it is ftillmore to the purpofe to pour it on some
rectify’d Spirits of Wine, which, he fays, will clear
it from the Drofs; but I have not try’d the Experi-
ment I fuppofe, that when the Spirit of Wine has
done its Work, it muft be pour’d off, and then the
Parts left behind muft be mix’d with Gum-water
again; but that Egg-shell powder is of great Ser-
vice as a white in Water-colours, 1 Know very
well; and that alfo itfelf, an Oyfter-shell powder,
well rectify’d and mix’d with the white of an Egs
well beaten, will make an extraordinary Nixture

with other Colours, and correct them from chang
ing or altering their Qualities.
WHT L E I am peaking of white for illumi-
hating of Prints, as I have already obferved, that
the clear white of the Paper is proper to be left
uncolourd ; fo if it happens, that the Paper is
given to fink, as it is called, or to fpread any
Water-colour we lay upon it more than is necef-
Jary, then the Way to correct it is as follows.
We muft fix the Paper in fuch a Station, as may
only receive the Colour we lay on to glaze juft as
far as we defign’d it; then take fome Starch boild
and prepared in Water, of a middle Strength,
and with a large Painting-bruth froke it over
the back of the Print, and, when it is well dry’d
in the Air or Sun, put the Print in a Book, with
a Weight upon it, to rectify the Crumplings
which it may receive by wetting of it; fo will
any Print be made to receive Water-colours as
one would have them be diftributed, and none of
them will then run farther than we intended.
THERE is an Earth brought fometimes from
Cbing of a very foft Nature, and very white,
which I find is better in Water-colours than
any of the reft but tis very fcarce.
C H A P.


32
HI)Avj CUj A)jp)I)I I NIDUP IAAI ApI
5
55

EF

525445
2
5
Tat the te te te the ttie  seitiee he she itiee ttiehe tbd tiee hiee tid
C H AP. VII.
Of VEL L O W S.

HERE are fome Objects which have the
4. Appearance of Gold fhining through the
Colour of Green, Red, or Blue; fuch as fome
fort of Flies and Bectles, and fuch as the Can
tharides, which latt Sort every one may buy at
the Druggiffs. This Gold Tranfparency is very
well imitated, by laying on the Drawing fome
Leaf-gold on the shaded Part, a little giving in to
the light side of the Print, the Way of laying
on of Leaf-gold, is to wath the Part where the
Gold is to be with firong Gum-water, and foon
after that pur the Gold on as fmooth and even as
poffible, preffing it down clofe with Cotton. But
take care that, when you lay on the Gum-water,
you do not exceed the Limits you would have
the Gold appear to shinc. In this Cafe the Gold
is only to thine through the tranfparent Colour,
which is to be laid upon it.
Now it muft be underffood, that the Leaf-
gold will not regularly receive Water-colours,
to that to render it fubfervient to our purpoic, we
muft, with a little thin Liquor of Ox-gall in a
Painting-bruth of Camel’s Flair, stroke it over, and
then it will receive any Colour we have a mind
to paint upon it, and hold it. So you may have
Gold Greens, GGold Reds, and Purples, Blues,
or what you pleafc. The Greens may be, firft the
Verdigrcafe Green, which I thall defcribe here-
after or the Sap Green, or Lake, or Carmine,
if they are good ; or for Purples, Lake and fine
Indigo, or Carmine and Indigo, and for the Blues,
Indigo
R.2


32
Indigo on the dark fide, and on the light fide a
little flroke of Ultramarine Blue, just to thine
into the Light, and it will have a wonderful Effect.
N. B. One may find upon Rofe-trees in June
and July, a Beetle of a green Gold-colour, which
will ferve te govern this Kind of Painting. s
for Gold of itfelf, I would not advife it to be
ufed, unless we polifh it, and then you may take
the following Method.
We fee in many Manufcripts fine Gold Let
ters, which rife above the Surface of the Volume
or Paper; thefe have raifed the Admiration of
the Curious, and the Manner of making them is
but little known  the Compofition, which raifes
them above the Paper, is made, as I am well
informed, of Vermillion and the white of an Egg,
whisk’d or beaten up to that Confiftence, as 15
called an Oyl, work’d together like a kind of
Pafte, and with a Stamp hx’d to the Paper with

Gum-Arabick; on this Figure of a Letter wash,
with a Camels Hair Pencil, fome ftrong Cum-
water, taking care that the rum does not reach
more than the Out-lines, then lay on the Leaf=
gold clofe with some Cotton, and as foon as it

23
15 dry, rub it with fome dry Cotton, and then
polish it with a Dog's Tooth this will make it
appear as if it was really caft in Gold.
THERE is yet another Way of working thefc
Things in Gold; and that is, by ufing the Gold
which is prepared in Shells, but it must be purc
Gold, and not fuch as is brought from some Pla-
ces in Cermany, which will change Green in a few
Days time.
BEFORE you ufc this Gold, cover the fhady
parts with Vermillion; and then, after your Gold
is well rectified with Spirits of Wine, lay it on
with Gum-water, which will mix with it very
well, and when it is dry, polith it with a Dogs
Tooth.


33
Tooth. I chufe when I lay on this Powder-gold,
to leave the Lights vacant of it, and it makes a
much brighter Appearance, than if one was to
cover the Object all over,
Bor if one was to cover by Accident the
whole Piece with Gold, there is no better Way
to fet it off, than by tracing over the fhady Parts
with Gall-fones or which is much preferable,
the Yellow, which I shall give the Compofition
of below, made of French Berries, I mean that
which is the deepeft in Colour, a little Minium
brightens it very much; but fee how 1 rectify
the Minium, amongit the REns, and polith the
Gold before you ufe any Minium to it.
SINCE I have mentioned Gold, I am next to
speak of the Vellows, as they fall gradually in
their Courfe of Strength.
THE firft is a Kind of Straw-colour, and is
made of Flower of Brimstone, which in itfelf
is fine enough to mix with Cum-water; and the
Manner of Preparing Gum-water, fince I have
not yet mentioned it, I shall infert at the end of
this Treatife of Colours.
A COMMON Way of illuminating of Prints, is
by giving the Tincture of Gamboge for a Yel-
low, and this may be of two or three forts, either
fainter or lronger the laft to be a Shade to the
firft, and that to be shaded with the Preparation
of French Berries, which I shall prefently mention.
THE great Mr. Bogle has left fome Papers be-
hind him that were never publifhed, which my
Lord Carleton gave me, and I shall infert occafi-
With regard to yellow
onally in this Ireatife.
Colours, he fays, that if the Roots of Barberries
are cut, and put in a Liivium made flrong with
Water and Pearl-afhes, there will be a fine yellow
Colour produced from it, which I have tried, and
fucceeds very well.
ANO-


34
ANOTHER Way Mr. Boyle propofes, to make
2 tranfparent Vellow, which is, to take the Root
of the Mulberry, which affords a very yellowish
uice, to wath it well from the Earth in common
Water, and boil it in the Lixivium I (peak of, made
with Pearl-afhes and Water from this we may
take out a ftrong Tincture, much deeper than
the former; but the Roots of the Mulberries are
much harder to be had than thofe of the Barber-
ries, for Mulberry-trees are very fcarce, and the
Barberries are in almoff every Hedge in Esex,
about Littlebury especially.
WirH regard to the Barberry-root, I think
it would be worth while to plant them on purpofe,
for the Advantage that one might make from
them by Dying, the Fruit, in my Opinion, be-
ing of little or no Signification, but the Root
and the Wood, I think, will nearly antwer the
Jame End, in producing a fine Yellow.
KELLow Oker will make another good pale
Yellow; but for illuminating of Prints, it is a
Colour rather of too much body; however being
well ground with Gum-water, it is of ufc after it
has been well wath’d.
ANOTHER good Yellow may be made from
the Plant call’d Celandine, infuting it in Water,
and prefting it gently, and then boiling the Li-
quor with a little Allum; this Yellow will be a
little inclining to Green.
Bur the Yellow which I like the beft, and
may be ufed in feveral Capacities of Lights and
Strength, is that made of French Berrics, pre-
pared as follows.
TAKE of French Berries an Ounce whole, and
boil them in a Pint of the Lixivium made of
Pearl-ashes and Water, till the Liquor will give
a fine Tinge of Vellow to a bit of Paper dipp’d
in it; then pour it off from the Berries, and when
t15


35
tis cool, put it in a Bottle for Ofe. But if we
only put French Berries to infufe in common Wa-
ter, they will produce a good Vellow, but then
it will not be durable
THEN again, add half a Pint of the same Lix
ivium to the Berries, and half an Ounce of fresh
Berries, and boil them, till the Liquor is as deep
as Gall-ftone; which will ferve to shade all the
Yellows you can ufe of any fort. You may boil
this even to produce a brown Colour; and with
a little Ox-gall, it will ferve to shade any Leaf-
gold that has been laid on Paper, as directed be-
fore, and is much preferable to Gall-ftone in imi-
tating any Gold-colour. It anfwers well upon a
Tincture of Gamboge, or any of the former
Fellows.
NEx T to this is the Tincture of Saffron,
which, with common Water only, affords a bright
reddith Yellow, fuch as one would have (to cover
the thadow’d parts of a Print) for an Orange or
Beldk Gold-colour; however, there is nothing
more High, when we ufe Saffron, than when we
infufe it in rectified Spirits of Wine; but then the
Colour flies, unless we load it with Crum-Arabick,
as I have try’d.
As for a deep Yellow with a body, Dutch
Pink comes the neareft to the aforefaid itrong
Yellow made of French Berries, in point of Co-
four and of a lighter Vellow is the Engliffs Pink,
which is ftill made of French Berries, and in a bo-
dy likewife.
1 CANNOT help obferving, that one may ex-
P
tract a good yellow Colour, for illuminating
s of
Prints, from the freth Roots of Ginger, if one can
Sct
 

t By beld is meant the boiling of pure Gold in Liquors,
which will take away the Vellow of it, and bring it to be of
2 reddith or higher Colour.





36
get nothing elfe; I fpeak this, becaufe fometimes
one wants a good Vellow, and any one may find
this any where, if Gamboge can't be had; and it
makes a fine Green, with the tranfparent Verdes
greafe I shall hereafter mention. I. B. This laft
Hint I took from Mr. Boyle's Papers.
Ir is again to be remark’d, that the Engliffs
and Dutch Vellow Pinks are made with French
Berries ground to a fine Powder and boiled.
owh fpr oft flor eth atl t   rs   

VIII.
C H A P.
Of ORANCE COLOUR.
8
THIE Orange-colour, which is ufeful to wath
fine Prints with, confifts in laying on a

Teint of Gamboge, and over that, fome of the
Minium or Red-Lead, fuch as I shall defcribe,
to be wash’d, and render’d fine and fit for Ufc,
for, as it is bought at the shops, it is not by any
means fine enough to paint with, and especially
will change or turn black after a few Weeks, if.
it be not refin’d; but if it be well prepared, will
be very lafting and beautiful: But we muft take
of it, two
this by the Way, that in the refining
Ounces will not produce above 40 Grains of good
Colour, to fland the Teff of the Painters. I shall
prefently defcribe the Method of Preparing it:
This Colour may be mix’d with Camboge, upon
a white Dutch Tile to render it of the lcint we
defire, either foft or tlronger or one may glaze
the Gamboge, and ftrengthen it with Tincture of
Saftion, to make it glare into a ftrong Orange.
CHAP.


C


37
nerao
oraATS m amemananuomnimfiggige
Pilck (o CbiCkiloki Cld Cote) (oe. Coed Cotd Coe Cole Cohe. (hor (oAi Cote. Cohel (de. Cole. Colelled
C H A P. IX.
Of MINTUM, or the brightest Red-lead,
and bore to prepare it.
TWHI E Minium, or Red-lead, is as heavy
 and frong a Colour as moft we have; but
is the moff delightful one, when well prepared,
that is, when tis well wath’d and clean’d of its
more weighty Parts, which occafion it to turn
black. My Way of doing it, as the great Mr.
Bogle directs, is to put 3 or 4 Ounces of it in
a Quart of Rain-water; then fir it, and pour
off the Water immediately,, and let it fettle to
the bottom of every Cup or Glafs you pour it
in; then pour off that Water, and in a Day's
time you will have the Colour dry, and as fine as
you- can with; put then a little piece of Gum=
Arabick to each Glafs or Cup, and as much Was
ter as will moiften each of them; Ufe any of
thefe afterwards with the Cum-water, as shall be
hereafter directed; but if the Gum, you should
happen to put in at firft, may be firong enough
to glaze it,, then ufe only common Water; in a
Word, as your Colour is lefs gum’d or Over-
gum’d, ue lefs or more Gum-water; for of itfelf
tis a dead Colour.
WHEN you ufc this Colour, touch it gently
on the Yellow we have mentioned into the light
Side, and if it wants a Shade, there may be a
little Vermillion put upon it; but Vermillion is
too heavy to paint with, when we illuminate
Prints, becaufe it hides the Shades of the Engra-
ver however, fornctimes they had better be hid-
 den then preferved: For my part, 1 generally
Shade this Red-lead or Minium with Carnine,
which


38
which gives it a fine Effect, and renders it equal
to the brighteff red Flower I ever faw, leaving
Kill the Lights uncoloured, only dathing a little
way into the Lights with the Minium.
VERMILLrON I muft advife to be left out
of the Queftion, unless it is well wath’d, as I
have directed the Minium to be, and then chieffy
for dry painting, One may think then, that after
I have advifed the Vermillion to be abandoned,
it should be quite left out of my Table of Co-
lours but I peak at that Time to fuch Perfons
as can ufe it moderately, and with Judgment;
for all heavy Colours will drown the Shades or
Strokes of the Engraver.
WHEN the Carmine has shaded the Miniurh,
or Red-lead, it may be fhaded again with
Lake in the ftrongeft Part, to bring it to a deeper
Red.
Ir may be a Wonder to fome, that when I
Ipeak of Orange-colours, I should mention fome
of thefe deep Sorts, tending to Purples; but I
nention them as Shades, and without which
the Orange of Red could not appear with any
Brightness.
lis of lipe of thee f pe pp  p pp p thess p t p Allp p24 t. D. A Td pt to Allp Athipe op thss 3 Sliss 
NOt
O
5
AFEEHEAFTRE EOEEERREREERESSS TArerEererETUEerEStESTEStESS

C HAP. X.
Of R ED S.
SEGT. I Of SCARLET.
II R.I we have pafted the Orange, we
next come to the Scarlet, which may be
reprefented on a Plane with Minium, a little
mix’d with Vermillion, but if you have Occa-
Lion


39
fion to paint a Flower of a Scarlet-colour on a
Print, let your Lights, as well as Shades, be co-
vered thin with Minium, and the shaded Parts
glazed with Carmine, which will produce an ad-
mirable Scarlet, fuch as we fee in the Flower of
the Scarlet Martagon.
SEG.T. H. Of CRYMSON.
ROMN the Scarlet we next come to Crimfon,
which is reprefented with Carmine; but I
muft inform the Perfon who is to ufe it, that
there are feveral Sorts of it, fome darker, and
some much coarfer than others, and therefore it
should never be bought by Candle-light, unlets.
of fuch ps one can well truft for between the
very beft and the worf Sort, there is about ten
Shillings difference in an Ounce, or indeed all
the Money an Ounce will coft, for the bad will
spoil all our Work. The beft that I have met
with was at Mr. Goupee's, the great Fan-Painter
in King-freet, Covent-Garden; I have had tome
very good likewife, at the Colonr-shop, the Sign
of the Bell, againt Arundel-street in the Strand,
SECT. III. Of LARE.
FTER this Crimfon, comes next the Lake,
which shades and heightens the Carmine,

but it is to be obferv’d, that in the laying of Cars
mine upon a Print, let your Lights be touch’d
only with a very thin Teint of it, hardly to be
difcerned; then juft on that part of the Light
which enters upon the Shade lay it on ftrong, and
cover the Shade with it; and after that, on the
Rronger part of the Shade lay fome Lake. The
beft Lake I have met with, is at the great Colour=
thop at the White-bart in Long-acre, near Jamess=
Strect,
F2


40
Rreet, Covent-Garden, ready prepared in Shells
for Water-colours.
SE CT. IV Of transparent CRTMSON.
 TT we may make a liquid Colour, not

9 much inferior to Carmine itfelf, with the
s of Bratil-wood, fold at the Dry-falters
Rafpings
and particularly at the great Colour-fhop at Hol-
Corn-briage which I mention, becaute 1 have
been fome time without knowing where to find
it, for few Colour-fhops Know what it is, and
Lovers of Painting in this Way, are now and
then impatient to have fuch Things, and unac-
quainted where to find them out.
To make this tranfparent Colour, we may take
an Ounce of the Rafpings of Brafil-wood, and
boil it in ewelve Ounces of pale Htale Beer, and a
little Allum, till the Colour of the Liquor is as
Hrong as you pleafe, which you may difcover,
by dipping into it a Slip of white Paper, and
when the Colour is as you would have it, and
is cold, pass it through a Linnen-cloth, and
put the clear Liquor into a Bottle for Ufc.
This is one of the Reccipts I had from a Ma-
nuscript of the great Mr. Boyle.
AwD if we have a mind to bring this Colour
to a Body, take Ox-blood, and dry it, till we
can reduce it to Powder, which, being mix’d with
it, will give us a Colour, which I think will be
little lefs in Value than a middling Sort of Car-
minc. And, as a Gentleman of Learning and
good Understanding in thefe Matters informs me,
the Blool of an Ox or Cow fo dry’d, will make
a good Body for any Colour.
SECT.


2
7
41

1
  ir 
V. CRIMSON from Mr Boyle.
SECT.
AKE the Fruit of the Berrybearing Spinach;
8
which is Known to every Gardner about
London, press them, and you will have a beautis
fulred-colour’d Juice from them; boil this, and
put about a fourth part of Allum to it when
you pour it into the Veffel where tis to cool, and
then it makes as fine a Colour as any others that
are noted, and it is of little Expence, for it will
grow any where and in one Bunch of the Fruit
thereare Seeds enough to fow two of three Rods
of Ground.
-
THE red Bect-root, back’d with a little ftrong
Vinegar, produces an elegant red Colour, equal
40
to a Lincture of Carmine, then pour it on Al-
lam, and when tis cool tis fit for Ufe, where
Carmine should be ufed in wathing of Prints: For
it is a fine tranfparent red.
SECT. VI. Of INDIAN-RED.
FI
KXT to thefe Colours, Indian-red, though
it is a Colour of a Body, is helpful for a
back Ground, for Flowers at a Diftance, being
uted thereby with Gum-water. But I shall have
Occafion to give an Example of it by and by.
I RAVE lately feen an Earth brought from
the Ie of Wight, of amuch finer Colour than the
Indianred; which I and fome others, have
try’d, and find to mix extreamly well with Crum-
water tho' as it is of a vifcous Nature, it requires
less Gumthan moft other Colours. And as it is
naturally fit for Ofe without Grinding, and is
vifcous, fo it will afturedly mix as well with Oyl
as with Water. This was difcovered by Edward
Lises








(42
Liffe, Efqz to which Gentleman we owe many
more extraordinary Things of Value.
THERE is one Thing very extraordinary in this
Earth, fimple as tis, that if we rub a Deal-board
with it, it renders it exactly of the Colour of
Mohogany-wood, and stains it to deep, and with
to much Strength, that it is very hard to get it
out without wathing.
And dry as this Earth
was when I receiv’d it, I cannot get it out of
some Papers, which by Accident were mix’'d in
my Pocket with it; fo that I am perfuaded it
will prove of extraordinary Ufe, when its Virtues
come to be Known.
SECT. VII. Of transparent PURPLE.
NTER this we may make a tranfparent
Purple, either more red, or nearer the blue
E
Colour, as we shall fee Occafion, by ufing the
Jame Menftruum as was prefcribed in the former,
2iz. of pale stale Beer one Pint, in which boil
one Pint of rafped Brafil-wood, and half an Ounce
of Log-wood or Campechy-wood, till the Liquor
is heighten’d to the Colour you defire which
you muft try, by dipping a piece of Paper into
1t. If you then find it too red, add a Quarter of
an Ounce of Log-wood to the Brafil-wood, and
you will find it much nearer the Purple than the
former; and fo one may humour any Degree of
Purple, as you put more or lefs Log-wood to the
former Composition, and fix the Colour with a
little Allum. This will produce fuch clear Pur-
ples, as no Mixture of folid Reds and Blues can
produce, and the Reccipt has been for a long
tine Kept a Scerct.
MADA Mariand of Amfterdam, who has been
to famous for her Painting in Miniature, and
her excellent Manner of illaminating Prints, told
IIIC,


43
me, that the beft Purple I could afe, might be
compofed between the Carmine and Indige;
which to itrengthen on the red Side one may add
Lake between the lighter and darker Part; which
I have in many Cafes found to be good, and of
Significancy. And fo Lake, when it is ufed in the
Same Way on the foregoing Purple, or the liquid
Crimfon, produces a very fine Effect. One may
vary the Colour of the Purple either redder,
by putting more Carmine, or bluer by ufing more
Indigo, which, being mixed on a white Dutch
Tile, will thew itfelf
offer respr  er alter  
to refer reffor rett rife regor reffor t

C
 H A P. XI.
Of BIvE.

SECT. I. Of the ULTRAMARINE.
TIIIE firft and beft bright Blue we have, is
the Ultramarine Blue, which gives a Spirit
to all Paintings where Blues are ufed; but it is
very dear, if we have the beft, even worth, or at
leaft fold at fix Pounds an Ounce; it is made from
the Lapis Lazuli, divefted of its Gold, and ground
and made into an impalpable Powder. This Con
lour however, as it is of a very high Price, will
make good its Value in Painting, as the leaft
Touch of it is enough to illuminate a Flower.
In uting it, leave the white or light part of the
Flower uncoloured, excepting that on the Edge
of the light next the shaded Parts, colour it with
Ultramarine; and, a little into the shaded Part of
the Print, add a faint Tincture of Indigo, the
Indigo covering a little the Verge on the shady
side



44)
fide of the Uitramarine, fo will your Flowerj
E3c. if it be a bright Blue, appear extreamly.
beautiful.
I. B. This is a Colour of Body, and will laft
aslong as one would defire, and even preferve
any Colour you can mix with it.
To ufe it fingly, there is nothing more darling;
as appeared in the Cafe of colouring Iron-gates;
which many Years ago was executed at the En-
france of Devonsbive-house in Picadilly. This
Colour was laid upon the Iron-work, at the Ex
pence of many hundred Pounds, and remain’d in
great Beauty Till they were taken down, and the
Kntrance of that Palace altered which thews that
this Colour will not change, though it fuffers all
Kinds of Weather; for tis computed that they
had been expoted upwards of fixty Vears. But
the beft Colour of this fort is, rarely to be met
with, unlets it be at Mr. Coupee's, the great Fan-
Shop in King-street, near Covent-Garden, where is
the beft I ever faw.
SECT. I. Of the PRUSSLAN BEvE.

DT
THTHIE Pruffian Blue is the next to the Ultras
L marine for Beauty, if it is used in Oyl; tho'
I imagine it will not hold to well as the fore-
going, confidering it has not the Body of Ultra-
marine. This Colour, however, is attempted to
be ground in Water; but there is fuch an oily
Quality in it, that it does not mix Kindly with
Water, and at the beft will change, as it is now
prepared in the common Way. It has been at-
tempted to make a blue Ink; which indeed held
the Colour for a Month or two, but then turn’d
to a muddy Yellow; to when you put your
Pencil with Gum-water into a Shell. of this Blue,
you will find where the Water preads, the Blue
will


5
4

will change yellowish, till the Body of the Bluc
is well firr’d up. And when we have done our
beft with this Colour in Water, it will only ferve
to shade Ultramarine with but in Oyl it ferves
very well for the prefent to fill the Place of Ultra
Mmarine.
SECT. II. Of BLvE BIsE.


IHIE next Colour to the foregoing for Bright-
nets, is that which we callblne Bife; which
tho it is a Colour of body, will flow pretty well
in the Pencil; especially if it be well wathed, as
I have directed the Whites and the Miniumte
be done.
SEC.T. IV Of SANDERS BIvE.
7
ITER this Colour the Sanders Blne is of

very good UIc, and may ferve as a Shade
1
for Ultramarine, or the blue Bife, where the
Shades are not required to be extremely deep, and
is of itfelf a pleafant Blue, to be laid between the
Lights and Shades of fuch a Flower as is of a
Mazarine Bluc, as tis called.
SEGT. V Of LACMUS OF LITMUS
B.L VE.
NOTHER Bluc, which is a beautiful Co-

lour, and will run in a Pen as free as Ink,

is made of Lacmus, or as fome call it Litmus,
which may be met with at moft Druggifts. This
Colour however is never met with prepared for
Water-colours; and therefore I shall fet down
the following Mcthod of preparing it according
7
t0


46
to Nirs. Mgrians, for it affords a bright Colour
which has extraordinary Effects.
TAKE of Lacmus one Opnce, and boil it in
about a Pint of Small-beer Wort, till the Colour
is as frong as you defire, then pour off the Liquor
into a Gallipot, and let it cool for Ufe. it will
foon become a felly, and by Degrees grow hard.
This Colour, however, is to be opened again, and
made liquid by Water, to as to be ufed as Ink;
and as it is rendered thinner or thicker, fo will
be paler or darker. By what I find of this Lac=
mus, it is not only a beautiful but an holding Co-
lour for I have fome Defigns I coloured with it
in the Year 1714, which sill preferve themfelves
in as much beanty as they had at the first; and I
have feen fome in Holland, which were faid to
be done with it forty Years before, which a Vear
or two ago look’d Hill as freth as one would des
fire the firft Day one ufed it. This Colour, how.
ever, if it be touch’d with Aqua-fortis, immedis
ately changes to a fine Crimfon, little inferior to
Carmine, and then finks quite through the Paper
To as not to be got out.
So that when we ufe this Colour as Blnc,
it is beft to preferve it from Aqua-fortis, or
Tuch ftrong Acids. It is a good Shade for Ultra=
marine, of blue Bife, where the ftrongest Shades
should not be extremely deep; and for colouring
of Prints it is very good, as it is a tranfparent Cos
lour, and goes a great Way.
SECT. Vj. OFINDICo.
VNDIGO is the next Colour I shall speak of,
9s it certainly makes the ftrongeff Spade for
Blues of any other, and is a foft and warm Co-

four, when it is well ground and wath’d with Crum-
water, by means of a Stone and Maller, As one
happens


4
happcns to want the Ufe of this; put inore Gums
water to it, if you would have it of the lighteft
Caft; of lets; as you would have it darker; but
before you touch your Print with it; try its

Strength upon a white Dutch Tile; for it runs
warmly in the Pencil, and may chance to be too
frong for your Defign, which you should always
think of, when a flowing Colour, is to be laid over
a dark Shade of a Print; which Shade will much
aggravate its Blacknefs; and even make it appeak
quite Black:

SECT. VIL. A fine BEvE from Mr.
BOyL E.


7

AE E the blue Leaves of Rhue, and beat
them a little in a Stone-mortar with a
wooden Peftel; then put them in Water; Juice
and all, for fourteen Days; or more; wathing
them every Day till they are rotten, and at latt
beat them and the Water together; till they are

in a Pulp, and let them dry in the Sun. This will
produce as good a Blue as Indigo, and be much
foffer; but to keep it a long while; when you.
beat it the laftt Time, add a little Powder of
Crum-Arabick. You may put more or lefs of the
Gum, as you defign to make it more free of te-
S77
1is a fine Blue for
nacious in the Working.
Shading; and has a good Body, and runs warnt
in the Pencil.
SECT Viil. Of Mir. BotlEs transpas
rent BLUE; equal to Ultramarine.

N the next Place; I have a Colour to defcribe,
which I took from the great Mr. Boyle's Mas
nutcripts given me by my Lord Carleton; and
proves
d 2


48
Broves a beautiful Blue, and what I admite 16
for the more is, becaute the chief of the Ingre-
dients it is compofed of, may be cafily had du-
ring four of the Summer Months, that is, the
Cyanus or blue Cornbottle-fower, which abounds
in almoff every Cornfield; Children may gather
it, without hurting any Thing; about the Skirts
or Verges of the Corn-field. This Flower has
two Blues in it, one of a pale Colour in the larger
outward Leaves, and the other a deeper Blue, which
lies in the middle of the Flower both thefe will
do, if they are feparated from the Buttons or Ca-
fes they grow in; but the deep Blue of the Micd-
die produces much the beft Colour, as one may
try, by rubbing it while it is fresh, to hard upon
a piece of good writing Paper, as to press out
the Juice, and it will yield an excellent Colour,
which will not fade, as the Experience of two of
three Years has shewed me. This part of the
Flower is therefore the principal, and what is to
be depended upon, therefore the fame Day that
People gather the Flowers, or the next at the lateff,
employ. fome Children to pick that part clean
from the reft; and when you have a good Quan-
tity, prets what Juice you can from it; and by
adding to that a little Allum, you will have a
latting tranfparent Blue, of as bright a staining
Colour as you would defire; and in my Opinion,
it is not inferior in Beauty to UUltramarine But
for the other Parts of the Flower, which are paler,
I muft obferve, that when I had a Buthel of them
gathered, and had not an Opportunity of preffing
them immediately, they changed white; to that
I cannot commend them, left the Allum should
not fix them, but as for the middle of the Flow-
er, it is certainly as good a Bluc as can be defir-
nd, and is durable.
Is


49
: IF any one should object, that Twill be trous
blefone to make it; let him confider only what
Pains there is in gathering and curing of Saffron,
which fometimes is fold at thirty shillings the
Pound, and feldom brings three Pounds per Pound:
But a Blue, if it comes up to the Colour of UI-
tramarine, is worth four or five Pounds per Ounce,
especially when it stains to well as this does; there-
fore I should think it worth while, when any one
has made this Experiment, as I have done, to have
a piece of Ground on purpofe for this UOfe, where
ho other Thing but this Corn-bottle, or Cyanus
should be fown. And as this Flower is plentiful
enough in the Fields between Twittenham and Te-
dington; in Middlefex, to there may be seed enough
gathered of it, in a Quarter of an Hour; by one
Hand, to fow an hundred acres. There is like=
wife abundance of it in the large Corn-fields in
Cambridgesbire. But how valuable are many
Things that we daily trample under Foot; if
we knew their Virtues; we should ufe them, pros
vided we could bring them to a proper Markets
But let that be as it will; gather the Flowers
about the beginning of Tune, or in July or Hus
guft, and fome you may find in May; thefe are
for your immediate Work to make the Colour of;
and muft be difpatched as Saffron is done, or it

will lofe its Perfections. And as I happen to
mention Saffron, which I very well know the
Management of, by drying it on Kilns, I do not
fee why thefe Chives of Flowers may not be cured
in the same Manner; they would certainly produce
a much greater body of Colour, and a I incture
might be drawn from them with more cafe, than if
we were to pressthem raw or freth from the Field.
THE Way then that I would have them dry’d
like Saffron, is, to provide in the first place fuch a
Kiln as is ufed for curing Saffron; within: which,
make





50
Make a fimall Charcoal-fire, which comins
Nicates an Hieat to the top of the Kiln, which is
covered with an Hair Cloth; and upon that; lay
on four or five Streets of white Paper, I mean fuch
as we ule fof curing of Saffron; then lay on the
Paper a parcel of the picked Flowers, till you
have the thickness of two or three luches, laying
clofe and flat with a knife; and prinkle it. with.
some thin Cum-water then cover the Cake of
Flowers with two or three more Sheets of Papery
and lay upon them a Board with a little Werght.
upon it for a few Minutes; then take off the
Board, and, taking hold of all the Papers with
both Hands, turn your Cake of Flowers upon.
the Kiln; and when tis rightly placed, take off
the upper Papers, and fprinkle the Cake again
with tome thin Gum-water, and with a Knife fet=
tle your Cake of Flowers, and lay on again your
28
Papers and Board; with a Weight upon it for a
Minute of two; and then turn your Papers again
and again, till the Flower-cake becomes united;
and of the thickness of a Cake of Saffron in this

57
Work you will find the Flowers grow darker.

ty. time they are turned; till at length the Cake.
Willlook of a deep Blue tending to Black. From
whence we cafily draw fuch a Tincture as I fpeak
Off.
DURINc this Operation, great care muft be
taken of the Fire, that it does not fcorch the
Flowers let it be gentle and as constant as may
be, which will be a fure Way to bring your
Flower-cake to a good Colour.
I wovts advite in this Cafe; that whoever
attempts this, they should fee the Management of
Saffron; or read Accounts that are publiffied of
the curingit.
Ir any one is defirous of feeing the curing of
Saffron, with the Manner of the Kilns, the boff
Artiffs


57
Brtifts that way, are about Chesterford and Littles.
bury in Effex; though I think it can be of no
great Morent, fince there is publiffed a large
Account of its Preparation, in Mr. BRADLEY S
Montbly Treatife of Husbandry and Gardenings
and in the prefent Cafe of the Blue, I have made
the neceffary Alcerations, and I think given what
is fufficient for fuch as are acquainted already with
the curing of Flowers by Kiln-drying.
Bur I come now to fpeak of the Culture of
this valuable Flower for I muft now to call it;
fince I am well affured of its Perfections.
EvERy Knob or Head of Seed muft be open’d
before we fow it, for each Head contains a great
number of Seeds, the Preparation of the Ground
for the Reception of this Seed, need not be more
troublefome or expenfive than common Plough-
ing requires which being done, fow the Seed
which will come up
either at the Knd of Auguft.
foon enough to ftand the
Winter, and blofforn
early the May following; or effe fow it. at the
End of Mareh, and it will begin flowering the
WWhen the Ground is freffy
following June.
plow’d at either of thefe Seafons, fow the Seed,
and harrow it in with Buthes, and it will prefently.
come up.
IN the Choice of the Seed I should obferve,
that it be gathered opply in fuch Fields where wc.
are fure there grow no Corn-bottles of any other
Colour but Blue; and then one may expect all
the Plants which rife from fuch Seed to produce
blue Flowers, but if they should be gathered itn
fuch Places, where there are Varieties of them,
we muft expect various Sorts, as White, Red, or
Purple, although we are fure we gather the Seed
from fuch as were truly of the blue Sort; for ac-
cording to the Dectrine of the Generation of
Plants, which has been explained to the World in
2 Sicat


52
a great mary Inftances, if there is a red Flower
of the fame Tribe with this growing near it, the
difference of Colour will be fo intermix’d between
Both, that the Seed of both will bring a variety
from the Principal, depending of the Colours of
both. And thus I conclude what I have to fay.
of Bines; as for the Smalt, tis much too heavy
a Colour to be ufed for illuminating of Prints.
MOr  iRngrmn
nna
C (] C Col e Cole) (oto) (ohe) Cole. Colol Colol: Coted Co. Cole fets. Coe Cote) (col ( oss Cate. Cole Chey
CH AP. KII
Of BLACK.
TVHIE. proper Black for Water-colours, is
what they call Ivory-black, which if it be
pure and well ground, is of ufe in miniature
Painting; but very feldom; and indeed ought
not to be ufed in colouring of Prints, if they are
good, for tis too heavy a Colour, and hides the
beautiful Strokes of the Engraver, unless done
with very great care. If it is neceffary however
to ufe Black by way of darkening a Print, rather
chufe a strong Tincture of good Indian ink, than
the Lvory-black, but to colour Pieces in Minia-
ture, ufe the Ivory-black prepared as follows.
LET your burnt Ivory. be well ground in
X
Crum-water, and then beat the White of an Eg
5
very well till you find a kind of oily Liquor fet-
tles to the bottom; this Liquormix with as much
of the Lvory-black as you think neceftary to make
it run freely in the Pencil, and it will afford an
extraordinary Gloss; and if the Object is fhining,
fuch as the Wings of fome Bectles, mix with fome
of it a little White upon a Dutch glazed Tile,
cillyou find it light enough to relieve the Shadej
and


5


33
fitid their make another lighter Mixture of the
ame; which being ufed on the brighter Part of
the Subject, will produce the Effect you defire.

ooniea> as ao <  <g 
47
CtelCe) Co) Ce1 (to) (os Col Cote Cote Coor? (oe) Co) (e. Cder sof Cdellde) Cdel Cec. Coe? too Cotey
C H A P. KIII
Of.GREE NS.

D
The 1 rogress of Greens from Tellore to Blue:

HI A VE already given an Account of the
Progress of Colour from White, through the
Vellows to the Orange; the Reds, Purples and
Blues, to the Blacks; and shall now treat of the
Greens in their feveral Orders, from the Yellows
to the Blues.
GKEENS are allow’d by all to depend upon the
Fellow and the Blue, and by the help of one and
the other Colour, may be framed any green Co=
lour we pleafe.
THE Gamboge is one of our firft Vellows;
which; with the Preparation of Verdigreafe, I shall
infert; may be made to produce five or fix Sorts
of Green, according as the Gamboge abounds, or
is in lets Quantity if it abounds; one mgy make
a tolerable Oak reen with it; and being Htill
more mix’d with the Verdigreafe Green; it will be
2 Grats Green.
Bur the Vellow that I pfefer before all others;
is that which is made of French Befries defcribed
above, which I have obferved is of different Cas
pacities, as the Liquor it is boyled in is more or
lefs ftain’d with it when it is very thin, it makes
d Good Glaze all over the Verdigreafe, ald; as it
sOries nearer to Durch Pitik of Gall-ftone, coims
mands
41


54

mands almoft any Colour we want, being agree-
ably mix’d with the tranfparent Verdigreafe, and
Hill is tran(parent.
So the Yellow drawn from the Roots of Bar-
berries, and thofe drawn from the Roots of the
Mulberry-tree, will produce in great meafure the
like Effect, being mix’d with the tranfparent Ver-
digrealc.
As for the Verdigreafe itfelf, it produces a fine
blucish Green, flows eafy in the Pencil, and may
even ferve as an Ink to write with.
+
THE preparing of this Colour is yet very little
Known, and I shall therefore inform my Reader
how to do it.
TAKE of common Verdigreafe three Ounces,
break it a little, and boil it gently in a Pint of
White-wine Vinegar, firring it continually; when
you perceive it to boil, add a little Tartar broken,
and Keep your Mixture ftirring till you find the
clear Liquer of fuch a Colour as you would with;
that is, of a fine tranfparent Green, with a blue
Calt, which you may do by dipping in a Stick,
and touching a piece of Paper with it.
WHEN you have a Colour to your Mind, pour
it through a Linnen-cloth into an open Veffel,
and fet it to cool; when it is quite cold, keep it
in a clofe Veffel for Ofe, pouring out a little at a
time as you want it; for when it is expoted to the
Air,; it will foon dry, but. is reducible again by
common Water.
WHEN we prepare this liquid Colour, do not
ufe the diftilled Verdigreafe, for it will notanfwer
the end we: propofe.

 4 Hrs Liquid should be touched upon part of
the Lights and Shades of a Print, and the Shades
afterwards coloured with Sap-green.
N.B.. IN the making this Green, take care you
make it trong enough, for it is not to be frength-

IICd


55
ned afterwards, without the trouble of boiling
afresh, but may at any time be rendered as faint
as we pleafe, by mixing common Water with it.
SAP-GREEN is a Colour like that of an. Oak-
leaf; if it is ufed thin with common Water, for
this as well as the former wants no Crum, but it
will, if we ufe it frong, produce as dark a Green
as any we can imagine. We may try our Colour
firft on a white Dutch Tile, and by thinning it
with Water, render it of what Strength we picafe,
and brighten it very much, with adding to it a
little of the Liquid Verdigreafc.
Sap-treen is made two Ways, Viz.
Firf, TAkE the Flowers of the blue Flag-Iris,
or Flower-de-Luce, and prefs them while there is
any Juice to be got from them, boil this gently
in a glazed Pipkin, till it grows thick, adding a
little Allum to it, and it will make a very ufeful
and lafting Green.
W.B. In the boyling of any Juice, 63c. of the
Colours heretofore mentioned, ufe an earthen
glazed Pipkin, for if you boil them in Veffels of
Metal, they will fometimes change from the De-
Sign we intend.
Secondly, ANOTHER Way there is of produ-
cing a Sap-green, for wathing or illuminating of
Prints, which is to take the Juice of Buckthorn-
berries; and tho' that Juice fimply will yield on-
ly a dark Purple, of a very bafe Hue, yet, by
adding Tartar to it, it will turn to a good Sap-
green, and may be brought to a good Contiffence
by boiling.
EYTHER of thefe Colours, will mik with
the liquid Verdigreafe above mentioned, as well
as make a delicate Shade for it.

THERE is yet one Green more, which is af-
mired by fome, and carries a good Body with
1t
H2


1


56
its with a Degree of Tranfparency, as I make it;
tho' as it is commonly yied; it is a full-bodied.
Colour, fit only for Miniature painting: For this.
end they mix Dutch Pink with Indigg, to what
Degree of Colour they pleafe, but in the Place
of Dutch Pink, my high Preparation of French
Berries with Indigo; Ithink much to be preferr’d,
as this anfwers all the Intent of Dutch Pink, and
Carries 2 Tranfparency with it, which the Dutch
Pink has not. And thus have 1 given fuch an
Account of the Paffage of Greens from the Vel-
low to the darkeft Blue; as I think neceffary, for
the Inftruction of thofe whe delight in illumings
King of Prints and Painting in Water-colours.
 

Ex      > / / 
 


F25
FX
30
RIELMe Mcheneeieie MEMEnSEuSSuELuEESE
C HA.P. XIV
Rurious Directions for Drawing with
Grayons.
7 1II E Manner of Drawing with Crayons is
A much more expeditions, where we would
1
xprets the Objects we are to take in Colours,
than Painting in Water-colours; for, before we
ife them to strike the Colours we intend, only 2
Rlight Out-line need he made, either with Chalk,
Charcoal, or Red-oker, of the Subicet we would
reprcfent.
We may bring thefe Drawings to a
delicate Sofincts and fine Expreftion, but then
they muft be always kept in Books,, or under
Cilaffes in Frames, where they may not rub; for
a Touch of a rude Finger, unacquainted with
the Performance, may change the Shades or Lights,
and fo altey the fine Defign of the Work.
BvT


57
:Ber we muft firft provide an indifferent coarfe
Paper, of the Colour of whited brown Paper, for
the Colour of the Paper being a little: dark, gives
a better Opportunity of thewing the light or white
Strokes of our Crayons, and will give a good Res

lief to the tender Parts of our Work.
AGAIN, the little Roughness of such Paper will
make the Crayons of every Colour express thems
felves much ftronger, than if we were to draw with


them upon Lmooth Paper.
THESE Crayons of every Sort of Colour, you.
will have occafion for, are made in Paftils, and
fold by moft of the moft noted Colour-men in
London; a few will ferve you at firft to try your
Hand, and in taking of Sketches of Prospects are
very ufeful, when you are once Wafter of Draw-
ing enough to take the Out-lines; for a little Box
of them will ferve to mark the Colours which
you will remark in the different Parts of your
Prospect; without the Trouble of Water and
Gum-Water, which muft be had if we ufe Water=
colours, and would be troublefome to get for your
Ofe in the Fields, where you should take thefe
Prospects from.
THESE Crayons being of fo eaty a Ufe, may
encouage us to colour our Prospects after the
Life, where we shall difcover the different Co-
lours of the feveral Fields which are very different
from one another, according as they happen to be
cropp’d, or fituared, and then the Woods which
are in View commonly confift of Variety of Trees,
which have every one of them their different Co-
lour, which at once we may fee in our Crayons,
and mark it as it happens to be upon our Draw-
ing. But if our Wood should prove all of one
Sort of Tree, we shall fill find a great Variety
of Colours in the Trees produced by their dific-
rent Situation, and if we match our Crayons
well


58

well with the Colours of our Trees, and other.
Parts of the Prospect, we shall learn by it what
is a natural Reprefentation of Things.
Bur to do this effectually, if you cannot fur-
nith a Draught in Colour at once, take the fame
Hour the next Day to do it in, becaute as the
Sun happens to be at one Point, at one Hour of
the Day, to the next Day it will be about the
same Point at the fame Hour; and if you was to
miss that Time, the Shades of all your Objects
will be altered, and your Colours would be vary’d:
S0 you fhould likewife take either the Mornings
or Evenings for this Purpofe, for then you will
have ftrong Shades and ftrong Lights, which will
give a pleafing Variety to your Picture. Memo-
randum; If you have a bright Morning or Even
ing, when you begin, finith your Work when the
Hours of your Drawing are as bright as they were
at firft, if you can.
Fok want of fuch Obfervations many one, who
is a good Draughts-man fpoils a fine Drawing,
he will fometimes place his Greens improperly, and
give Strengths where only little Touches should
be afed. And fome who are Beginners in thefe
Affairs, will encourage a favourite Colour, and

neglect the proper ornamental Colcurs.
I THINK I have not feen finer Prospects, to teach
us this rt, than what are on both lides Guifford—
downs, Box-bill, Leitb-hill, Richmond-bill, and
about High-eickham, where one has fine Vales,
beautiful Hills, and delightful Woods. In the
Spring and Autumn, to look on the Woods, you
may almoft perceive every Colour in our Collecti-
on; fome Trees will open with a yellowifh Caft,
others with a sharp blucifh Green, fome Brown,
and others of a reddith Colour, and to in the dy-
ing away of the Leaves in Autumn, or towards the
Fall of the Leaf, you will fee as much Variety.
AND


9
AND you will find then the Fields, and all the
changeable Parts of the Country, of different Cos
lours; about half a fcore Drawings in Crayons of
thefe Sorts, will enliven your Imagination, and
teach you the Art of Colouring in the moft
Natural, and confequently the moft beautiful
Manner.
Bur if you defign principally to draw Land.
Icapes in this Manner, 1 advife to make your Out-
lines, with Charcoal or Black-lead, very gently
touch’d, but Black-lead is the beft.
WHEN in this Way of Drawing, one has an
Object where a light Colour and a shaded Co-
lour should fall naturally into one another, then,
when you have marked your Paper with both, take
2 dry short haird Pencil, and bruth it gently be-
tween both, tillyou have mixed them to eafily to-
gether, that you cannot difcern where the Lights
and the Shades feparate, or where the Light and
the Shade part from one another, but this is pro=
perly for the larger Drawings, which are to appear
foft and tender.
Ir one wants a Pencil, of the Sort I peak of,
take a Piece of feft whited brown Paper, and roll
it, or twift it up till tis of the Bigness of a Ca-
mels Flair-pencil, of the Size we generally ufe in
Water-colours, and when you have rubbed the
pointed End gently on a rough piece of clean
Board, of a piece of rough brown Paper, Twill
serve inftead of a Pencil to & fcumble your Work
of make one Colour flow into another.
THE R E remains how only to tell you how
you ought, in this particular Way of Drawing,
to cut or Point your Crayons; take a fine Pen-
Knife, and inftead of Drawing it down from the
Body of the Crayon towards the Point, as one
does



  tter tt 

Scumbling is rubbing in gently one Colour into another.


65
Aces in pointing a Black-lead Pencil, begitn at the
Point and draw your Knife upwards; in fuch a
Manner as to leave your Crayon of the fame Fi=
gare you would require a Black-lead Pencil to be
of when twas sharpened; for thefe Crayons are
hardly two Inches long; and are brittle enough :
Befides if they have any Knots in them; they: will
be very apt to break:
ONE may-obferve too, before we conclude this
Chapter of Drawing and Colouring with Crapons,
that all thefe appear immediately of the Colour
Chhe would express; whereas the Colours to be us’d
with Water will be much deeper or darker when
the Water is put to them, than they will prove
when they are dry, which may confound a Begin-
her, and occation him to make his Colourlighter,
but when this comes to dry he will fee his Error.
Arip 4Ep pp A84 AEp Ap A8p 484 AX4 p 8
Sp 19 4 p
5 54.15638
9
INTOUNO
OhIOHSOtGOSC

Bhe sit tht tit ats is s terel rerersteftremerefl

C H A P. XV.
The Use and Nature of Dry Colours.
I )LUE. Bife is the moft excellent Blue next

D. to Wltramarine, which is too good to wash
vithal, and therefore I leave it out here, and put
in bluc Bife; which will very well ferve infiead
of it; and indeed you may leave out both, and
ule Smalt inftead of them; but that it will not
work fo well as Bife; no Bife is too good to wfc
pon all Occafions, but only when you intend to
beffow fome Coff and Pains upon a Piece, other
wife you may wfe no other Blue in your Work
than blus Verditer; with which you may make a
precty good Shiff, without any other Bluc, 1 incan
in any ordinary Work,

As IN



62
o
R



7
2: INbrGo is a dark Blae; and is rufed princes,
bally to shadow with upon your other Blue. Ins
2
digo and yellow Berries inikxed together make a.
Hark Green to shadow other Greens within the
Larkelt Places.
3. BLUE Verditer is a very bright pleafant Blue;

and the cafieft to work with in Water: It is fome=
what inclining to a Green, and being mixed with.
yellow Berries it makes a good Green; This Blne
15 moftuted.
4 VERDIGREASE is a good Green; bfit fubs
ieCt to decay : when it is dry upon the Paper it
Sir
will be of a lighter Colour than it is when you
lay it firft on; therefore; to preferve it from that
Fault; piut fome Sap-gree amongtt it to diffolve

in it; and it will make it keep its Colour: This
Colour is of a poifonous Nature, and therefore.
you muft be careful how you ufe it; that it come
fot near your Mouth. There is diffilled Verdis
5
Greafe to be bought at the Colour-shops, that; is
Ty
4 far better Green than the other, but it is fome-
What dear, and the other will ferve inftead of its
VERDITER-Green is a light Green; feldom
tifed in any Thing but in colouring of Landfcapes;
thofe Places that should thew a far off; and it is


Good for fuch a Purpofe, becaute it is fomewhat.
Inclining to a blue, but you may make a shift to
-
oany thing well enough without it for a little
blue Verditer mix’'d with Copper-green and a little
White, will make juft fuch another Colour.
6. SAp-Green is a dark dirty Green; and
never ufed but to fhaddow other reens in the
Harkeff Places; or eife to lay upon fome dark
Ground behind a Picture; which requires to be
coloured with a dark Green but you may make
a shift well enough without this Green, for Indigg.
and yellow Berries make juft fuch another Colour.
7. CoEL


r


62)
7. COPPER-Green, is an excellent tranfparent
Grech, of a fhining Nature if it be thickned in
the Sun, or upon a foftly Fire, and it is molt ufed
of any Green in wathing of Prints, especially in co-
louring of the Grafs-ground, or Trees, for it is a
nott perfect Grals-green.
S. VERMTLLtON is the perfecteff Scarlet-co-
lour, you need not grind it, nor wath it, it is fine
enough of itfelf, only temper it with your Finger
in a Gallipot, or Oyfter-thell, with Gum-water,
and it will be ready for Ufe; if you put a little
yellow Berries amongtt it, it will make it, the
Brighter Colour, this is principally ufed for Gar-
thents.
9. L A KE is an excellent Crimfoh-colour;
with it you may fhadow Vermillion, or your yel-
low Garments in the darkeft Places; with it you
thay make a Sky-colour, being mixed only with
white  with it you make Fleth-colour, fometimes
tix’d together with white and a little Red-fead;
it is of an excellent Colour itfelf to colour Gar-
ments, or the like. Indian Lake is the best Lake,
but too good to be ufed to wath Prints with, an=
lets you intend to beftow great Curiofity upon
your Work but the best fort of ordinary Lake
will ferve well enough for ordinary Ofes, but that
alto will be fomewhat coftly.
THEKREFORE inflead thereof you may afe red

Ink thickened upon the Fire, and it will ferve
very well for your Purpofe, and beiter than Lake,

unless it be very good.
NoTE, if you would make a light Sky-colour
of yourred Ink, or if you would mix it among
your Fiefh-colour; you muft not thicken it,; you
should rather chufe to shadow your Vermillion
with Spaniffi-brown, than thick red Ink, which
will ferve well for that Purpofe, and is much
75
Chcaper


63
cheaper, but it is not altogether fo bright a
Colour and clear.
10. RED-LEAD is the neareft to an Orange-
colour, and putting a little yellow Berries into
Tome of it, will make a perfect Orange-colour;
but if you mean to make Flefh-colour of it, you.
muft put no yellow, but only when you would
make an Orange-colour. This Colour is ufed for
the colouring of Buildings, or High-ways in
Landicape, being mix’d with a little white. Alfo
it is the only bright Colour to fhadow yellow
Garments with, to make them thew like change-
able Taffety. it is good alfo to colour any light
round in a Picture, taking only the thin Water
of it, and fo for feveral other Ufes as you shall
Lee occafion for it.
II. TELLow Berries are moft ufed in wathing
of all other Colours; their Colour is bright and
tranfparent, fit for all Vfes, and is fufficient with-
out the Ufc of any other Vellow.
12. SAFTRON is a deep Yellow, if you let it
sland a pretty while; it is good principally to
Shadow yellow Berries with, instead of Red-lead;
and it is fomewhat a brighter Shadow but you
may make fhift well enough without this Colour,
for Red-lead and yellow Berries make juft fuch
another Colour.
13. Lichr Mafficoat is a light Yellow, just
Like yellow Berries and white, and therefore you
may make shift well enough without it, only for
you a Labour to mix your yellow Berries
Saving
with white, when you have Occation for a light
Yellow, which you may fometimes make ufe of to
colour a light Ground in a Picture, and then
shadow it with the Water of burnt Umber or
Red-lead, that is, the thinneft Part of the Con
lour.
1.2
24 IS.



64
1
24. IS. CERUSE is the best Whites if it be
good and finely ground ready to your Hland,
as you may have it at some Colour-shops, or for
yant of it buy Whice-lead pick’d to your Ifand;
either of thefe will ferve well enough, for either
of them, being mingled with another Colour,
sake it lighter, and the more you put, the lighter
they will be, as you shall find in the uling of
Them.
16. SPANISH-Brown is a dirty brown Colour,
yet of great Ufc, not to colour any Garment with,
unlefs it be an old Mans-gown, but to Thadow
Vermillion, or to lay upon any dark Ground be=
hind a Pictyre, or to shadow yellow Berries in the
darkeff Places, when you want Lake, of thick
red Ink.
17. Ir is the beff and brighteft Golour when
it is burnt in the Fire till it be red hot; tho', if
you would coloug any Hars, Horfe, Dog, or the
like, you muft not burn it; but for other Ofes it
is beft when it is burnt, for inftance, to colour
any wooden Poft, Bodies of Trees, of any Thing
Elie of Wood, of any dark Ground in a Picture:
It is not to be afed about any Garments, unlets
you would colour many old Man's Gowns, or Caps,
standing together, becaute they muft not be all. of
one Colour of Black, therefore for Diftinction and
Waricties fake, you. may ufe Umber upburnt for
some of them.
18. PRINTERs Black is moft ufed, becaute if
is eafieft to be had, and ferves very well in walh-
ing, Note, you muff never put any Black amongft
your Colours to make them dark, for it will make
them dirty, neither spould you fhadow any Colour
with Black, unless it be Spanifh-brown, when
You would colour an old Man’s Gown, that re=
yifes to be done of a fad Colour; for whaffoc-
et o et n
VEF


n
11
65
wer is shadowed with Black will took dirty
, and
not bright, fair and beautiful.
19. Ivoxy buint, or for want of that, Bone
burnt, is the blackeft Black, and it is thus made;
take Lyory, or for want of it, fome white Bone,
and put it into the Fire till is be thoroughly
burned, then take it out and let if cool, and to
flit it in the middle, and take out the blackeft of
it in the middle and grind it for your Ife.
ffor ffor after odt l ell    reffis  
taS 
CH AP. EVE
with Di=
Of a portaple Cale for Colourss
llum, and other
Cu.
rections for makin

Waters.
EFORE, however; I conclude this Treas
ad tife of Colours, let me advife fuch Perfons,
who are curious in making Obfervations of the
Colours of Flowers, to have always in their Pock-
et a small Cafe with Colours in it, about the Big-
nness of a Snuff-box, made of Ivory, about half
an Inch thick, in which should be fcooped feveral
Concaves about half an Inch Diameter each, and
as deep as the Ivory would bear, without going
through: Thefe Cavities may be placed as near
one another as poffible, and filled with Colours
of feveral Sorts; and as for the Liquid Colours,
they will dry by being exposed to the Air, to that
one may have them altogether in a few Days dry
enough to be carried in the Pocket; 1 shall fup-
pofe the piece of Ivory disposed in the following
Manner, viz.
I












66















3








2
2
C
5
0
53

3

5

2
t
5

2
25
25
HE
C
 .




5

5
11
as












5



hen
d

C













.

X




p

 
AN. the foregoing rigure one may oblerve the
Difpofition of the feveral Cavities for the Colours
o the Dnbets 1,2, 3,4.5. 68. and on one ade
a littie Cale for rencils, and another for indran-
ink, Cum-Arabick bowdered with white Sugar-
candy, or for any thing elfe an rtiff may have
Occation for in the painting Way.
Iw fuch a Cafewou may have thirty two forts
of Colonr under verveafy Command, befides other
NNeccilaries. anen asa Cover to tris, iet there bo
a piece of plain lvory to open with an Hinge, that
may ferve as a Pallet, and all this will lie in a very
Narrow Compass; nav, even though one was to
add another vicce of lyory of half an Inch thick,
10


67
9 open below that of the Colours, to include a
Small pair of Compaltes, a Port-crayon, and fome
other luch ufeful Materials for Drawing.
How to make Gum-water
C THERE remains now, only to mention the Way
how to prepare Gum, Allum, and other Watersin
the beft Manner. To make Cum-water, take of
the whiteft Gum-Arabick one Ounce, of clear
white Sugazcandied half an Ounce, diffolve thefe
in a Quart of clear Water, and add to it, if. you
will, a little Coloquintida. When your Gum-
water is thus prepared, pats it cafily through a
fine Sieve, or a piece of Muflin, and keep it in a
Bottle fo stopped, that ho Dirt may get in; and

as you want to ufe it; pourout a little at a Time,
for if this proves dircy or foul, it will spoil the
Brightness of your Colours. The ufe of the Cos
loquintida is only to keep the Flies from spoiling
your Work, if it should be expofed.

To make Allum-water
Bort four Ounces of Allum in a Quart of Rain
of River-water till the Allum is diffolved, and let
it tland twenty four Hours.
Ufe of Allum-water.
WyTH this Water wath the Prines you defign
to colour, which will fix the Paper fo, that the
Colours will not fink or run in it when you lay
them, on, and will help likewife to brighten your
Colours.
Ir your Paper is very thin and loofe, then let
your Paver be washed with the above Water four
or five Times, letting it dry between every Time,
and your Paper muft always dry before youlay any
of your Colours, upon it.
But you muffobferve, that if you defign to var-
hith your Prints after they arc colour’d, then wath
the


68
the Prifits all over equally with whice Starch before
you colour them, and when that is drv las on

n 
your Colours.
To make Lime:water:
LYME-water is made by taking fome untlackt
Lime, and covering it an Inch with Water, and
To letting it remain for twelve Hours; ponf off
the cleat, and keep it for fc.
N. B. With this Water you may change your
Sap-green into Blue.

Water made with Fearl-asbes:
TAKE about half an Ounce of Pearlcathes; and
Keep them twelve Hours in Rain or River-waterg
then pour off the clear; and that Water is excel=
lent to life with Brafil-wood; in order to enlivert
Its red Colour.
Size for Water-colours.
TAKE the Cuttings of whice Glover's Leatherg
boil them in common Water till the Liquor will
Jflly; you may prepare any Colotr with this Size
when it is warm, and it should always be ufed
War.
+
THE Ufe of it is, that none of your Colours
should fhine by Candle-fight, as they would do
If they were to be mixt with Gum-water; there-
exe the Scenes of Play-houfes are painted in Sizes

9
C

Fr
AHIII




8
1
880


23
248








2..
5


an
 
she II IPE.L.


e
CHAP.
Pasiz
I. DULES for Drawing any Object in its

3
& Out-lines, as exatt as the Lifeor Nature 5
II. How to bring these Drawingsto Ife; and
to copy from Prints, Esc.
8
III. Secrets for Copying of Drawings, Ec.
continued
14
To take a Drawing with sixt Ink.
ib.
Ared ink for making an impression of a Print
ib.
Taking Draughts withred loofe: ink

15
Taking Draughts with biue loofe ink.
ib.
To take off a Drawing in a standing red

Colour by Tracing
ib.
A speedy Way of Exintingthe Leaf of any Tree
16
or Hlerb, as exact as Nature itself
Anotber Way of Printingibe Leaves of Plants.
so that the Impreftion shall appear as black
as if it bad: been done in a Printing-prets
1
To take the Imprettion of any Leat, as certain
as the former Way, only using such things
as may be bad in any Part of England
16.
8
Afine red or blue Printers ink, for makinm
18
Impressions of this fort
The Method of Taking-off the Leaves of
Plams in Plaifter of Paris, so that they
ib.
may afterwards be cat in any Nctal
The Manner of making the imprettions of any
Burterdy in a Minate in all their Colours 19
19
IV:Ofr Taking-off Medals instantly, bv
26
various Ways not known
V. Of Colours for illuminating of Prints in
the best Manner or of Painting in Wa-
27
er-Colourg
3
28
VI. Of Whices for Painting in Miniature
31
VII. Of Yellows
36
Viil. Of Orange-Colour
Is. Of Minium, or the brighteft Red Lead,
and bow to prepare it
F.O/
E



18









I
The L.DE X.
Pas.
OHIAP.


38
. Of Reds

3
iD.
SEeT: I. Of Scarlet
39
 II. Of Crmfon

ID.
III. Of Lake
40
IV: Of tranfparent Crimfon
42
V. Crimion from MMIr. Boyle
1b.
VI. Of Indian-Red
42
3
VIl. Of tranfparent Purple

43
8I. Of Blue
ib.
SEeT. I. Of the Ultramarine
44

II. Of the Pruffian Blue
III. Of Biue Bite
45
ib.
. IV. Of Sanders Blue
ib.
V. Of Laemus, or Litmus Blue
46
VI. Of Indigo
47
VII. A fine Blue from Mr. Boyle
VIII. Of Ar. Boyle's tranfparent Blue
1b.
equal to Ultramarine
XII. Of Back
52
3
KIll. Of Greens
33
Tbe Progress of Greens from Fellow to
Blue
ib.
Sap-Green made two Ways
55
XIV. Curious Directions for Drawing with
Crajons
56
60
XV. The Use and Nature of Dry Colours
XVI. Of a portable Cafe for Colours, with Di-
rections for making Gum, Allum, and
65
other Watcrs
66
A Plan of the portable Cafc

57
C
foe to make Cum-Water
ib.
To make Ailum-water and the Useof it
68
To make Lime-water
ib.
Water made with Pearl-athes
Size for Water-Colours
10.

A L   Dc




i

23
1

Lately published.
By the same Author
HE METHIODof LEARNINC to DRAw
in PERSPECTIVE made eafy and fully
explained.
As alfo, the rt of Painting upon
Glafs, and Drawing in Crayons, with Reccipts
for making them after the French and Italian
Manner. Likewife, a new and curious Method
of Japaning, either upon Glafs, Wood, or any
Metal, to as to imitate China and to make
black or gilt Japan-Ware, as Beautiful and Light
as any brought from the Eaft-Indies, with pro-
per Directions for making the hardeft and moft
tranfparent Varnifhes. And particularly the Way
to calt Amber in any Shape. Chiefty from the
MSS. of the great Mr. BOYLE. The THIED
EDrTiONN.
LONDON Printed for J. PEELE, at Lockes
Head in Amen-Corner, Pater—Nofter-Row,

MpCCXxNV. [Price One Sbilling


MINTLpTAE

115
CF
34
 35

3
3

7


