




2
a 


17

213 

4



24

1F r a Macy

re tift Alipr p & 24
552



tj
2.5
3
225
5
BE
 i 
Ft
2 
29

 t i
r  gn
57



13
F1



142
2.
v.
o i I do o a o  and
  

pr

LVL L2 Dd Lo 20 22 d 2
In which is contained;
T H E
1 2 42 2 18 1 110 C 4 18 C)  L4
L 2 A2 
✓
WI T H PH E
METHOD OF COLOURING.
UNDER THE HE ADS OF

0- Third or
A Sill IdilItILlE, &I ECAA-UUUULLIS;StCUHH FdILICLLt:
Painting :—Painting Back-grounds:—On Cooyine;—
Drabery, and Landichane Paintino
BT T. BARDWELL, PAINTERF:
r
-

5




d   
4



F
2
2



PRINTED FOR, AND SOL D By, THE BOOKSELLER St
MIcDEteLAKAll.
FitE
es ir. 

 & s


Price, ftirched in blue paper, Five Shillings.

yarts

os
1755


32
14

5


5
H

o ct  M   


24


1 



5217.9

52







r


8











TIS
5


















her


4



 
3





2








I ON.
C
NTRODU

T is an obfervation of Pliny's, that the ancients painted with four
colours only, and out of them made all their teints. Monficur de
Piles is of opinion, that it was out of thefe they made their grounds, or
what we call the dead-colouring.
How it really was, time has put it out of our power to determine : but
if we fuppofe thofe four principal colours in perfection, then, I think, it
can be no longer doubted, but that from them might be made all the
various colours in nature. For my part, I cannot believe, that the four
capital colours of the ancients would mix to that furprifing perfection we
fee in the works of Tirian and Rubens. And if we have no certain
Knowledge of their method of colouring who lived in the laft century,
how should we underfland theirs who lived near two thouland years ago!
And why the method and practice of colouring, which was fo well known
to Rubens and Van Dyck, should not be continued down to the prefent
mafters, is to me furprifing.
I muft confess, I have often thought, and still believe, that thofe pain-
ters, who had acquired fo fine a manner of colouring, might, if they
pleafed, have communicared it to pofterity in writing : but I never heard,
that any attempt was made towards it; though it is probable there might
be fome. It is aftonithing, neverthelefs, all Europe should fuffer alike
at the fame time, for want of that noble frankness and generous fpirit,
which might have been expected from thofe mafters; and which would
have done the world more fervice than their pictures.
It is plain, from the works of their pupils, that they knew it, becaufe
in their pictures we fee the same fort of colours and colouring: and from
the little variety of capital colours, and fameness of method ufed by them,
it is not to be doubted but the whole was contained in a few principles,
neither difficult nor tedious.
If we trace the art through its feveral declenfions, we shall find Rem-
brandt, who was maffer of all the parts of colouring in the higheft de-
gree, lived to the year 1668. Next to him was Zouft, who died in
England about eight years after. Lely lived to the year 1680. Reily,
who was Louft's difciple, furvived them, and was left the beft colourift
we had. Mr. Richardfon, who died about the year 1745, was his pupil;
4



d n nd that


9




1. 
 
   te 
5
F.T. 

 an  

5
T
13

2.
5
18
 
.
19

238
19
3
30
t 
3
T R O DY C T I O N.

but, in my opinion, in point of merit much his inferior. Reily, I think,
declined in the same proportion to Loult, that Zoult did to Rembrandr.
As all thefe mafters, from Rembrandt, funk gradually below each
other in the art of colouring, we may with certainey date the declenfion
of that art from him.
I cannot attribute this gradual degeneracy in the knowledge of fo
charming an art to any thing but inabiliry, or want of that generofiry I
have before mentioned, or both. Though thefe genrlemen were not able
to give us to perfect an account, as the great mafters, yet they might have
communicated what they learned from them; and if it was againft their
own private intereft to have publifhed it whilft they practifed, they should,
out of a general regard to men of tafte, and to the art itfelf, have left it
behind them, to have given to pofterity an opportunity of reaping the
pencfit of their Hludies.
I fatter myfelf that the following theets, compiled originally for my
own ufe, contain fomething that may be of confequence in fludying this
art; and hope the practicable method of colouring here laid down, which
has been the refulr of much fludy, and long experience, and which I now
ufe, will be found both ufeful and agreeable.
In the courfe of fludying this part of my art, as I could have no affift-
ance from the living,, I found myfelf obliged to make my court to the
dead; I mean their works. And though I have had very little oppor-
tunity to ftudy even them; yet, from the few I have copied; I have, after
a tedious courfe of miltakes, at laft, by mere dint of labour, and the af-
fiftance of genius, fuch as it is, found the following method of colouring
very eafy and expeditious.
93
of Painters, fays De Piles, co spend many years in the fearch of know-
ge ledge which they might have attained in a lirtie rime, had they hit at
This truth I have experienced; and
ce at firft upon the right path.
confels, that the works of Van Dyck and Rembrandt are the fureft
guides to nature. It is out of thefe moft excellent mafters that I have.
eftablished my method : it is from their pictures I have found the firft
lay of colours; and from them I have learned the virgin teints; and fi-
nithing fecrets; tho' I have always applied them to practice from nature.
In the method of my work, I begin with a short and plain account of
the principal Corours ufed in the Fiesh: next I follow with the
principal TEINTS.




 
 
5
LST
Mn S  Iist n e   
PE
F8
  
igrap  


3

n
222



I ON.
I N.T R.O D y C 1
FIRsT FAINTINC, OF DEAD-COEOURINC.

SECOND PAINTING.
THIRD, OFLAST PAINTINC.
Of painting BACK-GROUNDs.
Some remarks on CoPy IN G.
Of DEAPER Y-FAINTING.
Of LANDSCHAPE-PAINTINC.
All thefe particulars I have endeavoured to make familiar, clear, and
instructive, without defign to flatter or offend; and through the whole
courfe of the work I have had the urmoft regard to truth.
The motive of my publifhing is folely the beneft of the art. Suct
25
are born with a happy genius, though deftitute of a mafter or guide, may,
from thefe instructions, acquire a competent knowledge of colouring,
almoft without studying. Here the lovers of painting, who ftudy for
their pleafure and amufement, may be conducted eafily, step by step; to
the secrets of that art, which, of all the defigning ones, affords perhaps
the greateft pleafure to the mind.
It may be objected to me by fome, that my own works do not thew I
have either acquired or revived that art, which, according to my own
confeftion, has a long time lain dormant. I am not the proper perfon to
answer this objection : neverthelefs, I have some copies by me, that I
will leave to judges to compare, in this point, with any painting that has
been done for the laft fixty or feventy years. And I believe I could con-
vince any artift, even at twice painting a head from the great mafters, that
my method will certainly anfwer to all their variety of colouring. And
offfire every fenfible painter will grant, that that method which comes near-
eft to Van Dyck and Rembrandt, will certainly be the neareft way to:
Nature.
Since I have eftabliffied myfelf in thefe principles, I muft inform the
reader, that I make no difference in the method of the working between
copying, and painting from nature. Had I Known, at my firft fetting out,
as much as I have fince learned, I should have approached much nearer
to thofe great mafters. Others, who have the advantage of youth; may, I
am perfuaded; artain the end I propose. It is for them that I write;
and moft fincerely with the rules I lay down may contribute to reffore
to divine an art.






itrt
T n  
2
   th   t e  
 Ltr IIAg
2

 
K


FE



99
TTE KMEEMERE
50
3

 
7
F
i Fi
N T R O DU C T I O N.
Monfieur de Piles fays, es Tirian and Rembrandt prepared their firft
sf layor grounds, very near alike; and with colours that Kindly united,
is and were as near to the life as poftible; on which they laid their virgin
so reints with light flrokes of the pencil; and thus they imitated the force
os and frethnefs of nature.— They were convinced that there were cer-
is tain colours which deftroyed each other, if they were mixed to excels;
cs and that they should be as little thaken as poftible by the motion of the
29
co pencil.
Ir would be folly in any man, at this prefent time, to affume to much
knowledge in the art of painting, as Monficur de Piles really had; who
was a man of genius and learning, that made painting his principal Audy,
and travelled on purpofe to complece his knowledge in that delightful
art; was intimately acquainted with the painters in his time, who affifted
him in fludying the works of the great mafters, which he carefully exa-
mined; and from which he made his reflections, and judicious remanks.
This was when the works of Van Dyck and Rembrandt were morery
Kin
perfection, and in an age when painting was better underffood.
Is it poftible for any thing to be more plain and intelligible, than thefe
two moft excellent remarks of Monfieur de Piles; which contain the prin-
cipal matter and foundation of colouring: This is vaftly different from
theirs, whofe colouring is, as they pretend, to change and wear to the
complexion : though this may anfwer their purpofes, yet none that fiudy
the art of colouring will, I hope, believe it. It is certainly true, that
the great mafters imitated nature in their firft painting or dead-colouring,
to far as they could without dirtying the colours, omitting only the finiffi-
ing touches and colours, that should come laft; which I defign to the y
in the courfe of this work, in the moft intelligible manner I can, and ex
actly to the rules and method of my prefent practice.
Some painters imagine the great mafters had colours, which we have no
knowledge of ; and it is probable they might : yet I confets, I fee none in
the pictures of Van Dyck and Rembrandt, but what are common to
painters; only fome of them are better than ours, which would be reme-
died, if that art was more encouraged by the painters. Thofe we have, I
am convinced, would appearmuch finer, if they were laid on propergrounds.
A painter should have as great a regard to his firft lay, as he has to
the fucceeding parts of his work. Sir Godfrey Kneller, in Lely's time,
findied his manner, and prepared his grounds, and firft lay of colours,
30


5
S  
S 



55

TMIS.
TRT Te THRUEE AS. TTETAELEMyge
EF.TMES. Ip o
5
T 
 ften Fe t foe f e fre p t h f nd affe he e   te
ents of y al a
23
R


 Bn
  

.
25.
29
2
T
3
 
35.7

233
25
   
.
 S  


7

Ty
0
4 0
I
. T
N.
5 F.
57
i
2
1
on fuchcloths as Lely ufed : burafter his death he foon fell into a flighter
manner, which was more agreeable to his genins and inclination, and
invented the cold grey-coloured cloths, on which he effiblifhed his flight
12
expeditious manner. Then was the time, when the painters expofed
their underftanding, in neglecting the charming ftyle of Van Dyck, to
follow Kneller. But though colouring was not his talent, yer he was in
his time the beft face-painter in Enrope : nor has there been an artift
fince him, whofe heads can fland any comparifon with his.:. After him,.
colouring hung here for some time between the manners of Mr. Richard-
 
fon and Rofalba; the followers of the latter failing in oil, eftablished her
methed.
Havingtraced the art of painting through its feveral declenfions, I will
venture to give my opinion on it, as it flands at this prefent time; in
regard to portraiture; and hope to do it in fuch a manner, as to offend
no-body that may differ from me. If I may be allowed to judge from
the pictures brought
re by gentlemen from abroad, as the works of


mafters, I may, without partiality, affirm, thats.
the roff eminent:neny..
55

35
3.
2.F

face-painting is no where to well performed as in England, notwithfland-
ing the prejudices of fome in favour of foreigners : nor is it at all furprif-
ing it should be fo; fince, where there is the greateft encouragement to
an art, thither the moft eminent mafters in that art will refort, and there
it will be improved to its greateft height. It is well Known, that no
nation in the world delights to much in face-painting, or gives to ge-
nerous encouragement to it, as our own; and it is equally known, that
no country affords fuch helps in regard to beautiful nature.. We h
C
alfo the greateft number of Van Dyck's pictures, and the reft of the beft
face-painters (Rembrandt excepted,) of any people: and it feemsigea-
fonable, from thefe obfervations, which are founded on matter of fact, to
infer, that England is preferable to all other nations whatfoever in this
respect, and the beft place for fludying the art of facc-painting.
 ii? 

335


t  5


B



3
1

i n


F. H E
R A C
1
P
E
0 F

6.
A I
T. I

OF THE PRINCIPAL COLOURS USED IN THE FlEsH, FROM WHICH ALx
THE TEINTS ARE MADE.
ILAKE-WHITE, or FINE WHITE, is the very beft white
I.
we have. This colour should be ground with the fineft poppy
oil that can be made. At prefent our whife is bad, on account of the oil,
which is not really poppy. White is a friendly working colour, and
comes forward with yellows and reds, but retifes with blues and greens.
It is the nature of all whites to fink into whifcever ground they are laid
3 
on; therefore they should be laid on white groands.
ka colour which fym-
2. IvoRY-BLACK is the beft black we have id
true shade for blue.
pathizes and mixes Kindly with all the other.
Ivory-black and a little Indian-red make the begngeperal (hadow-colour
that can be. It is ground with lintfeed oil, antirifed wiis drying oil:
5
8
Black is a cold retiring colour.
g. ULTRAMARINE is the fineft blue in the world. It is a tender re-
tiring colour, and never glares; and is a beautiful glazing colour: it is
ufed with poppy oil.
4. PRUSSIAN is a very fine blue, and a kind working colour. It is
ground with lintfeed oil, though I think nut oil is more proper. It should
never be afed in the fleth, but in the green teint, and the eyes.
g. LICHT OKER is a friendly mixing colour, and of great ufe in the
feth : it is ufually ground with lintfeed oil, but nut oil is better.
All yellows are ftrengthened with reds, and weakened with blues and
greens.
6. LICHT RED is nothing but fine light oker burnt : this and white
yn mixing, produce the moft perfect ffeth-colour that can be made. Ir




g t h 
o
C0  0V. R. S.

.

is a beautiful, clean, kind, working colour; but too flrong for the whire;
and therefore will grow darker. It should be ground and ufed with nut oil.
7. No VERMILLTON, but what is made of the true native Cinnabar,
should ever be ufed. It will not glaze; but is a fine colour when it is
glazed. It is ground with lintfeed oil, and should be ufed with drying oil.
S. CARMINE is the moft beautiful crimfon that can be : it is a middle
colour between lake and vermillion; is a fine working colour; and
glazes delightfully. It should be ground with nut oil, and ufed with
drying oil.
9. LAkE is a tender, fympathizing, deep red; but of no firong body;
therefore it should be ftrengshened with Indian red. It is the beft
glazing colour that can be ufed. It is ground with lintfced oil, and
ufed with drying oil.
10. INDIAN RED is a flrong, pleafant, working colour; but will now
glaze well; and when mixed with white, falls a lirtle into the lead. It
is ground and ufed as the lake.
5

2

. Cn.t
8
11. BROwN PINk is a fine glazing colour; but of no ftrong body : y
in the fleth it should never join, or mix with the lights; becaufe this
colour and white antipathize, and mix of a warm dirty hue; for which
reafon their joinings should be blended with a cold middle teint. pin.
glazing of fhadows, it should be laid before the other colours; that are
to enrich it : it is one of the finithing colours, and therefore should neverr
be ufed alone in the firtt painring. It is ffrengthened with burnt umber,.
and weakened with terraverte; ground with lintfeed oil, and ufed with.
drying oil.
12. BURNT UMBER is a fine warm brown, and a good working:
ftrong colour : it is of greatufe in the hair, and mixes finely with the
Warm shade.
OF THE PRINCIPAL TEINTS THAT ARE AESLOUTELY NEY
CEsSARY FOR PAINTING FLEsH; ALl WHICH ARE MPE
FROM THE PRIN.CIPAL. COLOURS.
T. T IGHT RED TEINT is made of light red and whire : it is the moft

kind and beft conditioned of all colours, for the general ground
of the ffeth. With this colour, and the shade-teint, we should make out
all the fieth, like claro obfcuro, or mezzotinto. We should alfo remem-

7
Fni Filig
1.23
EK
2
9
S Sr Fns Mter
252

33
2255
243

289
KS


9


7
 r
o TWi
istp S1 u  1221 p
rt   5f
445
rs pr s 21
is  p h   

2

3
 f
F
 
S.
E I N

t 
ber, that this colour will grow darker; becaute it is in its nature too
frong for the white; therefore we should improve it; that is, mix fome
vermillion and white with it, in proportion to the fairness of the com-
plexion: and though it is thus mixed, yet I shall call it the light-red
teint in all the courfe of the work; becaufe I would not have the ver-

million teint confounded with it, as if there was no difference.
2. VERMILLION TEINT is only vermillion and white mixed to a
middle teint : it is the moft brilliant light-red that can be: it agrees beft
with the white, light-red, and yellow teints.
3. CARMINE TEINT is carmine and white only, mixed to a middle
teint: it is of all colours the moft beautifulred that can be for the cheeks
and lips : it is one of the finithing colours, and should never be ufed in
the firft painting, but laid upon the finishing colours, without mixing.
4. ROSE TEINT is made of the red shade and white, mixed to a middle
degree, or lighter : it is one of the cleaneff and moft delicate teints that
can be ufed in the fieth, for clearing up the heavy dirty colours; and
Ty therefore, in changing, will fympathize and mix Kindly.
7
5. TELLOw TEINT is often made of Naples yellow and white; but I
make it of light oker and white, which is a good working colour. Re-
member the oker is too ftrong for the whire; therefore we should make a
Elittle allowance in ufing it. It follows the light-red teints, and should
salways be laid before the blues. If we lay too much of it, we may reco-
ver the ground it was laid on with the light-red teints.
6. BLUE TEINT is made of ultramarine and white, mixed to a lighrish
azure: it is a pleafant working colour: with it we should blend the gra-
dations. It follows the yellows; and with them it makes the greens;
and with the red it produces the purples. No colour is fo proper for
blending down, or foftening the lights into keeping.
7. LEAD TEINT is made of ivory-black and fine white, mixed to a
middle degree: it is of a fine retiring colour; and therefore is of great
ufe in the gradations, and in the eyes.
S. GREEN TEINT is made of Pruffian, light oker, and white : this
colour will dirty the lights, and should be laid fparingly in the middie
reints. II is moft ufed in the red fhadows, where they are too (lrong:
It is of a dirty antipathizing nature.
9. SHADE-TEINT is made of lake, Indian.red, black, and white,
mixed to a beautiful murrey colour of a middle teint : this is the beft





LSME
4
Eij
3
FTR S T PA INTIN C.
colour for the general ground of shadows; for which reafon I call it the
shade-reint: it mixes with the lights delightfully, and produces a pleafant
clean colour, a little inclined to the redith pearl. As all the four colours
of its compofition are of a friendly fympathizing nature, fo confequently
this will be the fame; and therefore may be eafily changed, by the addi-
tion of any other colours.
10. RED SHADE is nothing but lake and a very lirle Indian red: it
is a charming working colour, and a good glazer : it ftrengthens the
shadows on the fhade-teint; and receives, when it is wer, the green and
blue teints agreeably. It is a good ground for all dark fhadows.
Ir. WAkm SHADE is made of lake and brown pink, mixed to a
middle degree: it is a fine colour for ftrengthening the fhadows on the
shade-reint, when they are wet or dry. We muft take care that it does
not touch the lights, becaufe they will mix of a dircy fnuff-colour; and
therefore should be foftened with a tender cold reint.
12. DAR K SHADE is made of ivory-black and a little Indian red
only. This colour mixes very Kindly with the red shade, and fympa-
thizes agreeably with the middle reints in the dead-colouring. It is a
charning glazing colour for the eye-brows and darkeft fhadows. It is of
all the moft excellent fhadow-colour, and one of the fineft working
colours we have.
FIR ST PA INT IN G.
THE COLOURS AND TEINTS THAT ARE NECESSARY FOR THE
FIRST PAINTING OF THE FLE SH.
I. FINE whire.
2.
Light Oker— and its two teints.
3. Light red.—and its two teints.
4. Vermillion—— and its reint.
5. A teint made of lake, vermillion, and white.
i
6. Rofe teint.
7. Blue trint.
8. Lead teint.
9. Green teint.
10. Half-Chade teint—is made of Indian red, and white.
125
 Map 
Ton Et
26.5
1r. Shade-teint.
Fr

THLEX

29
2905
397
4.
388
2205
3.
12. Red shade.
.
73
123
2

295

 .
13. Warm shade.


29

31
4
.

9.
2
C
y

248
9

2
15
308
488
38
30






&

7

SH


FAE



35.25
7
PP A I N 1 a NG.
F I Rs
3.


.
id
.
25

The finithing pallet for a fine complexion requires fix more; viz. Care
mine and its teint, lake, brown pink, ivory-black, and Pruffian blue. rr.
The firft painting, or dead-colouring, I divide into two parts: the
firff, I call the firtt lay, or ground; the second, the laying on the virgin
teints.
The firtt lay of colours confifts of two parts: the one is the work of
the hadows only, and the other that of the lights.
The work of the shadows is to make out all the drawing, very cor-
rectly, wits. the shade-teint, in the fame manner as if it was to be done
with this colour only; and remember to drive or lay the colour (paringly.
The lights should be all laid in withshe light-red teint, in different de-
riees, as we fee them in nature: thefe two colours unired produce a


clean tender middle teint; for, mixing with the fhade-teint, they turn
to a pearly hue; and by ftrengthening them with the light-red, we may
work to a very good refemblance. In uniting the lights and shades, we
should ufe a long fofcener, about the fize of a large twan's-quill; which
will help to bring the work into character, and leave the colouring more
delicare; then go over the darkeff fhadows with the red or warm shade,
which will finith the firtt lay.
The warm shade being laid on the fhade-teint, improves it to a
arnmer hue; but if laid inflead of the fhade-teint, it will dirty and spoil
the colours it mixes with; and if the red shade be laid firft, intlead of the
Pinde-teint, the fhadows would then appear too red and bloody; there-
fore, notwithftanding thefe two colours are the beft that can be for the
Shadows, yer they are too ftrong to be laid alone; which is a proof of
the great ufe and merit of the shade-teinr. Here we may obferve, that
the thade and light-red teints are fo friendly and delicare in their natures,
that they will not dirty, though we are continually changing them : how
Proper then, and agreeable to our purpofe, are they, for making the moft
principal part of the likeness, when in alcering and changing they always
produce a clean colour of the inviting pearly huer.
THE SECOND PART OF THE FIR ST PAINTING.
I N order to finith the firft painting, improve the reds and yellows to
the complexion, and after them the blues; obferving, that the blues on
5.17
3 i 
2
1
the redsmake the purple, and on the yellows produce the green. The

3
25
a S Eta


thod is to be underflood of the fhadows; but be fure to leave
James
ftet
1
t
29.
2.7
9.0
35
5
2 38

2

83





1
1223


155
TAMIRE SVIHA

H.HEEEESYETEEE
i R aw

      Tit 
A

S

248
2


Thi
55

G.
t
148

     

 pif ge 

7


2

25
1 T.N G.
F A 1
1

them clean, and not too dark: therefore allowance should be made
5
43
their grounds with the light-red; becaufe glazing them will make them
5
darker. When the cloth is of a dark or bad colour, there muft be a3
Rrong body of colour laid allover the (hadows, fuch as will not fink intol
the ground, but appear warm, and a little lighter than the life, to that it;
3

may be of the same forwardness to finish, as if it had been a light groundr
Therefore the bufiness of dead-colouring is, that we leave it always ifk.
the fame order for finishing, though the colour of the cloth be quite the
8
reverfe.
I am convinced by experience, that the grounds of shadows, in what
we call the dead-colouring, should be fuch as will fupport the character
of the finifhing colours; which ground muft be clean, and a little lighter
than the finifhing colours; I fay, a little lighter, becaufe the finishing of
shadows is glazing; and no other method but glazing can leave fuch
brilliancy and beauty as they ought to have : for I find, that glazing the
Shadows in the firtt painting is not to proper as laying a body of fhadow-
colours, that are very near to the life, though a little lighter: thefe may
be glazed and touched upon, when dry, with a great deal of eafe: but if
we begin the firft painting with glazing, we shall find it will flare, and be
of no ufe; and the folid colours, which are laid on it, will look heavy.
and dull; therefore all shadows and colours, that are to be glazed, should
be done with colours of a clean folid body; becaufe the glazing is more
latting, and has the beft effect, on fuch colours. Remember to leave no
roughness; I mean fuch as will appear rough, and interrupt or hurt the
character of the finithing colours; which, by examining the work whilft
it is wet, with a foft tool, or when it is dry, with a Knife, may be avoid-
ed, as it will eafily take off the Knots and rougheft parts.
The light-red and white improved is fuperior to all other colours for
the firtt lay or ground; which should be always done with a full pencil.
of fiff colour, made brighter than the life, becaufe it will fink a little

in drying. The greater the body and quantity of colour, and the stiffers
it is laid, the lets it will fink : every colour in drying will fink, and par-:
take, in proportion to its body, of the colour it is laid on: therefore all
the lights of the fleth, if not laid on a light ground, muft confequently.
change a little from the life, if there is no allowance made. The shade-
teint for the thadows should fall into the rofe teint, as the complexion
prows delicate; all which should be lightly united, with a foftlong pointed

hog-tool, to the lights, making out the whole like mezzotinto.



2 


3
9
3






 yr ne
as sr jutte it t picil  i    the i r
ad we  
S
 9
84
HF
5
n
3.96
3
o ptt ramoge
18
2.95

ing 73t
2
15
S EC OND: PA 1 
5
28

185
I believe the great mafters very feldom sweetened or foftened the cor
ours; but in uniting the firft lay, they were very careful in preferving

23
of the brightness of their colours, and therefore did not work them below
3
the complexion. For to force or keep up a brilliancy in the grounds, can
✓

only be done with the whites, reds, and yellows; which merhod will

make up for the deficiency of the white grounds : therefore, the firft
205

painting should be left bright and bold, and the less the colours are broken
the betrer. We should forbear ufing any colours that will prejudice them,
and be contented to add what is wanted the next painting; where if we
fail, a clean rag will reffore the firft ground.
SECOND PAINTING.
+
HI E second painting begins with laying on the leaft quantity that

can be of poppy oil; then wipe it almoft all off, with a dry piece
of a filk handkerchief.
The second painting is alfo divided into two parts : one I call the firft
lay of the second painting; which is fcumbling the lights, and glazing
the shadows: the other, finithing the complexion with the virgin reints,
and improving the likeness, as far as we can, without daubing.
ScUMBLING, is going over the lights, where they are to be changed,
with the light-red teints, or fome other of their own colours, facr as
will always clear and improve the complexion, with thore fliff pencils;
but fuch parts only as require it; otherwife the beauty of the firft paint-
ing will be spoiled, and we make ourfelves double work.
The light-red teint improved, is the very beft colour that can be for
scumbling, and improving the complexion in general. Where the tha-
dows and drawing are to be corrected, we should do it with the thade-
reint, by driving the colour very ftiff and bare, that we may the eafier
retouch and change it with the finithing teirts. Some parts of the sha-
dows should be glazed with fome of the tranfparent thadow-colours, fuch
as will improve and come very near to the life; but be fure not to lay on too
much of it, for fear of loting the hue of the firft painting, the ground of
which should always appear through the glaziny. Be very careful, in
uniting the lights and shades, that they do not mix dead and meally; for
the more the lights mix with the shades, the more meally thofe shades
will appear. Thus far the complexion is prepared and improved, in
order to receive the virgin teints and finishing touches,



38

215
  


p  r
182

I1TLt ex N
7
pe
3
233
4
19


5
22 SrSE
    
WTHErES WA F NC
  
.
 

148



5
227

2
 F
3.4
p

3
W

23
n 
5
THESECOND PART OF THE SECOND PAIN TING,
295
IS to go over the complexion with the virgin teints: thefe are the sd
3.3
:colours which improve the colburing to the greatelt perfection, both in
the lights and hadows. This should be done in the fame manner as we
laid them in the fecond part of the firtt painting; that is, with the reds,
yellows, and blues; blending them with delicate light touches of the
tender middle reints, without fofcening. We should leave the teints and
their grounds clean and diftinct, and be conrent to leave off whilt the
work is fafe and unfullied, leaving what is farther required for the next
fitring; for, in attempting the finithing touches before the other is dry,
we lofe the (pirit and drawing, and dircy where-ever we touch.
THE THIRD PAINTINC, OR FINISHING.
T is to be fuppofed the complexion now wants very little more than a
few light touches; therefore there will be no occafion for oiling.
Begin with correcting all the glazing; firft, where the glazing serves
as a ground or under part; then we should determine what should be done
next, before we do it, fo that we may be able to make the alteration on
the part with one (lroke of the pencil. By this method, we preferve both
the glazing and the teints; but if it happens that we cannot lay such va-
riety of teints and finifhing colours as we intended, it is much better to
leave off while the work is fafe and in good order; becaufe thofe few
touches, which would endanger the beauty of the colouring, may eafily
be done, if we have patience to tay till the colours are dry; and then,
withour oiling, add thofe finithings with free light trokes of the pencil.
I believe that Rembrant touched upon his beft pictures a great many
times, letting them dry between: it was this method, moft certainly,
which gave them that furprifing force and (pirit, which is to inimitable.
I find it much eafier to foften the over-(trong teints when they are dry,
than when they are wet; becaute we may add the very colours that are
wanting, without endangering the dry work. If any of the colours of
the pallet want to be a little changed to the life, when we are painting,
it is much better to do it with the Knife on the pallet, than with the
pencil; becaufe the Knife will mix, and leave it in good order for the
pencil.
D
5



Phiblt fe S.  
4
F
57
3.
2
5
O F BA CK G R O U.N.D.S.
T7 ANDY CK made out the keeping in his back-grounds more from
the different oppofition and harmony of the colours, than from his
Knowledge of the claro obfcuro. I confels I cannot find in his pictures
that intelligence of light and fhade, which is to Ilriking and beautiful in
Rembrandrs: Van Dyck's general method was to be very Htill and mel-
low, and to break the colours of the ground with thofe of the drapery.
This will certainly produce harmony, the principles of which method
belong only to the art of colouring : but it is the knowledge of light
and fhade which gives that furprifing force and ftrength, which, at firft
fight, we find in Rembrandrs works. I have feen a picture of a lady,
where he has made the ground juft light enough to thew her complexion
and hair, which was a dark brown, in the greateft perfection: the ground
was a wall, which, near to the face, was lighter than the fhadows of the
feth, and the light diminithed to artfully in the gradations, that though
the part round the head was much darker, yer it appeared to be of the
same colour with that near the fieth. I muft own, I like this method of
relieving the head from the ground, better than Van Dyck's method,
where he has made the ground almoft of the same colour with the hair;
and though I admire his way of breaking the colours of the ground with
thofe of the draperies, yer I am not to much pleafed, where there appears
to0 near a famenefs, as I have feen in fome of his pictures, where he has
carried this principle to near, that it is almoft imperceprible. In Rem-
brandrs pictures at Varmourh, the lights and fhades are as vifible as thofe
in his prints, and are remarkably broud, clear, and still; the shadows are
very warm and thin, and look as if they were painted all at once, with a
plenty of colour, which appears tranfparcht: which tranfparency was done
by glazing the dead colouring.
The principal colours that are neceffary for painting of back-grounds
in portraiture; as walls, buildings, or the like, are white, black, Indian
red, light and brown oker, Pruffian, and burnt umber, from which the
eight principal teints are made, as follows:
1. PEARL is made of black, whire, and a little Indian red.
2. LE AD, of black and white, mixt to a dark lead colour.
g. VELL Ow, of brown oker and white.
4. OLIVE, of light oker, Prullian, and white.


1
    
s th rpiyr re r ty itr 
38
9
T. F.t 

7
FACK. G ROVND:S.
32

y
55
Ft
257

14
2.


g. FLEsH, of Indian red and white, mixt to a middle teint.
6. MURREY, of Indian red, white, and a little black, mixt to a Kinds
of purple, of a middle teint.
7. STONE, of white, umber, black, and Indian red.
S. DARK-SHADE, of black and Indian red only.
Here the lead teint ferves for the blues; the fieth teint mixes agree-
ably with the lead; and the murrey is a very good blending colour, and
of great ufe where the olive is too flrong. The umber, white, and dark
shade, will produce a fine variety of ftone colours : the dark shade and
umber, ufed plentifully with drying oil, make a charming warm fhadow-
colour. All the colours should be laid with drying oil only, becaute
they mix and fet the better with the foftener.
Where the marks of the trowel are fo ftrong in the priming of the
cloth, that one body of colours will not be fufficient to conceal it, we
should lay a colour to prevent it; which should be dry, before we begin
with thofe parts that we expect to finith at once painting.
THE method of painting back-grounds, I divide into two parts.
The firft part is the work of the firtt lay: the second is to follow on
that with the finithing reints.
OF THE FIRST LAv.
WE should always begin from the shadowed fide of the head, and
paint the lights firtt; from them go into the gradations and fhadows,
which should be done with a large ftiffish tool, very (paringl
with the
dark shade and white, a little changed with the colours that will give it
more of the required hue, but very near in regard to tone and ftrength;
8
35
35
leaving them like mezzotinto.
The dark and warm fhadows should be laid before the colours that
join them : this we should do with the dark shade and umber, drove with
drying oil : I fay, before the colours that join them, becaufe, if thofe co-
lours were laid on firft, they would interrupt and spoil the tranfparency,
which is their greateft beauty. The more the firft lay is drove, the eafier
and better we may change it with the finishing teints; therefore we may
lay them with the greater body.
The second part is to follow directly, while the firft lay is wet, with
thofe teints that we think are moft proper to harmonize and finith with.



att t ap t  fdes of had he  
5
 
25
1292
2.
 
s ay  s M  


 F

Tt 

2
B A C E. G R O UN D.S.
2

0.
5
 
Begin with the lights firft; and remember, as we heighten and finiff
2
3
them, we do it with warmer colours; and let thofe be accompanied with
fine tender cold teints. The lighteff part of the ground is always neareft
to the fhadowed fide of the head : this is the part which governs all the
reft; and should be painted with a variery of light, warm, clear colours,
which vanith, and lofe their trength imperceptibly, in the gradations.
Thefe should be laid with a kind of cloudy rouch, rather than sported;
and we muft take care that we do not cover too much of the firft lay,
but confider it as the principal colour.
From the lights we go to the gradations and fhadows; for when the
lights are well adapted to produce and fupport the head, it is eafy, I
think, to fall from them into whatever kind of fhadows we shall find moft
proper for our work: then foften and blend the whole with a long large
hog-tool; which, with the ftrength and body of the drying oil, will melt
and fweeten all together, in fuch a flattering manner, as will teem fur-
prifingly finithed. Remember the teints will fink, and lofe a little of their
ttrength and beauty in drying. All the grounds, as walls, ecc. should be
finished at once painting; but if they want to be changed, we may glaze
them with a little of the dark fhade and drying oil, drove very bare; on
which, with a few light touches of the colour that is wanting, we may
improve their hue. The dark fhadows may alfo be ftrengthened and
improved by glazing, which should be done after the figures are near
finifhed, for fear of making them too ftrong.
I fee Rembrandr's grounds are rather brighter in the lights, and have
more variety of reints, than any other painter's : and to be fure he had
obferved, and juftly too, that thofe teints diminith in proportion with
the lights : therefore his fhadows have but a faint appearance of teints.
He underffood the gradations in perfection, by mixing and breaking the
firft lay of colours, fo artfully, that they flatter us in regard to their real
Rrength.
Frefnoy fays, co Let the field or ground of the picture be pleafant, free,
os tranfient, light, and well united with colours which are of a friendly
se nature to each other, and of fuch a mixture, as that there may be
io fomething in it of every colour that compofes your work, as it were
91
io the contents of your pallet.
De Piles fays, ic Variety of teints, very near of the fame tone, em-
io ployed in the fame figure, and often upon the fame part, with mo-
29
sc deration, contribute much to harmony.



HTEEEra
F.
2.2
Tti
52


358
C 6 P V I N G.
17
Bin
2
.
 

2.90
2.
All the curtains should be dead-coloured when we paint the ground;
and should be done with clean colours, of a near hue to the intended
curtain; fuch as will fupport the finithing colours. Do it with a render
fort of keeping, and near in regard to their tone in the lights, but much
fofter in the fhadows. All which should be mixed and broken with the
colours of the ground; and, as Frefnoy fays, io Bodies that are back in
io the ground, should be painred with colours allied to thofe of the ground
29
of itfelf. It will often happen, for want of the life, or some delign, that
we cannot make the folds the firft painting; we should ther leave the
maffes of light and fhadow, in regard to the keeping of the picture, broad
and well united together, fuch as may feem eafy to finith on. The co=
lours of the landichape, in back-grounds, should be broke and foftened
alfo with thofe of the parts which join them. This merhod brings
them into keeping, which will make all the parts of the ground as it
were of one piece, to that the different parts do not flare, nor cut at
their extremities.
The thy should be broke with the lead and the fieth reints : the
murrey teint is of great ufe in the grounds of diftant objects; and the
umber and dark shade in the near grounds : the greens should be more
beautiful than we intend them, becaufe they will fade and grow darker.
After all is painted, we should go over the whole very lightly with the
foftener, as we did the grounds, which will make it look agreeably
finifhed.
ON C OPY IN G.
PHE author of the Analyfis of Beauty, has given his opinion of
copying in his true fpirit and genius; treating with ridicule one
of the moft ufeful parts of painting. This I impure to his want of skil:
in this branch of the art, or to a moft ill-grounded prejudice : for is it
reafonable to believe, that a painter, who underftands the true merit of
copying, would treat that part of the art with contempt, which the
greatelt mafters have always practifed and effeemed : Men of common
fenfe know, that the arcifts in all ages have copied and fiudied each
other, in whatever they found moft for their purpofe, and for the ad-
vancement of their art : was it not for this, the art itfelf would foon
dwindle and decay; and I with this has not been the cafe with us.
E


4
2.


.  
4. 2171

4.r
an   e   
  F yr 28
IpIS
 f
 


123

Fe
C O PY T N G.
18
Rubens ftudied principally the works of Titian, Paul Veronefe, and
Tintoret; that is, he copied fuch of their pictures as he thought moft
worthy his imitation, and kept them for his own ufe.
Van Dyck copied Tirian, and all the Venetian fchool; or, in De
33
Teniers is celebrated for tranf-
Piles phrafe, or skimmed their cream.
forming himfelf into as many mafters as he copied; which he did fo
exactly, that it is hard to diftinguith the copies from the originals.
Hanneman's copies of Van Dyck are taken for the originals of that
great mafter. I have feen copies by Stone, fold at great prices for un-
doubted originals, notwithllanding they were divefted of that free pen-
cilling, and charming variety of teints, which are fo apparent in Van
Dyck. Buckfhorn was one of the laft good copiers we have had in
England; the reft that followed him and his mafter Lely, foon dwind-
led to half-arrifts. There is a copy of Buckfhorn's painting after Var
Dyck, which I like much better than any of Stones: I mean the pic-
turg of the Earl of Strafford and his fecretary, in the Marquis of Roc-
Kingham's collection, which is well painted, and defervedly effeemed.
I believe every one, that has heard of Andrea del Sarto's copy of Leo
the Tenth, painted by Raphael and Julio Romano, will be convinced of
the great ufe and merit of an art, to which is owing that great number
of originals now abounding in every country. By originals, I mean
pictures impoted as fuch, by our ingenious and honeft dealers, to adorn
the cabinets of the virtuofi and connoiffeurs.
It is furprifing, that fince the age of thefe great mafters, we have not
had a man able to make a fine copy from any one of their pictures:
and I believe, if fuch a genius should hereafter arife, it is to be feared
the deftroyers of the art, if they are fuffered to go on, will fcour off the
remains of their beauties, to that very little will be lefe for him to ftudy;
and by the end of this century, there will be none fit for copying.
It is in vain for a man to think of making a fine imitation of any of
the great matters, without being thoroughly acquainted with the nature
of colours and of colouring; and without being clearly convinced, at
light of the picture he is going to copy, of the method and principles
on which it was painted. It is the want of this knowledge and convic-
tion which leads us into to many errors and miltakes.
A painter, that has acquired any fort of manner, will always tincture
his copying with the fame. Now-a-days we are too apt to fall into a


 re
D R A PE R I E S.
1
manner, before we underfland the nature of colours; which is the cafe,
where fome predominant colour or hue appears in all the complexions
alike. For this reafon a painter, whofe carnations are too red, will cer-
tainly make his copies blush : or if his colouring and fhadows be heavy,
they will of courfe fall into the obicuro. By the fame rule, whatever
reints infect his colouring, the fame will unavoidably taint his copying;
for which there is no cure, becaufe he himfelf is infected.
Monficur De Piles fays, cr It is very rare to change a bad manner in
co colouring for a better : that Raphael, Michael ngelo, Leonardo da
co Vinci, Julio Romano, and other great mafters, spent their whole lives
39
co without truly underflanding good colouring.
And tho' colouring
is the principal excellence in copying, yet it is neceffary that every arciff
should avoid a particular manner with his pencil, otherwife it will cer-
tainly be feen in his work.
From what has been faid on this subject, I apprehend, it appears, that
the art of copying, which was practifed by the great mafters, in order
to carch each other's excellencies and perfections, and by which their
noble works have been fo often repeated, and as it were renewed, is fo
far from deferving contempt, that it ought to be encouraged, as a thing
highly ufeful, and worthy of efteem.
OF PAINTING DRAPERIES.
N order to underlland the nature, and different degrees, of colours or
teints ufed in painting draperies, I firft determine how many divifions
are abfolutely neceffary to make the firft lay of colours, and, after that,
the reffects and finithing teints.
The right method of painting draperies or fattins in general, is, to
make out the whole, or what I call the firft lay, with three colours only;
viz. the lights, middle teint, and shade-teint.
For the lights, I mean the colour of all the high lights. The middle
reint should be very near to the general hue of the fattin, &c. and
of an exact middle degree berween the high lights and the shade-teint.
The shade-teint I would have dark enough for the general hae of all
the shadows; for which reafon I call it the fhade-teint.
We should obferve, that the lights should racher incline to a warmish
hue : and the middle teint should be made of friendly working colours,


D R A PE R I E S.
20
fuch as will always mix of a clean tender coldish huc. The shades
reint should be made of the fame colours as the middle teint, only with
lets light; therefore this teint will alfo mix of a tender clean colour.
It is with thefe three colours we should make our the whole like mezzo-
tinto; and we should underfland, that all the beauty and character of the
folds, the shape, attitude, and principal lights and shades, are all to be
confidered, and made with thefe three colours only; which should be
done to our fatisfaction, before we add any of the reffeets or finishing
teints.
The reffects of drapery and fattins are generally productions of their
own, and are always lighter than the shadows on which they are found;
and being produced by light, will confequently have a light warm colour,
mixed with the local colour that receives them. Here it will be neceifary
to observe the general method and fecret in managing the colours of the
firft lay, and thofe of the reffects and finishing reints.
In the firft lay, the high lights should be laid with a plenty of fiff
colour, and then shaped and fofcened into character with the middle teint,
very correctly. Where the gradations of the lights are flow, as in the
large parts, it will be proper to lay the middle reint firft at their extre-
mities, with a tool that will drive the colour, and leave it (paringly; be-
caufe the lights will mix and he the better upon it. Next is, to make
out all the parts of the fhadows with the fhade-teint drove bare. After
this comes the middle teint, which fills up, and ferves as the second lights
and gradations, and should be managed together very nicely, to character
without touching any of the high lights which finith the firft lay.
The reflects and finifhing teints are in general the antipathies of the
firft lay : they will, without great care, poifon and dirty the colours on
which they are laid; and therefore should be laid with a delicate light
touch without foftening. If it is over-done, we muft remember to re-
cover it with the colour of the part on which it was laid : this may be
done directly, or when it is dry. We should alfo obferve, whether the
reffects proceed from the fame colour, or any other, that the method of
uling them is the fame.
Before I proceed to the particular colours, it will be proper to make
some observations on their grounds.
It often happens, that the colour of the cloth is very improper for the
ground of the drapery; and when it is fo, we should change it with


D R A P E R I E S.
White Sattin.
21
athofe colours which we think are moft proper to improve and fupport the
finifhing colours. This method of dead-colouring mult confequently
preferve them in their greateft luftre. In dead-colouring, we should
lay the lights and shades in a manner, to as only to thew a faint idea of.
them, with regard to the shape and roundings of the figure. If we have
a delign to work from, then it will be proper to make all the large and
principal parts in their places; which should always be done with a
colour that is clean, and lighter than the intended drapery, though in
general of the fame hue : and let the thadows be no darker than a middle
reint : thefe should be mixed and broke in a tender manner, and then
foftened with a large tool, to that nothing rough or uneven be left to
interrupt or hurt the character of the finithing colours.
WHITE S A TT IN.
A L L whites should be painted on white grounds, laid with a good
body of colour, by reafon this colour finks more into the ground than
any other.
There are four degrees of colours in the firtt lay to white fartin:
the firtt is the fine white for the lights; the second is the firft reint,
which is made of fine white and a very little ivory-black, mixed to an
exact middle degree between the whire and middle reint. This colour
follows the white; and it is with this we should shape the lights into
character, before we lay on any other : and take care that this firtt teint
appear diftinctly between the whire and the middle teint, otherwife the
beauty and character of the fattin will be spoiled.
The middle reint should be made of white, black, and a lirtle Indian
red : thefe three colours are very friendly, and mix to a beautiful clear
colour of a pearly hue, which has the true brightness and warmch of the
general hue of the fartin. Remember to allow for the red hue chang.
ing a little to the lead. If there is occafion to make any part in the
middle reint lighter, we should do it with the firtt teinr only. This
colour should alfo be laid fparingly before the white, in all the lirle
lights that happen in the middle teints and thadows; on which we
should lay the white with one light touch; and be fure not to cover all
the part that was made with the firft reint : if we do, ir will spoil the
character, and look like a fpor, for want of the foftening edge or ber-
F


courgas s vist y  stoits tths fosippir
SJ.TUzg-ITUrern
TEEgrrera rtrar ye prathegavez:

B 
Fis 
Ber
Whice Sattin.
22
DR A PE R T E S.
der, which muft be between the whire and the middle reint. The
shade-teint should be made of the fame colour as the middle teint;
but with lefs white, fo that it be dark enough for the fhadows in gene.
ral; with which we should make out all the parts of the fhadows nicely
to character : which is the work of the firft lay.
Next come the reffects and finithing reints.
Brown oker, mixed with the colour of the lights, is the moft ufeful
colour in general for all reflects in draperies that are produced from their
own colours. All accidental reflexes are made with the colour of the
parts from which they are produced, and the local colours that receive
them. There are but two reflecting reints wanted for draperies in ge-
neral; I mean to any one particular colour: one should be lighter than
the middle reint, the other darker. Thefe colours may be a little changed
on the pallet with the firft and middle teints, as occafion requires, or
lightly broken on the part that receives them : but this laft merhod is
not to fafe as the other. The reint fufficient for blending the dark sha-
lows to the mellow tender hae, is made with the shade-teint and a little
brown oker; which should be laid on very fparingly, with foft light
touches, for fear of making them dull and heavy. If it should be over-
clone, we may recover it with the colour it was laid upon.
We often fee a little blue ufed in the firft teint of white fattin. Van
Haecken, who was the beft drapery-painter we ever had in England, did
to; and fomerimes, intlead of the blue, he ufed blue-black, till he found
it to be a pernicious colour, and was therefore obliged to ufe blue; be-
caufe his middle reint, which was made only of black and white, was
for very cold, that no other colour but blue wonld make a colder teint:
yet he managed thefe cold colours, in all the lights and middle tf:
to agreeably, and fo light and eafy was his touch, that we cannot liely
admiring, and may learn fomething from him. Though he was not fo
lucky in his thadows, which were generally of a heavy dirry hue, this
was owing to the colours he ufed, and the methed of uting them; which
will always have fuch an effect, when a warm or dirty colour is mixed
with a clean light one; for, being mixed together, they will form a dirty
culour, that mult confequently appear to in the work: bur if his lead
or shade-reint had been mixed with Indian red inflead of the oker, and
then followed with a few light blending touches of the oker-teint, it
would have left them clean and mellow. It is the want of the red hue
which makes the whire fartins appear fo often like pewter.




S

7



Blue Sattin.
D R A PE R I E S.



BL UE 5 A T T IN.
Blue fartin is made of Pruffian blue and fine white.
The beft ground for blue is white for the lights, and black and white
for the fhadows.
The firft lay of colours for blue is divided into three degrees or teints.
We should firtt make the middle reint of a beautiful azure; then mix
the colour for the lights about a middle degree, berween that and white.
Make the fhade-reint dark enough for the fhadows in general. All the
broad lights should be laid with a plenty of colour, and shaped to cha-
racter with the middle teint, before we lay on any other colours. Re-
member, the less the colours are mixed, the berter they will appear and
tland; for the lights of blue should be managed with as much care as
thofe of whice farrin. Next is to follow with the reft of the middle
reint, and then make out all the fhadews. The more we drive the shade-
teint, the better it will receive the reffects and finishing teints. The
shadows should be ffrengthened and blended with ivory-black and fome
of their own colour, which will mix with them into a tender mellow
hue.

The reflects are made as thofe of white fattin; that is, with oker and
fome of the lights; which should be perfectly done, as we inrend it, at
once painting. The fhadows, when dry, may be a little improved, if
there is occafion to alter them, with the colours they were made with.
The Pruffian proper to be ufed, is that which looks of the moft beauti-
ful azure before it is ground; and the fooner it is ufed after it is ground,
the berter it will work and appear.
Velvet may be painted at once. The method is, to make out the
firtt lay with the middle teint and fhade-teint; on which we should lay
the high lights with light touches, and finith the fhadows as we did thofe
of the fattin : but the neareft imitation of velver we can make, is done
by glazing; which is to prepare a ground or dead-colouring with fuch
colours as will, when dry, bear out and fupport the glazing colour in its
higheft perfection. The nature of the glazing colour is, to be of a fine
tranfparent quality, and ufed fimply with oil only; fo that whatever
ground it is laid on, the whole may appear diffinctly through it. The
beft ground for blue is made with white and ivory-black : the white is.
for the high lights, which, with the middle reint and shade-teint, makes


D R A PE R T E S.
24
Blue Sattin.
out the firft lay, like mezzotinto. Remember to make the middle teint
lighter in proportion to the glazing, becaufe that will make it the darker.
It is often neceffary to cover all but the high lights with a thin glazing:
I do not mean with a plenty of oil in the colour, but laid with lefs
quantity than if it was to be done once only. If any of it touch the
lights, we should wipe it off with a clean rag. The very high lights
should be improved, and made of a fine whice, and left to dry. The
glazing colour is Prullian, ground very fine with nut oil; and should
be laid with a large ftiffith tool, that will drive the colour, as occafion
requires. It is on the latt glazing we should ftrengthen and finith the
Thadows.
The greateft fault in the colouring of draperies, is, the painting the
Thadows with frong glaring colours, which deftroy the beaury of the
lights. This is not only the reverfe of art, but of nature, whofe beauty
always diminifhes in proportion with the lights: for this reafon we should
take care to blend and foften the fhadows with fuch friendly colours as
will agree with their local character and obicurity. Here we may ob-
ferve, that glazing the middle teint, which is made of black and white,
will not produce a colour fo blue, as if it had been prepared with Prullian
and white; yet this colour will preferve the beauty of the lights in the
higheft perfection, by reafon of its tender obfcure hue, when the blue-
ness of the other would only diminith them. This method of glazing
the blue is the general rule for all glazing.
When we are glazing blue, the lights may be glazed with ultrama-
rine, though all the other parts are done with Pruffian. This method
laves a great quantity of that valuable colour, and anfwers our purpofe as
well as if it had all been done with ultramarine.
Though this general method of painting fattins, is to make the firft
lay of colours with three degrees or teints; yet we should underfland,
in ufing them, that they produce two more : for the mixing of two dif-
ferent colours together on the cloth, will make another of a middle
teint between them : fo it is with the lights and middle teint; and
with the middle and fhade-teint : the firff anfwers to the firft teint in
white fatrin; and the laft will confequently be a fort of gradation, or
half-shade.
If the lights and middle teint mix to a beautiful clean colour, of a
middle hue between both, there will be no occafion for a colour to yo


1







  t  vrig
INTTuEFWiTEY
32
16

2
25
 

Scarlet— Pink.
DR A PE R T ES.
25
25
0
between them, as in the blue fattin: but if in mixing, they produce a
reint inclining to a dirty warm hue, then there muft be another found
of a fympathizing nature, which should be laid between them, in order
to preferve the beauty of the lights, as the firft reins in the white fattin;
for if it was not fo, the red, in the middle teint, would certainly dirty

and fpoil the white.
It is highly neceffary to underlland thefe principleste whift lay of
colours, in order to have a perfect knowledge of the general rule of co-
louring, on which the principles of colouring depend.
S CARL E T A ND CR I M S O N.
A LIGHT yellow-rel, made of light oker, light-red, and white, is the
proper ground for fearlet; the fhadows are Indian red, and, in the
darkeff parts, mixed with a very little black.
The fecond painting should be a little lighter than we intend the
Phnithing colour. I mean in proportion to the glazing, which will make
it darker.
The high lights, are vermillion and white for fattin and velyet, and
vermillion for cloth: the middle reint is vermillion, with a very little
lake or Indian red: the shade-reint is made with Indian red and lake,
with the addition of a little black in the darkeft fhadows. The diffe-
rence between fearlet and crimfon is, that the high lights of crimfon are
whiter, and the middle teint is made darker. Their reffects are made
with light-red and vermillion. The high lights should be laid and ma-
naged in the fame manner as thofe of the blue, for fear of dirtying them;
and fometimes they require to be rouched over the second time, before
we glaze them. The more the colours of the second painting are drove,
the ealier and better they may be managed to character : but the high
lights should have a good body of colour, and be left with a delicare
light touch. After it is well dry, we should finith with glazing the
whole with fine lake, and improve the reflects and fhadows. Remem-
ber that the fearlet requires but a very thin glazing; and it is better to
glaze the crimfon rwice over, than lay too much at once painting.
PINK - C O L O UR.
TTHER E are two different methods of painting a pink-colour: one
is by glazing; the other is done with a body of colours at one painting.
6



i

5
e  t  

: 3r F S7

3
17
2
2
Yellow—Green.
D.R A PE R I E S.
2 
 25
The fame grounds do for both; which should be a whitifh colour, in-
clining to a yellow, for the lights; and Indian red, lake, and white, for
the fhadows.
The second painting for the glazing method, is done with the fame
colours and a little vermillion, for the reflects; and vermillion and white
for the high lights : when it is dry we should glaze it with fine lake,
and then break and foften the fhadows into character and harmony di-
rectly.
The other method is, to make the high lights with carmine and
white; the middle teint with lake, white, and a little carmine; and the
thadows with lake and Indian red, with a little vermillion for the re-
fleets. But remember the fhadows will require to be broken with fome
tender obfcure teint.
VEL L 0 W.
THE ground for yellow should be a yellowith white for the lights,
and a mixture of the okers for the shadows.
There are the same number of teints in the yellow as there are in the
white fattin; the method of ufing them is the very fame. The lights
are made with King's yellow, ground with clean good drying oil. The
firft reint is light oker, changed with a lirtle of the pearl reint made with
the dark shade and white; which should be laid and managed as the firft
reint in white fattin. The middle reint is a mixture of the light and
brown oker, foftened with the pearl teint. The shade-teint is made with
brown pink and brown oker. Thefe belong to the firft lay.
The reflects are light oker; and fomerimes, in the warmeft parts,
mixed with a little light-red : the fhadows are ftrengthened with brown
pink and burnt umber.
Thefe colours, well managed, will produce a yellow very like Van
Dyck's; but if we leave out the King's yellow, which is the high lights
only, then it will be one of Lely's favourite yellows.
GR E E N.
THE proper ground for green is a light-yellow green; which is made
of light oker, a little white, and Pruffian, for the lights; and the okers,
brown pink, and Pruilian, for the shadows.



3


So T 


 as o   gY
 t   
  ie f h hlt  d a


235
Tr 
F5
29

 
2.5
7

Green—Changeable.
DR A PER.I E.S.
3
5

395
The fineft green we have, for drapery, is made of King's yellow

Prulfian, and brown pink. The high lights are King's yellow and a3f
very little Pruffian; the middle teint has more Pruflian; and the fhade-
teint is made with fome of the middle teint, brown pink, and more
Pruffian : but the darkeft thadows are brown pink and a little Pruffan.
The lights and middle teint should be managed in the same manner as
thofe of the blues. The fhade-teinr should be kept intirely from the
lights, becaufe the brown pink that is in it, will, in mixing, dircy them,
as the black does thofe of the blues. Remember to allow for their
drying a little darker; and that the King's yellow should be ground with
with good drying oil; for the longer it is drying, the more it will change
and grow darker : and the fooner it is ufed, the berter it will fland. Ir
is proper to have two forts of King's yellow : I mean one to be very
Light, which will do bett for the high lights of velver.
C H AN G E A BL E.
CHANCEABLE colours are made with four principal teints, viz.
the high lights, middle teint, fhade-reint, and reffeeting teinr.
The greateft art lies in finding the exact colour of the middle teint;
becaufe it has more of the general hue of the filk than any of the others.
The shade-teint is of the same hue with the middle teint, though it is
dark enough for the fhadows. The high lights, though often very dif-
ferent from the middle teint, should be of a clean, friendly, working co-
lour, that will, in mixing with it, produce a teint of a clean fympathizing
hue.
The method of painting filks is to make out the folds wicl the thade-
teint, and then fill them up in the lights with the middie teint. This
is what I call the firft lay, which should be done to our fatisfaction be-
fore we add any other colours; and the fliffer the middle teint is ufed,
the better the high lights may be laid upon it. The reffeting teint falls
generally upon the gradating half-fhades, and should be laid with tender
touches, (paringly, for fear of spoiling the firtt lay.
This method of painting anfwers to all the coloured filks, as well as
changeable, with this difference only, that the plain colours require not
to much art in matching the reints, as the changeable do. The latt
part of the work is the finithing, and frengthening the fhadews with an





-
2

27
 t

Black.
D R E P E R T E S.
28
obicure teint, a lirtle inclining to a mellewith hue; fuch as will not
catch the eye, and interrupt the beauty of the lights.
FL A. C K.
THE bed ground for black is light-red for the lights; and Indian
red and a little black for the Thadows.
The finithing colours are, for the lights, black, whice, and a lirtle
lake. The middle reint has leis whice, and more lake and black. The
hade-reint is made of an equal quantity of lake and brown pink, with a
very little biack.
The merhed of painting black is very different from that of other
colours; for as the principal thing in them, is to leave their lights clean
and brillianr, fo in black, it is to keep the fhadows clear and tranfparent.
Therefore we should begin with the flade-reint, and glaze over all the
Shadows with ir. Next, lay in the darkeft fhadows with black, and a
lttle of the hade-reint, very correcily. Aifter that, fill up the whole
breadch of lights with the midile teint only. All which should be
done exactly to the character of the fattin, &cc. and then finith with the
high lights.
Here we may obferve, the ground, being red, will bear out and fup-
pert the reds, which are ufed in the finithing colours : the lake in the
lighes takes off the cold kue, and gives it a mere beauriful colour. If
the hade-reint was of any other colour than a tranfparent warm hue, the
shadows would confequently be black and heavy; becaufe no other co-
lours can preserve the warm brilliancy, which is wanring in the shadows
of the black, like lake and brown pink. Black is of a cold heavy na-
ture, and always too ftrong for any other colour; therefore we should
make an allowance in uling it. There will be a few reffects in fattin,
which should be added as thofe of other colours; but they should be
made of slrong colours, fuch as burnt umber, or brown oker, mixt with a
lirtle of the fhade-reint.
Though the grounds which I have mentioned for the draperies, are
abfolurely neceffary for the princigal and neareft figures in a picture, fuch
as a fingle pertrair, or the like; yer I do not intend them to for figures,
which are places more into the picture. Such as are behind the princi-
pal or front figures, their grounds should always be fainter, in proportion
to their loca! finifhing colours.


Linen.
D R A P E R I E S.
29
L IN E N.
THE colours ufed in linen are the fame as thofe in white fattin, ex-
cept the firft reint; which is made of whice and ultramarine athes, inflead
of the black, and mixt to a very light blucith tgint.
In the dead-colouring we should take particurar care, that the grounds
be laid very white and broad in the lights : the fhadows are made with
black, whire, and a little Indianred, like the middle teint of white fattin.
Thefe should be left very light and clean, in order to fupport the finifhing
Colours.
The second painting begins with glazing all the lights, with a stiff
pencil and fine white only, drove bare, without ufing any oil: the tha-
dows may be scumbled with poppy oil, and fome of the colour they were
made of. This is the firft lay, on which we are to follow with the finith-
ing colours directly. The middle teint of whire fattin is the beft colour
for the general hue of the fhadows. With this and whice, in different
degrees, we should make out all the paris to character, with free light
touches, without foftening. Then with a large long-pointed pencil, and
fine white, lay the high lights very nicely, with one stroke. After
this comes the fine light blueith teint, which should be mixed light,
and laid in the tender gradations very (paringly and lighily, without fill-
ing them up.
Remember the firtt lay should be left clear and diffinct; the more it
appears, the better. It is the overmixing, and joining all the colours to-
gether, which spoils the beauty of the character; therefore it is better to
let it dry before we add the refieds and finithing teints.
The method of letting the beauriful clear colours dry, before we add
the warm, reflex, and harmonizing teints, prevents them from mixing,
and dirtying each other.
The principal blending colours ufed in the reflects, are the yellow
teint, green teint, and the rofe reint; which laft is made of lake, Indian
red, and whire. I find glazing the pearl and lead colours with white,
though it feems to anfwer our purpofe when it is done, will cercainly
fink, and be loft in the grounds on which it is laid ; therefore we should
make the dead-colouring as white as we intend the finithing colours, by
reafon they will fink a little, in proportion to the colour of the cloth,
which the glazing with pure whice only will recover.
F7


30
L A ND S C H A PE S.

H E principal colcurs ufed in landfchapes, are,
1
1. Fine white.
2. Common white.
3. Fine lght oker.
f. Brown oker.
5. Brown pink.
C. Burnt umber.
7. Ivery black.
3. Prulian blue.
9. Thianmarins.
10. FUTra-VETt.
11. E.ke.
12. Iaclian red.
12. Vermillion.
14. King's yellew.
The principal teints ufed in lanfchapes, are,
1. Light oker and whire.
2. Light oker, Pruffian, and white.
3. Light oker and Pruffian.
4. The fame, darker.
5. Terra-vert and Prulfian.
6. Brown pink and Prullian.
7. Trown pink and brown oker.
S. Brown pink, oker, and Pruffian.
9. Indian red and white.
1o. Ivery black, Indian red, and lake.
The colours neceffary for dead-colouring, are common white, light
oher, brown oker, burnt umber, Indian red, ivory black, and Pruffian.
The principal colours and teints for painting the sky, are fine white,
altramarine, Prushan, light oker, vermillion, lake, and Indian red.
The reints are a fine azure, lighter azure, light oker and white, ver-
millon and whire, and a teint made of whice, a little vermillion, and
tome of the like azure.
LANDSCH A PE s should be painted on a fort of ranned leather colour,
which is made of brown oker, white, and light-red. This colour gives a
warmth to the fhadow colours, and is very agreeable and proper for glazing.


.
L A NDS CH A PE. S.
37
SKETCHING, or rubbing in the defign, is the firft work of the
picture.
This should be done with burnt umber, drove with drying oil, and a
litle oil of turpentine, in a faint, flight, fcumbling, free manner, as we
shade with Indian ink and water; leaving the colour of the cloth for the
liguts, as we do that of the paper. Remember, in doing it, we leave no
part of the shadows to dark as we intend the firft lay, or dead-colouring,
which is to be lighter than the finithing colours. And though the foli-
age of the trees is only rubbed in, with a faint fort of fcumbling, yet the
trunks and bodies should be in their proper shapes, with their breadths
of light and fhadow. All Kinds of buildings should be done in the same
manner, leaving the colour of the cloth for their lights : the figures on
the fore-ground, if they are determined, should alfo be lkerched in the
same method, and then left to dry.
OF DEAD-COL OUR IN G.
L. 27 the firft lay or dead-colouring be without any bright, glaring,
or Arong dark colours; to that the effect is made more to receive and pre-
serve the finithing colours, than to shew them in the firft painting.
The ty should be done firft; then all the diftances; and fo work
downwards to the middle group, and from that to the fore-ground, and
neareft parts. Remember all the parts of each group, as trees, buildings,
or the like, be all painred with the group they belong to.
The greateff fecret in dead-colouring, is to find the two colours,
which ferve for the ground of the fhadows in general, the tky excepted,
and the method of ufing them with the lights : the firft of which is the
dark-shade with a little lake in it; the other colour is only burnt um-
ber. Thefe should be a little changed to the natural hue of the objects,
and then laid and drove with drying oil, in the fame manner as we shade
with Indian ink, which is a fcumbling kind of glazing; and as fuch they
should be lefe; for otherwife they will be dark and heavy, and therefore
would be intirely spoiled for the finithing glazing. Both thefe colours
mix and fympathize agreeably with all the lights, but should be laid be-
fore them.
When the landfchape is defigned, begin with the sky, which should
be laid with a good body of colours, and left with a faint refemblance of


7


MMGiy  Ta EES

rS7

53
22

5
9
L ANDS CH A PE S.
33
the principal clouds; and this we should do more in the manner of Claro
Obfcuro, than with finithing colours: the whiter it is left, the berter it
will bear out and fupport them. The diftances should be made our faint
and obicurely with the dark-fhade, and fome of their lights in different
degrees; and laid fo, as beft to find and thew their principal parts. As
we come more into the middle group, we fall by degrees into the burnr
umber in the thades : all the grounds of the trees should be laid or rubbed
in, enough only to leave an idea of their shapes and (hadows faintly. The
ground of their hadows muft be clean, and lighter than their finithing
colours, fuch as will fupport their character, and feem eafy to finith on.
In painting the lights, it is better to incline more to the middle teint,
than to the very high lights; and obferve to leave them with a fufficient
body of clean colours, which will receive and preferve the finishing co-
lours the better; all which may be done with a few teints. After this,
go over the whole with the fweerener very lightly, which will fofcen and
mix the colours agreeably for finithing.
SECOND PAIN TIN G.
BE C IN with the ky, and lay in all the azure and colours of the
horizon; then foften them : after that lay in the general teint of the
clouds, and finith on it with the high lights, and the other reints that
are wanting, with light tender touches; then foften the whole with the
Tweetener very lightly. Remember the finithing of the lky should be
done all at once painting, becaufe the tender character of the clouds will
not do to well as when the whole is wer. Obferve, that the fliffer the
azure and colours of the horizon are laid, the better the clouds may. be
painted upon them.
The greateft diftances are chieffy made with the colour of the sky;
and as they grow. nearer and darker, we should glaze and scumble the
parts very thin, with fuch glazing fhadow-colours as come neareft to the
general hue of the group the objects are in : this glazing should be un-
derftood of a darkith hue, and that the firft painting or dead-colour
should be feen through it diftincily. On this lay or ground we should
add the finithing colours.
Now fuppoting this glazed ground is properly adapted to the object
and place, I think then it will be eafy to find the other colours which



   
1 3 t 5
 is 
IF.MT
2
5y   dTRU IrgCAa TE
3

F
r 
t 

.
L A NDS C HA PES.
23

3
1
are wanted for the lights and finithings of the fame. But in laying them;
we muft take great care that we do not fpoil the glazing; therefore we
should be very exact in making thofe colours on the pallet, and then be
fure to lay them with light free touches.
Before I proceed any farther, it will be proper to fay fomething of the
moft afeful glazing colours..
Lake, terra-vert, Pruffian, and brown pink, are the four principal.
The more we manage them like Indian ink, and the more diftinctly we
leave them, the berter their tranfparent beauty will fland and appear,
provided we do it with good drying oil. After thefe four glazing colours,
burnt umber is a very good glazing warm brown, and of great ufe in
the broken grounds and nearelt parts; but the moft agreeable colour for
the darkeft fhadows, is the dark shade improved with lake. It is a fine
warm fhade, when it is drove with drying oil : no colour in the world
is to fweet and fympathizing; it mixes harmonioutly with all the lights,
as well as the fhadows, and is a charming colour in the trunks and
bodies of trees, and in all kind of buildings.
We should make out all the ground of the objects with fuch glazing
fhadow-colours, as feem neareft to the natural hue of the object, in that
fituation : but as the principal glazing colours themfelves are often too
strong and glaring, they should therefore be a little changed, and foftened
with fuch colours as are of a near refemblance to themfelves and the
objects : thus, if it is in the diftances, the terra-vert and azure, which
are their principal glazing colours, may be improved and made lighter
with fome of the sky reints : and as the diftances come nearer, with the
purple. As we get more into the middle group, the terra-vert and
Pruffian may be changed with some of the green teints, fuch as are made
without white; for white is the defiruction of all glazing colours. As
we approach the firft group, there is less occafion for changing them;
but the fore-ground and its objects require all the flrength and force
of glazing which the colours are capable of producing.
After this glazing ground, we should follow with frengthening the
fame in the shadows and darkelf places, in fuch manner as will feem eafy
to finith; which is the firtt lay of the second painting.
The colours that come next for finithing, are in the degree of middle
teints : thefe should be carefully laid over the greateft breadth of lights,
in fuch manner as not to spoil and cover too much of the glazing. Do


Trent LREASES

222
.
 F
1
5
8.

T
E R ND S C H A P E S.

  
2.22

55
9.5
22
333

it with a good body of the colour, as fliff as the pencil can agreeably

manage to character. Remember, the colours of the middle teint should
be of a clean beautiful huc. According to thefe methods, I think it
will be eafy to finith all the second painting as we ayork, down, from the
sky; through the middle group. As we come to the firtt greup, where
all the objects should appear perfectly finifhed, we should finiff their un-
der or molt diffant parts, before we paint any of the other ffietwappear
nearer. Obferve this merhod down to the latt and Ilrgft fmalis ofthe


precure; and where it fo happens, that painting one tree oft attifien

does not pleafe, forbear the second, until the firft is dry: Thinzrg
trees, of different colours, will do better, if we let the under parts dry
before we add the finithing colours.
THE THIRD AND L A ST PAIN TIN G.
Ir oiling is neceffary; lay the leaft quantiry that can be; which should
be done with a stump-tool, or pencil, proportioned to the place that is to
be oiled, to that we may oil no more than is wanted: then wipe the
whole place that is oiled, with a piece of filk handkerchief: by this me-
thod,, we leave no more oil than is proper for our purpofe.
When we are going to finith any objects, we should remember to afe
a great variety of teints, very near of the same colour; but moff of at
4
when we are finithing trees : this gives a richness to the colourin, aid
produces harmony. I find by experience the greens will fade, and grovs
darker; therefore it is highly neceffary to improve and force them, by
exaggerating the lights, and making an allowance in ufing them to much
the lighter : for the fame reafon, we should take great care that we de
not overcharge and fpoil the beauty of the glazing; for if we do, it will
be dull and heavy, and therefore will confequently grow darker.
The method for painting near trees, is to make the firft lay very near
to nature, though not quite fo dark, but more in the degree of a middle
teint, and follow it with ftrengthening the shadows; then the middle
teints; and laft of all, lay the high lights and finishing colours: but all
this cannot be done as it should be at once painting. Therefore, the beft
way is to do no more than the firft lay with the faint shadows, and leave
it to dry.
Then begin with improving the middle teints and fhadowg, and let
them dry.


5


.A
PAPT ES
SrWET
C
  yt Twlis WF5

 a tt  



Fir
5
F
 


   t
  1

5.3

1.4
L L2 IV L D.C 12 421 ts Do
3.
3

49
23

35

14
The third and laft work is adding all the livhis and finishing colours;

2

9
138
151
i
25
in the beft manner we are able.. This method of leavino the firftand
32
2.
 

31.7
3

ICcolli Udll t0 ary IebaratclY HOL OnIY IIAKCs IiC wrivit 1iutil Eanes,. dartsy E
5.2
 Gt
7

more agreeable, but leaves the colours in the oreateft perfection; becautes
r 8
37
2.
molt or tne work may be aone with icumoling ana gidling, and 1oincf
t
5
parts without oiling. The lights alfo may be laid with a better body &

of colour, which will not be mixed and froiled with the wet oround:
13
what I have faid of trees, antwers the fame to all Kinds of thrubs and
37
buthes..
The firures in a landfchape are the laft work of the victure; thofe in
the fore-oround should be done firft, and thofe in the diftances next : for
after the figures in the firft and fartheft group are painted, I think it will
be much eafier to find the proportions of thofe in the middle parts of the
picture. And we should obferve, that the fhadows of the fioures should
be of the fame hue or colour with thofe of the croup, or place they arc.
in.
A £ 28 £ Do.


37


