58
2
1
 








2287
HBEOS



Fte


EFKTOSS
Cit Feaib
2
GEORGE R.
(E. OR GE the Second, by the Grace of Gon, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faich, (Gc. To all to whom thefe
X Prefents shall come, Greeting:
WHER E As our trulty and well-beloved Thomas Bardwell, of the Parith of St.
George Hanover-Square, in our County of Middlesex, hach, by his Petition, humbly
reprefented to Us, That he hath, after a great many Years Application, Care,
Study, Indultry, and Expence, compofed a Book, in Quarto, which is now ready
for the Press, intiruled, THE PRACTICE OF PAINTINC AND PERSPEC-
TIVE MADE EASY, with Copper-Plates; which he apprehends will be of the
greateft Ufe in inftructing Our Subjects in the Art of Painting: And being de-
firous of reaping the Fruits of his great Expence and Labour, moft humbly prays
UUs to grant him Our Royal Licence and Prorection, for the fole Printing, Publifh-
ing, and Vending, the faid Work, in the fame manner as has been done in Cafes of
the like Nature: We being willing to give all due Encouragement to this Under-
taking, are graciouly pleated to condescend to his Request; and We do by thefe
Prefents, to far as may be agreeable with the Stature in that Behalf made and pro-
vided, grant unto him the faid Thomas Bardwell, his Executors, Adminiftrators,
and Affigns, Our Licence for the fole Printing, Publifhing, and Vending, of the
said Work, for the Term of Fourteen Years, to be computed from the Dare
hereof; trictly forbidding all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms or Dominions
to reprint or abridge the fame, either in the like, or in any other Size or Manner
whatfoever; or to import, buy, vend, utter, or diftribute, any Copies thereof
reprinted beyond the Seas, during the aforefaid Term of Fourteen Years; without
the Confent and pprobation of the faid Thomas Bardwell, his Executors, Admini-
Rrators, and Affigns, under his or their Hlands and Seals, firff had and obtained,
as they will anfwer the contrary at their Peril; whereof the Commiffioners, and
other Officers of Our Cuftoms, the Mafter, Warden, and Company of Stationers,
are to take Notice, that due Obedience may be rendered to Our Pleafure herein
declared. Given at Our Court at St. James's the 29th Day of January 1756, in
the Twenty-ninth Fear of Our Reign.
By His MA IR8T Vs Command.
HI. FOK.


T H E
PRACTICE of PAINTING
A N D
PERSPEGTIVE
M A D E E A S V:
In which is contained
The ART of PAINTING in Oll,
WI T H TH E
METHOD OF COL OUR ING,
Under the HEADs of
FIRsT PAINTINC, OF DEAD-
Painting BACK -GROUNDS;
On CoPyINC;
COLOURING;
DRAPER Y-PAINTING;
SECOND PAINTING;
LANDSCAPE-PAINTING;
THIRD OF LAST PAINTING;
A N D
A new, thfrt, and familiar Account of the Art of PERSPECTIVE,
illuftrated with Copper-Plates, neatly engraved, by Mr. Vivares.

By THOMAS BARDWELL, PAINTER.
The SECOND EDITION.
L 0 N D 0 N:
Printed for THOMAS MILLER Bookfeller, in Bungay; and Sold by B. WHItTE, J.
WHISTON, L. DAVIs, T. DAvrEs, S. HOOPER, T. CADELL. S. LEACROFT,
C. PARKER, WM. OTTRIDGE, S. CROWDER, RORERT SAYER, and JohN
BOYDELL, London.
HIOCCIASI
w75
S17
1

3

3


 

 


C

7
5

e


0


3
F
9
4
23S
D


T O
The RIcHT HONOUR ABL E
T. H E
EARL of ROCHFORD;
GROOM Of the STOLE to His MATRSTY.
A N D
One of his MajEsTv's Moft Honourable PRivy-Couweir.
My Lord,
aD.HI E fine Arts feem to have a natural Claim to
2
the Patronage of thofe, whom Taffe and Genins
inspire with the Love of them, and whofe Rank
2
and Fortunes may afford that Support and En-
couragement, without which, they would languith and droop
in Shade and Obfcurity.
The


7


DEDICATIO N.
iv
The Want of this Encouragement, is, poffibly, one Reafon
why thefe Arts have never flourifhed among uncivilized uncul-
tivated Nations who, confined by too exact an Equality to
the fole View of procuring the Neceffaries of Life, have nei-
ther Inciination nor Leifure to purfue and cultivate Ornaments
and lilegancies that diftinguith the polite Parts of the World.
An cafy Situation, and Freedom from the Diltreffes of Necef-
tity, deprefted with which, the ftrongeft natural Genius Strug-
gies in vain to exert itfelf, are only to be found in the Favour
and Protection of the Noble, the Wealthy, and the Powerful.
To this Caufe, perhaps, Enrope owes its Superiority over
Climates equally bleft with that happy Temperature, which
might naturally inspire the nobleft Inventions, and excite and
animate the Ambition of excelling.
Let this Reafon, my Lord, excufe the Prefumption of beg-
ging Leave to fhelter this Work under your Lordship's
Patronage. Your Love for the Arc of Painting will, I hope,
difpofe you to favour an Attempt to reftore that effential
Branch of it which is the Subject of the enfuing Treatife; the
Decline of which has been univerfally acknowleged and
lamented; and at the fame time, your judgment, formed on
a Knowlege of its Principles, and Converfation with the beft
Works of the greateft Mafters, muft prove a fufficient Pro-
tection and Recommendation to the World.
Here, my Lord, might I indulge the Warmth of my Heart,
I could be tempted to expatiate on a Character, that would
employ


DEDIC ATIO N.
employ the utmoft of the Painter'’s Skill, without incurring
the Imputation of, what we are fo often accufed of, Flattery.
But 1 drop the Pencil, though I pretend to fome Skill in
Colours: Mine are all too faint for the Subject; and 1
will not daub what I cannot adorn.
The many Favours and Benefits your Lordship has heaped
upon me, make this but an Offering of Gratitude moft ftrictly
due; and upon this Topic I can never fay enough; nor no-
thing should induce me to be inclined, but as I am fure it
would be difagreeable to your Lordship to hear a Repetition
of thofe Favours, your Generofity made it a Pleafure to
Confer.
May you be long happy, in the pleafing Power of making
others fo; and may every Object of your Beneficence retain the
fame grateful Senfe of it, and make the fame Return, in a
fincere Devotion to your Service, with,
My LoRD,
Your Lordships
Most obliged,
Most bumble,
and Moft obedient Servant;
T. BARDWELE.



 
e


elf.
1

10
 e




8

30

e 
5
THE
 A A 6 1 1 6 E
O F
P A I N
A 2V (T.

INTRODUCTION.
s T is an Observation of Plinys, that the Ancients painted
with four Colours only, and out of them made all their
Teints. Monficur De Piles is of Opinion, that it was
53
out of thefe they made their Grounds, or what we call
the Dead-colouring.
30

How it really was, Tine has put it out of our Power to determine:
But if we suppose thofe four principal Colours in Perfection, then, I think,
it can be no longer doubted, but that from them might be made all the
various Colours in Nature. For my part, I cannot believe, that the four
capital Colours of the Antients would mix to that furprifing Perfection
we fee in the Works of Tilian and Rubens. And if we have no certain
Knowlege of their Method of Colouring who lived in the laft Century,
how should we underftand theirs who lived near Two thouland Vears
ago 1 And why the Method and Practice of Colouring, which was fo
well
B


IN T R ODUCT I ON.
2
well known to Rubens and Van Dyck, should not be continued down to
the pretent Mlafters, is to me furprifing.
I muft confess, I have often thought, and still believe, that thofe Painters,
who had acquired to fine a Manner of Colouring, might, if they pleafed,
have communicated it to Pofteriry in Writing: But I never heard, that
any Attempt was made towards it; tho' tis probable there might be some.
it is attonithing, neverthelefs, all Enrope should fuffer alike at the fame
time, for want of that noble Franknefs and generous Spirit, which might
have been expected from thofe Mafters; and which would have done the
World more Service than their Pictures.
It is plain, from the Works of their Pupils, that they knew it, becaute
in their Pictures we fee the fame Sort of Colours and Colouring: And
from the little Variety of capital Colours, and Sameness of Method ufed
by them, it is not to be doubted but the Whole was contained in a few
Principles, neither difficult nor tedious.
If we trace the Art through its feveral Declenfions, we shall find
Rembrandt, who was Mafter of all the Parts of Colouring in the higheff
Degree, lived to the Vear 1668. Next to him was Zouff, who died in
Lely lived to the Year 1680. Reily,
England about eight Vears after.
who was Zouft’s Disciple, furvived them, and was left the beft Colourift
we had. Mr. Richardson, who died about the Vear 174s, was his Pupil;
but, in my Opinion, in point of Merit much his Inferior. Reily, I think,
declined in the same Proportion to Zouft, that Louff did to Rembrandt.
As all thefe Mafters, from Rembrandt, funk gradually below each other
in the Art of Colouring, we may with Certainty date the Declenfion of
that Art from him.
I cannot attribute this gradual Degeneracy in the Knowlege of to charm-
ing an Art to any thing but Inability, or want of that Generofity I have
before mentioned, or both. Tho' thefe Gentlemen were not able to give
us to perfect an Account, as the Great Mafters, yet they might have com-
municated what they learned from them; and if it was againft their own
private Intereft to have published it whilft they practifed, they should, out
of a general Regard to Men of Taffe, and to the Art itself, have left it
behind


INTR ODUC T T ON.
3
behind them, to have given to Pofterity an Opportunity of reaping the
Benefit of their Studies,
I flatter myfelf that the following Sheets, compiled originally for my
own Ufe, contain fomething that may be of Confequence in sludying this
Art; and hope the practicable Method of Colouring here laid down,
which has been the Refult of much Study, and long Experience, and
which I now ufe, will be found both ufeful and agreeable.
In the Courfe of fludying this Part of my Art, as I could have no
Affiftance from the Living, I found myfelf obliged to make my Court
to the Dead; I mean their Works. And tho' I have had very little Op-
portunity to fludy even them; yet from the few I have copied, I have,
after a tedious Courfe of Miftakes, at laft, by mere Dint of Labour, and
the Affiftance of Genius, fuch as it is, found the following Method of
Colouring very eaty and expeditious.
Painters, fays De Piles, spend many Fears in the Search of Knowlege,
which they might have attained in a little time; had they bit at first upon the
right Patb. This Truth I have experienced; and confess, that the Works
of Van Dyck and Rembrandt are the fureft Guides to Nature. It is out of
thefe moft excellent Mafters, that I have eftablished my Method: It is
from their Pictures I have found the firft Lay of Colours; and from them
I have learned the Virgin Teints, and finifhing Secrets; tho' I have always
applied them to Practice from Nature.
In the Method of my Work, I begin with a short and plain Account
of the principal Colouns ufed in the FLEsn: Next I follow with the
principal TEINTS.
FIRST PAINTINC, Of DEAD-COLOURING.
SECOND PAINTING.
THIRD, Or LAST PAINTING.
Of Painting BACK-GROUNDS.
Some Remarks on CoPyING.
Of DRAPERY-PAINTING.
Of LANDSCAPE-PAINTING.
A new, thort, and familiar Account of the Art of PERSPECTIVE.
AI)
B2


INT R ODU.C TI ON.
4
All thefe Particulars I have endeavoured to make familiar, clear, and
instructive, without Defign to flatter or offend; and thro' the whole
Courfe of the Work I have had the utmoft Regard to Truth.
The Motive of my Publifhing is folely the Benefit of the Art. Such
as are born with a happy Genius, tho' deftiture of a Mafter or Guide,
may, from thefe Instructions, acquire a competent Knowlege of Colour-
ing, almoft without ftudying. Here the Lovers of Painting, who ftudy
for their Pleafure and Amufement, may be conducted eafily, Rep by step,
to the Secrets of that Art, which, of all the defigning ones, affords per-
haps the greateft Pleafure to the Mind.
It may be objected to me by fome, That my own Works do not thew
I have either acquired or revived that Art, which, according to my own
Confeffion, has a long time lain dormant. I am not the proper Perfon
to anfiver this Objection: Neverthelefs, I have some Copies by me, that I
will leave to Judges to compare, in this Point, with any Painting that has
been done for the laft fixty or feventy Years. And I believe I could con-
vince any Artiff, even at twice painting a Head from the great Mafters,
that my Method will certainly anfwer to all their Variety of Colouring.
And fure every fenfible Painter will grant, that that Method which comes
neareft to Van Dyck and Rembrandt, will certainly be the nearest Way to
Nature.
Since I have eftablifhed myfelf in thefe Principles, I muft inform the
Reader, that I find no Difference in the Method of the Working between
Copying, and painting from Nature. Had Iknown, at my firft fetting out,
as much as I have fince learned, I should have approached much nearer to
thote great Wafters. Others, who have the Advantage of Vouth, may, 1
am pertuaded, attain the End I propofc. I is for them that I write; and
moft fincerely with the Rules I lay down may contribute to reffore fo
divine an Art.
Monficur De Piles fays, Titian and Rembrandt prepared their sirs Lay,
or Grounds, very near alike; and with Colours that kindly united, and were
as near to the Life as possible; on which they laid their Virgin Teints with
light Strokes of the Pencil; and thus they imitated the Force and Freshness of
Nature.


IN TRODUC TI ON
5
Nature.—_—They were convinced that there were certain Colours, which
deftroyed each other, if they were mixed to Excess; and that they should be
as little shaken as possible by the Notion of the Pencil.
It would be Folly in any Man, at this prefent Time, to affume fo much
Knowlege in the Art of Painting, as Monfieur De Piles really had; who
was a Man of Genius and Learning, that made Painting his principal
Study, and travelled on purpoto to complete his Knowlege in that delight-
ful Art; was intimately acquainted with the Painters in his time, who
affifted him in fludying the Works of the Great Wafters, which he care-
fully examined; and from which he made his Reffections, and judicious
Remarks. This was when the Works of Van Dyck and Rembrandt were
more in Perfection, and in an Age when Painting was better underftood.
Is it poffible for any thing to be more plain and intelligible, than thefe
two moft excellent Remarks of Monficur De Piles; which contain the
principal Matter and Foundation of Colouring? This is vaftly different from
theirs, whofe Colouring is, as they pretend, to change and wear to the
Complexion: Tho' this may anfwer their Purpofes, yet none that ftudy
the Art of Colouring will, I hope, believe it. It is certainly true, that
the Great Mafters imitated Nature in their Firft Painting or Dead-colour—
ing, to far as they could without dirtying the Colours, omitting only the
finithing Touches and Colours, that should come laft; which I defign to
shew in the Courfe of this Work, in the moft intelligible manner I can,
and exactly to the Rules and Method of my prefent Practice.
Some Painters imagine the Great Mafters had Colours, which we have
no Knowlege of ; and it is probable they might: Vetl confess, I fee none
in the Pictures of Van Dyck and Rembrandt, but what are common to
Painters; only fome of them are better than ours, which would be reme-
died, if that Art was more encouraged by the Painters. Thofe we have;
I am convinced, would appear much finer, if they were laid on proper.
Grounds.
A Painter should have as great a Regard to his Firft Lay, as he has to
the fucceeding Parts of his Work. Sir Godfrey Kneller, in Lely's time,
udied his Manner, and prepared his Grounds, and Firft Lay of Colours,
On.


INT RODUC TI ON.
6
on fuch Cloths as Lelyufed: But after his Death he foon fell into a flighter
manner, which was more agreeable to his Genius and Inclination, and
invented the cold grey-coloured Cloths, on which he eftablifhed his flight
expeditious manner. Then was the Time, when the Painters expofed
their Underftanding, in neglecting the charming Stile of Van Dyck, to
follow Kneller. But tho' Colouring was not his Talent, yet he was in his
time the beft Face-painter in Enrope: Nor has there been an Artift fince
him, whofe Heads can fland any Comparifon with his. After him, Co-
louring hung here for fome time between the Manners of Mr. Richardson
and Rofalba; the Followers of the latter failing in Oil, eftablished her
Method.
Having traced the Art of Painting thro' its feveral Declenfions, I will
venture to give my Opinion on it, as it flands at this prefent time, in
regard to Portraiture; and hope to do it in fuch a Manner, as to offend
no-body that may differ from me. If I may be allowed to judge from
the Pictures brought home by Gentlemen from abroad, as the Works of
the moft eminent living Mafters, I may, without Partiality, affirm, that
Face-painting is no-where fo well performed as in England, notwithfland-
ing the Prejudices of fome in favour of Foreigners: Nor is it at all fur-
prifing it should be fo, fince, where there is the greateft Encouragement
to an Art, thither the moft eminent Mafters in that Art will refort, and
there it will be improved to its greateft Height. It is well Known, that
no Nation in the World delights fo much in Face-painting, or gives fo
generous Encouragement to it, as our own; and it is equally known, that
no Country affords fuch Helps in regard to beautiful Nature. We have
alfo the greateft Number of Van Dyck’s Pictures, and the reft of the best
Facc-painters (Rembrandt excepted), of any People: And it feems rea-
fonable, from thefe Obfervations, which are founded on Matter of Fact,
to infer, that England is preferable to all other Nations whatfoever in this
respect, and the beft Place for fludying the Art of Face-painting.
I cannot but indulge a fort of Compaffion for thofe Artifts, as I do for
other miltaken Men, who conceive it abfolutely neceffary to traverfe Nraty
and other Countries, walting that Time abroad, which, in my humble Opi-
nion, may be employed at leaft as well at home, in fludying the Works of
Van Dyck, and the inimitable Beauties of the English Ladies, which I
Chink


C OL O U R S.
7
think as much preferable to the Antiques, as the animated Beauties of
Nature are to the cold Initations of her in Stone.
I am informed there is a Scheme on Foot to eftablifh an Academy for
Painting and Sculpture : I with it may fucceed, as it muft probably in
time improve thofe Arts to the higheft Perfection, and will of courfe do
Honour to the Nation, and to the Nobility, who will, from frequenting
it for their Amufement, learn the Principles of thofe Arts, and to become
real Judges.
 

D 

88
( Dff E2289

 RIUT(RIDEAS
28
4
D

5

85
38
38


 58
.


29

Of the principal Colovas used in the Fieth, from which all
the Teints are made.
LAKE-WHITE, or FINE WHITE, is the very beft White we
2.
have. This Colour should be ground with the fineft Poppy Oil
than can be made. At prefent our White is bad, on account of the Oil,
which is not really Poppy. White is a friendly working Colour, and
comes forward with Vellows and Reds, but retires with Blues and Greens.
It is the Nature of all Whites to fink into whatever Ground they are laid
on; therefore they should be laid on white Grounds.
2. IvoRY-BLAcK is the beft Black we have: It is a Colour which
fympathizes and mixes Kindly with all the other. It is a true Shade for
Blue. Ivory-Black and a little Indian Red make the beft general Shadow-
colour that can be. It is ground with Linfeed Oil, and used with drying
Oil. Black is a cold retiring Colour.
3. UL TRAMARINE is the fineff Blue in the World. It is a tender
retiring Colour, and never glares; and is a beautiful glazing Colour: It is
ufed with Poppy Oil.
4. PRUsSTAN is a very fine Blue, and a kind working Colour. It is
ground with Linfeed Oil, tho' I think Nut Oil is more proper. It should
never be ufed in the Fleth, but in the green Teint, and the Eyes.
S. LiCHT


C OL O U R S.
S. LICHT OKER is a friendly mixing Colour, and of great Dic in
the Fleth: It is ufually ground with Linfeed Oil, but Nut Oil is better.
All Fellows are ftrengthened with Reds, and weakened with Blues and
Greens.
6. LICHT RED is nothing but fine light Oker burnt: This and White
in mixing produce the moft perfect Fleth-colour that can be made. It is
a beautiful, clean, Kind, working Colour; but too ftrong for the White;
and therefore will grow darker. It should be ground and ufed with Nut
Oil.
7. No VERMILLION, but what is made of the true native Cinnabar,
should ever be ufed. It will not glaze; but is a fine Colour when it is
glazed. It is ground with Linfeed Oil, and should be ufed with drying
Oil.
S. CARMINE is the moft beautiful Crimfon that can be: It is a middle
Colour between Lake and Vermillion; is a fine working Colour; and
glazes delightfully. It should be ground with Nut Oil, and ufed with
drying Oil.
0. LAkE is a tender, fympathizing, deepRed; but of no frong Body;
therefore it should be ftrengthened with Indian Red. It is the beft
glazing Colour that can be ufed. It is ground with Linfeed Oil, and ufed
with drying Oil.
1o. INDIAN RED is a ftrong, pleafant, working Colour; but will not
glaze well; and when mixed with White, ralls a little into the Lead. It
is ground and ufed as the Lake.
11. BRowN PINk is a fine glazing Colour; but of no ftrong Body:
In the Fleth it should never join, or mix with the Lights; becaufe this
Colour and White antipathize, and mix of a warm dirty Hae; for which
Reafon their Jonings should be blended with a cold middle Teint. In
glazing of Shadows, it should he laid before the other Colours, that are to
enrich it: It is one of the finithing Colours, and therefore should never be
ufed alone in the Firtt Painting. It is rengthened with burnt Umber,
and


T EIN T S.
9
and weakened with Terraverter ground with Linfeed Oil, and ufed with
drying Oil.
12. BURNT UMBER is a fine warm Brown, and a good working ftrong
Colour: It is of great Ufe in the Hair, and mixes finely with the warm
Shade.
 <a
Of the Principal TEiwrs that are absolutely necesfary for
painting Fleth; all which are made from the principal
Colours.
1. F ICHT RED TEINT is made of Light Red and White: It is the
A1 moft Kind and best conditioned of all Colours, for the general
Ground of the Fiesh. With this Colour, and the Shade-Teint, we
should make out all the Flesh, like Claro Obfcuro, or Mezzontinto. We
should alfo remember, that this Colour will grow darker; becaufe it is ifn
its Nature too ftrong for the White; therefore we should improve it;
that is, mix some Vermillion and White with it, in proportion to the Fair-
ness of the Complexion: And tho' it is thus mixed, yet I shall call it the
Light-red Teint in all the Courfe of the Work; becaufe I would not have
the Vermillion Teint confounded with it, as if there was no Difference.
2. VERMILLYON TEINT is only Vermillion and White, mixed to a
middle Teint: It is the moft brilliant Light-red that can be : It agrees
beft with the White, Lightred, and Vellow Teints.
3. CARMINE TEINT is Carmine and White only, mixed to a middle
Teint : It is of all Colours the moft beautiful Red that can be for the
Checks and Lips: It is one of the finithing Colours, and should never
be used in the firft Painting, but laid upon the finishing Colours, without
mixing.
4. ROSE TEINT is made of the Red Shade and Whice, mixed to a
middle Degree, or lighter: It is one of the cleaneft and moft delicate Teints
that
C


T EINT S.
10
that can be used in the Flesh, for clearing up the heavy dirty Colours;
and therefore, in changing, will fympathize and mix Kindly.
5. VELLow TEINT is often made of Naples Vellow and White;
but I make it of light Oker and White, which is a good working Colour.
Remember the Oker is too ftrong for the White; therefore we should
make a little Allowance in uting it. It follows the Light-red Teints, and
should always be laid before the Blues. If we lay too much of it, ws
may recover the Ground it was laid on with the Light-red Teints.
6. BLUE TEINT is made of Ultramarine and White, mixed to a
lighrith Azure: It is a pleafant working Colour: With it we should blend
the Gradations. It follows the Vellows; and with them it makes the
Greens; and with the Red it produces the Purples. No Colour is fo
proper for blending down, or foftening the Lights into keeping.
7. LEAD TEINT is made of Ivory-Black and fine White, mixed to a
middle Degree: It is a fine retiring Colour; and therefore is of great Ufe
in the Gradations, and in the Eyes.
S. GREEN TEINT is made of Pruffian, light Oker, and White: This
Colour will dirty the Lights, and should be laid (paringly in the middle
Teints. It is moft ufed in the Red Shadows, where they are too ftrong;
It is of a dirty antipathizing Nature.
9. SHADE-TEINT is made of Lake, Indian Red, Black, and White,
mixed to a beautiful Murrey Colour of a middle Teint: This is the beft
Colour for the general Ground of Shadows; for which Reafen I call it the
Shade-Teint: It mixes with the Lights delightfully, and produces a
pleafant clean Colour, a little inclined to the redith Pearl. As all the four
Colours of its Composition are of a friendly fympathizing Nature, fo confe-
quently this will be the fame; and therefore may be eafily changed, by
the Addition of any other Colours.
1o. RED SHADE is nothing but Lake and a very little Indian Red:
It is a charming working Colour, and a good Glazer: It ftrengthens the
Shadows on the Shade-Teint; and receives, when it is wet, the Green and
Blue Teints agreeably. It is a good Ground for all dark Shadows.
11. WARM


FIR S T BA IN T I.N G.
I1
Ir. WARM SHADE is made of Lake and Brown Pink, mixed to a
middle Degree : It is a fine Colour for ftrengthening the Shadows on the
Shade-Teint, when they are wet or dry. We muft take care that it does
not touch the Lights, becaufe they will mix of a dirty Snuff-Colour; and
therefore should be foftened with a tender cold Teint.
12. DARK SHADE is made of Ivory-Black and a little Indian Red
only. This Colour mixes very Kindly with the Red Shade, and Tympa-
thizes agreeably with the middle Teints in the Dead-colouring. It is a
It is
charming glazing Colour for the Eyc-brows and darkeft Shadows.
of all the moft excellent Shadow-Colour, and one of the fineft working
Colours we have.
 r 



HAKS AASFTR H HPETEFDpt m ANKEH HHEEEHHEEEIGRR
FIRST PAINTING.
The Colours and Teints that are necesary for the Firft Painting
of the Fleth.

INE Whice.
1.
2. Light Oker—and its two Teints.
3. Light Red —_ _____and its two Teints.
4. Vermillion ___ and its Teint.
5. A Teint made of Lake, Vermillion, and White.
6. Rofe Teint.
7. Blue Teint.
8. Lead Teint.
0. Green Teint.
10. Half-fhade Teint— is made of Indian Red, and White.
11. Shade-Teint.
12. Red Shade.
13. Warm Shade.
The finifhing Pallet for a fine Complexion requires fix more; viz,
Carmine and its Teint, Lake, Brown Pink, Ivory-Black, and Pruffian
Bluc.
The
C 2


F IR.S T PA IN T IN G.
12
The Firft Painting, or Dead-colduring, I divide into Two Parts: The
Firft, I call the Firft Lay, or Ground; the Second, the Laying on the
Virgin Teints.
The firft Lay of Colours confifts of Two Parts: The one is the Work
of the Shadows only, and the other that of the Lights.
The Work of the Shadows is to make out all the Drawing, very cor-
rectly, with the Shade-Teint, in the fame manner as if it was to be done
with this Colour only; and remember to drive or lay the Colour (paringly.
The Lights should be all laid in with the Light-red Teint, in different De-
grees, as we fee them in Nature: Thefe two Colours united produce a
clean tender Middle Teint; for, mixing with the Shade-Teint, they turn
to a pearly Hue; and by ftrengthening them with the Lightred, we may
work to a very good Refemblance. In uniting the Lights and Shades,
we should ufe a long Softener, about the Size of a large Swans-quill;
which will help to bring the Work into Character, and leave the Colour—
ing more delicate; then go over the darkeft Shadows with the Red or
Warm Shade, which will finish the firft Lay.
The Warm Shade being laid on the Shade-Teint, improves it to a
warmer Hue; but if laid inftead of the Shade-Teint, it will dirty and
spoil the Colours it mixes with; and if the Red Shade be laid firft, inftead
of the Shade-Teint, the Shadows would then appear toored and bloody;
therefore, notwithflanding thefe two Colours are the beft that can be for
the Shadows, yet they are too ftrong to be laid alone; which is a Proof of
the great Ufe and Merit of the Shade-Teint. Fere we may obferve, that
the Shade and Light-red Teints are to friendly and delicate in their Natures,
that they will not dirty tho' we are continually changing them: How
proper then, and agreeable to our Purpofe, are they, for making the moft
principal Part of the Likeness, when in altering and changing they always
produce a clean Colour of the inviting pearly: Ffue P
The Second Part of the First Painting.
In order to finith the Firft Painting, improve the Reds and Vellows to
the Complexion, and after them the Blues; obferving, that the Blues on
The
the Reds make the Purple, and on the Vellows produce the Green.
Same


FIR S T PA IN T IN G.
13
same Method is to be underftood of the Shadows; but be fure to leave
them clean, and not too dark: Therefore Allowance should be made in
their Grounds with the Light-red; becaufe glazing them will make them
darker. When the Cloth is of a dark or bad Colour, there muft be a
Itrong Body of Colour laid all over the Shadows, fuch as will not fink into
the Ground, but appear warm, and a little lighter than the Life, fo that
it may be of the same Forwardness to finish, as if it had been a light Ground.
Therefore the Bufinets of Dead-colouring is, that we leave it always in
the same Order for finishing, tho' the Colour of the Cloth be quite the
Reverfe.
I am convinced by Experience, that the Grounds of Shadows, in what
we call the Dead-colouring, should be fuch as will fupport the Character
of the finithing Colours; which Ground muft be clean, and a little lighter
than the finithing Colours; I fay, a little lighter, becaufe the Finifhing of
Shadows is glazing; and no other Method but glazing can leave fuch
Brilliancy and Beauty as they ought to have : For 1 find, that glazing the
Shadows in the Firft Painting is not to proper as laying a Body of Shadow-
colours, that are very near to the Life, tho' a little lighter: Thefe may be
glazed and touched upon, when dry, with a great deal of Eafe: But if we
begin the Pirft Painting with glazing, we shall find it will ftare, and be of
no Ofe; and the folid Colours which are laid on it, will look heavy and
dull; therefore all Shadows and Colours, that are to be glazed, should be
done with Colours of a clean folid Body; becaufe the Glazing is more
lafting, and has the beft Effect, on fuch Colours. Remember to leave no
Roughness; I mean fuch as will appear rough, and interrupt or hurt the
Character of the finifhing Colours; which, by examining the Work whilft
it is wet, with a foft Tool, or when it is dry, with a Knife, may be avoided,
as it will eafily take off the Knots and rougheft Parts.
The Lightred and White improved is fuperior to all other Colours for
the firft Lay or Ground; which should be always done with a full Pencil.
of fliff Colour, made brighter than the Life, becaufe it will fink a little
in drying. The greater the Body and Quantity of Colour, and the stiffer
it is laid, the less it will fink: Every Colour in drying will fink, and
partake, in proportion to its Body, of the Colour it is laid on: Therefore
all the Lights of the Flesh, if not laid on a light Ground, muft confe-
quently


S E.C.OND P.AI NT IN.G.
74
quently change a little from the Life, if there is no Allowance made. The
Shade-Teint for the Shadows should fall into the Rofe Teint, as the Com-
plexion grows delicate; all which should be lightly united, with a foft long
pointed Hog-tool, to the Lights, making out the Whole like Mezzotinto.
I believe the great Wafters very feldom sweetened or foftened the Co-
lours, but in uniting the firft Lay, they were very, careful in preferving
the Brightness of their Colours, and therefore did not work them below
the Complexion. For to force or keep up a Brilliancy in the Grounds, can
only be done with the Whites, Reds, and Fellows; which Method will
make up for the Deficiency of the White Grounds: Therefore, the Firft
Painting should be left bright and bold, and the lets the Colours are broken
the better. We should forbear, ufing any Colours that will prejudice them,
and be contented to add what is avanted the next Painting; where if we
fail, a clean Rag will reffore the firft Ground.

SECOND PAIN TIN.C.
+T THE Second Painting begins with laying on the leaft Quantity that
can be of Poppy Oil; then wipe it almoft all off, with a dry Piece

of a SilkHandkerchief.
The Second Painting is alfo divided into Two Parts: One I call the firft
Lay of the Second Painting; which is fcumbling the Lights, and glazing
the Shadows: The other, finithing the Complexion with the Virgin Teints,
and improving the Likeness, as far as we can, without daubing.
SCUMBLING, is going over the Lights, where they are to be changed,
with the Light-red Teints, or fome other of their own Colours, fuch as
avill always clear and improve the Complexion, with short fliff Pencils;
but fuch Parts only as require it; otherwife the Beauty of the firft Painting
will be spoiled, and we make ourfelves double Work.
The Light-red Teint improved, is the very beft Colour that can be for
Scumbling, and improving the Complexion in general. Where the Shadows
and


T HIR D PA IN T IN G.
15
and Drawing are to be corrected, we should do it with the Shade-Teint, by
driving the Colour very ftiff and bare, that we may the eafier rerouch and
change it with the finithing Teints. Some Parts of the Shadows should be
glazed with fome of the tranfparent Shadow-Colours, fuch as will improve,
and come very near to the Life; but be fure not to lay on too much of it, for
fear of lofing the Hue of the firft Painting, the Ground of which should
always appear through the Glazing. Be very careful, in uniting the
Lights and Shades, that they do not mix dead and meally; for the more
the Lights mix with the Shades, the more meally thofe Shades will appear.
Thus far the Complexion is prepared and improved, in order to receive
the Virgin Teints and finifhing Touches.
The Second Part of the Second Painting,
Is to go over the Complexion with the Virgin Teints: Thefe are the
Colours which improve the Colouring to the greateft Perfection, both in
the Lights and Shadows. This should be done in the fame manner as we
laid them in the second Part of the firft Painting; that is, with the Reds;
Yellows; and Blues; blending them with delicate light Touches of the
tender middle Teints, without foftening. We should leave the Teints and
their Grounds clean and diftinct, and be content to leave off whilft the
Work is fafe and unfullied, leaving what is farther required for the next
Sitting; for, in attempting the finifhing Touches before the other is dry,
we lofe the Spirit and Drawing, and dirty where-ever we touch.
IKKKKKKOCRJJDIECTuKKKMKK X
The THIRD PAINTINC Or, PIN ISHINC.
T is to be fuppofed the Complexion now wants very little more than a
A few light Touches; therefore there will be no Occafion for oiling.
Begin with correcting all the Glazing; firft, where the Glazing ferves
as a Ground or under Part; then we should determine what should be done
next, before we do it, to that we may be able to make the Alteration on
the Part with one Stroke of the Pencil. By this Method, we preserve
both


B A CE-CR O UND S.
16
both the Glazing and the Teints; but if it happens that we cannot lay
tuch Variety of Teints, and finifhing Colours as we intended, it is much
better to leave off while the Work is fafe and in good Order; becaufe
thofe few Touches, which would endanger the Beauty of the Colouring,
may eafily be done, if we have Patience to stay till the Colours are dry;
and then, without oiling, and those Finishings with free light Strokes of
the Pencil.
I believe that Rembrandt touched upon his beft Pictures a great many
Times, letting them dry between : It was this Method, moft certainly,
which gave them that furprifing Force and Spirit, which is to inimitable.
I find it much eafier to foften the over-ffrong Teints when they are dry,
than when they are wet; becaufe we may add the very Colours that are
Wanting, without endangering the dry Work. If any of the Colours of
the Pallet want to be a little changed to the Life, when we are painting,
it is much better to do it with the Knife on the Pallet, than with the
Pencil; becaufe the Knife will mix, and leave it in good Order for the
Pencil.

24
245 
  
82
25 5  
4
4
825
RH

L
Of BACK-GROUNDS.
7AN Dyck made out the Keeping in his Back-grounds more from the
different Opposition and Harmony of the Colours, than from his
Knowledge of the Claro Obfcuro. I confess I cannot find in his Pictures
that Intelligence of Light and Shade, which is to striking and beautiful in
Rembrandts: Van Dycks general Nethod was to be very still and mellow,
and to break the Colours of the Ground with thofe of the Drapery. This
vill certainly produce Harmony, the Principles of which Method belong
only to the Art of Colouring: But it is the Knowlege of Light and Shade
which gives that furprifing Force and Strength, which, at firft Sight, we
find in Rembrandts Works. I have feen a Picture of a Lady, where he has
made the Ground juft light enough to thew her Complexion and Hair,
which was a dark Brown, in the greateft Perfection : The Ground was a
Wall, which, near to the Pace, was lighter than the Shadows of the Fiesh,
and


B A C K-G R O UND S.
27
and the Light diminished to arttully in the Gradations, that though the
Part round the Head was much darker, yet it appeared to be of the fame
Colour with that near the Flefh. I muft own, I like this Nicthod of
relieving the Hlead from the Ground, betterthan 1 an Dyck's Method, where
he has made the Ground almoft of the fame Colour with the Hair; and
though I admire his Way of breaking the Colours of the Ground with
thote of the Draperies, yer I am not to much pleafed, where there appears
too near a Samenets, as I have feen in fome of his Pictures, where he has
carried this Principle to near, that it is almoft imperceptibic. In Rembramdts
Pictures at Farmouth, the Lights and Shades are as vitible as thofe in his
Prints, and are remarkably broad, clear, and still; the Shadows are very
warm and thin, and look as if they were painted all at once, with a
Plenty of Colour, which appears tranfparent: Which Tranfparency was
done by Glazing the dead Colouring.
The principal Colours that are neceffary for painting of Back-grounds in
Portraiture, as Walls, Buildings, or the like, are White, Black, Indian
Red, Light and Brown Oker, Pruffian, and burnt UUmber, from which
the eight principal Teints are made, as follows:
7. PEARL is made of Black, White, and a little Indian Red.
a. LE AD, of Black and White, mixt to a dark Lead Colour.
g. VELLow, of Brown Oker and White.
4. OLIvE, of Light Oker, Pruffian, and White.
5. FLESI, of Indian Red and White, mixt to a Middle Teint.
6. MURREY, of Indian Red, White, and a little Black, mixt to a kind
of Purple, of a Middle Teint.
7. STONE, of White, Umber, Black, and Indian Red.
S. DARK-SHADE, of Black and Indian Red only.
Here the Lead Teint ferves for the Blues; the Fleth Teint mixes agree-
ably with the Lead; and the Murrey is a very good blending Colour, and
of great Ufe where the Olive is too frong. The Umber, White, and
Dark Shade, will produce a fine Variety of Stone Colours: The Dark
Shade and Umber, ufed plentifully with drying Oil, make a charming
warm Shadow-Colour. All the Colours should be laid with drying Oil
only, becaufe they mix and fet the better with the Softener.
D
Where


B A C K-G R O UN D S.
16
Where the Marks of the Trowel are fo ftrong in the Priming of the
Cloth, that one Body of Colours will not be fufficient to conceal it, we
should lay a Colour to prevent it; which should be dry, before we begin.
with those Parts that we expect to finith at once Painting.
THE Method of Painting Back-grounds, I divide into two Parts.
The Firft Part is the Work of the Firft Lay: The Second is to follow.
on that with the Finithing Teints.
Of the First Lay.
We should always begin from the shadowed Side of the Head, and paint
the Lights firft; from them go into the Gradations and Shadows, which
should be done with a large ftiffith Tool, very paringly, with the dark
Shade and White, a. little changed with the Colours that will give it more
of the required Hlue, but very near in regard to Tone and Strength; leaving.
them like Mezzotinto.
The dark and warm Shadows should be laid before the Colours that
join them: This we should do with the dark Shade and Umber, drove
with drying Oil: I fay, before the Colours that join them, becaute, if.
thote Colours were laid on firft, they would interrupt and fpoil the Tranf
parency, which is their greateft Beauty. The more the Firft Lay is drove,
the cafier and better we may change it with the finifhing Teints; there-
fore we may lay them, with the greater Body.
The Second Part is to follow directly, whilft the Firft Lay is wet,
with thofe Teints that we think are moft proper to harmonize and finish
with.
Begin with the Lights firft; and remember, as we heighten and finish
them, we do it with warmer Colours; and let thofe be accompanied with.
tine tender cold Teints.. The lighteff Part of the Ground is always neareft
to the fhadowed Side of the Head: This is the Part which governs all the
roft; and should be painted with a Variety of light, warm, clear Colours,
which vanifh, and lafe their Strength imperceptibly, in the Gradations.
Thefe


B A CK-C R O UND S
19
Thefe should be laid with a Kind of cloudy Touch, rather than potted;
and we muft take care that we do not cover too much of the Firft Lay,
but confider it as the principal Colour.
From the Lights we go to the Gradations and Shadows; for when the
Lights are well adapted to produce and fupport the Head, it is eafy, I think,
to fall from them into whatever kind of Shadows we shall find moft pro-
per for our Work: Then foften and blend the Whole with a long large
Hog-tool; which, with the Strength and Body of the drying Oil, will melc
and sweeten all together, in fuch a flattering Manner, as will seem furprife-
ingly finifhed. Remember the Teints will fink, and lofe a little of their
Strength and Beauty in drying. All the Grounds, as Walls, Sc. should be
finished at once Painting; but if they want to be changed, we may glaze
them with a little of the dark Shade and drying Oil, drove very bare; on
which, with a few light Touches of the Colour that is wanting, we may
improve their Hue. The dark Shadows may alfo be ftrengthened and im-
proved by Glazing, which should be done after the Figures are near
finished, for fear of making them too ftrong.
1 fee Rembrandt's Grounds are rather brighter in the Lights, and have
more Variety of Teints, than any other Painters: And to be fure he had
obferved, and juftly too, that thofe Teints diminish in Proportion with the
Lights: Therefore his Shadows have but a faint Appearance of Teints. Ie
underftood the Gradations in Perfection, by mixing and breaking the Firft
Lay of Colours, fo artfully, that they flatter us in regard to their real
Strength.
Frefnoy fays, Let the Field or Ground of the Picture be pleafant, free.
transient, light, and well united with Colours which are of a friendly Nature
to each other, and of such a Mixture, as that there may be something in it of
every Colour that composes your Work, as it were the Contents of your Pallet.
De Piles fays, Variety of Teints, very near of the same Tone, employed
in the same Figure, and often upon the same Part, with Moderation, contri-
bute much to Harmony.
All the Curtains should be dead-coloured when we paint the Ground;
and should be done with clean Colours, of a near fiue to the intended
Curtain;
1) 2


C O PY IN G.
20
Curtain; fuch as will fupport the finishing Colours. Do it with a tender
fort of Keeping, and near in regard to their Tone in the Lights, but
much fofter in the Shadows. All which should be mixed and broken with
the Colours of the Ground; and, as Fresnoy fays, Bodies that are back in
the Ground, should be painted with Colours allied to those of the Ground irfelf.
It will often happen, for want of the Life; or fome Defign, that we
cannot make the Folds the firft Painting; we should then leave the Maffes
of Light and Shadow; in regard to the Keeping of the Picture, broad
and well united together, fuch as may feem eafy to finith on. The
Colours of the Landlkip, in Back-grounds, should be broke and foftened
alfo with thote of the Parts which join them. This Method brings them
into Keeping, which will make all the Parts of the Ground as it were
of one Piece, to that the different Parts do not ftare, nor cut at their Extre-
Ilitics.
The Sky should be broke with the Lead and the Fleth Teints: The
Murrey Teint is of great Ofe in the Grounds of diftant Objects; and the
Umber and Dark Shade in the near Grounds: The Greens should be more
beautiful than we inted them, becaufe they will fade and grow darker.
After all is painted, we should go over the Whole very lightly with the
Softener, aswe did the Grounds, which will make it look agreeably finifhed.

t 


88
A p   on e ick an nl 2181
SIDlee
DENCREES(EIS


2

R DRS
55

8

5

25
B5
 

On CoPYING.
-491IE Author of the Anclyps of Becuty has given his Opinion of
A Copying in his true Spirit and Genius; treating with Ridicule one
of the moft ufeful Parts of Painting. This I impute to his Want of
akill in this Branch of the Art, or to a moft ill-grounded Prejudice: For
is it reafonable to believe, that a Painter, who underftands the true Merit
of Copying, would treat that Part of the Art with Contempt, which the
greatelt Mafters have always practifed and eftcemed f Men of common
Senfe Know, that the Artifts in all Ages have copied and ftudied each
other, in whatever they found moft for their Purpofe, and for the Advance-
nent


C O PY IN C.
27
ment of their Art: Was it not for this, the Art itfelf would foon dwindle
and decay; and I with this has not been the Cafe with us.
Rubens ftudied principally the Works of Tition, Pal Veronef, and
Tintoret; that is, he copied fuch of their Pictures as he thought moft
worthy his imitation, and kept them for his own Ufe.
Van Dyck copied Titian, and all the Venetian School; or, in De Piless
Phrafe, simmed their Cream. Teniers is celebrated for transforming him-
self into as many Wafters as he copied; which he did to exactly, that it is
hard to diftinguith the Copies from the Originals. Henneman's Copies of
Van Dyck are taken for the Originals of that great Wafter. I have seen
Copies by Stone, fold at great Prices for undoubted Originals, notwith-
standing they were divefted of that free Pencilling, and charming Variety
of Teints, which are fo apparent in Van Dyck. Bucksborn was one of the
laft good Copiers we have had in England; the reft that followed him and
his Mafter Lely, foon dwindled to Half-Artifts. There is a Copy of Buck-
orn’s Painting after Van Dyck, which I like much better than any of
Stones: I mean the Picture of the Earl of Strefford and his Secretary, in
the Marquis of Rockingbam's Collection, which is well painted, and de-
servedly efteemed.
I believe every one, that has heard of Andrea del Sarto'’s Copy of Lco
the Tenth, painted by Raphael and Tulio Romano, will be convinced of
the great Ofe and Merit of an Art, to which is owing that great Number
of Originals now abounding in every Country. By Originals, 1 mean
Pictures imposed as fuch, by our ingenious and honeft Dealers, to adorn
the Cabinets of the Virtuofi and Connoiffcurs,
It is furprifing, that fince the Age of thefe great Mafters, we have not
had a Man able to make a fine Copy from any one of their Pictures: And
I believe, if fuch a Genius should hereafter arife, it is to be feared the De-
Aroyers of the Art, if they are suffered to go on, will feour off the Remains
off their Beauties, to that very little will be left for him to fludy; and by
the End of this Century there will be none fit for Copying.
I


C O PY IN G.
22
It is in vain for a Man to think of making a fine lmitation of any
of the Great Mafters, without being thoroughly acquainted with the
Nature of Colours and of Colouring; and without being clearly con-
vinced, at Sight of the Picture he is going to copy, of the Method and
Principles on which it was painted. It is the Want of this Knowlege and
Conviction which leads us into fo many Errors and Miltakes.
A Painter, that has acquired any Sort of Mlanner, will always tincture
his Copying with the fame. Now-a-days we are too apt to fall into a
Manner, before we underfland the Nature of Colours; which is the Cafe,
where fome predominant Colour or Hue appears in all the Complexions
alike. For this Reaton a Painter, whofe Carnations are too red, will cer-
tainly make his Copies bluth: Or if his Colouring and Shadows be heavy,
they will of courfe fall into the Obicuro. By the Jame Rule, whatever
Teints infect his Colouring, the same will unavoidably taint his Copying;
for which there is no Cure, becaufe he himfelf is infected.
Monlicur De Piles fays, It is very rare to change a bad Manner in Colour-
ing for a better: That Raphael, Michael Angelo, Lconardo da Vinci, Julio
Romano, and otber great Mafters, spent their whole Lives without truly
underslanding good Colouring. And tho Colouring is the principal Excel-
lence in Copying, yet it is neceffary that every Artift should avoid a
particular Wlanner with his Pencil, otherwife it will certainly be feen in
his Work.
From what has been faid on this Subject, I apprehend, it appears, that
the Art of Copying, which was practifed by the Great Mafters, in order
to catch each other's Excellencies and Perfections, and by which their
noble Works have been to often repeated, and as it were renewed, is to
to far from deferving Contempt, that it ought to be encouraged, as a thing
highly ufeful, and worthy of Eftcem.
9f


D K A PER I E S.
23
 4s Wi  Hr  is WMr 2f Hr 1 H5 7f Hr 14 Mr TMr  Mor-2545 5 r
48 245 245 245. 8 25 245 245
2

C
Of Painting DR A PEE1 E S.
N order to underftand the Nature, and different Degrees, of Colours
N or Teints ufed in painting Draparies, I firft determine how many Di-
vifions are absolutely neceffary to make the Firft Lay of Colours, and, after
that, the Reffects and Finishing Teints.
The right Method of painting Draperies or Sattins in general, is, to
make out the Whole, or what I call the Firft Lay, with three Colours
only; viz. the Lights, Middle Teint, and Shade-Teint.
For the Lights, I mean the Colour of all the High Lights. The
Middle Teint should be very near to the general Hue of the Sattin, Cec.
and of an exact middle Degree between the High Lights and the Shade-
Teint. The Shade-Teint I would have dark enough for the general Hlue-
of all the Shadows; for which reafon I call it the Shade-Teint.
We should obferve, that the Lights should rather incline to a warmiffi
Hue; and the Middle Teint should be made of friendly working Colours,
tuch as will always mix of a clean tender coldish Flue. The Shade-Teint.
should be made of the fame Colours as the Middle Teint, only with less
Light; therefore this Teint will alfo mix of a tender clean Colour. It is.
with thefe three Colours we should make out the Whole like Mezzotinto;,
and we should underfland, that all the Beauty and Character of the Folds,
the Shape, Attitude, and principal Lights and Shades, are all to be con-
sidered, and made with thefe three Colours only; which should be done.
to our Satisfaction, before we add any of the Reffects or finifhing Teints.
The Reffects of Drapery and Sattins are generally Productions of their
own, and are always lighter than the Shadows on which they are found;
and being produced by Light, will confequently have a light warm Colour,
mixed with the local Colour that receives them. Here it will be neceffary.
10
5


D R A PE R T E S.
24
to observe the general Method and Secret in managing the Colours of the
Fisil Lay, and thote of the Retlects and finithing Teints.
In the First Lay, the High Lights should be laid with a Plenty of siff
Colour, and then ship’d and fotten’d into Character with the Middle Teint,
Vely correctly. Where the Gradations of the Lights are llow, as in the
large Parts, it will be proper to lay the Middle Teint firft at their Extre-
mities, with a Tool that will drive the Colour, and leave it (paringly; be-
caute the Lights will mix and lie the better upon it. Next is, to make
out all the Parts of the Shadows with the Shade-Teint drove barc. After
this comes the Middle Teint, which fills up, and ferves as the fecond Light
and Gradations, and should be managed together very nicely, to character
without touching any of the High Lights which finith the Firtt Lay.
The Reffleets and Finifhing Teints are in general the Antipathies of the
FirttLay: They will, without great Care, poifon and dirty the Colours on
which they are laid; and therefore should be laid with a delicate light
Touch without foftening. If it is over-done, we muft remember to
recover it with the Colour of the Part on which it was laid : This may
be done directly, or when it is dry. We should alfo observe, whether the
Retleets proceed from the fame Colour, or any other, that the Method
of uting them is the tame.
Before I proceed to the particular Colours, it will be proper to make
fome Observations on their Grounds.
It often hapens, that the Colour of the Cloth is very improper for the
Ground of the Drapery; and when it is fo, we should change it with
thofe Colours which we think are moft proper to improve and support the
Sinithing Colours.
This Method of Dead-colouring muft confequently
preferve them in their greateft Luftre. In Dead-colouring we should lay
the Lights and Shades in a Manner, to as only to thew a faint Idea of them,
with regard to the Shape and Roundings of the Figure. If we have a
Betign to work from, then it will be proper to make all the large and
principal Parts in their Places; which should always be done with a
Colour that is clean, and lighter than the intended Drapery, tho' in gene-
ist of the fame Ilue: And let the Shadows be no darker than a Middle
Teint:


White Sattin.
DR A PER I E S.
25
Teint: Thefe should be mix’d and broke in a tender manner, and then
foftend with a large Tool, to that nothing rough or uneven be left to
interrupt or hurt the Character of the finithing Colours.
WHITE SATTIN.
All Whites should be painted on white Grounds, laid with a good
Body of Colour, by reafon this Colour finks more into the Ground than
any other.
There are Four Degrees of Colours in the Firft Lay to White Sattin:
The Firft is the Fine White for the Lights; the Second is the Firft Teint,
which is made of fine White and a very little lvory-Black, mixed to an
exact middle Degree between the White and Middle Teint. This Co-
lour follows the White; and it is with this we should shape the Lights
into Character, before we lay on any other : And take care that this Firft
Teint appear diftinctly between the White and the Middle Teint, other-
wife the Beauty and Character of the Sattin will be fpoiled.
The Middle Teint should be made of White, Black, and a little Indian
Red: Thefe three Colours are very friendly, and mix to a beautiful clear
Colour of a pearly Hfue, which has the true Brightness and Warmth of
the general Hue of the Sattin. Remember to allow for the Red Huc
changing a little to the Lead. If there is Occafion to make any Part in
the Middle Teint lighter, we should do it with the Firft Teint only. This
Colour should alfo be laid fparingly before the White, in all the little
Lights that happen in the Middle Teints and Shadows; on which we
should lay the White with one light Touch; and be fure not to cover all
the Part that was made with the Firft Teint: If we do, it will spoil the
Character, and look like a Spot, for want of the foftening Edge or Bor-
der, which muft be between the White and the Middle Teint. The
Shade-Teint should be made of the fame Colour as the Middle Teint;
but with lefs White, to that it he dark enough for the Shadows in gene-
ral; with which we should make out all the Parts of the Shadows nicely
to Character: Which is the Work of the Firft Lay.
Next
1


White Sattin.
DR APER TES.
26
Next come the Reffects and Finishing Teints.
Brown Oker, mixed with the Colour of the Lights, is the moft ufeful
Colour in general for all Reffects in Draperies that are produced from their
own Colours. All accidental Retlexes are made with the Colour of the
Parts from which they are produced, and the local Colours that receive
them. There are but two Reflecting Teints wanted for Draperies in
general; I mean to any one particular Colour: One should be lighter
than the Middle Teint, the other darker. Thefe Colours may be a little
changed on the Pallet with the Firft and Middle Teints, as Occation
requires, or lightly broken on the Part that receives them: But this laft
Method is not to fafe as the other. The Teint fufficient for blending the
dark Shadows to the mellow tender Hue, is made with the Shade-Teint
and a little Brown Oker; which should be laid on very (paringly, with
foft light Touches, for fear of making them dull and heavy. If it should
be over-done, we may recover it with the Colour it was laid upon.
We often fee a little Blue ufed in the Firft Teint of White Sattin. Van
Haecken, who was the beft Drapery-painter we ever had in England, did
to; and fometimes, inftead of the Blue, he ufed Bluc-black, till he found
it to be a pernicious Colour, and was therefore obliged to ufe Blue; be-
caufe his Middle Teint, which was made only of Black and White, was
to very cold, that no other Colour but Blue would make a colder Teint:
Tet he managed thefe cold Colours, in all the Lights and Middle Teints,
to agreeably, and to light and eaty was his Touch, that we cannot help
admiring, and may learn fomething from him. Tho' he was not folucky
in his Shadows, which were generally of a heavy dirty Hue, this was
owing to the Colours he uted, and the Method of uting them; which
will always have fuch an Effect, when a warm or dirty Colour is mixed
with a clean light one; for, being mixed together, they will form a dirty
Colour, that muft confequently appear to in the Work: But if his Lead
or Shade-Teint had been mixed with Indian Red instead of the Oker, and
then followed with a few light blending Touches of the Oker-Teint, it
would have left them, clean and mellow It is the Want of the Red Huc
which makes the White Sattins appear to often like Pewter.
BIvE


Bhie Sattin.
DRAPERIES.
27
BLUE SAT TIN.
Blue Sattin is made of Pruffian Blue and Fine Whice.
The bett Ground for Blue is White for the Lights, and Black and
White for the Shadows.
The Firft Lay of Colours for Blue is divided into three Degrees or
Teints.
We should firtt make the Middle Teint of a beautiful Azure; then
mix the Colour for the Lights about a middle Degree between that and
White. Make the Shade-Teint dark enough for the Shadows in gene-
ral. All the broad Lights should be laid with a Plenty of Colour, and
shap’d to Character with a Middle Teint, before we lay on any other
Colours. Remember, the less the Colours are mixed, the better they
will appear and fland; for the Lights of Blue should be managed with
as much Care as thofe of White Sattin. Next is to follow with the reft
of the Middle Teint, and then make out all the Shadows. The more
we drive the Shade-Teint, the better it will receive the Reffects and
Finishing Teints. The Shadows should be ftrengthened and blended
with lvory-Black and fome of their own Colour, which will mix with
them into a tender mellow fluc.
The Reffects are made as thofe of White Sattin; that is, with Oker
and fome of the Lights; which should be perfectly done, as we intend it,
The Shadows, when dry, may be a little improved,
at once Painting.
if there is Occation to alter them, with the Colours they were made with.
The Pruffian proper to be uted, is that which looks of the moft beautiful
Azure before it is ground; and the fooner it is ufed after ir is ground,
the better it will work and appear.
Velvet may he painted at once. The Method is, to make out the Firft
Lay with the Middle Teint and Shade-Teint; on which we should lay
the High Lights with light Touches, and finith the Shadows as we did
thofe of the Sattin: But the neareft Imitation of Velvet we can make,
is done by glazing; which is to prepare a Ground or Dead-colouring
L 2
with


28
DRAPERIE S.
Blue.
with tuch Colours as will, when dry, hear out and fupport the Glazing
Colour in its higheft Perfection. The Nature of the Glazing Colour is,
to be of a fine trantparent Quality, and ufed fimply with Oil only; fir
that whatever Ground it is laid on, the Whole may appear diftinctly thro'
it. The heft Crround for Blue is made with White and lvory-Black:
The Whire is for the Hligh Lights, which, with the Middle Teint and
Shade-Teint, makes our the Firtt Lay, like Mezzotinto. Remember to
make the Mliddle Teint lighter in Proportion to the Glazing, becaute
that will make it the darker. It is often neceffary to cover all but the
High Lights with a thin Clazing: I do not mean with a Plenty of Oil in
the Colour, but laid with lets Quantity than if it was to be done once
only. If any of it touch the Lights, we should wipe it off with a clean
Rag. The very high Lights should be improved, and made of a fine
White, and left to dry. The Glazing Colour is Pruflian, ground very
fine with Nut Oil; and should be laid with a large ftiffith Tool, that
will drive the Colour, as Occafion requires. It is on the laft Glazing
we should ftrengthen and finith the Shadows.
The greateft Fault in the Colouring of Draperies, is, the painting the
Shadows with ftrong glaring Colours, which deftroy the Beauty of the
Lights. This is not only the Reverfe of Art, but of Nature, whofe
Beauty always diminifhes in Proportion with the Lights: For this Rea-
ton we should take care to blend and foften the Shadows with fuch
friendly Colours as will agree with their local Character and Obfcurity.
Here we may obterve, that glazing the Middle Teint, which is made of
Black and White, will not produce a Colour to Blue, as if it had been
prepared with Prullian and White; yet this Colour will preferve the
Eeauty of the Lights in the higheft Perfection, by reafon of iis tender
abteure tlue, when the Eluenets of the other would only diminith them.
This Mlethed of glazing the Eluc is the general Rule for all Claring.
Winen we are glazing Blue, the Lights may be glazed with Ultra-
marine, tho' all the other Parts are done with Pruffian. This Method
levee a great CQuantity of that valuable Colour, and anfivers our Purpote
is veil as if it had all been done with Ultramarinc.
Though


Scarlet.
DR APER IE S.
29
Though this general Method of Painting Sattins, is to make the firft
Lay of Colours with three Degrees or Teints; yet we should underftand,
in ufing them, that they produce two more: For the mixing of two dit-
ferent Colours together on the Cloth, will make another of a middle
Teint between them: So it is with the Lights and Middle Teint; and with
the Middle and Shade-Teint; The firft antvers to the firft Teint in White
Sattin; and the laft will confequently be a fort of Gradating, or Hialf-Shadc.
If the Lights and Middle Teint mix to a beautirul clean Colour, of a
middle Hue between both, there will be no Occation for a Colour to go
between them, as in the Blue Sattin: But if in mixing, they produce a Teint
inclining to a dirty warm Hue, then there must be another found of a
Trmpathizing Nature, which should be laid between them, in order to
preferve the Beauty of the Lights, as the firft Teint in the White Sattin;
for if it was not fo, the Red, in the Middle Teint, would certainly dirty
and poil the White.
It is highly neceffary to underfland thefe Principles of the firft Lay of
Colours, in order to have a perfect Knowlege of the general Rule of Co-
louring, on which the Principles of Colouring depend.
SCARLET and CRIMSON.
A light Vellow-red, made of light Oker, Light-red, and White, is the
proper Ground for Scarlet; the Shadows are Indian Red, and, in the
darkeft Parts, mixed with a very little Black.
The second Painting should be a little lighter than we intend the Finiffi-
ing Colour. I mean in proportion to the Clazing, which will make it
darker.
The High Lights, are Vermillion and White for Sattin and Velvet, and
Vermillion for Cloth: The Middle Teint is Vermillion, with a very little
Lake or IndianRed: The Shade-Teint is made with Indian Red and Lake,
with the Addition of a little Black in the darkeft Shadows. The Difference
between Scarlet and Crimfon is, that the Hligh Lights of Crimfon are whiter,
and the Middle Teint is made darker. Their Reffects are made wicli
Lizht.


DRAPER IE S.
Pink. Yellow.
30
Lightred and Vermillion. The High Lights should be laid and managed
in the same Manner as thofe of the Blue, for fear of dirtying them; and
foinctimes they require to be rouched over the fecond Time, before we
glaze them. The more the Colours of the second Painting are drove, the
eafier and better they may be managed to Character: But the High Lights
should have a good Body of Colour, and be left with a delicate light
Touch. After it is well dry, we should finish with Glazing the Whole
with fine Lake, and improve the Reffects and Shadows. Remember that
the Scarlet requires but a very thin Glazing; and it is better to glaze the
Lrimfon twice over, then lay too much at once Painting.
PINK-COLOUR.
There are two different Methods of Painting a Pink-colour: One is by
Clizing; the other is done with a Body of Colours at one Painting. The
Jame Grounds do for both; which should be a whitith Colour, inclining to
a Vellow, for the Lights; and Indian Red, Lake, and White, for the
Shadows.
The second Painting for the Glazing Method, is done with the fame
Colours and a little Vermillion, for the Reffects; and Vermillion and
White for the High Lights: When it is dry we should glaze it with fine
Lake, and then break and foften the Shadows into Character and Hlar-
mony directly.
The other Method is, to make the High Lights with Carmine and
White; the Middle Teint with Lake, White, and a little Carmine; and
the Shadows with Lake and Indian Red, with a latle Vermillion for the
ReHleels. But remember the Shadows will require to be broken with fome
render oblcure Teint.
VELL O.
The Ground for Vellow should be a yellowith White for the Lights,
and a Mixture of the Okers for the Shadows.
There


DR APERTES
Green.
37
There are the fame Number of Teints in the Vellow as there are in the
White Sattin; the Method of ufing them is the very fame. The Lights are
made with King's Vellow, ground with clean good drying Oil. The firft
Teint is Light Oker, changed with a little of the Pearl Teint made with the
Dark Shade and White; which should be laid and managed as the firft
Teint in White Sattin. The Middle Teint is a Mixture of the Light and
Brown Oker, foftened with the Pearl Teint. The Shade-Teint is made with
Brown Pink and Brown Oker. Thefe belong to the firft Lay.
The Reffects are Light Oker; and fometimes, in the warmest Parts,
mixed with a little Light-red: The Shadows are ftrengthened with Brown
Pink and burnt Umber.
Thefe Colours, well managed, will produce a Vellow very like Virn
Dicks; but if we leave out the King's Vellow, which is the high Lights
only, then it will be one of Lety's favourite Vellows.
GREEN.
The proper Ground for Green is a Light-yellow Green; which is
made of Light Oker, a little White, and Pruffian, for the Lights; and
the Okers, Brown Pink, and Pruffian, for the Shadows.
The fineft Green we have, for Drapery, is made of King's Vellow,
Pruffian, and Brown Pink. The High Lights are King's Vellow and a
very little Pruffian; the Middle Teint has more Pruffian; and the Shade-
Teint is made with fome of the Middle Teint, Brown Pink, and more
Pruffian: Eur the darkeft Shadows are Brown Pink and a little Prullian.
The Lights and Middle Teint should be managed in the fame manner
as thofe of the Blues. The Shade-Teint should be kept intirely from the
Lights, becaute the Brown Pink that is in it, will, in mixing, dirty
them, as the Black does thofe of the Blues. Remember to allow for
their drying a little darker; and that the Kipg's Vellow should be ground
with good drying Oil; for the longer it is dlying, the more it will change
and grow darker: And the fooner it is ufed, the better it will sland. It is
proper to have two Sorts of King's Vellow: I mean one to be very light,
which will do beft for the High Lights of Velvet.
CHANGF-
5


Changeable.
DRAPERIE S.
32
CHANGEABLE.
C1ARable Colours are made with four principal Teints, viz. the High
Lights, Middle Teint, Shade-Teint, and Reffecting Teint.
The greateft Art lies in finding the exact Colour of the Middle Teint;
becaute it has more of the general Hue of the Silk than any of the others.
The Shade-Teint is of the fame ffue with the Middle Teint, though it is
dark enough for the Shadows. The High Lights, though often very dif-
terent from the Middle Teint, should be of a clean, friendly, working
Colour, that will, in mixing with it, produce a Teint of a clean fympa-
thizing llue.
The Mcthod of painting Silks is to make out the Folds with the Shade
Teint, and then fill them up in the Lights with the Middle Teint. This
is what I call the firft Lay, which should be done to our Satisfaction before
we addany other Colours; and the Hiffer the Middle Teint is ufed, the
better the High Lights may be laid upon it. The Reffecting Teint fallsge-
nerally upon the gradating Half-Shades, and should be laid with tender
Touches, (paringly, for fear of fpoiling the firft Lay.
This Nicthod of Painting anfwers to all the coloured Silks, as well as
Changeable, with this Difference only, that the plain Colours require not
to much Art in matching the Teints, as the Changeable do. The laft
Part of the Work is the finithing, and ftrengthening the Shadows with an
obicure Teint, a little inclining to a mellowith Hue; fuch as will not catch
the Eyc, and interrupt the Beauty of the Lights.
BLACE.
The heft Ground for Black is Light-red for the Lights; and Indian Red
and a little Black for the Shadows.
The finithing Colours are, for the Lights, Black, White, and a little
takc. The Middle Teint has lefs White, and more Lake and Black.
The


Black.
DRAPER IE S.
33
The Shade-Teint is made of an equal Quantity of Lake and Brown Pink,
with a very little Black.
The Method of painting Black is very different from that of other
Colours; for as the principal Thing in them, is to leave their Lights clean
and brilliant, fo in Black, it is to keep the Shadows clear and tranfparent.
Therefore we should begin with the Shade-Teint, and glaze over all the
Shadows with it. Next, lay in the darkeft Shadows with Black, and a
little of the Shade-Teint, very correctly. After that, fill up the whole
Breadth of Lights with the Middle Teint only. All which should be
done exactly to the Character of the Sattin, Cc. and then finith with the
High Lights.
Here we may obferve, the Ground, being Red, will bear out and fup-
port the Reds, which are ufed in the finithing Colours: The Lake in the
Lights takes off the cold Hue, and gives it a more beautiful Colour. If
the Shade-Teint was of any other Colour than a tranfparent warm Hue,
the Shadows would confequently be black and heavy; becaufe no other
Colours can preferve the warm Brilliancy, which is wanting in the Shadows
of the Black, like Lake and Brown Pink. Black is of a cold heavy Nature,
and always too ftrong for any other Colour; therefore we should make
an Allowance in ufing it. There will be a few Reflects in Sattin, which
should be added as thofe of other Colours; but they should be made of
Arong Colours, fuch as burnt Umber, or Brown Oker, mixt with a little
of the Shade-Teint.
Though the Grounds which I have mentioned for the Draperies, are
absolutely neceffary for the principal and neareft Figures in a Picture, fuch
as a fingle Portrait, or the like; yet 1 do not intend them to for Figures,
which are placed more into the Picture. Such as are behind the principal
of front Figures, their Grounds should always be fainter, in proportion
to their local finishing Colours.
LINEN.
The Colours ufed in Linen are the fame as thofe in White Sattin, except
the firft Teint; which is made of Whice and Ultramarine Affies, inftead
of the Black, and mixt to a very light blucith Teint.
In


DRAPER IE S.
Linen.
34
In the Dead-colouring we should take particular Care, that the Grounds
be laid very White and broad in the Lights: The Shadows are made
with Black, White, and a little Indian Red, like the Middle Teint of
White Sattin. Thefe should be left very light and clean, in order to fup-
port the finifhing Colours.
The second Painting begins with Glazing all the Lights, with a stiff Pen-
cil and fine White only, drove bare, without ufing any Oil: The Shadows
may be fcumbled with Poppy Oil, and some of the Colour they were made
of. This is the firft Lay, on which we are to follow with the finithing
Colours directly. The Middle Teint of White Sattin is the beft Colour for
the general Hue of the Shadows. With this and White, in different
Degrees, we should make out all the Parts to Character, with free light
Touches, without foftening. Then with a large long-pointed Pencil, and
fine White, lay the High Lights very nicely, with one Stroke. After
this comes the fine light blueith Teint, which should be mixed light, and
laid in the tender Gradations very paringly and lightly, without filling
them up.
Remember the firft Lay should be left clear and diftinet; the more it
appears, the better. It is the overmixing, and joining all the Colours toge-
ther, which fpoils the Beauty of the Character; therefore it is better to let
it dry before we add the Reffects and finithing Teints.
The Method of letting the beautiful clear Colours dry, before we add
the warm, reflex, and harmonizing Teints, prevents them from mixing,
and dirtying each other.
The principal blending Colours ufed in the Reffects, are the Vellow
Teint, Green Teint, and the Rofe Teint; which laft is made of Lake,
Indian Red, and White. I find glazing the Pearl and Lead Colours with
White, though it teems to anfwer our Purpofe when it is done, will cer-
tainly fink, and be loft in the Grounds on which it is laid; therefore we
should make the Dead-colouring as white as we intend the Finifhing
Colours, by reafon they will fink a little, in proportion to the Colour of
the Cloth, which the Glazing with pure White only will recover.
LAND.


L A NDS C H A PE S.
35
g
L A ND S C H A P E S.
+AHE principal Colours ufed in Landichapes, are,
1. Fine White.
2. Common White.
2. Fine Light Oker.
4. Brown Oker.
5. Brown Pink,
6. Burnt Umber.
7. Ivory Black.
8. Pruffian Blue.
9. Ultramarine.
10. Terra-Vert.
11. Lake.
12. Indian Red.
13. Vermillion.
14. King's Vellow.
The Principal Teints ufed in Landichapes, are,
1. Light Oker and White.
2. Light Oker, Pruffian, and White.
3. Light Oker and Pruffian.
4. The fame, darker.
5. Terra-vert and Pruffian.
6. Brown Pink and Pruffian,
7. Brown Pink and Brown Oker.
8. Brown Pink, Oker, and Pruffian.
9. Indian Red and White.
10. Ivory Black, Indian Red, and Lakc..
8
The Colours neceffary for Dead-colouring, are Common White, Light
Oker, Brown Oker, Burnt Umber, Indian Red, Ivory Black, and
Pruffian.
F 2
The


36
L ANDS CH A PES.
The principal Colours and Teints for painting the Sky, are fine White,
Ultramarine, Pruffian, Light Oker, Vermillion, Lake, and Indian Red.
The Teints are a fine Azure, lighter Azure, Light Oker and White,
Vermillion and White, and a Teint made of White, a little Vermillion,
and fome of the Light Azure.
LANDSCHAPEs should be painted on a fort of tanned Leather Colour,
which is made of Brown Oker, White, and Lightred. This Colour
gives a Warmth to the Shadow Colours, and is very agreeable and proper
for Glazing.
SKETCHINC, or rubbing in the Defign, is the first Work of the
Picture.
This should be done with burnt Umber, drove with drying Oil, and a
little Oil of Turpentine, in a faint, flight, fcumbling, free Manner,
as we shade with Indian Ink and Water; leaving the Colour of the Cloth
for the Lights, as we do that of the Paper. Remember, in doing it, we
leave no Part of the Shadows to dark as we intend the Firft Lay, or Dead-
Colouring, which is to be lighter than the Finithing Colours. And though
the Foliage of the Trees is only rubbed in, with a faint fort of Scumbling,
yet the Trunks and Bodies should be in their proper Shapes, with their
Breadths of Light and Shadow. All Kinds of Buildings should be done in
the same Manner, leaving the Colour of the Cloth for their Lights: The
Vigures on the Fore-ground, if they are determined, should alfo be
sketched in the fame Method, and then left to dry.
Of Dead-colouring.
Let the Firft Lay or Dead-colouring be without any bright, glaring,
or ftrong dark Colours; to that the Effect is made more to receive and pre-
ferve the Finithing Colours, ithan to thew them in the Firft Painting.
The Sky should be done firft; then all the Diftances; and fo work
downwards to the middle Croup, and from that to the Fore-ground, and
Reareft


L A NDS CH A P E S.
37
neareft Parts. Remember all the Parts of each Group, as Trees, Buildings,
or the like, be all painted with the Group they belong to.
The greateft Secret in Dead-colouring, is to find the two Colours,
which ferve for the Ground of the Shadows in general, the Sky excepted,
and the Wethod of ufing them with the Lights: The firft of which is the
Dark-Shade with a little Lake in it; the other Colour is only burnt Um-
ber. Thefe should be a little changed to the natural Hue of the Objects,
and then laid and drove with drying Oil, in the fame Manner as we shade
with Indian Ink, which is a fcumbling Kind of Glazing; and as fuch
they should be left; for otherwife they will be dark and heavy, and there-
fore would be intirely fpoiled for the finifhing Glazing. Both thefe Colours
mix and fympathize agreeably with all the Lights, but should be laid
before them.
When the Landfchape is defigned, begin with the Sky, which should
be laid with a good Body of Colours, and left with a faint Refemblance of
the principal Clouds; and this we should do more in the Manner of Claro
Obicuro, than with Finishing Colours: The whiter it is left, the better it
will bear out and fupport them. The Diftances should be made out faint
and obicurely with the Dark-Shade, and some of their Lights in different
Degrees; and laid fo, as beft to find and shew their principal Parts. As
we come more into the middle Group, we fall by Degrees into the burnt
Umber in the Shades: All the Grounds of the Trees should be laid
or rubbed in, enough only to leave an Idea of their Shapes and Shadows
faintly. The Ground of their Shadows muft be clean, and lighter
than their Finithing Colours, fuch as will fupport their Character,
and feem eafy to finith on.
In painting the Lights, it is better to incline more to the Middle Teint,
than to the very High Lights; and obferve to leave them with a fufficient
Body of clean Colours, which will receive and preserve the Finishing
Colours the better; all which may he done with a few Teints. After this,
go over the Whole with the Sweetener very lightly, which will foften and
mix the Colours agreeably for Finishing.
Second


L AND S CH A PE S.
38

Second Painting.
Begin with the Sky, and lay in all the Azure and Colours of the Hori-
2on; then foften them: After that lay in the general Teint of the Clouds,
and finith on it with the High Lights, and the other Teints that are want
ing, with light tender Touches; then foften the Whole with the Sweetener
very lightly. Remember the Finithing of the Sky should be done all at
once Painting, becaufe the tender Character of the Clouds will not do fo
well as when the Whole is wer. Obferve, that the ftiffer the Azure and
Colours of the Horizon are laid, the better the Clouds may be painted
upon them.
The greateff Diftances are chiefly made with the Colour of the Sky;
and as they grow nearer and darker, we should glaze and fcumble the Parts
very thin, with fuch glazing Shadow-Colours as come neareft to the
general Hue of the Group the Objects are in: This Glazing should be
underftood of a darkith Hue, and that the Firft Painting or Dead-colour
should be feen through it diftinetly. On this Lay or Ground we should
ald the Finishing Colours.
Now fuppoling this glazed Ground is properly adapted to the Object
and Place, I think then it will he cafy to find the other Colours which
are wanted for the Lights and Finishings of the fame. But in laying them,
we muft take great Care that we do not fpoil the Glazing; therefore we
should be very exact in making thofe Colours on the Pallet, and then be
sure to lay them with light free Touches.
Before I proceed any farther, it will be proper to fay fomething of the
moft ufeful glazing Colours.
Lake, Terra-vert, Pruffian, and Brown Pink, are the four principal.
The more we manage them like Indian Ink, and the more diftinctly we
leave them, the better their tranfparent Beauty will fland and appear, pro-
vided we do it with good drying Oil. After thefe four glazing Colours,
burnt Umber is a very good glazing warin Brown, and of great Ufc in
the broken Grounds and neareft Parts; but the moft agreeable Colour for
the


L. A ND S C H A PES.
39
the darkeft Shadows, is the dark Shade improved with Lake. It is a fine
warm Shade, when it is drove with drying Oil: No Colour in the World
is to sweet and fympathizing; it mixes harmonioutly with all the Lights,
as well as the Shadows, and is a charming Colour in the Trunks and
Bodies of Trees, and in all kind of Buildings.
We should make out all the Ground of the Objects with fuch glazing
Shadow-Colours, as feem neareft to the natural Hue of the Object, in
that Situation: But as the principal glazing Colours themfelves are often
too ftrong and glaring, they should therefore be a little changed, and
foftened with fuch Colours as are of a near Refemblance to themielves
and the Objects: Thus, if it is in the Diftances, the Terra-vert and Azure,
which are their principal glazing Colours, may be improved and mads
lighter with fome of the Sky Teints: And as the Diftances come nearer,
with the Purple. As we get more into the middle Group, the Terra-
vert and Pruffian may be changed with fome of the Green Teints, fuch
as are made without White; for White is the Destruction of all glazing
Colours. As we approach the firft Group, there is less Occafion for change-
ing them; but the Fore-ground and its Objects require all the Strength
and Force of Glazing which the Colours are capable of producing.
After this glazing Ground, we should follow with firengthening the
Same in the Shadows and darkeft Places, in fuch Manner as will feem
eaty to finith; which is the Firft Lay of the Second Painting.
The Colours that come next for Finishing, are in the Degree of Middle
Teints: Thefe should be carefully laid over the greateft Breadth of Lights,
in fuch Manner as not to fpoil and cover too much of the Glazing. Do it
with a good Body of the Colour, as fliff as the Pencil can agreeably
manage to character. Remember, the Colours of the Middle Teint should
be of a clean beautiful Hue. According to thefe Methods, I think it will
be eafy to finith all the Second Painting as we work down, from the Sky,
through the middle Group. As we come to the firft Croup, where all the
Objects should appear perfectly finished, we should finith their under or
moft diftant Parts, before we paint any of the other which appear nearer.
Obferve this Method down to the laft and neareft Objects of the Picture;
and where it fo happens, that Painting one Tree over another does
Rot


L ANDS CH A PE S.
40
not pleafe, forbear the second, until the firft is dry. Thin near Trees, of
different Colours, will do better, if we let the under Parts dry before we
add the Finifhing Colours.
The Third and Laft Painting.
If Oiling is necefiary, lay the leaft Quantity that can be; which should
be done with a Stump-tool, or Pencil, proportioned to the Place that is to be
viled, to that we may oil no more than is wanted: Then wipe the whole
Place that is oiled, with a Peice of Silk Handkerchief: By this Method, we
leave no more Oil than is proper for our Purpofe.
When we are going to finith any Objects, we should remember to ufe
a great Variety of Teints, very near of the fame Colour; but moft of all,
when we are finishing Trees: This gives a Richness to the Colouring, and
produces Harmony. I find by Experience the Greens will fade, and grow
larker; therefore it is highly neceffary to improve and force them, by
cxaggerating the Lights, and making an Allowance in ufing them to much
the lighter: For the fame Reafon, we should take great Care that we do
not overcharge and fpoil the Beauty of the Glazing; for if we do, it will
be dull and heavy, and therefore will confequently grow darker.
The Method for Painting near Trees, is to make the Firft Lay very
near to Nature, though not quite fo dark, but more in the Degree of a
Middle Teint, and follow it with firengthening the Shadows; then the
Middle Teints; and laft of all, lay the High Lights and Finifhing Colours:
But all this cannot be done as it should be at once Painting. Therefore,
the beft Way is to do no more than the Firft Lay with the faint Shadows,
and leave it to dry.
Then begin with improving the Middle Teints and Shadows, and let
them dry.
The Third and Laft Workis adding all the Lightsand Finifhing Colours,
in the beft manner we are able. This Method of leaving the firft
and fecond Part to dry feparately not only makes the whole much eafier,
and more agreeable, but leaves the Colours in the greateft Perfection;
becaufe


L A NDS CH A PE S.
42
becaufe moft of the Work may be done with Scumbling and Glazing,
and fome Parts without Oiling. The Lights alfo may be laid with a
better Body of Colour, which will not be mixed and spoiled with the wet
Ground: What I have faid of Trees, anfwers the fame to all Kinds of
Shrubs and Buthes.
The Figures in a Landichape are the laft Work of the Picture; thofe in
the Fore-ground should be done firft, and thofe in the Diftances next: For
after the Figures in the firft and fartheft Croup are painted, I think it will
be much eafier to find the Proportions of thofe in the middle Parts of the
Picture. And we should obferve, that the Shadows of the Figures should
be of the fame Hue or Colour with thofe of the Group, or Place they
are in.
3o 
5
et Pa
5
0
383
8
de
T II E
C7


42

 2
215 45 p 25 245  
48 i 245 It 25 Mr 2s Mr 25 M5 245 145 245 24r M5 5 75
W 
35
8 2   2 
   
5
s  s t  S3. H SC Bd





Sad



S50
 836A
5   Cktt 
&Cl  DiClkir 
830 
32
ODCERH ENSDGURR C

25
3
6
8
 LrDa&des&a
239E HLEs
ed
2 F RedEs&.
FRedes

2
545
it 

52
Fitt 
2
E

2

Il S S I i 12 i2 SR He IRth Te the AiSe Ai Al Ae T He Ae He He He HHe Mi He Aith Ae He SHe MiHe H
T H E
 KLL&CLLLAU OA LRDLEC LIVL.
INT R ODUC TI ON.
TORSD L
are much obliged to the Learned in the Mathematicks,
BSEE
OE
Dy
who in the Beginning of this Century made fuch great im-
2
23

253
provements in the Principles of Perspective, and who have
2
2
67
245
done their utmoft to render them ufeful: But for want of
a
underftanding the Art of Painting, and the Practice of Defign-
ing, they are intelligible only to thofe Readers who have a fufficient Fund
of Geometry to comprehend all their Schemes and Examples. They
found that all Planes were alike in Geometry;
and followed their geo-
metrical Cenins, which led them into fuch Constructions as they thought
would explain their Properties in general, and, as they faid, give a new
Turn to Pertpective. Indeed, their Schemes are to intricate, that none
but thofe, who are well acquainted with the Mathematicks, can under-
sland them. Dr. Tayfor neglected the Horizontal Plane; and in his
Book made no Difference between that Plane and any other whatfoever.
Here it is that I am quite of the reverfe Opinion to that learned Gentle-
man, and believe, that the Term of Horizontal Line should confine our
Notions to the horizontal Plane: And I think, that That Plane, which
repretents the Earth on which we live, enjoys fome particular Privileges
which makes the Figures in it more cafy and more convenient to be
described, notwithllanding all Planes are alike in Gcometry: For which
Reafon
5


P E R S PE C T I VE.
43
Reafon I have followed Nature, and have united the old and new Prin-
ciples: And, believing that Objects are beft underftood rfom their narural
Appearance, I have given the Horizontal Plane to all my Work, with
the Vanithing Line, in its proper Pofition. Here I found it abfolutely
neceffary to confider the Subject in a Wanner as yet unattempted, and
which should require no mathematical Knowlege to underfland it. This
obliged me to find one general Method for the whole Work: And find-
ing the Principles few and fimple upon which the Art depends, and that
there are no more than three Planes, and six different Lines, required to
be underftood, in order to reprefent any Object whatfoever; I compoted
such a Variety of Objects, as I conceived would draw on the Knowlege
of Perspective; and which, I think, cannot fail of rendering the ufeful
Principles of this Art general and intelligible.
Moft Gentlemen that have ftudied the Mathematicks, whom I have
talked with on Perspective, are for having a mathematical Demonftration
of all the lineal Parts of a Picture; and will not allow that any thing
can be right, but what is done according to the pricleff Rules: And Dr.
Taylor fays, a Painter ought to govern himself intirely by the Rules of
Perspective, and not to take any Liberties whatfoever. I confels I am of
their Opinion, and believe they are moft certainly right, provided the
Picture was only the Projection of any of the five Solids. Were we
to follow the Rules, in projecting the Bafe and Capital of a Column, we
should find thofe ufelefs Operations too tedious and difficult for human
Patience. And how we are to reprefent all Sorts of Objects according to
the Rules of Perspective, is to me as furpriting as impoflible.
A Painter is not to be confined strictly to the Rules of Perspective; but
to make them fublervient to his Purpotes. Nothing should tie up his
Hands: He should not have his Genius imprifoned; but be at Liberty to
express his Idea, like Gyotro, with one Stroke of his Pencil; and, as
Frefnoy fays, let the Compaffes be rather in his Ryes than his Hands: There
let him meafure diftinctly every Object by Compariton; which is the
principal Talent of a Painter. If he is well acquainted with the P:in-
ciples of his Art, he will not stop at the dry Rules of Geometry, whilff
his Fancy is fketching all the principal Parts of the Picture: Hle will
proceed
C 2


PE R S P E C T I VE.
44
preceed with the Whole; and then, after the Defign is fixed, correct fuch
Parts as are requifice with the Rules of Perspective.
I detign not to trouble the Reader with a Multitude of Examples; but
to explain the general Rules of Perspective in fuch a manner as may be
intelligible to him. All my Schemes are limited to fix Plates only; which
are the subject of the fix different Sorts of Lines that reprefent all Objects
whatfoever; and which are adapted to fuch Objects as are eafy to be
underftood. And though I delign to take the Reader out of the common
Road, I will not lead him any round-about redious Byc-ways, as is often
the Cafc. I shall conduct him directly into fome beautiful Garden, where
he may entertain himself with a pleating Variety of Objects, as Buildings,
avenues, Walks, and Viftos, terminated with agreeable Views of diftant
Prospects; and, that he may enjoy them to his With, I have intermixed
no Figures that might interrupt or divide his Attention.
ugGerassessesesesesesegse
PL A TE I FICURE I.
VN order to explain the general Rules of Perspective, let us fuppofe
 we lee the real Objects; as Part of a Garden, with fome distant
Prospects; and, between them and the Spectator's Eye, let us imagine a
trantparent Plane, as Clats, to be placed perpendicularly on the Ground,
at the nearcht Part of the Objects, on or thro' which Plane we fee their
Repretentations: And it is with the Affiftance of this imaginary Planc
that we are to undertland the Principles, and are fuppofed to produce the
perspective Projection or Reprefentation.
The Seat, or Line, on which this Plane flands, is called the Bafc-Line,
2V.
225
The Line IIl, at the Ilorizon, is called the Iforizontal Linc.
The
Ileight or Diftance this Line is from the Bafc-Line, is always equal to
the leight of the kye of the Spectator, and is always drawn parallel to
the Batc-Linc.
The


5.


p445

s Tntet  
 


15
 f


idtTh

 
11713
1
H









F
P



comporseesf
ars faer 
tin parngon
into





43
F1: 3.
3
anne
Bardwell delin








12


Fig:1.
Crontin






Tn
TDDPRD
a.


(C


I


Feq:2.



2
Flvares Scut


lateI


PER S PE C T I VE.
45
The Diftance which we are from the imaginary Plane, when at the
Station where we propofe to take the Peripective View, is the Diftance
of the Picture,
The Point of Sight is the principal Point in a Picture.

It is that Point,
where a Line from the Spectator's Eye cuts the imaginary Plane at right
Angles; and which I always diftinguith with the Letter S.
The Line 50, is equal to the Diftance of the Picture, and cuts the
Horizontal Line at right Angles, as the principal Ray does the imaginary
Planc: Therefore O is the Eyc-point; becaufe it reprefents the Fyc
transferred from its firft Pofition, or Point of View, to the imaginary
Plane.
The next thing we are to confider is the Ground-Plane.
The Ground-Plane is that Part which is below the Bafe-Line 2V: It
is the Plane whereon the Plans of the geometrical or original Objects are
drawn.
Though we are obliged to have the Ground-Plane below the Baic-
Line, yet the Parts which are in it will be produced by the Rules above
it, and, as it were, beyond it, at a Diftance in a Perspective Proportion,
as thofe in the Ground-Plane are diftant from the Bafe-Line.
We should remember, that, in order to reprefent any Objects in Per-
spective, it is neceffary that we underfland their geometrical Plan, Eleva-
tion, Profile, and Section, before we attempt the Perspective Projection.
In the Beginning of the Work, we should firft draw the Bafe-Line:
Then affume a Point for the Point of Sight, and draw the Horizontal
Line through it.
Make S0 equal to the Diftance of the Picture, and defign the gco-
metrical Plan of the Object in the Ground-Planc.
Here the geometrical or original Object is the Point A: The Repre-
fentation of which is required to be found in the imaginary Plane or
Firtt,
Picture.


PE R S PE C T I V E
46
Firft, draw a Line from the given Point, to cut the Bafe-Line in any
Direcion at Pleature, as AB: Parallel to that draw a Line from the Eyc-
point to cut the Horizontal Line, which gives the Vanithing Point for the
Reprefentation of the Line AB. Here the Line OS is parallel to the
Line AB; therefore S will be the Vanithing Point. Draw the Lines BS
and A0, the Interfection of which is a, the Reprefentation fought. The
Line Ba is alfo the Reprefentation of its Original BA.
We may find the Reprefentation of the Seat or Place where the Pine-
tree grows, without ufing the Original in the Ground-Plane, thus:
Bring down the Diftance S0 to the Horizontal Line, as SD; and bring
up EA to the Bafc-Line, as BC; which makes BC and SD parallel:
then a Line drawn from C to D will cut the Line BS in a: Therefore,
if we fuppofe the imaginary Plane to be the Picture, and having affumed
the Line BS, in which we fuppofe the Pine-tree, make BC, on the
Poctom of the Picture, equal to the Diftance we suppofe or know the Tree
is beyond the imaginary Plane (which Diftance is commonly called the
required Diftance), then the Line CD will interfect BS; which gives the
Reprefencation fought.
S is the Vanithing Point of the original Line AB; becaufe the Line Ab
Vanithes in that Point.
The Reprefentation a, depends on the Parallelifm of the Lines OS and
AE: For were they parallel in any other Direction, they would then project
the Point a, in the very Jame Place.
Now after this Explanation of the Firft Figure, we should remember,
that the imaginary Plane is to be underftood and called the Picture.
Fic. 2. Let a,6,c, d,c, be five original Points given in the Ground-
Pione: To find their Reprefentations.
fir is the Bate-Lipne, DV the Horizontal Line, S the Point of Sight,
id 53 the Diftance of the Picture.
IVC
tuttead of drawing the Lines from the Points in any Direction,
15
ndy draw two parallel Lines thro' four of the Points to the Bafc-Line,
68.


PER S PE C T I VE.
47
cg, and as, which will fhorten the Work: Then draw their Parallel
OV from the Eyc-point O, to cut the Horizontal Line, which will give
the Vanithing Point V: Draw gV and yV and interfect them with the
Rays 60, c0, and d0, which give the Reprefentations 1, 2, 3, 4. The
Points a, and e, are in a Line that is parallel to the Bafc-Line; the
Repretentation of which muft be parallel to the Bafe-Line alfa; which
being interfected by the Ray cO, gives the Point g. Then will the
Points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, be the Reprefentation of the original Points a,6,c, d,e,
the Projection fought.
We may find their Reprefentation, without ufing the Ground-Plane,
thus : Ering down the Diftance of the Vanithing Point V, to the Hori-
Zontal Line, as , and bring up the Lines cbg, and day; to the Bafe-
Line; then draw Lines from them to the Point v, which will interfect the
Lines g V, and yV, in the sfame Points, as may be feen by the Line vh.
All Circles and curve-lined Figures are reprefented by finding feveral
Points in them, and then joining them neatly by Hand. Therefore we
should affume in the original Lines only to many Points as are abfolutely
neceffary, and in fuch manner as may be eafy for the Work of the Pro-
jection.
Frc. 3. Is the Method of dividing the Vifual Line ES, into any
Number of Parts, as the Trees, Coc.
Let 2V be the Bafc-Line, S the Point of Sight, S0 the Diftance of the
Picture, and SD that Diftance brought to the Horizontal Line; and let
the Line Es be required to be divided into a given Number of Parts
equal to FE.
Firft, bring up the given Space FE to the Bafc-Line, as 1E, and draw
the Line 1 D, which interfects ES, in the Point 2, or the Seat of the firtt
Tree. Inftead of continuing the Divilions on the Bafe-Line, we may
draw a Line from 1, the firft Divition, to the Point of Sight, and by making
the Line 2 3, parallel to Er, we have a new Scale of the Space, at its
Place in the Picture; therefore all the reft are found by this Repetition.
PLATE


PE R S PEC T I VE.
43
CRRREDCCRISOCTRUSOCTAUSDCLAASDEEASNSDCTANSDCTARSSCTAASSCIADSDCrkNSS
PL A TE II. Fic. 4.
LL Lines that interfect or cut the Picture at right Angles, are
AA called direct Lines; which Lines will vanish in the Point of Sight:
Therefore we fee Rows of Trees, or the like, which are in parallel Lines,
contract themfelves, and feem to grow more and more narrow, the far-
ther they are extended from the Eye.
The Reprefentations of direct Lines are called Vifual Lines or Rays.
Here the Lines AB, and yg, are direct Lines, whofe Reprefentations
are the Vifuals BS and g S, which vanith in the Point of Sight, as do alfo
both the green Walls, the Walk, and the Sides of the Buildings that are
parallel to them. The Side of the Building at 1 has its Parts, as the Bafe
and Frize, parallel to the Bafe-Line: But thofe in the Side where the
Windows are, and which are perpendicular to the firft, vanith in the
Point of Sight. The fame holds with respect to the Pavilion.
Frc. s. 2V is the Bafe-Line, S the Point of Sight, DE the Horizon-
tal Line, and S0 the Diftance of the Picture: a,6, C, d, e, f. 8, b, are
direct Lines, the Reprefentations of which vanith in S, the Point of Sight.
in order to underfland the Nature of the generating Lines and Angles,
and the Diftance of the Picture being placed above the Horizontal Line;
Suppofe they were turned or lifted upon their Axis, the Vanifhing Line
DE, till the Eyc-point O is directly oppofite to the Point of Sight; then
they would be in a vifual Plane, which pafies from the Spectator's Eye,
parallel to the Ground-Plane: The Interfection of which Plane with the
imaginary Plane or Picture is the Vanithing Line of that Plane, or Hori-
Zontal Linc.
Lines which are drawn from the Eyc-point to the Horizontal Line,
producing the Vanithing Points, are called generating Lines. They are
alto the Parallels of original Lines. In the firft Figure, Plate l. 0S is
the


p.3.




ymetr yur
f  h
y


  

Ly


A &t  0



Wintholt lten


119.5



Fig:4
B
pt



5
7

2
of
7 6)






a


1
8
Prion, Prt


iitate II.


2


l2


P ER S PE C T I V E.
49
the Parallel of the Line AB. In the fecond, OV is the Parallel of the
Lines cg and df. In the third, the principal Ray is the Parallel of the
Line FE. And in the fourth Figure, Plate II. it is the same to the Lines
AB, and fg.
The Generating Line OE, being parallel to the Diagonal cl, gives E
the vanithing Point of that Line: And Dis the Vanithing Point of the other
Diagonal dK. The Line OP, is alfo the Parallel of the original Line 1c.
Therefore P is the Vanithing Point of that Line.
The Lines that generate the Vanifhing Points of two original Lines,
make the fame Angle at the Spectator'’s Eye, or Eye Point, as the original
Lines do with each other.
Here the Generating Angle SOE is equal to that of dLe, and produces
that of SLE. And the Angle DOS is equal to that of dke, and pro-
duces that of DKS. The Angle POS is alfo equal to that of elf, and pro-
duces the Angle PiS.
If we confider the Plane of the Picture as a Ceiling, thefe Objects which
are laid on the Ground, will then appear perpendicular to the Plane of the
Ceiling. This fort of Perspective is eaty, becaufe the Reprefentation of
Objects which are parallel to the Plane of the Ceiling, are fimilar to their
Originals; and therefore will retain their geometrical Forms.

 d t Wd S  S d S t th est S id t  Sd
PL A T E III.
LL Reprefentations of Objects parallel to the Picture, are parallel
f to its Original. Therefore those Lines that are parallel to the
Picture have no Vanifhing Points; becaufe the original Lines, which should
produce the Parallel, are alfo parallel to the Picture.
Lines that are parallel to the Picture, are called Tranfverfe Lines.
Fic.
II


PER S PEC T I VE.
50
Fic. 6. 2V is the Bafe-Line, IIl the Horizontal Line, 5 the Point
of Sight, and SD the Diftance of the Picture in the Horizontal Line,
which is a Point juft behind the Tree.
In this Picture all the Objects, but the approaching Walk, and the green
Wall, are parallel to the Picture. Here I have given the Plans of the four
Trees, and the Grass-plot, and B2, the Diftance the Wall is from the
Picture; which Diftance is found by the Interfection of a Line from B
to the Point D, and the Vifual 25, as A in the Bafe-Line of the Wall.
Wlake 26, equal to nm, and draw the Vifual nS. Interfect that witlr
the Line D6, which will give the Corner of the Grais-plot. Cz, is the
Diftance the Trees are from the Picture: The Interfection of the Line
5D and the Vifual 2S, will give the Reprefentation of the Seat of the
Tree, whole Plan is C; through which Point draw a Line parallel to the
Picture, in which the Line will be the Seat of four Trees, and the End of
the green Wall. The reft of this Figure needs no Explication.
Fic. 7. MY is the Bafe-Line, S is the Point of Sight, SD the Hori-
Zontal Line and Diftance of the Picture.
Planes that are perpendicular to the Horizontal Plane, are called vertical
Planes. Therefore the imaginary Plane or Picture is a vertical Plane,
whole Interfection with the Ground Plane is the Bafe-Line. The Objects,
whofe Sides are MNRD, are in the Plane of the Picture; and thofe of A
and Bare in a Plane parallel to the Picture. The Line O6, is the Vanitl-
ing Line of a vertical Plane; which cuts the Picture in that Direction.
The Diftance of any Vanithing Line, which paffes through the Point of
ight is equal to the Diftance of the Picture; therefore GS, and OS, are
equal to SD.
in order to project the Object E, draw the Vifual fS for the upper Side.
Then draw the two Diagonals NO, and f6, and the Side hl, which will
complete the whole Squarc. bin the Plane of the Picture, is the geome-
trical of a, the End of the Bcan.
In
5




T





F72
5dgro

85

-




EST





23

3




5

2

Buntwelldelin.


114:6.
17



73
e

    

4

11

th

o







a  o




t
4

e prn
R

li
R
Sis
79
114

a  t 
stiti
  

111
or
e 

me
ine tatin t
17


d

ay


3
35
  

 


f
8
 

pmis
   t f in       
52  



 

4

12
Pet
100

  co 
 
t dii
 i


55

F
o
I)
3
3B
In
I
 14:





ap he Fn



plate III

00 0 000
M
P1 warar eutr.


2


PER S PE C T I VE.
52
In this feventh Figure it is obvious, after the Vanithing Lines, their
Centers, and Diffances are fixed, that the Rules for drawing the Appear-
ance of Objects upon the vertical or perpendicular Plane, are the same as
thofe for reprefenting them on the Horizontal Plane; which Rules will
anfwer the fame to inclined Planes.
The Line which paffes through OL., is the Vanifhing Line of an inclined
Plane, which inclines to the Picture in the Direction of the Line D0, and
OL is the Distance of that Vanifhing Line, it being the Length of D0;
which laft is the Parallel of the inclined Plane. More will be faid on this
Subject, when we come to the inclined Plane.
4 itf Ms Mr WHr  is 15 4 45 47 Us Hr ts s t5 Mr 27 r 75 r u5 f 75 r 24 s 7s 3r 27 ts ts V

KAA . 
PL A TE IV. Fic. 8.
&t is the Bafe-Line, IIl the horizontal Line, 5 the Point of Sight,
L1 and S0 the principal Ray, or Diftance of the Picture.
The two direct Lines CA, and KL are Part of the Originals, whote
vifual Lines AS and L5 terminate this agreeable Walk. My Delign
in this Picture, is chiefly to thew the Reprefentation of a Line, which is
perpendicular to the Ground Plane, whole original Seat is C; the Pro-
jection of which is the Interfection of the Vifual AS, and the Ray CO.
23 2.
The Object which I have made choice of for the perpendicular Line,
is the Fuft of the Gothic Column; the Axis of which is next to be
demonftrated.
Let AB, in the Plane of the Picture, be the given Height of the per-
pendicular Line, then will the Vifual BS determine the Top. And a
Line drawn from the Seat a, perpendicular to the Bafc-Line, gives the
Axis of the Column, the Reprefentation fought.
The Reprefentation is in a Vifual Plane, which paffes from the line
AB, through the Column, the Face of the green Wall, and vanithes in
 the
HI 2


PER S PE C T I VE.
52
S the Vifual Point.
This Vifual Plane is alfo a vertical Plane, becaufe it
is in a perpendicular Direction. There is alfo a perpendicular Plane, which
paffes through the Axes of the Vews, or Cone Trees, in which are found
their Heights. Their Seats may be found, as Frc. z, in the Firft Place.
The Situation of the Buildings is parallel to the Picture, which may be
observed by their parallel Parts corresponding with the Bafe-Linc.
Fic. 9. 27 is the Bafe-Line, 5 the Point of Sight, DE the Hori-
rontal Line, S0 the Diftance of the Picture, 60 is the Vanishing Line of
the vertical Plane, and SD is its Diftance, placed perpendicular to it.
All thefe Objects are in a perpendicular Pofition to the Horizontal.
Plane; therefore all their Sides are in perpendicular or vertical Planes.
The Figure A is the Reprefentation of a Cube, which has its neareft Side
in the Plane of the Picture; the Perspective of the upper Face, in the
Horizontal Plane, is shewn by the Vifuals and the Diagonals from D and
E, in the Vanithing Line of that Plane.
The Projection of the Side in the Vertical Plane, is alfo thewn by the
Vifiuals and Diagonals G4, and Og. Here I have made the double Pro-
jection to this Cube, only to thew how exactly alike the Principles are to
both the Planes; which will appear more, if we turn the Paper, to that
the Vanishing Line 60, be in the Horizontal Pofition; then the Horizontal
Scheme will be changed to the Vertical, and confequently appear fo.
The Pillar E, has that and its oppofite Side parallel to the Plane of the
Picture. But the other Sides are in vertical Planes, which vanith in the
Vifual Point. The Plan is thewn by the Diagonal to E. It is obvious
from this Figure, that all Objects, which are parallel to the Picture, can-
not alter nor change their Shapes; for if we fuppofe Lines continued from
all the Parts to the Vanishing Point, and that they were cut by a Plane in
a vertical and parallel Direction to the Picture; yet then every Section
would retain the original Form of the Side E.
The Pillar B, placed obliquely with the Bafe-Line, has its neareft Angle
in the Plane of the Picture; the Vanishing Points are produced by the
Gene-


11 52.

Mt


I.T






L


Ruritwell delin


F





5
 



2


1iq: 9.



Fiy S


20



Fnt
d


3.0


Plivaras Jril


plate IIII


7


2


PER S PE C T I VE.
53
Generating Lines, which make the right Angle at the Kye Point, as DOE,
the Reprefentation of which is DhE, and DLE. The Side B, is in a
vertical Plane that paffes through the Line Lh, and vanifhes in the Point
E. The other Side e, is in the Plane hl D, and therefore vanithes in the
Point D. In order to project the Bottom, bring down the Diftance of the
Vanishing Point E to the Vanithing Line, as c. Make hf, equal to the
Side, and draw fe, which gives the Side h6; draw a Line from 6, paral-
lel to the Bafe-Line, to interfect hD, which gives the other Side: But if
the Vanifhing Points were not at equal Diftance from the Point of Sight,
which is here the Vanithing Point of the Diagonal, then it would be
neceffary to draw Lines from 6 to D, and from E through 7, which
would give the other Side.
The triangular Pillar C, has its neareft Angle in the Plane of the Picture,
and its Plan in the Ground Plane; the Projection of which is found by
bringing the Sides to the Bafe-Line, as 12 and 1z. Draw 2D, which
gives the Side of the Vifual Line; d is the Diftance of D brought down
to the Horizontal Line; draw zd which gives the other Side: Then raife
the Sides, and finish the Top. The Side C is in a Vertical and Vifual
Plane, the Side I vanifhes in the Point D.
The neareft Parts of Objects will, in their Reprefentations, be fartheft
from the Vanishing Line of the Horizontal Plane; and if that Vanifhing
Line was in the Middle, their Tops and Bottoms would then be exactly
fimilar, as may be underftood by thefe Objects.
I imagine, from the Principles which I have already laid down, the
Reader will be inclined to believe, that the Reprefentation of Objects
may be projected without the Ground Plane. For if we underftand the
Original, why should we not ufe the fame Rules at the Part of the Object
in the Picture, where the Projection is required, as if it was below the
Bottom of the Picture? Which Method would certainly shorten the
Work, and make it more cafy.
PEATE


PE R S PEC T IV E.
54
245
7IF 7


PL A T E V. Fic. 10.
 I is the Bale Line, Pl the Horizontal Line, 5 the Point of Sight,
L 50 the Diltance of the Picture, and AB Part of an original
oblique Linc.
All the Objects in this Picture are reprefented to the Eye obliquely;
not one Vifual Line is to be found in the Work, except the principal Ray.
The Vanithing Points vary in their Diftances from the Point of Sight,
the Situation of the Wall is governed by the original Line AB, the Paral-
tel of which is OV, and Po is perpendicular to it. This makes the
Generating Angle POV go Degrees; which determines the End of the
Wall to be square.
In order to find the Perspective of the Wall, we should firft find the
Reprefentation of the Plan, from which we raife the Elevations: The
Whole being governed by two Vanifhing Points, with their Diftances
brought to the Vanishing Line, makes it very eaty. The Seat of the Trees
is found as that in Figure g. Platel. by making their Diftance or Space
from the firft Tree, parallel to the Bafe-Line; and dividing the Line AP,
as ES, in that Figure; but remember it should be with the Diftance of the
Vanithing Point P.
The Obelifk at P being placed with the Walks, has their Vanishing
Points.
The Corner of the Building, at a, is (quare, though it appears an
obtule Angle, which is owing to the little Diftance of the Picture. For
had the Point P been at a much greater Diftance, the Obliquity of the
Line P2, would appear more to the Satisfaction of the Eyc.
Fic. 11. Here Al is the Bafc-Line, PN the HorizontalLine, 5 the
Point of Sight, and S0 the Distance of the Picture.
1 de-


p.54.


2

2




20






Fi9:11.
S

 L
Bardwelliddin.





119.10


I


B
I

A












23






2
F1WarasJculp







n



II


Platc:


12


PE R S PE C T I VE.
55
I defign to begin with the Projection of the Wall, and after that, of the
Floor, then the Object RT, and to finith with the Moulding above the
Wall.
The Generating Angle POV is a right Angle; therefore thofe of the
Wall will be square.
We should firft make the Corner el, then the Side E, and next that of
S. Affume the Corner V, and draw Lines from it to P, to interfect thofe
of cN and IV, which will give the Side M, and make the Side V, which
finifhes the Wall.
The Line Oh, divides the Angle POV equally, and chis its Repre-
fentation. h is the Vanithing Point of Lines that interfect the Wall, as
Diagonals do the Side of a Square. Let Ac be the Diagonal of the firft
Square: Draw Av and AP, interfect them with Pe and Vc, which give
the Square Abed, the next Diagonal is be. By this Repitition it is eafy
to fee how the whole Floor is projected.
I defign the Cornerf of the Object RT, to be exactly over the Point g,
and that its Side oppofite to T, should touch the Wall.
Let Ae in the Plane of the Picture, be the given Height of the Corner
f; therefore that Corner is the Interfection of eV, and a perpendicular
from 8.
The Side next the Wall, and its oppofite T, are in a vertical Plane,
the Vanifhing Line of which is VIl, becaufe it paffes through the Point
V in that Direction. And V is the Vanishing Point of the common
Interfection of the vertical and Horizontal Planes. E is the Diftance of
the Vanifhing Point V, brought down to the Horizontal Line, the Place
where we should make the original Angle of Inclination, as VEHI, which
is the Angle the Object is suppofed to make with the Floor. And II is
the Vanithing Point of the Inclination.
If from the Point E we draw a Line perpendicular to IIE, to cut the
Point of Lines
Vanifhing Line IIV, then will that Point be the Vanishing
perpendiculir


PER S PEC T I VE.
56
perpendicular to the Side R. The Perpendicular at 3 gives the Length of
2f. Draw all the Sides to their Vanithing Points, which finish the Repre-
tentation.
The most exact and cafieft Method of projecting Mouldings in Archi-
recture, is to make the geometrical Profile at its Place in the Picture, which
I defign to thew by the Projection of theie three Mouldings, that reprefent
2 fort of Cornice.
Let Ikl be the geometrical Profile of the Mouldings, placed at the
Top of the Wall, to the Line cL. Draw a Line from the Vanishing
Point of the Diagonalh, through L, cutthat with a Line from P, through
K, the interfection of which is N, the Extremity of the Projection.
By
repeating this Method at every Point of the Profile, down to the Bottom
I, we shall have the exact Reprefentation in a vertical Plane, which pafies
through the Angle or Mitre Joint. When this Projection of the Mitre
Joint is found, we have nothing more to do, but to continue the Lines
of the Sides, in their proper Direction.
UUAUE JJAMOUUυUURυ TTEυT THESUnJ UYETUMSEOUEOUEEOgpypuEE JUTHS UJEJUnVJUMougus asayips ui ouiis aigy
ETUETUUUEOUOVOGVUENOGVOGTAGVOGUOUUOGVOJCUOEUEGUOUUEGUEGUEUUUGTOVCVabVeCtSetS
PL A T E VI
 1IIIs Picture is the Reprefentation of a large Block of Stone,
A whofe Angles are (quare, like thofe a Cube. It flands on one of
its Edges on the Horizontal Plane, and is fupported by another Block. The
Line CP, is the Seat of the Edge it flands on; and CV is the Seat of
the Side R. Iis Angle of Inclination with the Horizontal Plane is equal to
the Angle VEFl. Therefore II is the Vanithing Point of its Inclination.
Fic. 12. Let 2y be the Bafe-Line, PE the Horizontal Line, 5 the
Point of Sight, 50 the Diftance of the Picture, and P the Vaniffing
Point of the Edge the Block flands on.
Firft we muft find V the Vanishing Point of Lines that are perpendi-
cular to the Point P; thus: Draw a Line from P to the Eyc-point O,
and


1.527
39
Fir 12.
5

9
Tntr
Se r 
h
 
 
eo
 





  

2
4

8


7

5

y 

2

cxngt 


ftht ta A 8   ts




B

I
Ny15

3.2
B




nint
119.14.

ai

2 3 4 5 6
9
119 13
X
I

8
t

I
F Peatertary
Penttt letin


plate VI


2


PER S PEC T I VE.
57
and make OV perpendicular to the Line OP, which gives the Vanithing
Point V: Then will V be the Vanithing Point of the Seat of the Side R;
which Side is in a vertical Plane, whofe Vanithing Line paffes thro' V in
that Direction: Therefore V is the Vanithing Point of the common Inter-
fection of the Vertical and Horizontal Planes. Draw the Vanishing Line
GH; then will V be its Center, and VO its Diftance. Make VE per-
pendicular to the Vanithing Line GHI, and equal to its Diftance VO:
Then at the Point E make the geometrical Angle of Inclination, as VEII,
which gives II the Vanithing Point of the Inclination. Draw EC per-
pendicular to EII, which makes 6 in that Vanithing Line the Vanithing
Point of Lines perpendicular to II. Next draw the Vanithing Line PHI,
and make SD parallel to it, and equal to the Diftance of the Picture;
then, from the Point of Sight, draw a Line to cut the Vanithing Line
PII at right Angles; which gives 1 the Center, and ID the Distance,
of that Vanishing Line.
Here it is obvious in this Projection, that the Lines PII, 6H, and PC,
are the three Vanishing Lines of the feveral Faces of a Figure, which con-
tain a folid right Angle.
It is alfo very plain, that the Line EII, according to thefe Rules, muft
be the geometrical of the original inclined Plane: Therefore, if we make
Eb equal to the End or Thickness of the Block, then will a, be the
Seat of b, as on the Horizontal Plane.
To proceed with the Projection: Make AB in the Plane of the Picture
equal to ab; then will the Point B be the neareft Angle of the Block.
Next we should make 1k equal to ID, and draw the Lines PK, and
HK, that generate a square Angle, which is equally divided by the Line
Ke. Make BL equal to the Length of the Block, and parallel to the
Vanishing Line Pil. Draw a Line from L to h, the Distance of P;
which will give the Side Bn. DrawnHI, and the Diagonal Be, and
thro' their Interfections draw a Line from P, which gives the upper Side.
Next draw the Line B6, which gives BC, the neareft Edge; and draw
the Lines BP, CP, and BIl, CH; then the Line nG, and one from the
Angle above 5 to 6, will finish the whole Reprefentation, or Projection of
the Block.
I have


P.E R S PE C T T VE.
58.
I have endeavoured to thew, in the Progrets of all the Schemes, that
the Principles, on which the whole Art depends, are to fimple, that it is
ohvious the Method is general to all Planes alike.
Firft, of the Horizontal Plane. The Distance of the Picture muft be
placed from the Center, or Point of Sight, perpendicular to its Vanishing
Line, before we can make the generating Angles, which give the Vanish-
ing Points: Then we may bring down their Diftances to the Horizontal
Line, provided the Dimentions of the Original are brought parallel to
them; as I have thewn in the Courfe of the Work.
Secondly, of the Vertical Plane. The Diftance of the Vanishing Line
is placed perpendicular to it; and from the Eye-point proceed the gene-
rating Lines that give the Vanishing Points: The Diftance of which are
uted and brought to the Vanifhing Line in the fame manner as thofe of
the Horizantal Plane.
And the Inclined Plane has its Diftance placed perpendicular to the
Vanifhing Line; and from the Eyc-point proceed the generating Lines
and Angles, which produce the Vanithing Points, and which are alfo
brought to the Vanithing Line, and ufed as thofe of the Horizontal.
The Method of finding the Center of a Vanithing Line, is, only to draw
a Line from the Point of Sight, to cut or interfect the Vanithing Line at
right Angles; which Interfection will be the Center of that Vanishing
Line. The general Rule for finding the Distance of a Vanithing Line, is,
always to make the Diftance of the Picture from the Point of Sight parallel
to that Vanithing Line, and to draw a Line from that, to the Center of the
Vanithing Line, which will be the Diftance of that Vanifhing Line, as DI.
is to the Vanishing Line PIl, or OV to that of GII.
To find the perspective Reprefentation of Circles, we are obliged to
make a Plan of the Circle, or Part of the Plan, by adding fuch Lines to
it, as may cafily be projected, and leave a clear Idea of the required
Circlc.
Fic. 19. Let S be the Point of Sight, Dand E the Points of Diftance,
and KL MN the Scheme of the Plan.
The


PER S PEC T I VE.
59
The moft exact and cafieft Method, is, to inclofe the Circle with a
Square, and then make the two Diameters and Diagonals, which give the
eight required Points. But inflead of drawing Lines thro' the Points of
the Diagonals parallel to the Sides of the Square, I make them parallel
to the Diagonals: This Method gives the fame Points, with the Lines
nearer to the Circle than can be drawn by any other Method whatfoever.
The reft of the Figure needs no Demonftration.
Frc. 14. Shews the Method of making the Plan of the Circles, in
order to find the perspective Reprefentation of the Torus; which I have
done according to my Method, juft thewn, of drawing Circles; and
which may be underftood very eafily, at Sight of this Figure.
The Perspective of the Torus feems to be a Circle contained in four
Lines, which are nearer or farther diftant from each other, according to
the Situation of the Eye: Two of which are perpendicular to the Hori-
2ontal Plane: Thefe give the greateft Breadth of the Torus; the other two
are parallel to that Plane, and give the Height and Depth: The one is
the upper and fartheft Part of the Circle, the other the neareft and bottom
Part of the Torus. The two perpendicular Lines proceed from the Ex-
tremity of the Circle in the Plan, which are found from the Projection of
the two eight oppofite Parts: Thofe that give the Height and Depth are
governed by the Perspective Section of the Bafe, which is in the Vertical
Plane.
Frc. ig. Is the Diagonal Scale; which is of univerfal Ufe for trant
ferring all Sorts of Defigns to the greateft Exactness, and to eaty to under-
tland, that one Demonftration is fufficient for every Artift; who will, I
imagine, find no manner of Difficulty in applying it to Practice. Suppofe
A B to reprefent one Foot in the Defign which we are to work from, and
AC to be the intended Length of one Foot in that which we are going
to make.
The Method is, firft to take the Dimentions of the Part we propofe to
begin with; then to place the Compaffes to the Bafe-Line of the Scale,
aid
1 2


PER S PEC T I V E.
60
and find what it is in the Line DE; then open them to that in the
Line DC, which will be the required Length.
Thus the Reprefentation is found by Feet and Inches; becaute the
Bafe-Line DA contains twelve Parts, which confequently divide the
Length AB, and AC, on the Lines DB, and DC, into that Number.
By this Method we may make the Scale to any Proportion: And as it
is the Bufiness of every Artift to find a proper Scale for his Purpofe, there-
fore Painters are not obliged to ufe always fuch Scales as the Work was
Wrought to.
Suppofe we draw the Pedeftal without ufing the Method of Feet
and Inches: Divide the whole Height into any convenient Number
of equal Parts, and let one of thofe be for the Scale: Then divide
the Height we intend to make the Pedeftal of, in the fame manner, and
apply them to the Method of the Scale; which will antver our Purpofe
as well. It is fometimes neceffary, in copying, to divide the Original into
a Number of Squares, and then divide the Cloth for the Copy the fame.
If in one of the Squares at the Corner of the Cloth we make the Scale
according to this Method, we may ufe them as we did the Scale of Feet
and Inches.
The Number in the Bafe of the Scale is at our Pleafure. Remember
to make the Squares very large; for none but Novices make them
otherwife.
Fic. 16. Is a Method which I have often found to be of great Ofe,
and very eafy to practife, when we are a little ufed to it.
Suppofe the Line Ac, to be the Height of any Defign we have to work
from; and the Line Bb, the intended Height of that which we are going
to make. Draw the Bafe CB, then place the Defign perpendicular to it as
An, Bb, Oc. and draw a Line from b through a, to cut the Bafe, which
will give the Center C.
18


PER S PE C T T. VE.
61
If the Line Ac, be divided into any Number of Parts, and we draw
Lines from the Genter Cthrough them, to cut the Line Bb, then will they
divide the Line Bb in the fame Manner exactly.
Therefore if the Line Ag, was the Axis of a Column and Entablature,
the same may be transferred to the Height we would have it, by having
a fmall Nail in the Center, and a fine Thread, fuch as the Wig-makers
weave with, and only strain the fame over the Parts in Aa, to Bb; which
will give the required Dimenfions.
In the fame Manner we may have all the Breadths, by applying them
to the Line Ac, and continuing them to the Line Bb; or if it is only a
few of them, as the Diameters, they may be done feparately: But remem-
ber, that after the Places of the Lines Ag and Bbare fixed, they muft con-
tinue fo, till the Whole is finished.
The antique Figure in the fixth Plate, marked with the Letter K, is an
Object I have studied with great Application and Care, in order to project
it exactly, according to the Rules of Perspective; and as I improved in the
Knowlege of the new Principles, I flattered myfelf I should fucceed;
believing if larrived at fuch Perfection in the Art, I should then be able in
time to reprefent all Objects whatfoever, as fome of the Learned in the
Mathematicks will have it, according to the pricteff Rules; who dogma-
tically affert that every Part of the Perspective should be mathematically true.
When we fancy this to be really the Cafe, it is reafonable to believe that
we should be anxious to learn an Art, which we think fo abfolutely necef-
fary. Now, gentle Reader, I muft confels my Weakness, and tell you, that
notwithftanding all my Care, and puzzling after this mathematical Truch,
I find the UUndertaking was too great for my Capacity; and therefore, from
the Experience of my Folly, I determined to give up the Attempt, and
flatter myfelf no farther with fuch Expectations. But whenever the
Rules which I have shewn, should fail, and grow tedious, which I believe
will not happen in Matters of Confequence, I defign immediately to fettle
the Affair at Sight of the Object.
The


P ER S.P E C T I V E.
62
The Volutes in the Capitals of Columns, and the Twift in Stair-cafes,
are Objects of this Nature, and very probably were taken from this An-
tique. It has alfo a great Refemblance to Nr. Hegarth's precise Serpentine
Line; and therefore, without doubt, has fome Grace, though the Twift
is a little quicker. It is an Object of well-varied Contents, whofe Pro-
portions gradually leften to its Extremities; and its Dimenfions are governed
by Fitness, Variety, Oniformity, Simplicity, Intricacy, and Quantity. What
a Pity it is, this venerable Object of Antiquity should not be reprefented by
the Rricteff Rules of Perspective! 1 confels this would afford Matter of
Triumph to any learned Critic, that is happy enough to fucceed in the
Attempt.
In purfuance of our prefent Inquiry, fuppofe, according to a certain
chimerical new Syftem, the Object under our Confideration be imagined
to have all its inward Contents nicely fcooped out, and the Eye at once to
view the Whole from within, and mark the oppofite corresponding Parts,
and take Care to acquire a perfect Idea of the Diftances and Bearings of
their feveral material Points and Lines in the Surfaces: Or, for the more
caty Description of the Projection, fuppofe we were to gauge the Contents
with Wires, in order to affift and guide us to a readier Conception of all
the intervening Parts; I leave it to the Critics to judge of what Ufe thefe
Expedients are, towards raifing in the Imagination a true and perfect Idea
of the Antique in Queftion.
The Pamphlet intituled A critical Examination of the Paintings on the
Coiling of the Banqueting-house at White-hall, thews that that celebrated
Ceiling has nine feparate Points of Sight: And that no Painting can appear
perfectly true, unless feen from the Point intended by the Painter: And
though a Picture may be perfectly true from one certain Point of View,
it cannot from any other. Therefore the Author has taken great Care, to
thew the Neceffity of regarding a Picture, as intended by the Painter.
The Picture he fays, being always considered as a transparent Surface or
Medium, through which the Visual Rays are supposed to pass; if the Spec-
tafor changes bis Situation, those Rays (in Nature) will interfett that Sur-
face


PER S PEC T I VE.
63
face in different Points; and therefore (in the Pitture) being determined to
such certain Points, the Station of the Spectator becomes neceffarily sixed and
unalterable, and the Picture must appear falfe seen otherwife.
Suppofe we fee, through a Window or tranfparent Plane, a real Cube,
placed directly oppofite, tho' fomewhat below, the Eye. In this Situation
we shall fee only two Faces, one in Front, and the other at Top; and if
we move to the Right or Left, we muft fee one of the other Faces. This
ishis Proposition; which is certainly true.
In order to underftand the Principles of Perspective, we are obliged to
confider the Picture as a tranfparent Plane, thro' which the vifual Rays
pats to the Spectator’s Eyc. But when the Defign is really a Picture,
whofe Reprefentation is fixed upon fome opaque Body, as a Board, Wall,
or painted Cloth, that cannot be tran(parent, but a flat fmooth Surface;
and the Object reprefented is a Cube that thews only two Faces, one in
Front, and the other at Top; tho' we move to the Right or Left from
the Point of Sight, we shall never fee more by changing the Place; nei-
ther is it reafonable to believe we should: For if we find the fame Appear-
ance, tho' moved from the Point intended by the Painter, the Cafe is not
altered; which thews there is no Neceffity of having the Eye of the
Spectator exactly in that identical Point.
If the Spectator's Eye muft coincide with the Point of Sight, the Distance
should be confidered accordingly; and it will then be a very difficult Mac-
ter to come at the proper Point of View to fee the Picture; and the more
fo, as its Horizon, when hung up, is feldom fo low as the Eye.
I own the Sight of the Pamphlet excited my Curiofity to examine the
Ceiling; and I find the Centre of the Whole to be the only Point of Sight
requifite in all that noble Defign. For, from the Middle of the Room,
I faw the Intention of that great Painter, and was convinced of it from
the Order of the Whole, and by the natural Pofition of the Figures, which
appeared all finely forefhortened, and looked like fuch living Objects
viewed from the middle of the Room below, which was, in my Opinion,
the principal Point of View that Rubens intended for the whole Ceiling.
Iam:
4


P.ER S PE C.T I.VE.
64
I am alfo of Opinion, that allCeilings, except thofe of Galleries or
long Rooms, should have but one Point of Sight; and, that there are
some Subjects, which I believe require no Point of Sight, as living Objects
reprefented in the Clouds, which have no Architecture, nor any terreftrial
Appearance; which is the Cafe with moft of the Work in this Ceiling.
And if there is no Point of Sight required in the Work of the Picture,
then I think there is none in regard to its being truty seen; becaufe the
Kye cannot coincide with the Point that never was made or intended.
It was not material to take Notice of the moft dry and lifeless Part of
the Performance; I expected Mr. Highmore would have given us some
ingenious Remarks on the Forefhortenings of the Figures, and of the
Excellence of the Colouring, which I prefume would have been more
agreeable to his Readers, than telling them, that Rubens was a little
deficient in an Art which was never underftood, as he might have faid, till
this Century. But it is reafonable to believe, if his Leifure had permitted
him to examine the Whole, he would have found much to commend,
and very little to cenfure.
As it may be expected, that I should fay fomething of the Perspective of
Shadows, I shall only observe, that the Geometrical or Perspective Know-
lege of Shadows is of very little Confequence to a Painter; it is eafily
underftood, when we have learned that of the Objects. But in my Opinion
Painters may (pare themfelves the Trouble of learning the lineal Perspec-
tive of Shadows, becaufe their Bufiness is to fhun every thing of that
Nature in a Picture. All the Limits and Shapes of Shadows should vanish;
every Part that is hard and edgy cuts and offends the Eyc.
Having now given my Readers the beft Infight in my Power to the
Practice of Painting and Perspective, I hope they will excufe the Size of
this Treatife, which it has been my Study, from its first Projection, to con-
fine to as narrow Limits as poftible, being from Experience convinced, that
an Art (if properly) cannot be too concifely described: Therefore I am
forry I could not, from the Nature of the Subjects, reduce it to a shorter
orleffer Work.
P I N I S.

223

8
15


E R R 4 T 4.
Page 6, Line 14, afier do ir, read in. P. 8,1. laft, after ufed, r. alone. P. 23, 1. 13, for
reason which, r. which reason. P. 27, 1. i1, for a. r. the. P.29, 1.26, 27, for Sattin
and Velvet, and Vermillion for Cloth: The Middle Teint is Vermillion, r. Sattin, Velvet,
and Cloth: The Middle is Vermiltion and White. P.32,1.18, for all the coloured, r. all co-
loured. P.4o, 121, for then the Middle Teints, x. and improving the Middle Teints. F. 43.
1. 2, for rfrom, r. from. P. so, 1. 14, for Picture in which the Line, r. Base-fine, in which
Line. Ibid. 1. 22, for and B, r. and a. 1bid. 1. 28, for Sideh1, r. Sides hl and Nf.
P. 52,1. 4, for their Seats, r. the Center of their Seats. Ibid. 1. 28, for a vertical and
parallel Direclion, r. a vertical Direction, but parallel to the Piture. P. 53, 1. 16, fer
Side of, r. Side in. P. 56,1. 19, for these a. r. those of a.



