The PRINCIPLES Of DESIGN
FoR THE CURIOUS YOUNG GENTLEMEN AND LADIES,
Who study and practise the noble and commendable ART or DRAWING,
COLOURING AND JAPANNING: Or a NEw and CoMPLETE
DRAWING-BOOK,
Consisting of Variety of whole Figures in divers Positions, and all the several Parts of
the Human Body from Head to Foot, &c.
In Fifty COPPER-PLATES, neatly engraved.
Designed chiefly for young Beginners, very neceffary and useful for all Drawing Schools, Boarding-Schools, &c.
TO WHICH IS PREFIXED
AN INTRODUCTION To DRAWING;
Containing a Description of the Instruments and their respective Use, and the Materials proper for
Drawing; Rules for managing the Pencil, and the best Method for attaining Perfection in the Art ;
with Instructions by which a young Practitioner shall be enabled to form a Judgment as well of his own
Performances as those of others; with easy, proper and necessary Lessons for him at his first Entrance.
Also the Names of the Colours used, with Instructions to temper and mix them, and fit them for Painting.
Likewise, Colours for washing Landskips, or Prinis of any Kind.

Translated from the FRENCH of Monsieur GERRARD DE LAIRESSE.
LONDON: Printed for H. SERJEANT’, at the BLack SwAN, near TEmrLE-Bar. 1777.
[PRICE FOUR SHILLINGS.]





INTRODUCTION.
NONE of the arts which have been invented for the use or amusement of man
kind, can boast so great a number of admirers as that of DRAWING ; and very


justly, for it gives such an agreeable representation of things, that we are apt to fancy
we see objects which have no real existence, and that the imagery before us, which is

no more than a painted cloth, actually breathes. The whole creation, with all its

works and wonders, comes within the power of its imitation. It fets before us things
long since buried in oblivion, exhibits to perfect view the most noted actions of people
who have bcen long in their graves, and shews us our ancestors, in a perfect resemblance
of their feature, through several successive generations.
That therefore youth may be instructed how to attain a good degree of perfection in
the art, we shall prescribe the best rules we are able, at least such, as we apprehend,
are absolutely necessary, for their information; after which we shall give them some
very useful and pertinent instructions for their better understanding of this art.
Rules for the Direction of the young Practitioner in the Art of Drawing.
It is highly necessary for him who would draw well, to understand what is truly good
and beautiful in a draught: in order to which, the most expeditious method will be





to comparc prints and draughts together. Many painters have grievoully miscarried, by
satisfying themselves only wich imitating bad pieces, without giving any scope to their
own genius, or improving their knowledge in judging of the beauties and defects of
a picture. The ideas in our minds may in a great measure serve us for a model.
But the labour of the hand must indeed aid and assist that of the brain; for whoever

would be an able artist, must, by continual practice, make the art habitual. The
rules of all arts are soon learned, but to attain perfection in any of them, a long prac
tice and strict attention are absolutely requisite. It is a true maxim, that laziness was
never the parent of any thing excellent. Drawing is not attainable but by a length
of time, or perfection in it acquirable, unless the hand be frequently employed in the
practice, and the mind in judging; every day should produce something, and the hand
give frequent proofs of thie speculations of the head.
He who proposes to gain an entrance into Minerva’s cabinet, must make his approach
es gradually; thus in the art of drawing, though the representation of the human
figure, or many figures in a piece, be the principal object which every practitioner has
chiefly in view; yet he must not make this his first essay, but procced to this by proper
and regular steps. Let the first part of his study be to draw streight and curved lines,









square, round, regular, irregular and inanimate figures; also parts of human figures,
as the eye, the ear, the hand, feet, &c. This will be a good foundation whereon to
erect his future structure; for by this means he will acquire a readiness of hand, a
freedom and exactness in drawing lines, and accustom himfelf to the exercise of his
patience; Qualifications absolutely necessary for one who would be esteemed an exact
copier of nature, especially in pieces that require a length of time, and more than or
dinary skill in the performance.
The out-lines are the circumferent strokes of a figure; the perfection of a good out
line consists in the freedom and boldness of the stroke, and the due proportion of all its
parts: to attain which, the scholar is admonished to reject all mean and trifling prac
tices, such as tracing the original through oil'd paper, or making use of thin paper for
the same purpose, or taking advantage of any artificial light. The use of such deceptions
will certainly prevent all progress and improvement in drating.
For some time at first be satisfied with practising upon a good out-line, without aim
ing at a finished piece, nor is it necessary that you should, as yet, hatch or shade your own
draught; your out line at first must be sketched with flight and faint touches, that you
may have an opportunity to amend it where proper, which will have the less appear



ance of being retouched. In every stroke endeavour an exact imitation, and when ever
you mend the out-line either by taking away a little of its parts, or by swelling the
others be sure to lose nothing of the freedom and boldness of it. Mind frequently to
compare your copy with the original, take particular notice of what is amiss, and let not
the least fault escape uncorrected, that so in the draught, which you may afterwards
make the same original, these errors may be avoided; for you must pass from one
original to another, 'till you are in a good degree master of the first. The best and
surest method of practice is, to make a great number of sketches of the same figure, in
each of which endeavour to excel what you did in the former.
In your first operations procecd slowly, for hasty productions are seldom beautiful or
correct and the design is often thus spoiled in the first attempt; it is no easy matter to
amend bad habits; expedition in performance is acquired by constancy in practice.
When you fit down to work, and all the time you are at it, take a strict and close
view of your original, and in your mind divide it into several parts; take due notice of
the length, breadth, and similitude of each part; observe the proportion of each
to the other, and to the whole, the distances between the parts, and the parts that lie
parallel, or are exactly opposite to each other.




When you have finished your copy, and laid aside both example and draught, let
your mind be employed for some time on other affairs, then return to it again, and view
your work afresh, and very probably you will discover faults which did not appear to
vou before.
Let your out-lines be large and smooth, and drawn in a flowing gliding manner: for
if they are too fsreight they will carry a disagrecable stiffness, but if drawn according to
this direction, they will have the resemblance of life and motion, and appear with an
easy grace.
In all your draughts let there be a perfect relation between the parts and the whole,
and uniformity run through the whole piece, that is, let every member be made for its
own head, and agree with it; you must not put strong limbs to a body that is confump
tive, or to old age in its decay; nor must you be less exact in pairing the eyes, hands,
legs and feet, for the least disproportion will be a blemish; and when any of the limbs
are not proportionate to the rest.
When you draw the muscles, take care to insert them according to the rule of anato
my they must not be crouded into small sections, but kept as entire as possible, and only
the principal muscles expressed; in a member which is to express any particular force,







they must be shewn large, as in the leg when it supports the body, or in the arm when
it lifts a weight, &c. and be more swelled than in any other members.
The MATERIALS proper for Drawing.
THE materials necessary for this purpose, are either pencils of black lead, or black
lead fixed in porcrayon, charcoal, chalk, black, red and white pastils or crayons,

pens, hair pencils, and Indian ink.
Nothing is more proper for beginners to practise with than black lead, in drawing
plain lines, &c. especially as this makes a smoother stroke than can be done by charcoal
or crayons. Cut your lead with a penknife 'till you have brought it to a fine point,
that it may give it a neat small stroke. Or you may fix a piece of the same lead in a
porcrayon. But whatever it is you sketch with, use yourself to hold it long-ways in your
hand, and let your fingers be much farther from the point, than the nib of a pen is
when you write, and let your strokes be formed with light gentle touches; thus will
you gradually acquire a ready command of hand, and you will with ease make your
out-line free and bold.





in practising after limbs and figures it will be proper, at first, to draw the rough
sketch with charcoal, Which is more easily discharged from paper than black lead.
Slit your charcoal in small flender pieces, one of which fix in a porcrayon the better to
hold it ; then sharpen it to a point, and lightly but correctly, sketch out your original.
When vou have so done, if there is any thing you mislike in the performance, you may
easily wipe it out by brushing it with a feather or clean rag. When you have secured
your out-Iines with charcoal, procced thus; take a feather and wipe them slightly over
with it that it may appear faint, then go over the line with black or red-lead, and cor
rect them where ever you can. If after all this you still see any errors to amend, take a
bit of crumb of a stale white loaf, with which you may discharge any part of it you
please, by rubbing it therewith.
You may use red-lead, or red or black chalk in the same manner as black-lead.
If in heightnings, or when you would give strong lights, or draw on coloured paper,
use white chalk and tobacco pipe clay.
Pistils and crayons are terms which perhaps the learner may not readily understand;
they are colours mixed up with tobacco pipe clay, which must be worked into a paste,
and rolled up into the thickness of a quill two or three inches long, and then dried;





when fit for use, the artilt works them on coloured paper, but not in hatchings, as
black and red-Iead commonly are; the colours are rubbed and worked together, so
that there is no single stroke, but the whole appears as if only a brush had been
used.
The crayons is a very expeditious manner of drawing, and when skilfully handled,
always produce a delicate softness and fine expression; however it must be observed, that
the careless or rude touch of a linger may at once blot out all the beauties of this fine
work; to prevent which, let it be preserved in books, or in a frame under a glass.
The crayons will be worked more easily if the grain of the paper be a little rough, and
be expressed more strongly than when the paper is quite smooth; or if the paper be some
what dark or brownish, or what they call a whited-brown, it will give a relief to the ten
der part of the work, by shewing the light strokes of it.
In shading draughts sometimes pens are used for hatching the cross strokes; however,
the hair pencil and Indian ink serve much better for this use, which are not only proper
for hatching by strokes, but for shading by a method much more expeditious, that is by
washing, which is the same way of working as with hair pencils and water colours.
In hatching, the shades arc produced by lines, not unlike the strokes whlich shade a





print engraved; but in washing, no lines appcar, but the shades shew themselves like
those in a metzotinto print.
Of the Tints of Lights and Shadows.
ILGHTS and shades, when judiciously disposed, give the appearance of substance,

nature and distance to such bodies as the pencil represents. Suppose, for instance,
a circle drawn on a piece of paper; imagine you see it fill'd up with any even colour,
you can conceive of it no otherwise than as a round, flat equal body; but if you put
the strongest of the colour in the middle, and weaken it gradually towards the extre
mities, you will perceive an agrecable deception, and instead of a flat even body, it will
have the resemblance of a ball or globe.
Wherever the colour appears the most lively, there the object catches the eye first, and
seems nearest to it; but where the colour weakens and goes off, it grows faint, and at
length seems to fly off and break away from the fight. Thus the painter, by breaking
and diminishing his colours, throws that behind which he has a mind shall be less
visible.






When you round the parts of an object, it requires the nicest touch of the pencil to
draw the extremities so, as that in turning they shall lofs themselves insensibly and con
fusedly, without too sudden a transltion of the light into the shadows, or of the sha
dows into the light, but let the one pass into the other as it were reciprocally and im
perceptibly, that is, by degrees of light into shadow, and shadow into light.
When your objects are to be painted light, you must allow a due breadth of shadow
to sustain them; if dark, a sudden light must rise behind them, to separate them from
the ground, or from other objects that are placed behind them, or else they will appear
as if they were sticking upon each other in a confused manner; whereas by a just oppo
sition of light to shade and shade to light, a projection is given, which makes a se
paration of the objects.
You must keep a proper ballance between light and shadows, and introducing a
broad light into your draught, you must give it a large shadow. You must make your
light serve as a repose to the darks, and the darks to the lights.
It should be farther observed in regard to lights and shades, that it is not enough that
remote objects be coloured in a more faint and languid manner, but the more or less
distant they are, the parts should appear more or less confused; the eye cannot minutely






discriminate an object which is at a distince from it. We can see human figures at a
street, length, but cannot discern the features of their faces or the plaits in their
cloat is ; so the innumerable leaves of a dsitant grove appcar to the light but as one
mass.
In the representation of bodies, you must always give them such lights as are
most proper and convenient for their supposed situations. Suppose the objects before
you in the fields or open air, and the sun obscured with clouds, your business
is to introduce an universal light, though not vivid or strong, you shades too must be
faint. But when the sun appears in all its glory, your lights must then be very strong
and bold, and the shadows exceeding dark.
Suppose again, that the object you represent is in a room, a little, though not
very much illuminated, and to survey it you take your station without, and stand level
with the light that slrikes upon it, that figure must have very soft shadows, which
will shew it very beautifully, and though the shadow be so soft, yet the figure
will seem as if it were embossed and have a very bold appearance.
When a small light illuminates a body, the shadows on the dark side appear large,






and their extremities very bold: whereas a large light renders the shadows on the
darker side more distinct and much softer than their limitations.
Useful Instructions for the young Practitioner.
HE that would be a perfect master in the art of drawing must learn to sketch
well, to which therefore be ought to give the greatest attention. In copying a
statue some persons begin with the head, which they entirely finish before they pro
cecd any farther; by which means it frequently happens, that they either make the head
too little or too big, and the other part so disproportionate, that there is but small re
semblance of the original, occasioned cheifly through a want of duly observing distances.
When therefore you have any thing to draw, let your first care be to divide it into its
different parts, then measure the distances in the original wich your eye, mark the
distances and length of each division with a faint line on your paper, and make a sketch
of the whole figure before you proceed to finish any part of it; so will you secure the pro
portions in the exactest manner.






The learner will find among these examples several draughts of the parts of the
face, as the eyes, nose, mouth, &c. viewed in different positions, all wlich he should
practice upon before he attempts a whole face; for which purpose we shall lay down
such lessons and instructions concerning an oval, with its several changes and varia
tions, and of the cross in the same, as will enable him to figure all bowings and re
turnings, reclinations and inclinations of all forts of faces.
The head, you are to observe, has the shape and form of an egg, or oval; this
head has eyes, eye-brows, nose and ears, which must be placed in their proper situ
ations, by running a cross through the oval. By this means you will divide the per
pendicular in the oval into four equal parts, which will make the head measure four
noses in height, the face three only; the diameter crossing the perpendicular, divide
into five parts, cach being the breadth or wideness of one eye; this diameter is called
the ocular line, or that whereon the eyes are to be placed; you must therefore draw a
streight line from the top of the right car through both eyes to the top of the left
ear; and the line drawn from the top of the head down through the nose, mouth
and chin, is called the perpendicular, crossing the diameter or ocular-line at right
angles; these lines together we call the cross of the oval; upon which cross (what





ever situation the face is in) you must place the eyes, nose, mouth, and ears in proper
places.
When you understand this thoroughly, and have fixed it in your mind, you will soon
be able to draw good faces our of your own fancy and invention, and execute them
in a masterly manner: But if you accustom yourself to draw only after a print, draught
er picture, without knowing the use of the cross-lines, and the proportion of a face
wich its parts, you take a wrong method, don't know what you are about, and will
never attain to any degree of perfection.
Having thus instructed you in the several methods of drawing a face, we come now
to give you the dimensions and proportions of the several parts of the body.
It was cuslomary with the antients to allow eight heads to their figures, though
some of them have only seven. The moderns usually divide a figure into ten faces,
taking it at the crown of the head, and ending at the sole of the foot, thus:
From the crown of the head to the forehead, is the third part of the face.
The face takes its beginning at the root of the lowest hairs on the forehead, and it
end is at the bottom of the chin.










Painters divide the face into three proportional parts; namely, the forehead, the
gose, the mouth and chin.
The distance from the chin to the pit betwixt the collar-bones, measures two lengths
of a nose.
From the same pit to the bottom of the breast one face.
From thence to the navel, onc face.
From the navel to the privities, one face.
The distance from the genitals to the upper part of the knece two faces.
The knee itself measures half a face.
Measure from the lower part of the knee to the ancle, and you will lind it two faces.
From the ancle to the sole of the foot, is half a face.
When a man stretches out his arms as wide as he can, a line drawn from the top
of the longest finger of the right hand to the top of the longest finger on the left,
will measure the length of his whole body, or he will find himfelf as broad as he is
long.
The distance from side to side of the breasts, two faces.






The bone of the arm called humerus, from the shoulder to the elbow, measures
to faces.
The bonce called cubitus, with part of the head, measuring from the tip of the
elbow to the root of the little finger contains two faces.
From the box of the shoulder-blade to the pit betwixt the collar-bones, is onc face.
In taking the measurement of the breadth, from the extremity of one finger to the
other, to see if it be equal to the length of the body, you are to observe that the boxes
of the elbows with the humerus and of the humerus with the shoulder-blade, bear the
proportion of half the face, when the arms are stretched out.
The sole of the foot measures the fixth part of the figure.
The hand is the length of the face.
The thumb, of the nose.
From the place where tle pectoral muscle, or that muscle which makes the breast,
disappears to the middle of the arm, measures four noses.
Carry your measure, from the middle of the arm to the beginning of the hand, you
will find it five noses.
Your longest toe is the length of your nose.








The tops of the two nipples, and the pit betwixt the two collar-bones, make an
equilateral triangle.
These farther rules are to be observed in drawing a hend, viz.
You must fet the eyes at such a distance from one another, that you may place one
between them.
The mouth, when shut, has the dimensions of an eye.
The cars are always on a level with the eyes, a-top and below with the nose, whether
ie be short or long.
The nostril should be placed exactly against the corner of the eye.
In a face that is flat, the checks swell out, and once that is lean, the cheeks fall in,
and the jaw-bones stand out.
Having finished our instructions for the drawing of the face, let us now procced to
draw a man at full length.
In the first place you must make your oval, then divide as before directed; you then
draw a perpendicular line from the top of the head to the sole of the foot, which you
must divide into eight lengths. This will be a good direction in placing your figure
upright, or in whatever action the posture requires, whether it either falls in or swells







out. You must make the length of one head between the chin and che breast, the
third measure must reach to the navel, the fourth from thence to the genitals, the fifth
to the middle of the thigh, the sixth comes to the lower part of the knee, the seventh to
the lower part of the leg, and the last reaches to the heel or sole of the foot.
In every measure or division you must take particular notice what touches there are
of the muscles.
The leg must be first drawn on which the body slands, then the other, after which
draw the arms and hands. You must first draw all the parts very lightly only with

coal, because that will give you the leafs trouble in rubbing out or altering.
The hands, you must observe, are twice as long as broad, and each of their parts has
its particular length, breadth and thickness.
The nail of the finger makes about half the joint it is upon.
The length of the foot mensures the sixth part or height of a man, or five eights
more in length than in breadth.
Take notice, that the length of the face and hands are exacly equal, and is just the
tenth part of a person's height.





Having thus instructed you to draw a complete man, we shall in the next place lay
down some rules for drawing of children.
Some will have the length of a child to contain five measures of the head, as thus:
from the top of the head they make three, and the thighs and legs two more; the
breadth between the shoulders is the length of one head and a half; the breadth of the
body above the navel, the length of one head; and the breadth of the thickest part
of the thigh is one third of two lengths of the head; the breadth of the knee
measures exactly the distance between the eyes and the chin; the brawn of the arm
and small of the leg are just the thickness of the neck.
If you take the proportion of a child slanding backward, you will find it of the fame
meafure as the former.
RULES for filling up Empty Figures.
WHEN with your charcoal you have drawn the out-lines, you must retouch them
with your red-lead crayon, and then with a feather brush away the dirtiness of

the charcoal. When you have donc that, you must retouch with a gentle hand such






places as have been fouled in the rubbing, as the hair, eyes, mouth, fingers. toes,
out-lines, &c. Let me also caution you, that in those out-lines which are open to day,
you make your strokes very light, but strong in those which are darkened. Thus will
the out-lines appear in a natural manner, and add a wonderful beauty and grace to
human fgures and all other objects. When this is done, you must begin the shades
wich a single hatching, but pretty strong; you begin it at the top, proceeding insensibly
to the bottom, as evenly in the distance as you possibly can. You then go on to the
roundings, which you must also express by single strokes, wich such a light as the object
before you requires; be cautious not to make your shadows too hard or dark at first. If
you would present the perspective in the best manner, begin the shadows lightly and
faintly, and heighten them afterwards; and you will soon be pleased with the agreeable
effect.
Instructions bow to draw after a PICTURE, a MODEL, or the LIFE.
WHEN you have got a picture to draw after, be sure to place it in a goodl ight, so
that the sight of your eye and the light of the day may fall together on the pic








ture. Place yourself at a moderate distance, according to the largeness or smallness of
the picture, at least no farther off than that you may, with a glance of your eye, see
the whole picture at once; for the larger the picture is, at thie greater distance you must
fit to draw it. Be careful likewise to place your print exactly right before you, and let it
not lie down flat; for if it be laid flat, you will quickly see the figures in it fore-shortned.
The paper you draw upon you must lay five or six times double upon a pinnel board set
in your lap, and raised as high as you can with your knees, or let it be rested on a form
or stooping desk, so that your work may stand upon one end before you. Thus will
you be enabled to judge of the similitude between your draught and the original, which
it will be impossible for you to do if it lies flat before you. The next thing you have to
do is, to guess as near as you can at the middle of the thing you have to draw, whether
a picture or any other matter; then mark it on your paper with the point of your coal;
when you have done this, look for the largest figure (if there happens to be more than
Ione) and touch them lightly in proper places, and so all that is in the picture, you will
then presently discover whether your guessing and sketching be true or not: But besides
this, before you draw a stroke, be sure you do it with good reason and observation, and
be very careful about the great and general parts, and meddle not with the small break






ings 'till the next sketching, and by constantly practising in this manner, you will in
sensibly acquire a facility and judgment in your work. Another rule you are to
observe is, always to begin on the right side of the figure, for so you have the first stroke,
conslantly in your eye, and the rest will naturally follow and give less trouble: but if
you begin on the left side, your hand covers the object from your sight. Having thus
made a rough sketch you should carefully review and examine it, and see if it be done
according to art, and if the action of the figure or figures in it be answerable to the
original; now, as actions are the life of a picture, they must shew themselves in the
first draught, however rude it be, or you can never expect it will be happily finished.
You must then correct your sketch and improve it in neatness and air, by adding and
diminishing as you see proper, as you may easly do with your charcoal. But in doing
this, be mindful that you don't spoil the first good action in it, which may easily be done,
if you don't well observe the movements of the several parts.
If you can, always make choice of a North light for your situation, because it is less
variable than any other. Should you fit at a South window, you will find it proper to
place a sash of oiled paper before it, which will break the intenseness of the fun's rays,
and diffuse them more equally without any sensible variation.








The next thing
you have to do is, to put your figure, whether it be the life or a
model, in a proper
position: the best light is that which is high and equally diffused,
not too strong nor glaring; when objects are so dilposed you see all their beauties, and
the minutest parts show themselves to advantage.
For Drawing the FACE.
WHEN you have drawn the circle of the face (which you must do at first with a

plain circular line, without making any bending or indentures in or out) make a

stroke from that place of the forehead which is even with the chin, down the place
where you intend to fix the middle of the nose, and the middle of the mouth; this stroke,
you must observe, must be struck that way which the face should turn, either to one side, or
straight down, which stroke will be a great help to you in placing the features rightly,
so that they may not stand awry, but directly one under another. Now if the face
turn downward, the stroke must be struck in such a manner that the eyes may turn
answerable with the face downwards; when you have done that, make another stroke
for the length of the nose where the end of it should come, and another stroke for the







mouth, that it be not made crooked, still observing to make all the strokes to turn one
way, up or down, according as the face turns, that is, if the face turns up or down,
the eyes, nose and mouth, mult turn with it; when you have made these strokes ex
actly, procced to place the features according to the preceding rules.
In the face is usually observed this threefold proportion. 1. From the top of the
forehead to the eye-brows. 2. From the eye-brows to the bottom of the nose.

3.
From thence to the bottom of the chin. This proportion however is not constantly the
same; for in some persons the forehead is lower than in others, the nose of some longer
and in some shorter than others; and therefore this rule can only be observed in a well
proportioned face. The distance between the two eyes is juft the length of one eye,
if in a full face: but if it turn any thing aside, then that distance is lessened according
ly; the nostril ought not to come out farther than the corner of the eye in any face, and
the mouth mult be always placed between the eyes and the chin, just under the nose.
As the greateft difficulty, and principal part of the art lies in the lively drawing
of the face, I shall add these farther directions to perfect you in this particular branch of
your art.






First, If you would draw a face exactly, so as to resemble the original you draw it
from. you must in the first place take notice of the physiognomy or circumference of
the face, whether it be long or round, fat or lean, big or little, that so you may be
sure to draw the physiognomy, or bigness of the face right; if it be a fat face, you will
perceive the checks to make the fide of the face swell out, and so make the face look
as it were square if it be a lean face, the jaw-bone will stick out, and the checks fall
in, and the face will look long and slender; if it be neither too fat nor too lean, the
face will for the most part be round.
When you draw the utmost circumference of a face, you must take in the head and
all with it, otherwise you may be deceived in drawing the true bigness of the face.
Secondly, You must carefully and judiciously observe and discern all the master touches,
which give life to a face, or discover the grace or disposition of the mind, in which
lies the whole graces of the work, and the credit of the workman; thus a smiling
countenance is easily discern'd in the mouth, when the corners of it are a little turn'd
up; a frowning countenance in the forehead, eye-brows bending, and the top of



 




the nose between the eyes somewhat wrinkled; a sober and staid countenance is best
discerned in the eye, when the upper eye-lid comes somewhat over the ball of the
eye; a laughing countenance is easily discerned all over the face, and so is an angry
wrathful countenance, by extraordinary frowning; there are also qome touches about
the eyes and mouth, which give life and spirit to a face, which you will by degrees
find out by frequently observing and imitating the works of the best masters.
Further Rules for the young Praclitioner in Drawing.
1. YOUR charcoal being neatly sharpen'd, you must, in the drawing of a face,

first lightly draw the out-stroke, or circumference of the face exactly, ac
cording to the bigness of the pattern, making it to sland fore-right, or to turn upwards
or downwards according to your pattern; then make some little touches, where the
features, namely, the eyes, nose, mouth, chin, should be placed, not drawing them
exactly at the first; when you have thus lightly pointed out the features, then begin to
draw them more exactly, and so proceed 'till the face be finished; which being
done, then add the beard, and other things about it. In drawing a side-face, you need





not at first draw the nose, mouth, and chin, that stand in the outmost line, but only
make it first but a bare circumference, turning this way or that way, according to the
pattern, and then make the mouth, nose, and chin in their places and just proportion.
2. You must be sure to place the muscles in the right and proper places; by the
muscles I mean all the shadows that are caused by some dents or swellings in the
face, and be able to find out the reason of every muscle, that so you may procced
to work with the more judgment; the muscles will be most visible in an old wither'd
face, and you must first draw the most principal of them, and then you only draw
the more ealily the lesser within; be sure to be very exact in the placing of them, or
you will spoil your draught be it ever so good.
3. Observe to make the shadows rightly, and be careful not to make them too dark
where they should be faint; or if you do, you can never recover it to make it hght again,
and so the whole face will be marr’d and appear unhandsome; the shadows are

generally fainter and lighter in a fair face than in a swarthy complexion. When
your draught is finished, you will do well to give fome hard touches with your
pen where the shadows are darkest, which will add a great life and grac to your
drawing.





When your face is finished, you come next to the cars and hair, wherein you must
observe this rule: having drawn the out-line of it you must first draw tle princi
pal curl, or master stroke in the hair, which will guide you wich ease to do the
lesser curls which depend on them; always make your curl to be bent, and turn exactly
according to the pattern, that they may lie loose and fast and not appear stiff, stub
born and unpliable. When you have drawn your curl exactly, you must in the
last place strike in the loose hairs which hang carelessly out of the curls.
The face being drawn (which is the principal thing in the art) chen proceed to the
hands and arms, legs and feet, and so to full bodies of men and women.
Of drawing tbe Hands and Feet.
THE actions and postures of the hand are so various, that no certain rule can be
given for drawing of them, only this in general; when you first draw it with

charcoal, you are not to do it exactly, that is, you must not make the joints or veins,
or other things, to appear more than lightly or faintly, and to touch out the big
ness of the hand, and the manner of turning it with faint touches, and not with






hard strokes; if you have done that right, then you part the fingers asunder, or close,
according to your pattern, with the like faint strokes; then mark that place where any
of the fingers stand out from the others, and make a faint resemblance of it; having so
done, if you perceive your draught to be right, proceed to draw it more perfectly, and
make the bending of the joint, the wrist-bone, and other principal things somewhat
exactly. And, laftly, go over it again, and draw every small bending, or swelling of
the fingers, and make the nails, knuckles, and veins, so many of them as appear,
and every thing else that you can discern.
The proportion of a hand you have sufficiently described in the print, which shews
how many qualities or equal measures there be in it, which you should endeavour to be
acquainted with, that fo you may know when a hand is well proportioned with just
and equal distances. But you are to observe this rule, or exception, that according as
the hand turns one way or other, the proportions must be shortened according as they
appear in the eye, as you may see by the fore-shortning of the hand in the print; so
much as the hand turns away from our fight, so much it lofss of its ordinary propor
tion, and is made to shorten unto that proportion that the eye judges of it, nay, some
times a whole finger, sometimes two or three, or more, are lost to our sight, by the






turning of the hand another way from us, and so they must be wholly left out, and
not made. As to the feet, it is not fo difficult to draw them as it is the hands,
and you must proceed in the same method in the one as in the other. When you can
draw hands and feet pretty well, then proceed to arms and legs, wherein is little
difficulty; after which you may procced to whole bodies.
RuLES to be observed in drawing the whole Body.
1. IN the drawing of a body, you must begin with the head, to which you must
give just proportion and bigness, because all the body must be proportioned accord.

ing to the head.
2. When you have drawn the head, proceed to the shoulders, and go on to the
trunk of the body, beginning at the arm-pits (leaving the arms till afterwards) and
so draw down to the hips on both sides, and be sure you observe the exact breadth of
the waist: when you have done thus, draw first that leg on which the body stands,
and afterwards that which stands loose, or from the body, and last of all the arms, and
then the hands, either joined to the body, or separated from it, agreeable to your pattern.






2. Observe in your drawing to place the parallel joints, finews and muscles, directly
opposite in a strait even line one against the other, as the shoulders, arm-pits, waist,
hips, knees, and so every thing else, that one may not be higher or lower than the
other, that the body may not seem crooked or deformed, but every parallel joint, bend,
&c. may directly answer the other that is opposite to it; to which end you may strike
a strait stroke directly cross the shoulders, to direct you to place them even and strait
one against the other, which you may likewise do in other places, as the arms, waist,
hips, thighs, or any other parts that are opposite; where you should place the one
even with the other ; but you must have the same care in all parts of the body, as you
have in one place, where any bendings or members of the body have or do require
a direct opposition onc to the other, you make use of this help and direction.
4. Observe, that if the body turn one way or other, then this stroke must be so
sruck, that it may answer the bowing of the body; thus, if the body stoop a little
downwards, yon must strike the stroke stoping or sideways, in which case you must
make the shoulders and other things which should be strait against one another, to be
somewhat higher than one another, so that the side which the body turns upon, the shoulders






and other things that otherwise should be placed even against the other, must be made
somewhat lower than the other side, more or less according to the stooping of the body.
5. As you are to be careful in the placing rightly all level or parallel joints, bendings,
finews, and muscles, so you must be very exact in all perpendicular joints, muscles, &c.
that is, when vou have drawn the out-lines of your piece, and are come to draw the
joints and muscles that are within the body, you must be as exact in placing them,
that is, directly once against another, as you are in placing chose even that are opposite to
one another. To the end that you may place things exactly perpendicular, that is, in a
strait line one under another, you may strike a strait perpendicular line from the pit of
the throat down to the privities, just in the middle or seam of the body, where you
discern the parting of the ribs, and from thence strait down to the fect; which line
will direct yon to place things perpendicularly even, that the body may stand strait
upright, and not appear crooked or awry.
6. Take notice of the bowings and bendings that are in the body, to make that
part which is opposite to that which bends, to answer to it in bending with it; thus, if
one side of the body is bent in, the other side must stand out answerable to the bend
ing in of the other fide; if the back bend out, the belly must bend in; if the belly





come in, the back must stick out; if the breech stick out, the thigh that answers to
it in opposition, must come in; so also in any other part of the body; as when the
knee bends out, the hams that answer to it must come in; and the same rule must
strictly be observed in all other joints of the body, otherwise the body will be made grosly
and absurdly, and without any proportion.
7. Be careful to make things of an equal proportion and bigness, that one arm,
or leg, be not bigger than the other, or one breast larger than the other, or any part of
the body in an unjust proportion; but as every thing in a face must answer to the big
ness of the face, so one member must answer to another in bigness, that so there may
be a perfect harmony in all the parts of the body; that it may not have brond shoulders
and a thin slender waist, a raw-bone arm and a thick gouty leg, or any part dispro
portionable from the other, unless it be so that any part of the body do turn awry
from our eye; thus, it one arm should be seen side-ways, and the other fore-right then
the one arm must be made so much less than the other by how much it turns awat
frem our fight, and appears less to our eye, and if one leg be seen full or fore-right,
and the other leg be seen side-ways, then it must be made so much less than the other,
by Low much it turns away from your fight.





3. As a just proportion must be observed in the bigness of your draught, so like
wife in the length, that one thing may not be too long for the other, the body not
too long for the legs, nor the legs too short for the body, that neither leg, nor arm,
be disproportioned in their lengths, but that every thing have its due proportion both
for length and bigness; unless when the body shortens away in any part from your
fight; as thus, it one leg stand behind the other, it must be made so much shorter
than the other, according to the distance it is removed from your eye; se likewise if
one arm remove itself ever lo little out of your light, that which comes first to the eye,
and stands nearest to the sight, must be made longer than the other, and the other be
made so much the shorter, by how much it turns away from your sight. So, again, is
any part of the body be fore-shortened, that is, if it appears so to your eye, as to hinder
the full light of the latitude of that part of the body, then the body, or that part of
the body must be made to shorten, according to that proportion that the eye judges
of it.
9. Observe the due distance of one thing from another, that you may be exact in
your draught, and perfectly imitate your pattern.





10. Observe how much one part of the body sticks out beyond the other, or falls
in within the other, or whether it stands even with the other; to which end, you may
strike a small stroke down from the top of the shoulder along by the outside of the
body strait down to the fect; and this will direct you how far one part of the body
should sland out beyond the other, and how far other parts should come in; let no
thing be done without rule and judgment.
11. Let nothing be donc hard, sharp, or cutty, that is, let not the bendings that
are in the body or in the joints, be made as if they were dents or cuts in the flesh
with sharp corner strokes, but finely round and sloping, like bendings, and not like
cuts in the body; this is a common fault among learners, who should therefore be the
more careful to avoid it by imitating their pattern exactly, in the manner of making
every stroke and touch that is given; for nothing should be done without judgment.
RULES for drawing Landskips.
LANDSKIP is the expressing a tract of land by hills, woods, castles, seas,
valleys, ruins, rocks, &c. in which there is not so much difliculty as in drawing
figurcs; and therefore the following rules will be sufficient.






1. The best way of making landskips, is to represent them shooting away, one part
lower than another, as hath been practised by our best artists but others have run into
a contrary error, by making the landskip mount up higher and higher, till it reach
to such a height, that it seems as if it touched the clouds, as if the drawer had
stood at the bottom of a steeple when he took the prospect, which is altogether incon
gruous; for we can discern no prospect at the bottom of a hill; but the most proper
way of making a landskip, is to make the nearest hill highest, and so to make the rest
that are at a greater distance, to shoot away under that, that the landskip may appen
as if taken from the top of a hill.
2. Be careful to lessen every thing in proportion to its distance, expressing it bigger
or less according to the distance it is from the eye.
3. You must make all your lights fall one way, both upon the ground and trees,
and all things else, and all the shadows mult be cast one way.
4. You must give every thing its proper motion; as trees when they are shaken
with the wind, their smaller and more pliable boughs must be shewn in such an
action, as if they struck one against another, by yielding and declining from that part
whence the wind blows; the stiffer boughs have less bending and motion; You

















must likewise observe the bending of a twig when a bird fits upon it, so likewite it
it be forced or pressed with any other thing.
Clouds in the air must be shewn with motions now gathered together with the
winds, now violently condenfed into hail, thunder-bolts, lightnings, rain and such
like. Finally, you can make nothing but what requires a motion peculiar to itself, ac
cording to which it ought to be represented: But this rule you must always observe,
namely, that all your motions which are caused by the wind, must be seen to move one
way, because the wind can blow but one way at once.
Always express a fair horizon, shewing the heavens cloudy or clear, more or less ac
cording to the occasion; and if you express the fun, let it be either rising or setting,
and as it were behind or over some hill or mountain.
The moon and stars are seldom or never depicted, unless it be in representation of
twilight, because all things are supposed to be seen by day.
If you express the fun, make his light to reflect upon all the trees, hills, moun
tains, rocks, or buildings; shading the contrary side; after which manner also shadow
clouds, mists and the like, making the shadows to fall all one way.






In expressing things at large distances, as ten, twenty or thirty miles off; where the
object is hard to be discerned, as whether it be temple, castle, house, or the like,
shew no particular signs thereof, or any eminent distinction; but rather as weakly,
faintly and confusedly as the eye judgeth of it.
If landskips be Lid in colours, the farther you go, the more you must lighten it
with a thin and airy blue, to make it seem as if it were afar off, beginning first with a
dark green, io driving it by degrees into a blue according to the distance.
In rivers, observe the general current, and dashing of the waves against the boat
sides. In the sea, observe the waves and other proper agitations, the rowling of the
biliows, the tumbling of vessels up and down; ships floating, some dipt, some half
drowned, some standing almost on end, some hid almost with the waves, through the
uncertainty of the surges, others striving to live.
In the motion of waters falling from
an high place, but especially when they fall upon rocks or stones, you must make it
leaping up in the air, and sprinkling all about.
It your work imitate the season you intend it for. Thus, if you intend it for a
winter piece represent felling of timber; sliding upon the ice ; fowling by night; 
hunting of bears or foxes in the snow; making the trees every whole naked or





laden with a hoar frost the carth bare, without greenness, flowers or cattle; the
air thick; water frozen, with carts pissing over it, and boys upon it, &c.
Lastly, let every site have its proper works, adjuncts, or additional graces, as the
farm-house, windmill, woods, flocks of sheep, herds of cattle, pilgrims, ruins of
temples, castles, monuments; with a thousand such other things, only proper to par
ticular subjects.
To take the perfect Draught of any Picture.
TAKE a sheet of fine Venice paper, wet it all over with linseed oil on one side
thereof, which then wipe off as clean as you can; let the paper dry, and lay it to
any painted or Printed picture, then with a black lead pencil you may draw it over
with ease put this oiled paper upon a sheet of clean white paper, and with a little
pointed stick on feather our of a swallow’s wing, draw over the stroke which yon draw
upon the oiled piper; so shall you have the exact form upon the white paper, which
may be fet out with colours with pleasure.





To make the Shape of a Leaf, Herb, or Plant.
HOLD a whole Ieaf or sprig (as of nettles, plantane, &c.) in the smoak of gum
sandrack, rosin, a link, or wax candle, 'till it is well black'd, which place
between the leaves of a sheet of white paper, and carefully press upon the leaf with
some smooth thing; so shall you have in a moment the print on the paper, espe
cially the backside thereof, with the very ramifications of the fibres disperied through
it. This may be of good use in travelling, when we meet with strange plants.
Of Colours for Landskips.
1.
FOR a light green, use pink, and masticot heightened with white; for a sad
green, indico and pink, heightened with masticot.

2. For some trees, take lake, umber and white, for others charcoal and white,
for others black and white, with some green; adding some lake, or vermilion, with
other colours.





2. For wood, take lake, umber and white, mixing sometimes a little green
withal.
4. For fire, lay red lead and vermillion tempered together where it is reddest;
where it is blue, lay oil, smalt and white lead; where it is yellow, take masticot,
and work it over in certain places; where you would have it shine most with vermilion.
5. For an azure sky, which seems afar off, take oil, smalt, or bice, and temper

them wich linseed oil, but grind them hot; for smalt or bice utterly lose their colour in
grinding.
6. For a red fky, take lake and white: and for sun-beams, or yellow clouds at sun-
risng or setting, take masticot and white.
7. For a night sky, or clouds in a storm, take indico deepened with black, and
heightened with white.
8. For wood colours, they are compounded either of umber and white, charcoal
and white, seacoal and white, umber black and white, or with some green addad ; to
which you may adjoin sometimes, as in the barks of trees, a little lake or vermilion.





Of Washing and other Materials thereof.
By washing here we intend nothing more, but either to set out maps, or printed

pictures in proper colours, or else to varnish them.
The instruments and materials of washing are six. 1 Alum-water. 2. Size or Gum
water. 3. Liquid gold. 4. Pencils. 5. Colours. 6. Varnish.
To make alum-water: Take alum, eight ounces; fair water, a quart; boil them till
the alum is dsslolved.
Or thus: take spring, or well-water, a gallon; rock alum, a pound, beat it to
Powder, and dissolve it in water by boiling; filter it through a brown paper, and keep
it for use: wich this water wet your paper before you lay on your colours, it will keep
them from sinking in, and withal, add a lustre and beauty to the colours laid on: but
this you must note, that is your paper is not good, you must wash it over four or flve
times, which may be done with a large pencil brush: moreover, alum generally raiseth
staining colours, and preserves them from fading.






To make size: Take glew, which steep all night in water, then melt it over the
fire, to see that it be neither too strong nor too weak; then let a little of it cool; if it
be too stiff when it is cold, put more water to it, if too weak more glew, using it lake
warm.
To make gum-water: Take pure spring water, a quart; put it into a jar glass, and
hang therein a sufficient quantity of pure, white and clean gum arabick, bruised and
tied up in a rag; let it hang till the gum is dissolved, then put your fingers into
the water, and if you find them ftick together as it they were glewed, your water
is too stiff, or full of the gum, which you must remedy by putting thereto more fair
water; and if you find it too weak, you may help it by adding more gum: with this
water, or the former fize, most colours are to be tempered, and wich so much of
the gum-water, as being touched when dry, the colour will not come off: where note,
that if the colour glisten, there is too much gum in it.
Liquid gold and silver: Take five or six leaves of gold and silver, which glind (with
a stiff gum-lake water, and a good quantity of salt) as small as you can; then put it
into a vial, or glazed vessel; add so much fair water as may dissolve the gum-water;
then let it sland four hours, that the gold may settle; decant the water, and put in






more till che gold is clean washed: to the gold put more fair water, a little sal-ar
moniac, and common salt, digesting it close for four days: then put all into a piece
of thin glovers leather (whose grain is peleed off) and hang it up, so will the sal ar
moniac fret away and the gold remain behind, which keep.
When you use it, temper it wich glair of eggs, and so use it with pen or pencil.
Glair of rggs is thus made : take the whites and beat them with a spoon, till they
rise all in a foam; then let them stand all night, and by morning they will be turned
into a clear water, which is good glair.
Of Colours simple for washing of Maps, &c.
BRAZIL: To some ground brazil put small beer and vinegar, of each a suffici
ent quantity; let it boil gently a good while, then put therein alum in powder
to heighten the colour, and some gum arabick to bind it; boil it till it taste strong
or the tongue and make a good red, pink colour, or light violet.
Logwood: Ground logwood boiled as brazil, makes a very fair transparent violet, or
purple colour.





Cochineal: Steeped as brazil was boiled, makes a fair, transparent purple: as thus,
tike cochineal, and put it into the strongest soap-lees to steep, and it will be a fair
purple, which you may lighten and deepen at pleasure; infused in strong vinegar, it
makes a transparent purple.
Madder: Take madder, four drams; ground brazil, one ounce; rain-water, a
quart; boil away a third part; then add alum, half an ounce, boil it to a pint;
ihen gum arabick, onc ounce ; which boil till it is dissolved, cool it, stirring it often,
and strain it for use: It is a good scarlet die for leather.
Verdigrise: Take verdigrise ground finely one ounce, put to it a good quantity of
common varnish, and so much oil of turpentine, as will make it thin enough to work
withal; it is a good green. Fine verdigrise, dissolved in Rhenish wine or vinegar,
makes a transparent green inclining to blue; ground with juice of rue and gum-water,
it is a pure green; without the juice it makes a glorious emerald; mixed with crystal
of tartar in white wine vinegar, in which gum arabick has been dissolved, makes a
pure green. And verdigrise, alum, of each one dram; logwood, three drams; boiled
in vinegar, make a good murry.






Cambogia: Dissolve it in fair spring-water, and it will make a beautiful and transparent
yellow ; or if you would have is stronger, dissolve some alum there in ; it is good for
silk, linen, white-leather, parchment, valleum, paper, quills, &c. This colour delights
in no mixture.
Turnsole : Put into a sharp vinegar over a gentle fire till the vinegar boil and is co
loured : then take out the turnsole and squeeze it into the vinegar, in which dissolve a 
little gum arabick ; it shadows very well on a carnation or yellow.
Flory Blue : Grind it with glair of eggs, if you then add a little rossel it makes a 
light violet blue ; mixed with white and red-lead, it makes a crane-feather colour.
Indian Lake : Ground with gum-arabick water, makes a glorious murry ; in grinding
it, add a little sugar candy ; some say it makes a deep pink of a bloom colour.
Vermillion : Being ground with glair of eggs and honey or gum-water, it makes a
deep red, or scarlet colour.
Red-lead : Grind it with a stiff gum-lake water ; if you add saffron, it makes an 
orient, and a marrigold colour ; of itself it is between a red and an orange colour.
Orpiment :  Washed and coloured with gum-water, makes an orient or gold colour ; 
there are several degrees of it, some more red, others more yellow. 


















 






Indico. Ground and tempered with gum-water, makes a deep blue, and is fit to
shadow all other blues.
Sap-green. Steep it in sharp vinegar all night, to which add a little alom to raise
its colour. In alom-water it makes a good green to shadow with.
Ivory Black. Burnt, ground, and tempered wich gum-water, makes a good black.
Flake lead. Ground and tempered with gum-water, is an excellent white.
Spanish White. Ground and tempered in like manner with gum-water, makes the
best of all whites.
Spanish Brown. Burnt, ground, and tempered with gum-water, makes à reddish
brown, or liver-colour.
Umber. Burnt, and ground, and tempered with gum-water, makes a good haw
colour; and is very good to shadow with upon gold.
Green of Walnuts. Boiled in water, and strained, and gum-arabick dissolved in the
liquor to bind it, makes an excellent colour to express highways, lanes, &c.





Of Compound Colours for washing of Maps, &c.
Orange colours. Red-lead and yellow-berries make a good orange colour: thus,

take annatto hall an ounce, pot-ashes one drachm, water one pound, boil it half
away, then strain it, and use it hot.
lt is gooll for white leather, paper, vellum, quills, parchment, &c.
Green. Take distilled vineger, silings of copper, digest till the vinegar is blue, which
let stand in the sun or on a flow fire till it is thick enough, and it will be a good green.
Or thus: Take cedar green (which is best of all) or instead therecof green bice, steep
it in vinegar and strain it; then grind it well wich fair water, and put to it a little
honey, and dry it well; when you use it, mix it with gum-water.
To make fine Indico. Take of the blossoms of oad three ounces, amylum one ounce,
grind them with urine and strong vinegar, of which make a cake, then dry it in the
sun, and so keep it for use.
A Blue to wash upon Paper.  Take of the beft azure an ounce, kermes two ounces,
mix them, which temper with clear gum-water, and it will be a glorious colour.









To make a Venice Blue. Take quick lime, make it into paste wich strong vinegar,
halt an hour after put thereto more vinegar to soften it: then add indico in fine pow
der one ounce, mix them, and digest it in horse-dung for 30 or 40 days.
Another excellent Biue. Mix fine white chalk with juice of elder-berries full ripe, to
which put a little alom-water.
To make blue Smalt. Take fluxible sand, fal-nitre and cobalt, mix them togeth 
A lively Yellow. Dissolve orpiment in gum-water, to which put a little ground
vermillion, grind them together, and you shall have a very lively colour.
A light green. Take juice of rue, verdigrise and saffron, grind them well together and
use them with gum-water.
Or thus: Take sap-green, flower-de-luce, or tawny green, which steep in water.
Verditure and ceruse, mixed with a little copper green, make a good light colour.
Blue. Ultramarine, blue bice, smalt, and verditure, ground singly with gum-water,
or together, make a good blue.
Brown. Ceruse, red lead, English oker, and pink, make a good brown.
Spanish Brown. To colour any horse, dog, or the like, you must not calcine it;
(yet not calcined it is a dirty colour) but to shadow vermillion, or lay upon any dark






INTRODUCTION
ground, behind a picture, to shade berries in the darkelst places, or to colour wooden
posts, wainscot, bodies of trees and the like, it is very good, (being burnt).
Flesh Colour. Mix white, Indian lake, and red-lead (according as you would hive
it light or deep) and to dislinguish a man’s flesh from a woman’s, mingle it with ;
littie oker.
Colour of Stoner. Verdigrise with varnish makes an emerald; with Florence lake,
a ruby; with ultramarine, a sapphire.
A never-fading Green. Take juice of flowers of flower-de-luce, put into gum-water,
and dry it in the sun.
Of mixing Colours and Shadowing.

IN mixing be careful not to make the colour too fad, nor take the pencils out of one
colour and put them into another.
In mixing colours, stir them well about the water severally till they are well mixed;
then put them together, making the colour fadder or lighter at pleasure.
Green is shadowed with indico and yellow-berries.






Blue is shadowed with indico, litmose and flory; or any of them being steeped in
soapralhes, and used with gum-water.
Garments are shadowed with their own proper colours; or you may mingle the co¬
lours witn white (for the light) and shadow it wich the same colour unmingled; or you
may take the thinnest of the colour for the light, and shadow with the thickesl or bot
tom of the same.
Sapgreen is only uied to shadow other greens with, and not to be laid for a ground
in any garment.
Late ought not to be shadowed with any colour, for it is a dark red; but for a variety
you may shadow it with bice, or bluc verditure, which will make it like changeable
taffeta.
The shadow for yellow-berries is umber; but for beauty's fake with red-lead, and the
darkest touches wich Spanish brown; and for variety with copper-green, blue bice or
verditure.
White sets off blues and blacks very well; red sets off well with yellow; yellows with
reds; fad blues, browns, greens, and purples.






Blues set off well wich yellows, reds, whites, browns and blacks; and green set off
well with purples, and reds.
A Compound Green. Mix verdigrise water with yellow-berry water; it will be trans
parent, and you may make it deeper or lighter according to the proportion that you
take of either.
A Compound Blue Colour. Mix litmose water with yellow-berry water, and yon will
have a tranfsarent fsd blue, which you may heighten or deepen as the former at
pleasure.
A Compound Orange Colour. It is made by mixing braül water with yellow-berry

water of a transparent colour.
Of Colours for washing Landskips.
GREEN mixed with white, pink, bice, maslicot, smalt, indico, or ceruse: or
blue verditure mixed with a few yellow-berries makes a good green for landskips.
For the saddest hills, use umber burnt; for the lightest place, put yellow to the burnt
umber; for other hills, lay copper-green thickened on the fire, or in the fun; for the





next hills farther off, mix yellow-berries with copper-green; let the fourth part be
done with green verditure; and the farthest and saintest places with blue bice, or blue
verditure, mingled with white, and shadowed with blue verditure, in the shadows in
different thick.
Let the highways be done with white and red lead, and for variety yellow oker;
shadow it with burnt umber, which you may use for fandy rocks and hills.
Rocks may be done with several colours, in some places black and white, in other
places red and white, and others blue and white, and the like as you see convenient.
The water must be black verditure and white, shadowed wich green and bluc ver
diture, when the banks cast a green shadow upon the water, and the water is black
shadowed, then shade it with indico, green thickened, and blue verditure.
Colour buildings with as much variety of pleasant colours as may be imaginable,
yet let reason be your rule in mixing your colours: you may sometimes use white
and black for the wall conduits, or other things. For brick houses and the like,
red lead and white; if many houses stand together, set them off with variety of
colours, as umber and white; lake and white; red-lend and white, and the like.







Lastly, for the sky, use maslicot, or yellow-berries, and white for the lightest and
west places; red rosset, and white for the next degree; blue bice, and white for the
other ; blue bice, or blue for the highest.
These degrees and colours must be fs wrought together, that tle edge of each colour
may not receive any sharpness; that is, so as that you cannot perceive where you be
gan to lay them, being so drowned one in another.
Of the Practice of Washing.
WITH the alom-water wet over the picture to be coloured, for that keeps the co
lours from sinking into the paper, and will add a lustre unto them, make them
shew fairer, and keep them from fading.
Then let the paper dry of itself (being walled with alom-water) before you lay on
the colour; or before you wet it again, for some paper will need wetting four or five
times.
The washing of the paper must be donc with a large pencil brush.
But if you intend to varnish your pictures after you have coloured them, instead of
washing them with alom-water, first size them with new fize made of good white







starch, with a very fine brush; and this you must be sure to do all over, for else the
varnish will sink through.
Having thus prepared your work, go to laying on your colours according to your
former directions, suiting them as near as may be to the life of every thing.
How to lay on your Colour.
FIRST provide yourself of pencils of several sizes, and if you will be curious, you
ought to have a great and a small to each respective colour; if not, you must always
have by you a dish of fair water, in which you must wash and cleanse your pencil,
wiping it with a clean linen cloth, before yon put it into another colour.
For your pencils close those that are good, thus: see that they be fullest next the
quill, descending or lessening into a small room or sharp point, which you may see by
putting the hair into your mouth, and drawing it through your lips once or twice, then
you see what it is, and if you find any straggling hairs, finge them off with the flame
of a candle
Being thus provided with colours and pencils, if you delsgn to lay any colour about
the edges of any map, part, piece, or division of ground, in a plat; as suppose you






would inclose a particular field, or close in a meadow, with yellow; with your pencil
take camboge, or yellow-berry water a very small quantity, and on the inside of the
black lead line draw the colour along of an equal breadth (as near as you can) from
the line, broader or narrower as your field is in bigness; not daubing the field or close
all over with the colour, which would be but an abuse to your map or plat.
Then having gone round the close or field in this manner, with your colour, wet
your pencil in your mouth, or have by you a small quantity of water to dip it in, and
strike along the inside of the coloured line, bringing it more down towards the center
of the field; and this will sweeten your colour, and make it shew as if it loft itfelf by
degrees, to the very colour of your paper or parchment. This course is to be taken
not only for yellows, but for all other colours. Lastly, with a pen (if you cannot do it
handsomely with a pencil) take fome of the colour which shadows the colour you have
already used about the field, and go over your black-lead only, fo shall your field be
finished.
Lastly, after the same manner you may adorn all the parts in your plat or map, of
divers colours.






