THE
PRINCIPLES
O F
Painting


Under the HEADS of
Harmony
Contrast
Passion
Anatomy
History
Colouring
Portraiture
Attitude
Invention
Sculpture
Design
Accident
Landskip
Style
Disposition
Architecture
Lights
Truth
Draperies
Composition
Proportion
Claro-obscuro
Unity, &c.
Expression
c
 
In which is Contained,
An Account of the Athenian, Roman, Venetian
and Flemish SCHOOLS.
To which is Added,
The BALANCE Of PAINTERS.
BEING
The Names of the most noted PajnTeRS, and their
Degrees of Perfection in the Four principal Parts of their
Art: Of singular Use to those who would form an Idea
of the VaLuE of Paintings and Pictures.
Written Originally in French by Mons. DU PILES,
Author of The Lives of the Painters.
And now first Translated into ENGLISH.
By a PAINTER.
•
LONDONS
Printed for J. OSBORN, at the Golden Ball, in Pater-
noster Rew. M.DCC. XLIII.










The TRANSLATORS

Preface


ThE author, tho a man o)
title and fortune, made paint-
ing, for-bis diversion, both bis study and
practice: which occasioned bis obliging
the publick with several useful treatises
on this art. In the year 1708, he
published the present system, as the re-
sult of all his thoughts: and, to make
it of more service, has handled it
by way of principles; a method, I
believe, displeasing to none who desire
to know the bottom of the art, or would
rive raasons for what they do. Ac-









cordingly, the reader will find a very
learned and natural account of the three
capital branches, history, portraiture,
and landskap , and of their four chief
parts, composition, design, colouring,
and expreffion, and their incidents.
BUT tho bis home-acquirements
were, in all respects, very great, he
thought them incomplete without finishing
bis reftections abroad: For wbich pur-

pose he travelled into several parts op
Europe, to see the finest paintings-
wbereby he was enabled to make me
balance of painters we find in this
treatise, an attempt, which, for its
novelty, must needs be acceptable to
the curtous.
HIS love of painting induced bim
also to draw up a parallel between it
and poesy : wherein, with bis usual





candour and learning, he shews the
excellences and preferences of both
arts.
WE shall bere endeavour to make
some remarks on portraiture, as it is
the branch of painting chiesly practised
among us , anh at the same time to
sbew what may be learned from the
following
' system, by those who study
er practise this art.
IN the balance aforesaid, Van-
dyke (whom, for several reasons, wa
may call ours) stands high, as hav¬
ing fifteen degrees of merit for com-
position, ten for design, seventeen fon
colouring, and thirteen for expression :
And we accordingly discover in his
works such composition, air, grace,
and fine penciling, as none of his suc-
cessors have hitherto attained. His







(method indeed was pretty singular
wbich our author does not wholly agree
to) and calculated for dispatch- for
he bestowed not above an hour on
a sitting, but, being pretty Jure of
the effects of bis colours, he painted
without much scuaubling, the best way
to preserve their purity and vivacity.
Rembrant swbom the balance equals
with Vandyke for colouring) tho. not
a perfect model for an Engish face-
painter, was so careful not ta torture
bis colours, that he chose rather to add
Jresp ones: and for this reason bis
works, as well as Vandyke s, maintain
to this day an unusual strength and
vigour, Now, it may be naturally
anferr d, from the practice of these
two painters, that as any colour any
stroke, is to express some drawing
some tendency, towards teint and like-
ness, so any great disturbance, or




wrong colour (too often the case o
portraiture) not only spoils drawing.
but surprisingly alters and fouls te
teint, and makes the painting less like,
and lefs durable.
BUT, to return to Vandyke -
What if we should suppose, that the
historical management he was brought
up to, under the excellent Rubens,
loosened his head, gave him easy
penciling, and a noble air, and in-
duced bim to exprefs nature with more
spirit, even more to improve her,
than if bis genius and pencil had been
always confined to portraiture à Ips
very probable, that such a genius will
never quit historical freedom , and
yet, like Vandyke s, it will, on coming
to portraiture, be thereby better en-
abled to exalt nature, and preserve
likeness.





The Transtator S PREFACE.
BUT no pains was too great for
this artist: who, proposing an exact
truch in all things, always sketched, in
black and white crayons, the size, at-
titude, and dress of the person who
fat to bim, and, from them, painted
afterwards his cloaths, wbich were
sent to him for that purpose. This,
wbatever trouble painters may think
it, must needs look more free, natural,
and becoming, and tend more to like-
ness, than any size, posture, or dress,
taken from a layman. As for hands,
this artist painted them from those
of the persons he retained for that
purpose.
IN speaking of the attitudes, (wbich,
with the face, are the language of
portraiture) our author makes them of
two kinds: viz. in motion, and at




reft: The one for young people only,
and the other, for any persons indif-
ferently , yet, allowing the mactive to
have some motion. Now, if the atti-
tude be to express, who and what
the sitter is, and bis very temper,. (a
very nice bistorical point) how much
does it concern the portraitist to study-
it, and make the distinctions aforesaid
Whereas the postures of most of our
portraits are at rest, and at best taken
from the layman.
BUT, to prove motion, and histo-
rical management, in a portrait, I
must acquaint the reader, that I bave
seen a picture drawn in italy, of an
English gentleman, where he is repre-
sented in a sitting posture: the ground
is à piece of walling, with a window,
at the outside of wbich appears a
person holding up a small image of




white marble for the gentleman to look
at, who, with extended arms, admires
its beauty. And tho bis face was, on
this account, fore-shortened lengthwise,
yet it retained great likenefs.
THERE is yet bebind a favourite
historical principle of Vandyke and
Titian, which face-painters little heed,
I mean the dlaro-obscuro: a com-
pound itahaan word, signifying simply.
an opposition of light and shade ,
but, in a more refined sense, any co-
lours, naturally luminous and light
in themselves, opposed to others na-
turally more brown and heavy.
THE artifice of the claro-obscuro,
of whatever small import painters may
think it in a portrait, is certainly
practicable in a family-piece: because
our author tells us, that every such
picture




picture is an history, and becomes a
group by the meeting of the figures
of different sexes and ages, and in
different attitudes and draperies. Noso
this group must be so managed, that the
foremost figures must net only, as be-
ing nearest to the eye, receive the
greatest light, but also be improved by
draperies of natural light colours, (and,
in this, white and yellow sattin does
wonders) and the off-figures be more
brown and heavily coloured, but with
discretion , so that the whole group
may appear to bave one general light
opposing one general shade.
In a word- This treatise will ap-
pear, as our author would bave it be,
a palace and bulwark for art, to wbich
both painters, and lovers of painting
may safely retire for instruction and.
entertainment.





AS to the translation: we have
endeavoured to make it as acceptable to
the Engish reader as possible, by ob-
serving a medium between too wide a
parapbrase, and too literal a verfion
the properest method for a work that
treats so learnedly and profoundly oj
the Art of Painting.











The author's
Preface
ON THE
IDeA of PaintinG.
THE prize of a race is not to be won;
if we have not the goal in our eye 3
nor is the perfect knowledge of any
art or science to be acquired, without
having a trie idea of it. This idea is our
goal or mark, and directs us unerringly to
the end of our career; that is, to the pof-
session of the science we desire:
But though there is nothing which does
not include in itself and discover its true
idea; yet we must not from hence infer,
that this idea is so obvioues, as not to be
mistaken; or that the false idea does not
often pafs for the true and perfect. There
are several ideas of painting, as well as of
other arts: The difficulty lies in discovering
which of them is the true one. For this
purpose, it is necessary to observe, that, in
painting, there are two forts of ideas ; a









general idea, wlich is common to all men,
and a particular idea, peculiar to painters.
The surest way to know infallibly the
true idea of things is, to derive it from the
very basis of their essence and definition ; for
desinition was invented for no other purpose
than preventing equivocation and ambiguity
in ideas, banishing those that are false, and
informing the mind of the true end and
principal effects of things. Whence it fol-
lows, that the more an idea leads us directly
and rapidly to the end which.its essence points
out, the more certain we ought to be, that
such an idea is à true one.
The essence and definition of painting is,
cne imitation of visible objects, by means of
form and colours: Wherefore the more for-
cibly and faithfully painting imitates nature,
the more directly and rapidly does it lead us
to its end; which is, to decerve the eye; and
the surer proofs does it give us of its true
ide4.
The general idea above-mentioned strikes
and attracts every one, the ignorant, the
lovers of painting, judges, and even painters
themselves. A picture, that bears this cha-
racter, permits no one to pass by it with in-
difference ; but never fails to surprise us, and
to detain us for a while to enjoy the pleasure
of our surprize. True painting, therefore,
is such as not only surprises, but, asit were,
calls to us ; and has so powerful an effect,






that we cannot help coming near it, as if it
had something to tell us. And we no sooner
approach it; but we are entertained, not only
with sine choice, with the novelty of the
things it represents, with the history or
fable it puts us in mind of, with ingenious
inventions, and with allegories, to give us
the pleasure of employing our parts, either
in discovering the meaning, or criticising the
obscurity of them; but also with that true
and faithful imitat ion, which attracted us at
first sight; and afterwards lets us into all the
particulars of the piece; and ahich, accord-
ing to Aristotle, never fails to divert us; hoW
horrible soever those natural objects may be
which it represents.
The other idea, which, as we said, 25.
peculiar to painters, and to which they
ought to be perfectly habituated, concerns,
in particulat, the whole thebry of painting ;
and should be so much at command, that it
may seem to cost them no reflection to exé-
cute their thoughts., So that after having
studied correct design, fine colouring; and
all their dependencies, they ought to have
those ideas always present and ready, which
answer to the several branches of their art.
On the whole, true painting, by the
force and great truth of its imitation, ought,
as I have observed, to call. the spectator to
surprise him, and oblige him to approach it,
as if he intended to converse with the figures:







In effect, when the piece bears the character
of truth, it seems to have drawn us to it,
for no other purpose, than to entertain and
instruct us.
BuT here we must observe, that the zdeas
of painting in general are as different as the
manners of the several schools. Not that
painters are without those particular ideas,
which they ought to possefs: But the use
they make of them not being at all times just,
the habits which this use brings upon them,
their attachment to one parf more than an-
other, and the affection they preserve for
the manner of those masters whom they
have imitated, prejudice their choice, and
bias them to some favourite branch of the
art ; though they are under the strictest ob-
ligation to make themselves masters of every
part of it, in order to contribute to the ge¬
neral idea above-mentioned : For most
painters, are always divided in their inclina-
tions ; some following Raphael, others Mi-
chael-Angelo, others the Caracchis, and
others the scholars of these masters: Some
prefer the whole; oters the abundance of
thoughts; ofhers the graces ; others the ex-
pression of the passions of the soul; and there
are some who give themselves wholly up to
the heat and transport of their genius, thor
but little improved, either by study or re-
flection.




But what can be done with all these
vague and uncertain ideas : Tis certainly
dangerous to reject them; we must therefore
resolve to prefer to all other things that
truth, which we have supposed in the ge-
neral idea: For, to all painted objects, the
appearance of truth is more necessary, than
the manner of any master whatever ; becau se
truth in painting. is the basis of all the parts
which heighten the excellence of this art;
as the sciences and virtues are the foundation
of all those accomplishments, which can
either exalt or adorn human nature. For
which reason we must suppose truth on the
one hand, and virtue and science on the
other, to be in perfection, when we talk of
those finishings, or accomplishments, of
which either painting or human nature is
susceptible, and which, without resting
upon such a basis, can have no good effect.
In short, the spectator is not obliged to seek
for-truth in a painting; but truth, by its
effect, must call to the spectator and force
his attention.
Tis in vain to adorn a stately palace with
the greatest rarities, if we have forgot to
make doors to it, or if the entrance be not
proportionable to the beauty of the building;
so as to raise the passenger’s desire to walk in,
and gratify his curiosity. All visible objects
enter the understanding by the faculty of
seeing, as musical sounds do by that of hear-







ing. The eyes and ears are the doors, which
admit us to judge of painting and mufick-
The first care therefore both of the painter
and the musician should be, to make these
entrances free and agreeable by the force of
their harmony; the one in his colouring con-
ducted by the claro-obscuro, and the other in
his accords. The spectator being thus at-
tracted by the force of the performance, his
eye discovers in it those particular beauties
which are capable of instructing and pleasing;
the curious finds in it what suits his taste,
and the painter there observes the different
branches of his art, in order to improve
himself by what is good, and to reject what-
ever may be vicious. Every thing in a
picture is not equally perfect. Some paint-
ings there are, which, with several faults,
when minutely consider’d, do not fail, ne-
vertheless, to catch the eye; because of the
artist’s excellent management in his colouring.
and the claro-obscuro.
REMBRANT, for instance, diverted him-
self one day with drawing his maid’s picture,
in order to set it at his window and deceive
passengers: His project succeeded; for the
fallacy was not discoverd till some days
after. And yet, as we may justly imagine
of Rembrant, this effect was not owing to
the beauty of the design, nor to the noble-
ness of the exprefsion. When I was in Hol-
land, I had the curiosity to see this picture ;





and, finding it to be well pencild, and of
great force, I bought it, and it has at this
time a considerable place in my cabinet.
OTHER painters, on the contrary, have
shewn in their works a good many per-
fections in the several parts of the art ; yet
have not been so happy as Rembrant, to gain,
at first sight, such favourable regards: I say,
not happy ; because, if they have sometimes
succeeded, ’twas owing to a chance dispo-
sition of objects, which, in the places they
filled, required an advantageous claro-obscuro;
a perfection which cannot be denied them,
but wherein the skill of the painter had very
littie share; since, if it had been the effect
of science, it would have appeared in all his
other productions.
ThUs nothing is more common, than to séë
paintings set off a room, purely by the rich-
ness of their borderings, whilst the insipidity
and coldness of those paintings is such, that
people pafs unconcernedly by them, without
being attracted by that truth which calls to
us. Now to make this point clearer, I
must explain it by the example of some
skilful painters, who yet have not been
masters enough to strike the eye, at first
sight, by a faithful imitation, and a trutk
which ought to decelve, as even excelling
nature itself. Thé most rémarkable examplé
I can quote is Raphael, because of his great
reputation, and because there was never any






painter who possessed so many parts of the
art, or possessed them in so high a degree of
perfection.

is very certain, by the confession of
many, that men of knowledge have often
sought for Raphaels works in the midst of
them ; that is, in the halls of the Vatican,
where are his best performances; and have
asked their guides to shew them the works
of Raphael, without giving the least indi¬
cation of being struck with them at the first
glance of the eye, as they expected to be,
from that painter’s reputation. The paint-
ings of Raphael did not answer the idea they
had conceived of so great a genius, because
they measured them by that idea which one
ought naturally to have of perfect works.
They, could not imagine, that the imitation
of nature would not, in the works of so
wonderful an artist, appear in all its vigour,
and all its perfection. This shews, that
without the knowledge of the claro-obscuro,
and of whatever depends on colouring, the
other parts of painting lose much of their
merit, even when they are in that degree of
perfection to which Raphael carried them.
I sHALL offer here a late instance of the
little effect which Raphael’s works produce at
first sight. I had it from (a) a friend well
known for his genius and knowledge, and
2) Monsieur de Valincourt.






who, as it usually happens to persons of his
parts, has such an esteem for this famous
painter as comes up to admiration. Being
some time ago at Rome, he was very im-
patient to see Raphael’s works; the most
admired of which are his Fresco paintings
in the halls of the Vatican. He was accord-
ingly carried thither, but happened, with
indifference, to cross the halls, without per-
ceiving, that he had before his eyes what he
so eagerly sought after. His conductor


thereupon stopt him short, and said
Whitber are you going so faft Sirè Theres
wbat you look for and you do not mind. My
curious friend no sooner perceived the
beauties whech his fine genius pointed out to
him in those works, but he resolved. to repair
thither cften, fully to gratify his curiolity,
and to form his taste on what he could fur-
ther discover. But what, if, besides charmn-
ing with the sight of so many fine things,
Raphael had, at first sight, called to him, by
the effect of a colouring proper for each
object, and supported by an excellent claro-
obscuro!
This gentleman thought he should be
extremely surprised at the sight of paintings
that had so great reputation; but was not :
And, not being a painter, he contented him-
self with examining and praising the airs of
the heads, the expressions, the nobleness of
the aftitudes, and the graces of the parts he
best



best understood : In other things he had but
little curiosity, because they relate to the
painter only. This story is often revivéd, as
well by painters who never saw any of Ra-
phael’s works, as by other curious persons,
ignorant of painting.
Yet it must be acknowledged, that some
of this artist’s paintings are well colour’d ;
but we must not form our judgment of the
whole, by the few of this kind; for it is
the general run of his, and other painters
works, that must determine the extent of
their capacities.
SOME object, that this great and perfect
imitation is not essential to painting; and
that, if it were, the effects would appear in
most pictures ; that a picture may call, and
yet not always answer the idea of the per-
son who comes to it; and that it is not ne-
cessary for the figures to seem desirous to
enter into a conversation with the spectator,
because he is already prepossessed with the
notion of its being only a painting.
IT is certain, that the number of pictures
which call the spectator is but few: But
that is not the fault of the art; the essential
effect of which is to surprise, and deceive the
eye : We must only blame the painter’s nieg-
ligence, or rather impute it to his genius, as
not being exalted enough, or not sufficiently
furnish’d with the principles necessary for
com-



ompelling, as it were, those who pass by,
o stop, and give attention to his pieces.
BUT further ; it argucs more genius to
nake a good use of lights and shades, har-
nony of colours, and théir suitableness to éach
articular object, than to design a single
igure correctly.
DEsIGN, which requires much time to
earn perfectly, consists of little more than
n habit, which is often repeated, of giving
neasures and outlines; but the claro-obscuro
nd harmony of colours, is a continual sub-
ect of reasoning, which employs the genius
n ways that are as different as the compo-
itions them selves. A moderate genius may
hrough perseverance attain correct design-
ng
; but the clare-obscuro requires, besides
lie rules, such a compass of genius, as may
ncorporate with, and, as it were, diffuse
tself through, all the other parts of paint-
ng
Tis well known, that the works of Ti--
tian, and of all the painters of his school,
have fcarce any other merit than their claro-
obscuro, and colouring; and yet they bear à
great price, are in great repute, and maintain
their posts in the cabinets of the curious, as
first-rate pictures.
WHEN I speak of design, I must be un-
derstood to mean only that material part,
which, by just measurès, foris all objects
in a regular manner; for I am not ignorant,
that



that in design there is a genius capable to
season all sorts of forms by the asfistance of
taste and elegance ; yet it is easy to observe,
that the effect, which calls to the spectator,
arises principally from the colouring of all
the parts; by which we are to understand
the claro-obscuro, and the general harmony
of colours, as also such as we call local, or
colours which faithfully imitate those of any
particular object. But all this hinders not
the other parts of art from being necessary to
help forward the whole work, and from
mutually assisting each other; some to form,
others to adorn the objects painted, in order
to give them a taste and grace that may in-
struct, respectively, both lovers and painters,
and, in a word, may please every one,
THUs, as it is the duty of painting, both
to call and please; when it has called the
spectator, it must necessarily entertain him
with all the various beauties of which it is
capable.
I MUST now proceed to set the several
parts of painting in their natural order, that
I may confirm the reader in the idea I have
been endeavouring to establisn, And because
this idea is founded on truth, I shall begin
the following discourses with a treatise on
this- subject: which I am the more obliged
to do, because the subject of trutb, and the
idea of painting, are so nearly allied, as to
be almost the same thing ; for all the parts





of painting are no further valuable than they
ear this character of truth.
AFter the idea of painting which I have
endeavoured to establisn, and after the trea-
tise upon truth, I snall speak of the other
parts of painting; and if the grounds l go
upon are solid, they may possibly sereen me
s well from the false critick, as from those
who are ignorant of the true principles of
the art.
SUCH principles I will endeavour to esta-
bish, as may serve to build a rampart and
palace for painting, where great painters,
rue criticks, lovers of painting, and all per-
ons of good taste, may safely retire. In-
vention will furnish the thought of the
structure, and chuse its painter-like situation,
which, though fanciful, and sometimes even
wild, will, nevertheless, be extremely agree-
able. Invention will also prepare the ma¬
erials, and disposition compart the rooms,
or receiving all the solid beauties and orna-
nents we would place in them. After in-
vention and disposition, design and colouring,
and their dependencies, are ready to perform
their parts in executing the building. Co-
couring will visit every thing, and every-
there distribute its gifts, according to the
exigence- and propriety of the place; and,
pointly with design, will chuse the furniture
of the palace. Design also will, by way of
pre-eminence, have alone the charge of over-




seeing the architecture, as colouring will
have that of chusing the pictures; and both
will co-operate to put the finishing hand to
the structure.
ThE situation, to make it commodious
for painting, must be diversified with objects
produced without art or culture, as rocks,
cascades, mountains, rivulets, forests, skies,
and fields, all in an uncommon manner, yet
keeping within the bounds of probability.
and which will be more particularly handled
in my discourse on landskip.
AMong other inhabitants of this palace,
painting will receive poesy with all the
marks of distinction fhe deserves, where they
will live together, like two kind sisters, who
ought to love one another, without jealousy
and without disputes: It is with a parallel
between these two arts I intend to close this
system of painting.
SoMe persons of good sense have blamed
me for making use of the defect in Raphael
to confirm- my sentiment on the idea of
painting; Raphael, who ought not to be
mentioned, say they, but. as the model of all
perfection, considering the general and esta¬
blished reputation he has acquired. They
own I have reason in the main; yet say,
that l ought to chuse some other example,
and join with people of understanding in
creating Raghael with more complaisance.
They add, that the curious are already set
against




against me, because they have imagined, that
I preferr’d Rubens to Raphael; and that the
example I make use of to confirm my senti-
ment, would rather irritate than convince
them; and would likewise, with them, very
much lessen the opinion which the world
entertains of my skill in painting.
I CAn only answer, that I chose Raphael XX
as an example, that is, what often happens
at the first sight of his works, for no other
reason, but because he excelled more in all
the parts of his art, than any other painter;
and because I should reap more advantage,
and more certainly establisn my sentiment
on the idea of painting, if I set it in oppo¬
sition to all Raphael’s perfections. To chuse
Raphael, therefore, as an example, because
he possessed more excellencies than any other
painter, and in order to shew, that all excel-
lencies lose much of their lustre, when they
are not accompanied with a colouring which
calls the curious to admire them, can never
be thought to argue a contempt of him.
My intention is not to write, either for
the learned in painting, or the ignorant, but
for such as are born with an inclination to
this sine art, and may at least have improved
it by conversing with able judges, and learned
painters : l write, in a word, for young,
pupils, who may have set out in a right
path, and for all those, who, after acquiring
some tincture of design and colouring, have
impartially






impartially examined the best works, and
are docile enough to embrace those truths
which may be hinted to them.
As for half-learned painters, who have set
out in the wrong path, and most of the
book-learned, they usually maintain the false
ideas which they have hastily embraced; and,
tho strangers to design or colouring, or Ra-
phael, or Rubens, will talk of those two
painters according to an antient tradition,
which, though much lessened of late by
good reflections, has yet left its imprefsions
on the minds of many.
As for myself, I can say, that having, in
my travels, view’d, with great attention, the
finest pictures in Europe, I have studied
them with fondness; and such parts as nature
has bestowed upon me, Ihave improved and
employed this way: ladmire every thing that
is good in the works of the great masters.
without respect to names, or any other com-
plaisance. I value the several celebrated
sclools: Ilove Raphael, Titian, and Rubens;
and l do my-utmost endeavours to dive into
the rare accomplishments of those great
painters: But, whatever perfections they may
have, I love truth better: Truth alone is
what should be had in view, especially by one
who writes for the publick : This is a respect
to which the publick has a right, and there-
fore I thought I could not excuse myself
from paying it.












Of Truth
IN
PAINTING.
MA N, however much given to lying;
hates nothing so much as a lye, and


the surest way to gain his confidence
is, to treat him with sincerity Tis needless,
therefore, to make an encomium here on
truth, since every one loves it, and feels the
beauties of it ; nothing is good, nothing
pleases, without truth; ’tis reason, equity,
good sense, and the basis of all perfection;
tis the aim of the sciences; and all the arts,
whose object. is imitation, have no other ten-
dency than to instruct and direct men, by a
faithful imitation of nature: Wherefore
those, who either cultivate the sciences, or
exercise the arts, cannot say that their en-
deavours have been crowned with success,
if, after all their pains, they have not dis-
covered that truth which they look upon as
the reward of their studies.









Besides the general truth, which ought
to appear in all things, there is a truth pecu¬
liar to each of the fine arts, and to each of
the sciences. My present design is, to dis-
cover what is truth in painting, and of what
importance it is to the painter to express it
well.
BUT before we enter on the subject, it
must be premised, with regard to imitation
in painting, that though the true object is
the natural one, and the feigned object that
in the picture, the latter is, nevertheless,
called true, when it is a perfect imitation of
the former. It is therefore the truth in
painting, which I shall endeavour to dis-
cover, in order to shew its worth and neces-
sity. I observe, in painting, three kinds of
truth, viz.
The simple;
The ideal; and
The compound, or perfect truth.
ThE simple, which 1 call the primary
truth, is a plain and faithful imitation of the
motions that express nature, and of those
objects which the painter has chosen for his
copies, such as they appear to the eye at first
sight; so as the carnations may seem to be
real flesh, and the draperies real stuffs, in
their several varieties, and each object main-
tain the true character of its nature, and, by
the force of the claro-obsucro, and of the




union of colours, the several painted objects
may appear to have a relief, and the whole
be harmonious.
In all natural things, this simple truth
discovers the way by which the painter may
gain his end ; which is such a strong and
lively imitation of-nature, that it may seem
possible for the figures to come out of the
picture, as it were, in order to talk with
those who look at them. But let it be here
observed, that from this idea of the simple
or primary truth 1 abstract all the beauties
that may embellish it, and which either the
painter’s genius, or the rules of art, may add
to it, in order to make the whole perfect.
THE ideal truth is a choice of various
perfections, not meeting in any single copy,
but taken from several, and commonly from
those of the antique.
ThIs kind of truth comprehends an abun-
dance of thoughts, a richnefs of invention,
a propriety of attitudes, an elegance of out-
lines, a choice of fine expressions, an hand-
some cast of draperies, and, in a word,
every thing that can, without altering the
primary truth, make it more moving,, and
more agreeable. But as all these perfections
can only subsist in idea, with regard to paint-
ing, they have need of a lawful subject,
both to preserve and set them off to advan-
tage : And this lawful subject is simple
truth, in the same manner as moral virtues






are only ideal, if they have not a lawfui
subject, that is, a subject properly disposed
to receive and support them; without which
they would be but the shadows of virtue.
SIMPLE truth subsists of itself, and gives
both relisn and spirit to the perfections which
attend it ; and if it does not alone lead to an
imitation of perfect nature, which depends
upon the choice the painter makes of his
copy, it leads at least to an imitation of na-
ture, which, in general, is the end of paint-
ing. Ideal truth, of itself, must be allowed’
to lead into a most agreeable path: yet it is
such as does not carry the painter to the end
of his art, but leaves him short of it; and
the only affistance he can expect to come to
the end of his career, must proceed from thé
simple truti. Hence it appears, that the
simple and ideal truths together make a
perfect compound, and mutually assist each
other; with this difference, that the former
overpowers and darts its rays through all the

perfections that are joined to it.
The third truth, as a compound of the
other two, gives the last hand to art, and the
perfect imitation of fine nature. It carries
so beautiful a probability, as often appears to
be more true than truth itself: And the
reason is, that, by the aforesaid conjunction,
che primary truth seizes the spectator, salves
many negligencies, and produces its effect
the first, without our attending to it,




This third truth is the mark which hi-
therto no man has hit; we can only say,
that those who have come the nearest to it,
are the most accomplished. The simple and
ideal truths have been divided according to
the genius and education of the painters who
possessed them, Giorgione, Titian, Pordenon;
old Palma, the Bassans, and all tie Venetian
school, had no other merit, but that of pos-
sessing the primary truth: And Leonardo da
Vinci, Raphael, Julio Romano, Polydore da
Caravaggio, Poussin, and some others of the
Roman school, have gained their greatest repu-
tation by ideal truth; especially Raphael, who,
besides the beauties of ideal, was master of a
considerable part of the simple truth, by
which means he came nearer to that truth
which is perfect, than any other Italian :
In effect, it appears, that, in order to
imitate nature in its variety, this painter
usually made use of as many different na-
tural objects, as he had figures to introduce
into his pieces ; and if, at the same time, he
added some things of his own, it was to
make his drawings the more regular, and
more expressive, but always preserving truth,
and the distinguishing character of what he
copied. Though he was not thoroughly
master of simple truth in the other parts of
painting, yet he had such a taste for truth,
that in most of the parts of the human body
which he designed, after nature, he drew






them on paper, as they really were, in order
to be testimonies of the most simple truth,
and to be joined to the idea he had of the
beauty derived from the antique. An ad-
mirable conductl in which no painter has
been so successful as Rapbael, since the re-
vival of the art.
NOW, if perfect truth be composed of
the simple and ideal, painters may be said
to excel, in proportion to the degree wherein
they possess those several truths, and to the
happy facility they have acquired of joining
them into one compound.
Atter having settled what truth is in
painting, it is proper to inquire, whether
those painters, who exaggerate, or overdo
the out-lines of their figures, in order to
seem learned, have not abandoned truth, by
exceeding the bounds of a regular simplicity.
In this point, painters use the word charge,
to signify any thing that exceeds, Now as
every thing that exceeds, is beyond proba-
bility, ’tis certain, that whatever may be
said to be charged, is contrary to the truth

which we would establisn. a et there are
charged out-lines which please, because they
are above the lowliness of ordinary nature,
and because they carry with them, an. air of
freedom, and a certain idea of a great taste,
which deceives most painters, who call these
excesses, the grande maniere. But those
who have a true idea of correctness, of re-




gular simplicity, and of the elegance of
nature, will look upon these excesses as
fuperfluous, since they always adulterate the
truth: Yet one cannot help praising some
overcharged things in great works, when
the distance from whence they must be
viewed, softens them to the eye, or when
they are used with such discretion, as makes
the character of truth more apparent.
SOME painters there have been, who, in-
stead of a reasonable moderation in their de-
signs, have affected to express their out-lines
and muscling with greater exactness than
the art of painting requires. Their motive
was, to gain to themselves the reputation of
being fkilful in design and anatomy; but
their motive, like theit pictures, has a cer-
tain air of pedantry, more capable of lessening
the beauty of their works, than of increasing
their reputation, It must, indeed, be granted
that the artist ought to understand anatomy
and the sharp swells, which are its conse-
quences ; because anatomy is the basis of de-
signing, and because these swells may lead
those to perfection, who know how to take
and to leave as much of them as is necessary
to make exactness and simplicity of design
agree with good taste: Such things may also
be tolerable, and often agreeable, in mere
sketches of a picture, and the learned painter
may profitably make use of them when he
begins and dead-colours; but should cut them





off when he would have his work appear in
perfection; as the architect strikes his centre
as soon as the arch is set.
On the whole, the antique statues, which
have passed at all times for the rule of
beauty, have nothing charged, nothing af-
fected ; nor is there any thing of this kind
in the works of those who have always imi-
tated them; as Raphael, Poussin, Domini-
chino, and some others.
Not only all affectation is displeasing
but nature, besides, is obscured and overcast
by a bad habit, which painters call manner-
The better to understand this principle.
’tis proper to know, that there are two forts
of painters: Some, and they are but few
paint according to the principles of art, and
make truth so obvious in their works, as to
stop and entertain the spectator ; others work
only practically, by an expeditious habit,
which they have either taken up without
reason, or learnt of their masters without
reflection. Though these sometimes do well,
either by chance, or by the help of their
memories, yet they always succeed but in-
differently when they work on their own
bottom ; for as they but rarely make use of
the natural, or else confine theiselves to
their habit, they never express that truth,
or that probability, which is the sole object
of a true painter, and the end of painting.




For the rest, among all the fine arts,
there is certainly none, where truth ought
to be so conspicuous, as in painung. The
other arts do but revive the idea of things
absent ; whereas this intirely supplies them,
and makes them present, by the very essence
of it, which consists not only in pleafing.
but deceiving, the eye. Apelles drew his
portraits so true and like, both: in air, and
every thing else relating to the face, that a
certain horoscope-maker could, on sight of
them, tell the temperament or constitution
of the person painted, and what would befal
him- Twas this painter’s care, therefore,
rather to observe truth in his portraits, than to
embellish them with falsities. In effect, truth
has, in this case, so many charms, that it
ought to be always preferr’d to borrow’d
beauty ; since, without it, portraits can-only
preserve à vague and confufed idea of our
friends, and not the true character of their
persons.
WHAT can be inferr’d from all this rea-
soning, but that there is in painting a pri¬
mary, an essential truth, which leads the
painter directly tohis end; an animated truth,
which not only subsists and lives of itself,
but also gives life to all the embellisbments
of which it is susceptible, and which ought
to be joined with it; and that these. per-
fections are but secondary truths, which, by
themselves, have no force to move, but yet
do



do honour to the primary truth, when added
to it; Now this primary truth in painting
is, as we have said, a simple and faithful
imitation of the motions which express na-
ture, and of objects, such as, at first sight,
they present themselves to the eye, with all
their varieties, and in theif true characters.
It appears, therefore, that every painter
who not only neglects the primary truth,
but does not. take great pains to make Him-
self thoroughly master of it, will only build
upon sand, and will never pafs for a genuine
imitator of nature; and that the whole per-
fection of painting consists in the three. forts
of truth we have endeavoured to establish.
rom Monsieur Du
Copy of a Letter
Guet, to à Lady of Quality, who
bad sent him the preceding Discourse,
and had asked bis Opinion of it.
19. March 1704.
THE discourse of truth in painting,

Madam, has better informed and pleased
me, than those other discourses with which
you know I was so well satisfied. It appears
to me, not only to be a summary of the
rules, but also to discover the foundation,
and ultimate end of them; and I have there
earned, with great pleasure, the secret of




reconciling two things, which I took to be
opposite; the art of imitating nature, and
that of going beyond this imitation, by
fadding to her beauties, in order- to attain
them; and of correcting her, to make her
more apparent. The simple truth gives life
and motion, and the ideal chuses with art
every thing that can either adorn or make it
moving; yet does not chuse but from the

simple truth, which indeed is barren in some
parts, but, upon the whole, is rich and
fruitful.
Now if the secondary truth does not
support the primary, but rather overpowers
it, and hinders it from being more apparent,
than any addition from the secondary; art
departs in this case from nature; takes her
place, instead of representing her; disappoints
the spectator’s expectation, and not his eye ;
and warns him of the snare, instead of con-
cealing it from him. If, on the other hand,
the primary truth has all the truth of life and
motion, and is wanting in that nobleness,
exactness, and grace, which sometimes are
only to be found elsewhere, if it subsists
without any aid from the secondary, which
is always great and perfect, it pleases no fur-
ther than it is agreeable and finish’d, and the
copy has nothing that was missed in the
original.
The use we are therefore to make of this
secondary truth is, to supply every subject




with those things which it has not, but
inight have, and such as nature has distri-
buted among others, and thus to unite those
perfections, which nature has commonly
separated.
The secondary truth is, strictly speaking

very near as real as the primary. ; for it does
not invent ; it chuses from all parts ; it
studies whatever may please, instruct, or
animate. Nothing escapes it, not even what
would seem to have escaped it by chance. It
catches, by means of design, what does but
once appear, and enriches itself with a thou-
fand different beauties, that it may be always
uniform, and never fall into repetitions.
Tis for this reason, methinks, that the
union of these two truths has so surprising
an effect; for this union produces a perfect
imitation of what is most ingenious, most
moving, and most perfect in nature. Every
thing here is probable, because it is true;
but surprising, because it is rare ; every
thing strikes, because every thing that is
capable of striking has been observed ; yet
nothing appears affected, or overdone, be-
cause there is nothing here that is wonderful
and perfect, which has not been copied from
nature.

Tis departing from the rules, and the
end of painting, to let any one beauty over-
power another, or to aim at à reputation for
any one part, and not for the whole. De-




sign, skill in anatomy, and even the desire
to please, and be approved, should all be
subservient to truth. A true painting, in-
short, ought to transport the spectator from
the very first moments he sees it, and not to
give him leave, till afterwards, to think of
the painter, and admire his art.
MONSIEUR DU PILES has, very hap-
pily, displayed the character of Titian, for
the simple truth in its greatest force ; and
that of Raphael, for ennobling the simple
truth with the ideal: And I know not whe-
ther any more refined or more universal me-
thod could be found for judging of the
merit of the greatest painters, than going
even beyond their efforts, and their success,
and pointing out the union of the two truths
which they have endeavoured after, but have.
not attained, as the utmost stretch of the
art.
IKNOw not, Madam, why I say so much
on this subject, if not to let you see, hoW
full I am-of what I have been reading, and
what value I set on such things as l can t
help repeating to you, though l am sensible,
that in so doing I spoil and weaken them,
Iam, Madam,
with all imaginable Respect,
your most humble,
and most obedient Servant.












Norder to observe some method in treat-
ing of the several parts of painting, we
may consider it in two lights ; either
with regard to the young student, or to the
perfect artist: lf it is considered according
to the method in which it is learned, we
must begin with designing, then treat of
colouring, and end with composition; be-
cause ’tis to no purpose to think what we
would imitate, if we know not how to
imitate it, and because objects can only be
represented by design and colouring. But
if we consider this art in its perfection, and
according to the order in which it is ex-
ecuted, and if, besides, we suppose the
painter to have acquired a perfect habit in
the several parts, so as to execute them with
facility; the first part that offers itself will
be invention ; for, before he can represent
objects, he must determine which he would

Tis in this second light I am
represent.
here to consider painting, that I may give





an idea of it suitable to the taste of -the
greatest number of readers.
SEVERAL authors, who treat of paint-
ing, make use of the word invention, to
express different things: Some would convey
such an idea by it, as they take to compre-
hend the whole composition of a picture ;
others have ascribed to it fertility of genius,
newness of thoughts, and the method of
expressing them, and of treating the same
subject in different ways. But though these
particulars are extremely proper for support-
ing invention, for ofnamenting it, and giving
it heat and life, they are neither the ground
nor the essence of invention ; for a painter,
who is not master of all these things, may
nevertheless, do his part in invention, by
the justnefs of his thoughts, the prudence
of his choice, and the solidity of his judg-
ment.
INVENTION, therefore, as it is but apart
of composition, cannot give a perfect idea of
it ; for composition implies both invention
and disposition ; ’tis one thing to invent ob-
jects, and another to place them rightly. I
shall not stop here, to refute the other ideas
which have been entertained of invention ;
as I hope to define it in so true and obvious
a manner, that l imagine. there will be no
diversity of opinions on this subject.
I Take invention to be a choice of the
objects that enter into the composition of




the subject which the painter would treat of:
I say, a choice ; because objects ought not
to be brought into a picture inconsiderately,
and without contributing to the expression
and character of the subject. 1 say, that
these objects ought to enter into the compo¬
sition, but not wholly compose the picture ;
to the end, that invention may not be con-
founded with disposition, and may leave it
at full liberty to act its part, which consists
in placing the aforesaid objects to the best
advantage.
PoEts, as well as orators, have their
different styles to exprefs themselves in, ac-
cording to the several subjects they treat of;
and upon this depends the choice of words,
of harmony, and of the turn which they
give to their thoughts.
Tis the same in
painting: When the painter has chosen his
subject, he must chuse his figures, and their
dependencies, accordingly. The painter, as
well as the poet, has his sublime style for
things that are elevated, his familiar style
for common things, his pastoral style for the
country, and so forth. Now though all
these various styles fall in with all the parts
of painting, they are, nevertheless, in a more
particular manner, the province of invention.
But this point would require à treatise of
itself.
INVENTION, as it relates to painting,
may be considered in three respects ; it is





either simply historical, or allegorical, or
mystical.
PAINTERS, with reason, use the word
history, to signify the highest kind of paint-
ing, which consists in bringing many figures
together. And, ’tis usual to say, Such a
painter does bistory, such a one paints beasts,
such a one landstip, such a one flowers and
so forth. But there is a difference between
the division of the kinds of painting, and the
division of invention. I here take the word
bistory in a large sense, and mean by it,

every thing that can either fix the painter’s
idea, or inform the spectator. I say, there-
fore, that invention, simply historical, is such
a choice of objects as simply of themselves
represent à subject.
This kind of invention comprises not
only all sorts of history, whether true or
fabulous, as related by authors, or established
by tradition, but also portraiture, views of
countries, beasts, and all the productions of
art and nature ; for in painting a picture, the
artist must not only have his pallet and pen-
cils in readiness, but, as we have said, he
must, before he begins, resolve upon what
he would paint, though but a flower, fruit,
plant, or insect ; for though the artist may
confine his genius to such things, they are often
capable of yielding instruction, as they have
their particular virtues and proprieties : Those
who have written of them, and have set off





their works with demonstrative figures, are-
called historians; and we say, The history
of plants, the history of animals, as well as
that of Alexander the Great. Invention,
simply historical, has therefore its degrees,
and is more or lefs valuable according to the
quantity of its matter, the nature of its.
choice, and the genius with which it is ma¬
naged.
ALLEGoRICAl invention is a choice cf
objects that serve to represent mn a piece,
either wholly or partly, what in fact they
are not. Such, for instance, is the painting
of Apelles, representing Slander, as described
by Lucian: Such also is the moral painting
of Hercules, placed between Vezus and Mi-
nerva, where those pagan deities are only
introduced, to shew the force of virtue.
And such is the picture of the School ef
Athens, in a chambet of the Vatican, where
several figures, of different times, countries,
and conditions, are brought together to re-
present Philosopby. The three other pictures
in the same chamber are drawn in the same
allegorical manner; and, if we consider the
transactions recorded in the old testament,
they will appear to be partly (a) allegorical,
as well as simply historical, because they are-
the types of what should come to pass under






the new llaw. These, are examples of sub-
jects which are wholly allegorical.
The works, which are but partly alle2
gorical, engage our attention more easily
and more agreeably ; because the spectator,
ebeing assisted by thé mixture of figures purely
historical distinguishes, with pleasure, the
allegorical figures that are joined with them.
We have an authentick example of this in
the bas-reliefs of the Antonine column, where
the sculptor, being to express some rain,
which the christian army obtained by their
prayers, (b) has introduced, among the sol-
diers, a raining Jupiter having his beard
and heir covered with water which falls from
thence in abundance. Now Jupiter is not
place there as a God who makes a part of
the story but as à symbol of rain, after the
 manner of the heathens. Antient authors,
speaking of the paintings of their times, re-
late many examples in allegory , And, since
the revival of the art, painters have made
frequent use of them; and, if some have
abused them, ’twas because they knew not
that allegory is a kind of language, which
ought to be common among several people,
This happened in the reign of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, who erected the column here mentioned, on
which were represented, in bas-relief, the wars he waged
with the Germans and Sarmatians; and, in gratitude,
placed on it the statue of Antoninus, who had adopted
him to the empire.







and is founded on a received usage, and the
knowledge of books and medals; and chose,
rather than consult them, to invent a parti-
cular allegory, which, tho ingenious, could
not be understood by any but themselves.
MYSTICAE invention respects the chri-
stian religion. Its end is to instruct us in
some mystery
grounded on scripture; which
mystery is represented to us by several objects
that concur to point out some truth..

OUR mysteries, and the points of faith,
which the church has injoined, furnish a
great many examples. The second council
of Nice, having allowed of setting before the
eyes of the faithful the mystery of the Trinity,
painters represent the Father under the figure
of a venerable old man ; the Son in his hu-
manity, as he appeared to his disciples after
the resurrection; and the Holy Ghest, in the
form of a dove. The last judgment, the
church triumphant, matters relating to the
law, to faith, and the sacrament, come un-
der the same denomination. Among the
many examples which able painters have left
us, I shall mention a most ingenious one, a
colour’d sketch of which I have by me, and
prize highly. The subject is, The mystery
of the incarnation. Now, had the author
of this design been willing to treat the An¬
nunciation historically, he might have only
drawn the virgin Mary in a plain room,
without other company than the angel; but,
being




being resolved to treat the subject mystically,
he has placed her on a kind of throne or
half-pace, where, on her knees, she receives
humbly, but with dignity, the angel’s em-
bassy whilst God the Father having settled
with his Son the price of mans redemption,
assists, as it were, at the performance of the
contract. The Father is seated majestically
on the globe of the world, encompassed by
the celestial choir, and having, at his right
and, Justification and Peace, which it had
been agreed to bestow on the whole earth.
He sends his Holy Spirit to work this great
mystery. The Holy Spirit is surrounded with
circle of angels, holding each others hands,
and exulting, because mankind were to fill
up the places of the bad angels. Several
angels, terminating this celestial part of the
piece, have in their hands different attributes,
which the church ascribes to the holy vir-
gin, to shew, that of all mankind she was
the worthiest of the grace with which she
was filled. All this great sight takes up the
upper part of the piece. Beneath are the
Patriarchs, who longed for the coming of
the Messiab ; the Prophets who foretold it,
the Sibyls who spoke of it, and the little
Genii, reconciling the passages of the Sibyls
with those of the Prophets. Thus does this
picture mystically display the truth and
grandeur of its subject.






I HAVE now gone through the three
ways in which we may conceive invention;
to wit, as either simply historical, or allego-
rical, or mystical. Let us now see what
they have in common one with another;
after which we shall speak of the qualities
peculiar to each of them.
A painter of genius finds, in all the
parts of his art, ample matter to make it
appear. But the part that gives him most
opportunities of shewing his sense, imagin-
ation, and judgment, is, without doubt,
7
invention. Tis by means of invention, that
painting goes hand in hand with poesy ; it is
chiefly invention that gains the esteem of the
better fort; l mean, persons of judgment,
who, not satisfied with the bare imitation of
objects, would have the choice of them to be
just, in order to express the subject.
BUT this very genius must be cultivate
1
by the knowledges that relate to painting;
because, let the imagination be ever so
bright, it can only bring forth such things
as the understanding is already filled with;
and the memory supplies us with no other
ideas, but those of what we know, and have
seen. Accordingly the talents of particular
men are either sunk in the lowness of com-
mon objects, or else rise to the sublime, by
searching for such as are extraordinary. For
this reason, some painters, who have cul-
tivated their parts, have happily supplied a







want of genius; and, raising themselves with
their subject, their subject has been observed
to rise and grow greater on their hands.
Without the neceffary parts of knowledge,
one is liable to many mistakes ; but when
we are possessed of them, every thing pre-
sents itself regularly, and comes insensibly
into order.
TIs, nevertheless, convenient for young
people, after having studied the essentials of
their art, and before they give publick proofs
of their abilities, to exercise their genius on
all forts of subjects; because, like new wine,
which violently ferments, that it may be-
come in time more palatable, they at first
give themselves wholly up to the impetuosity
of their imagination ; but when their first
sallies are evaporated, the images of their
conceptions, without losing their force, grow
more clear and purified. But if they do not
trust so much to their own understandings,
as not to consult their knowing friends on
the kind and measure of their talents, they
ought to consider them as a plant which must
be set in a particular fort of ground, prefer-
ably to any other, in order to yield its fruit
in its season. In the same manner, if the
painter can chuse his owa subject, he ought
to prefer that which best suits the nature and
compass of his genius, aad affords him mat-
ter for exercising it in the manner for which
he is best furnished. To give heat, to his
imagination,






imagination, he must turn his ideas into dif-
ferent shapes, he must read his subject se-
veral times with great attention, that a lively
image of it may be form’d in his mind; and
that, in proportion to the greatness of the
matter, he may suffer himself to be trans-
ported, even to enthusiasm, which is the
distinguishing quality both of a great painter,
and a great poet.
As the painter can represent, in the same
piece, no more of nature, than what is to
be seen at one glance of the eye, he cannot,
for this reason, exhibit, in the same piece,
what passed at different times; and. if some
have taken the liberty to do otherwise, they
are inexcusable for it, unlefs they were
forced to do it by those who employed them,
or unless they meant to compose a mysterious
or allegorical subject, like the picture of the
School of Athens.
BUT after the subject is well fix'd, it is
extremely proper to introduce such circum-
stances as serve to fortify its character, and
make it known. They must not, however,
be so numerous as to tire the attention, but
rather so judiciously chosen, as to give an
agreeable exercise to the mind. These cir-
cumstances relate to place, time, and per-
sons. Thus, whilst the artist is instructing
the spectator, he ought, besides, to divert
him with variety. This variety appears in
the sexes, ages, countries, conditions, atti-
tudes,




tudes, expressions, diversity of animals, stuffs,
trees, buildings, and every thing that can
exercise the mind, and properly set off the
scene of the picture. 1 would not, how-
ever, approve of this abundance of objects,
and of this variety, how pleasing soever in
other respects, but so far as it is suitable to
the subject, or at least has some instructive
relation to it; for, as some subjects breathe
nothing but joy and tranquillity, so there
are others which are either mournful or
tumultuary ; some require gravity, dignity,
respect, silence, and sometimes solitude, and,
consequently, admit but of few figures ; as
there are others which are susceptible of a
great many, and of such a variety of objects
as the skill of the painter thinks proper to
introduce: For the whole must have a ten-
dency to the hero of the subject, and pre-
serve an unity well expressed, and well con-
ceived.
ThESE are the general properties of the
three kinds of invention. It remains to con¬
sider, what is peculiar to each of them.
AMong the properties, of which in-
vention, simply historical, is susceptible, I
observe three, fidelity, perspicuity or clear-
ness, and good choice. I have elsewhere
obierved, that fidelity in history is not the
essence of painting, but only a necessary ap-
pendage to the art ; for, though the painter
be only an historian by accident, he is, ne-
vertheless,




vertheless, to blame, if he does not acquit
himself well in what he has undertaken.
By fidelity I mean an exact imitation of
things, whether true or fabulous, as trans-
mitted to us either by authors, or by tra-
dition, And it is not to be doubted, but the
more fidelity such an imitation preserves, the
greater force does it give to the invention,

and the greater value to the painting.
But

if the painter has been careful to stamp his
subject with some mark of erudition, such
as may awaken the spectator’s attention,
without destroying the truth of history; if
he can blend some poetical passage with
those historical facts that admit of it; in a
word, if he can treat his subject with that
moderate licence which is allowed both to
painters and poets, he will make his inven-
tions sublime, and will gain himself a distin-
guished reputation. Fidelity, therefore, is
the first property of historical invention.
ThE second is perspicuity or clearness;
so that the spectator, if sufficiently acquainted
with history, may easily discover what par-
ticular passage the painter would represent.
Whence it follows, that all ambiguity must
be removed by some peculiar mark of the
subject, that may distinguish it from any
other. I speak here of subjects which are
uncommon ; for these which are generally
known, and are often repeated, have no
need of this precaution. If the subject is
not





not enough known, or if the painter cannot
well bring in some object to explain it, he
ought to make no difficulty of inserting a
motto or inscription. Of the many ex-
amples of this kind, both antient and mo-
dern, I shall chusé only two, which are
well known; one of Raphael, and the other
of Hannibal Caracche. The latter having

painted, in the Farnesian gallery, the story
of Anchises endeavouring to give proofs of
his love to the goddess Venus; lest Anchises
should be mistaken for Adonis, has artfully
made use of Virgil’s words, (c) Genus unde
Latinum - which he write beneath the bed,
on the bottom of the alcove. And Raphael,
on his Parnassis, having placed Sappho among
the poets, has writ the name of that learned
dame, lest sne should be taken for one of
the muses.
The third property of historical inven-
tion is the choice of the subject, supposing
the painter has the power to chuse; for a re-
markable subject furnisnes most opportunities
of enriching the scene, and commanding
attention. But if the painter bestows his
pencil upon a little subject, he must endear
vour to make it great, by the extraordinary
manner in which he treats it.
ALLEgORICAL invention, in like man-
er, has three properties. The first is, that
() Alluding to the origin of the Italian race.
it





it be intelligible. Tis a great fault to keep
the attention long in suspense by means of
new-invented- symbols, as ’tis a perfection to
entertain it, for some moments, by such alle-
gorical figures as are known, generally re-
ceived, and ingeniously employed. Obscurity
tires the mind ; but perspicuity makes it en¬
joy the discovery with pleasure.
The second property of allegory is its
authority. Caesar Ripa has written a volume
upon this point, which is in the hands of the
painters, But the best things in this author
are his extracts from the antique medals ;
and, indeed, the best authority for allegories
is antiquity, because ’tis incontestable.
The third property of allegory is, that it
be necessary. For as far as history can be
explained by fimple objects, which belong
1
to it, ’tis needlefs to seek for foreign aids,
which serve rather to embarass than adorn
such a subject.
MYSTICAL invention, as it is intirely
devoted to religion, must be pure, and free
from any mixture of objects drawn from
fable. It must be grounded either on scripture,
or the ecclesiastical history: We have ample
matter for this kind of invention in our Sa-
viour’s parables, and in the Apocalypse (4)
the obscurity of which we ought to reve-
rence, but are not obliged to imitate. The
Holy Spirit, which breathes where it pleases,
(d) Sicut tenebræ ejus, ita et lumen ejus.





nakes itself intelligible when it pleases; but
he painter, who can neither penetrate nor
Iter the spectator’s understanding, ought to
se his utmost efforts to be understood.
As nothing is more sacred, more grand,
nore permanent, than the mysteries of our
eligion, they can’t be treated in a style that
s too majestick. All that pleases, does not
lways please ; and the greatest pleasures
ommonly end in aversion; but that which
reates an idea of grandeur and magnificence,
ndures for ever.
To conclude, in whatever manner the
part of invention be discharged, it must ap-
pear to be the effect of an easy genius, rather
than of laborious reflection, And as there are
talents for attaining facility, there are also
talents for concealing labour; and each have
heir merit, and their partizans.
Happy is the man, on whom nature
has bestowed a genius able to run through
the vast race in this part of painting, and to
chuse his objects well, in order to make his
subject intelligible, in order to enrich it, and
instruct the spectator. But still more happy
is the artist, who, after knowing every thing
that contributes to fine invention, knows
himself still better, and makes a proper esti-
mate of his own abilities; since it is the
glory of a painter, not so much to undertake
great things, as to execute well what he
undertakes.




A
DESCRIPTION
OF THE
SCHOOL of ATHENS.

A PAINTING of RAPHAEL;
Referred to in the preceding Discourse
of INVENTION.

This picture, usually called, The Scheol
of Athens, has been variously under-
stood by those who have described it; and
it is surprising, that, among others who
have publisned an explication of it, Vasari.
a Cotemporary of Rapbael, should have
made so great a mistake as to neglect con-
sulting him, that he might draw from the
source itself, those instructions he had oc-
casion for, to explain a work which has
made so much noise throughout all Italy.
This author, who first wrote of it, says,
Pat it is the agreement of philosophy and astro-
logy with divinity; and yet there appears
no mark of divinity in the whole compo-
sition. The engravers of it have as im-
properly put an inscription under it, taken
from





from the acts of St. Paul, to induce us to be¬
fieve, that this apostle, after having met with
an altar, on which was inscrihed, TO THE
UNKNOWN GOD, is here presenting
himself before the judges of the Areopagus,
to give them the knowledge of the God they
were ignorant of, and to instruct them in
te article of the resurrection of the dead,
about which the Epicureans and Stoicks were
then disputing.
AGOSTINO VENETIANO is yet more
grosly mistaken, when, in his print of five
or six of the figures, which are towards the
right-hand in the aforesaid piece, he has
supposed the philosopher, who is writing, to
be St. Maré; and the young man with one
knee on the ground to be the angel Gabriel,
holding a table, on which is engraved the
angel’s salutation — Ave, Maria, &c.
As ’tis needless to spend much time here
in refuting these errors, which are equally
gross, I shall only describe the four cieling
figures, which correspond with the four
subjects painted in the chamber, where this
stands, and which evidently point them
out.
The first represents Tbeology, with these
words — Scientia divinarum rerum, thie
knowledge of things divine.
ThE second is Philosopby, with these
words — Causarum cognitio, the know-
ledge of causes.





The third is Jurisprudence, or Knowlédge
in the law ; with these words-— Jus situmi
unicuique, doing right to every one: And
The fourth reprefents Poesy; with these
words-- Numine afflatur inspired by the
Deity.

Now in the piece called the school of
Athens, the figure of Pbilosophy is placed
uppermost; and therefore it cannot be
doubted but that this painting represents
Philosopby, as will appear more clearly from
the particular description l am going to give
of it.
The scene opens with a building of mag-
nificent architecture, consisting of arcades and
pilasters, and so disposed as to render the
prospect of them gradually diminishing, and
the break advantageous, and to give a grand
idea of the subject. The place is filled with
philosophers, mathematicians, and others,
who give themselves up to the sciences; and
as it is only through a course of time, that
philosophy is come to that degree of per-
fection in which we see it, Raphael, who had
a mind to represent this science by an af-
sembly of philosophers, could not effect it
by putting together only those of one age.
The painter’s intention was, not to compose
a simple history, but an allegory, where the
diversity of times and countries, does not
hinder the unity of the subject. Raphael
has taken this method in drawing the three
other



other pictures in the same chamber to wit,
theology, jurisprudence, and poesy. In the
first of which we see the several fathers of
the church; in the second, the lawyers; and
in the third, the poets of all ages.
FroM the disposition of the sigures in
this piece, and from the nature of their seve-
ral employments, we may safely conclude,
that it must be a meeting and society of
men, possessed of several parts of know-
ledge, such as the philosophers ; nay, we
discover among them Pythagoras, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotie and their disciples; and
mixed with them we see persons employd
in mathematical sciences.
In the middle of the piece are placed,
uppermost, the two most celebrated philo-
sophers of antiquity, Plato and Aristotle
the former holds, under his left-arm, a
book, the stalian word for the title of which
is written, Timeo, Platos finest dialogue;
and as this book treats mystically of natural
things compared to divine, this philosopher
has his right-arm raised, and points with it
to heaven, as the supreme cause of all
things.
On the left-side of Plato is his disciple
Aristotle, holding a book on his thigh, on
which is written the word Ethica, or, the
science of manners, to which this philosopher
chiefly applied himself; and his arm, being
stretched out, gives him the attitude of a
peace-





peace-maker, and a moderator of the pas-
sions ; a character perfectly agreeable to
moral philosophy.
ON each side of these two great philoso-
phers are their disciples, of all ages, so art-
fully grouped and disposed, as to set off the
two heroes of the piece to great advantage ;
and tho the attitudes of these disciples are
very different, yet they all shew a great
attention to the words of their masters.
BEHINp Platos hearers is Socrates,
turned towards Alcibiades, who is opposite
to him ; both are in profile. the former is
known by his bald head, and flat nose; and
the latter is a handsome young inan, in
a warrior’s dress, with his flaxen hair flowing
on his shoulders; his armour edged with a
gold ornament, and one hand on his side,
and the other on his sword : and as he was
both a philosopher and warrior, he gives
great attention to the discourse of Socrates;
which the latter enforces with very expressive
action; he extends both his hands, and takes
with his right the tip of the first singer of
the left, to shew that he is explaining and
illustrating his thoughts, so as to make them
thoroughly understood, while all his disciples
are attending to what he says.
NEXT to Alcibiades is Antisthenes the
currier, in whom Socrates discovered so great
a propensity to philosophy, that he instructed
him in the principles of it, and Antisthe-
nes,




nes; quitting his trade, became a famous
professor of moral philosophy, upon which
he wrote thirty-three dialogues, tis he who
is the chief of the Cynick sect. The painter,
to vary his figures, and give them motion,
has set, behind Alcibiades, a man turning
about, and holding out his hand, to call,
fater the Italian manner, and hasten à ser-
vant, who brings a book, and a great roll
of papers, to which the antients gave the
name of Volumes; and behind the servant
appears the face of another, who with his
and to his cap, seems respectfully to an-
wer the person who calls.
Among Aristotle’s disciples, Raphael has,
in like manner, displayd their attention to
their master’s words : One among the rest,
having understood the demonstrations of
Archimedes is leaving, according to the
Greek custom, the Mathematick school, to
go to that of Pbilosopby; and meeting with a
person on the way, he inquires of him where
the science may be learnt, and is directed to
Aristotle and Plato.
Hard by this figure is a studious young
man leaning upon the base of a pilaster;
with his legs across, and writing down, on
paper, what he wants to learn ; while an
old man, learning on the same base, and
resting his chin on his hand, is seriously
weighing what the young man has been
riting.





AMong other figures that terminate thio
side of the picture, is (4) Democritus, wrapt
up in his cloak; he walks in the asfembly,
after the manner of blind men, by the help
of his stick ; for near the end of his life he
blinded himself of his ewn accord, that he
mighe not be disturbed in his philosophical
contemplations. The painter may have re-
presented him in a great old age, to shew that
a man should labour, even to his grave, to
i 1fori and undeceive himself.
In the group, on the right-side of the
piece, and on the first ground, ’tis easy to
discovet Pythagoras seated, who writes the
principles of his philosophy, taken from
che harmonick proportions in musick. Next
to him is a young man holding a table, on
which are, in Greeè characters, the accords
and consonances of singing, which are read
cus: — Diapente, Diapason, Diates-
saron— terms well known to able mu-
ficians. It is even said, that this philo-
sopher is the author of the demonstration
of these consonances, of which Plato, his
disciple, formed the accords and barmonick
proportions of the soul.
PYTHAGORAS sits profile-wise, with a
book in his lap; he appears intent upon
shewing the relation of mufical numbers to
(a) Cic. de finito bon. et mal. 1. v. V. 29. Idem
I. V. Tusc. 79. Aal. Gel. X. c. 17. ex Laborum
mimis.
the.



the science of natural things. Near to him
are his disciples Empedocles, Epicharmes, Ar¬
chitas; one sitting by his master, and bald-
headed, writes on his knee, having his ink-
horn in one hand, and his pen held up in
the other, his eyes very open, and mouth
shut, to shew him very careful not to let any
of his master’s writing be lost.
BEHINd this philosopher, another dis-
ciple, with his hand on his breast, comes
forward to lcok into the book ; he has a cap
on, his chin is shaved, but he has a bold
pair of whiskers, and his cloak is clasp'd.
All this decoration probably tends only to
shew the variety Raphael always aimed at
in his works.
BEHIND this group, are seen the face and
hand of another philosopher, who, some-
what stooping, opens his two first fingers, as
if he was reckoning, after the Italian man-
ner, and seeming to explain the Diapason,
which is the double consonance described by
Pythagoras.
In a corner of the piece is a person shaved,
with a book resting on the pedestal of a
column, in which he is earnestly writing.
This figure is thought to be the portrait of
some officer in the pope’s palace ; because he
is crowned with oak-leaves, which were the
device of pope Julius II. to whom, as his
benefactor, and the reviver of the golden age





in Italy, with regard to the fine arts, Raphael
dedicated this work.
HARD by, and at the extremity of the
picture, we see an old man, with a little
boy in his arms, who, in a manner suitable
to his age, reaches out his hand to a book
wherein the old man is writing. It looks as
if he had brought the boy thither purely to
discover whether he had any inclination for
the sciences; intimating, that we cannot too
soon discover and cultivate the talent which
nature has given us.
On the side of this group of figures, ap-
pears a young man, of a noble mien, in a
white cloak fringed with gold, with his hand
on his breast. This is believed to be Fran-
cisco Maria de la Rovere, the pope’s nephew
and that he is introduced into the piece on
account of the love he had for the fine
arts.
A little more before Pythagoras, an¬
other of his disciples, with one foot on a
stone, and his knee raised, appears with a
book in one hand, and copying with the
other some remarkable passages, which he
would reconcile with his master’s sentiments.
This man may well be taken for Terpander
or Nicomachus, or some other disciple of
Pythagoras, who believed that the motion
of the stars depended on mufical principles.
MOrE forward, we see a philosopher by
himself, leaning with his elbow on a marble
base ;




base; has a pen in his hand, and looks
stedfastly upon the ground, as if he was
intent upon the solution of some great diffi-
iculty ; he is coarsely clad, and his stoekings
hang out his heels, to shew that philo-
sophers little regard dress, and place all their
pleasure in reflection, and the improvement
of their understanding.
On the second step appears Diogenes by
himself, half naked, and with his cloak
slung back: and by himn is his dish, as his
badge of distinction. His attitude is negli-
gent and becoming a Cynick, who is so
much taken up with morality, as to despise
wordly pomp and grandeur.
On the left side, are seen several mathe-
maticians, whose science, though it consists
of what falls under the senses, yet has a re-
lation to philosophy, which considers things
intellectual. The first of these persons is
Archimedes, under the likeness of the archi-
tect Bramante ; he stoops, and. with arms
bending downwards, is measuring, with the
compasses, an bexagonal figure, composed
of two equilateral triangles, and seems to
demonstrate some property of it to his
scholars. He has about him four disciples
well-made, who in different actions discover
eitheir ardent desire to learn, or the
pleasure they have in conceiving what they
are taught. They are painted youthful, be-
cause it was necessary to learn the mathema-
ticks,





ticks, before one could proceed to philosophy.
The first of them has a knee on the ground,
his body bent, and his hand on his thigh,
and the fingers spread ; he is attentive to the
aforesaid demonstrative figure. The second
disciple, who stands behind him, rests his
hand on his companions. back, thrusts out
his head, and earnestly observes the motion
of the compasses. The two other disciples,
next to Archimedes, are advanced very for-
ward to see commodioussy. The foremost.
having a knee on the ground, turns about
and shews the figure to the person behind
him; who, stooping, discovers to us, by his
arms crossed and advanced, his admiration,
and the pleasure he sinds in instruction:
Vasarz will have this to be the figure of
Frederick Il. duke of Mantua, who was
then at Rome.
BEHINp Archimedes are two philoso-
phers, one holding the celestial globe, and
the other the terrestrial ; the first, by his
garb, seems to have some relation to the
Chaldaeans, the inventors of aftronomy; and
the other, who turns his back, and has a
royal crown on his head, is presumed to be
Zoroaster king of the Bactrians, who was
a great astronomer, and great philosopher.
These two sages are conversing with two
young men, who are at the corner of the
picture, one of whom is Raphael himself.
IN




In this learned, sublime and judicious
manner has Raphael chosen his subjects, and
thus produced one of the finest inventions of
the ’kind that ever appeared: But, not con-
tent to illustrate his subject by the several
persons who enter into it, he was also de-
sirous, that the statues and bas-reliefs, which
adorn thé architecture, should contribute to
the richness and expression of his thoughts.
Accordingly the two statues, one on each
side the picture, are those of Apollo and Mi-
nerva, the deities who preside over arts and
sciences. In the bas-relief, under Apollo’s
figure, is represented the emblém of zraf-
cible and concupiscible passions ; tne one by a
furzous man, who outrageoussy insults all he
meets with; and the other by a Triton, em-
bracing a nymph’ on the element which gave
birth to Venus. And as vice is only to be
subdued by virtue, which is its opposite,
the painter has, in the bas-relief, under Mi-
herva’s figure, placed Virtue sitting on the
clouds, with one hand on her breast the
seat of valour, and indicating to mortals, by
the sceptre in her other hand, the power of
her empire. Near her is the figure of the
Lion in the zodiack, the emblem of force,
which, in the moral science, can only be
gained by good habits.
THUs has Raphael, with a beauty of
genius, delicacy of thought, and solidity of
judgment, set before us the allegorical subyect

of philosopby.
UE







OF
DISPOSITION.
1
IN my division of painting, Ihave assigned
to composition, which is the first part of
it, two things; to wit invention and
disposition; and in treating of invention, I
have shewn, that it consists in finding objects
proper for the subject the painter would re-
present. If they are not well distributed, the
composition will never give full satisfaction
to the unbiassed spectator nor have a ge-
neral approbation. But however advanta-
geous the subject be, however ingenious the
invention, however faithful the imitation of
the objects chosen, oconomy and good order
is what gives a value to every thing; and, in
the fine arts, draws attention, and fixes it,
till the mind is replenished with whatever,
in such a work, can both instruct and please :
And this aconomy I properly call disposition;
in which are six parts; viz.
I. The distribution of objects in general -
2. The grouping:
3. The choice of attitudes :
4. The contrast :
5. The





6. The cast of draperies : And,

6. The effect of the whole together ;
where I shall occasionally speak of harmony
and enthusiasm.
ThESE, in their order, I shall examine
as succinctly and clearly as I possibly can.
Of the Distribution of Objects in general.
As the subjects which painters may treat
of are innumerable, it is not possible to- relate
them all here, much less to shew their par-
ticular dispositions : But good sense, and the
nature of the matter, must, in general, de-
termine the artist to assign to his objects such
places as are proper to make the composition
good.
In compofitzon, the painter ought to con-
trive, as much as he possibly can, that the
spectator may, at first sight, be struck with
the character of the subject, or at least may,
after some moments of reflection, take the
principal scope of it. It will greatly con-
tribute to this end, that he place the hero,
and the principal figures, in the most con-
spicuous places ; yet this must be done
without affectation, and in such a man-
ner as the subject and probability require ;
for oconomy, or management, depends upon
the nature of the subject, which may
be either pathetick or gay, heroick or po-
pular, tender or terrible; in short, the pic-
ture must have more or less motion, as its
subie ct




subject is more or less stirring or still. As
the subject points out to the artist the proper
ceconomy in the disposition of objects, so
distribution, in its turn, wonderfully con-
tributes to the expression of the subject,
gives both force and grace to what is in-
ven ted, prevents confusion in the figures, and
makes every thing in the picture more clear
more apparent, and more capable to pro-
duce the effect above-mentioned, of calling
to aud detaining the spectator.
Of the Grouping.
THE aforesaid distribution of objects does,
in general, respect grouping; and the groups
proceed from the joining of objects together.
Now this joining or combination may be con-
sidered two ways ; either with regard to
design alone, or with regard to the claro-
obscuro ; both of which concur to hinder the
eye from being dissipated, and to fix it
agreeably.
The joining of objects with regard only to
design, that is, without taking in the claro-
obscuro, principally respects human figures,
the actions, conversations, or affinities, of
which often require, that they be near one
another ; but though these circumstances do
not always happen where several persons
meet together; yet it is sufficient, that the
thing be possible, and that there be figures
enongh




enough in the composition of the picture, to
give the painter an opportunity of displaying
his art, and pleafing the eye, by joining the
figures together, when he thinks it agreeable
and probable.
Tis impossible to enter into such a detail,
as to shew how these different kinds of groups
must be managed: The painter must, in this
case, rest upon his own genius and reflec-
tions : Nevertheless, in order to form a just
idea, and good taste of them, he ought to
consult the fine grouping in the pictures of
the best mafters, especially Raphael, Julio
Romano, and Polydore, who have often com-
bined several figures in such manner, as to
discover all the judgment, and all the beau-
ties, that can be desired in grouping. But
before the artist makes this examination, he
must be apprised, that the joining or com-
bination we speak of, derives its best principles
from the choice of attitudes, and fine con-
trast.
Of the Choice of Attitudes.
THE part of painting which falls under-
the word attitude, as it comprehends all the
motions of the body, and requires a perfect
knowledge of ponderation, ought to be tho-
roughly examined in a particular treatise,
that may have a relation to design. And as
it likewise falls within the province of dispo-
sition, with regard to the groups we talk of,





I shall only observe, upon this occasion, that
whatever attitude be given to the figures, let
the subject be what it will, this attitude
must shew their beautiful parts, as much as
the subject will permit; and must, besides,
have such a turn, as without departing from
probability, or from the character of the
figure, may diffuse a beauty over the action.
In effect, there is nothing in imitation,
H
ut what is susceptible of some grace, either
by the choice, or by the manner of imitating.
1
nere is a graceful exprefsion of the vices,
as well as of the virtues. The outward
actions of a soldier have a particular grace,
which would ill become a woman; as the
actions of a woman have a grace, which
would not become the soldier. In fine, the
each object, and chiefly depends upon its
sex, age, and condition, is the foundation of
good choice, and the source of the graces
proper for each figure. Tis easy, therefore,
to observe, that the choice of fine attitudes
makes the greatest part of the beauties of
grouping. Let us now see, what affistance
the contrast affords in this point.
Of the Contrast.
IF in grouping the attitudes must not be
repeated in the same view, and if diversity
be a part of the graces of nature, those






graces can’t be better discovered than in the
variety and opposition of motion.
ThE word contrast is not much in use,
except among painters, who took it froni
the Italians. It signifies an opposition
among objects with regard to lines, which
either wholly or partly compose them. It
takes in not only the different motions of
figures, but also the different situations of
the members, and of all other objects which
meet together ; yet in such manner, as to
appear without affectation, and only to give
more energy to the expression of the subject.
Now, the painter who disposes his objects to
advantage, contrastes not only his figures,
but also inanimate objects, that by such con-
trast he may breathe into them a kind of
life and motion: Contrast, therefore, may
be defned to be such an oppositzon of lines
that form objects, as makes those objects set
off one anotber
This opposition, if well expressed, gives
life to objects, commands attention, and in-
creases that gracefulness which is necessary
in groups, at least in those that relate to
design, and the conjunction of attitudes.
WE have before observed, that the first
sort of groups, as relating to design, princi-
pally belongs to human figures; but those
groups which relate to the claro-obscuro,
take in all sorts of objects. They require
not only a knowledge in the lights and shades
of




of every particular object, but also in the

effects which those lights and shades are ca-
pable of producing by their asfemblage or
union; and it is this which is properly called
the- art of the claro-obscuro ; which I shall
treat of with as much exactness as possible,
when I come to speak of colouring.
Of the Cast of Draperies.
A 8 the chief beauty of draperies lies in
a proper cast or distribution of the folds, and
as they are of frequent use in grouping, this
subject must needs be considered as depend-
ing partly on disposition. I therefore refer to
what I shall say hereafter on the subject of
Draperiès.
Of the Whole together
THE last point depending on disposition
is, the whole togetber which is the result of
the parts that compose the piece; but the
whole, arising from the combination of se-
veral objects, must not be like a number
made up of several unities, independent and
equal among themselves, but like one poeti-
cal whole, where the great have need of the
lower people, and these have need of the great.
All the objects, lines, colours, lights and
shades, of a picture, are great or small,
strong or weak, only by comparison; but,
let




let their natures, qualities, or conditions, be
what they will, they have such a relation to
one another in their combination, as no one
in particular can supersede: For the effect
of the whole consists in a general subordina-
tion, where the darks heighten the lights, and
the lights set off the darks, and where the
merit of each part is founded. on a. mutual
dependence. So that we may define the
whole together to be, Such a general subor-
dination of objects one to another, as makes
them all concur to constitute but one.
Now this subordination, by which se-
veral objects concur to make but one, is
founded on two principles, viz. The satis-
faction of the eye, and the effect of vision.
And this I shall explain.
The eye has this in common with the
other organs of sense, that it cares not to
be obstructed in its office; and it must be
agreed, that a great many people, met in one
place, and talking together at the same time,
and with the same tone of voice, so as that
no one in particular could be distinguished,
would give pain to those who heard them :
It is just so in a picture, where many objects,
painted with equal force, and illuminated by
the same light, would divide and perplex
the sight, which, being drawn to several
parts at once, would be at a loss where to
fix ; or else, being desirous to take in the
whole




whole at one view, must needs do it imper-
fectly.
Now, to hinder the eye from being dis-
sipated, we must endeavour to fix it agree-
ably, by a combinâtion of lights and shades,
by an union of colours, and by oppositions
wide enough to support the groups, and give
them repose. But where the picture has
several groups, one of them must predomi-
nate in force and colour; and besides, de-
tached objects must be so united with their
ground, as to make but one mafs, that may
serve as a rèpose to the principal objects:
The satisfaction of the eye is therefore one
of the foundations upon which the unity of
objects in painting depends.
The other foundation of this same unity
is, the effect of vision, and the manner of
its operation. Now the eye is at liberty to
see all the objects about it, by fixing succes-
sively on each of them; but, when ’tis once
fix’d, of all thofe objects, there is but one
which appears in the centre of vision, that
can be clearly and distinctily seen;. the rest,
because seen by oblique rays, become obscure
and confused, in proportion as they are out
of the direct ray. This truth appears as oft
as we direct our eye to any object: I suppose
my eye, for instance, at A, plate. I, directed
to the object B, by the strait line AB. Tis
certain, that if l do not move my eye, and
yet would observe the other objects, which
can































can only beeen by oblique lines to the right
and left of AE, I shall find, that though
they are all in the same circular line, and at
the same distance from my eye, yet they
decrease, both in force and colour, in pro-
portion as they recede from the strait line,
which is the centre of vision: Whence it
follows, that vision proves the uinity of an
object in nature.
NOw if nature, which is wise, and which
. in supplying our -wants accompanies those
supplies with pleasure, thus brings several
objects into one glance of the eye, so as to
make them but one, sne instructs the painter
to take the same method, in such mannêr as
his art, and the natire of the subject, will
I
permhit. This observation seëms to me not
unworthy of His notice, if he would emhploy
liis art for the satisfaction of thé eye, after
the examiple of nature whom he imitâtes.
ANother experimient may be made by
thè convex mirrour which improves upon
nature as to the unity of the object in vision-
All objects that afe seen there with one
glance of the eye make together one whole,
and a whole much more agreeable than that
which the fame objects would produce in an
ordinary glafs, or, f will venture to say, even
in nature itself. I suppose this convex mir-
rour to be of à reasonable size, and not one of
those, which, being segments of a small circle,
impair the forms of objects too much. Let






me observe, by the way, that glasses of this
sort, which are become pretty rare, might
be usefully consulted, for particular objects,
as well as in general, for the whole together
AfTer all, the painter must consult him-
self in his undertakings ; for if his work be
large, he may compose it. of several groups,
which may, after the first view be capable
of fixing the eye, by the help of well-ma¬
naged reposes, and become in their turn so
many centres of vifion. Thus the judicious
painter ought to contrive so, that after the
first view, let his work be ever so large, the
eye may take it in successively.
IT remains that we now speak of a won-
derful effect, which the whole together pro¬
duces, and it is that of putting all the objects
into harmony. For harmony, where-ever
it appears, proceeds from arrangement and
good order. There is a harmony in moral
as well as in natural philosophy; in the con-
duct of human life, as well as in the pro¬
portions of the human body; and, in short,
in every thing that consists of parts, which,
however different from one another, yet
agree to make but one whole, more or less
general. Now, as this order must be sup-
posed to exist in all parts of painting sepa¬
rately, we must infer, that each part has its
particular harmony. But it is not enough,
that each part has its particular arrangement
and propriety ; they must all agree together
in




in the, picture, and make but one harmo-
nious whole; in the same manner as it is
not enough, in a concert of musick, that
each part be heard distinctly, and follow the
particular arrangement of its notes; they
must all agree together in a harmony which
unites them, and which, out of several par-
ticular wholes, makes but orie whole that is
general. This is what painting does, by the
subordination of objects, groups, colours, and
lights, in the general, of a picture.
ThERE are in painting several sorts of
harmony; the sweet and the temperate, as
usually practised by Correggio, and Guido
Reni; and the strong and great, as that of
Giorgione, Titian, and Caravaggio. And
these may be in different degrees, according
to places, times, light, and the bours of the
day. Great light, in a close place, produces
strong shades ; the same, in an open country
requires broken colouring, and sweet shadow-
ing. In short, the skilful painter knows
what use he ought to make, not only of the
seasons of the year, but of the times of the
day, and of the accidents that happen, either
in the skies, or on the earth, in order to
bring all, as we have said, into one har-
monious whole.
ThIS is the idea l have conceived of what
is called, in painting, the whole together-
And I have endeavoured to make it under-
stood as a machine, whose wheels give each








other mutual assistance, as a body, whose
members have a mutual dependence; and,
in short, as an harmonious oconomy,
which stops and entertains the spectator, and
invites him to please himself with con-
templating the particular beauties of the
picture.
If we do but a little reflect on what I
have said of disposition, we shall find, that
this part of painting, as it includes, a great
many others, is of very great consequence ;
because it gives a value to every thing that
invention has supplied it with, and to every
thing that is most proper to make an impres-
sion upon the eye and the mind of the
spectator.
Able painters may know by their own
experience, that, in order to succeed in so
refiried a part, they must rise higher than
ordinary, and, as it were, be transported out
of themselves; which gives me occasion to
say something here of enthusiasm, and the
sublime.
Of Enthusiasm.
ENTHUSIASM is a transport of the
mind, which makes us conceive things after
a sublime, surprising, and probable manner.
Now as he who considers a work, is raised
to that degree of elevation, which he finds in
it, so. the transport of mind, which comes
up




up to enthusiasin, is common both to the
painter, and the spectator ; yet, with this
diffèrence, that it has cost the painter a course
fo labour, and repeated efforts, to heat his
imagination, and bring his work to the per-
fection of enthusiasin; whereas the spectator,
without having the trouble to examine par-
ticulars, finds himself transported at once,
without his knowledge, and, as it were,
without his consent, to that degrae of en-
thusiasm, which the painter inspires.
ThoUgh truth always pleases, because
tis the basis of all perfcction, yet ’tis often
insipid when it stands alone; but, joined to
enthusiasm, it raises the soul to a kind of
admiration, mix'd with astonishment; and
ravishes the mind with such violence, as
leaves it no time to bethink itself.
I hAVE comprehended the sublime in the
definition of enthusiasm, because it is the
effect and production of it: Enthusialin com-
prehends the sublime, in the same manner as
the trunk contains the branches, which it
sends forth on all sides, Or rather, enthu-
siasm is, as it were, the sun, which by its
heat, and vivifying influence, produces ele-
vated thoughts, and brings them to such a
state of maturity, as we call the sublime.
But as entbusiasin, and the sublinie, both tend
to elevate the understanding, we may con-
clude them to be of the same nature; with






this difference, that enthusiasm is a rapture
that carries the soul above the sublime, of

which it is the source, and has its chief effec
in the thoughts and the whole together of a
work: Whereas the sublime is perceived
equally, both in the general, and in the par-
ticulars, of all the parts. Enthufiasm, be-
sides, has this peculiarity, that its effect is
more instantaneous ; whereas the sublime
requires, at least, some moments beforê it
can be seen in all its force.
ENTHUSIASM elevates insensibly, and
transports us, as it were, from one country
to another, without our perceiving it, other-
wise than by the pleafure it causes. In short,
enthusiasm, methinks, seizes us, and we seize
the sublime. Tis therefore to this surprifing
but just and reasonable pitch, that the
patinter, as well as the poet, must raise his
work, if he would attain to that extraor-
dinary probability which shakes the heart,
and gives both painting and poesy their
6
reatest merit.
Some fiery genius’s have mistaken the
sallies of their imagination for real enthusiasin,
though, at bottom, the abundance and vi-
vacity of their productions are but the
dreams of sick persons. Some whimsical
dreams would, indeed, if a little tempered,
give much genius to- the composition of a
picture, and agreeably rouse the attention :
Poetick fictions, as Plutarch says, are but
the




the dreams of a waking man, But we may
say likewise, that some productions are only
the dreams of a man in a burning fever,
which have no connexion, and the dan-
gerous extravagance of which ought to be
avoided.
It is certain, that men of a fiery genius
easily give into enthufiasm, because theit
imagination is almost always upon the
stretch ; but such as burn with gentle fire,
and have but a moderate vivacity, joined
with a sound judgment, may slide into enthu-
siasm by degrees, and even make it more
regular by the solidity of their parts. If
they do not so easily and so readily enter
into this fury of the painter, they suffer it
at least to seize them by little and little;
because their reflections have enabled them
to see and to feel every thing, and because
there are not only many degrees of enthu-
fiasm, but likewise many ways of attaining
it. If painters of this sort have a written
subject to handle, they ought to read it over
and over with application; and, if it be not
written, it is proper they should chuse,
from among the qualities of the subject, such
as will best furnisn them with circumstances
for setting their parts at work, and keeping
them in motion. And when they have thus
warmed their imagination, by the elevation
of their conceptions, they will at length
arrive




arrive at enthusiasm, and fill the spectator
with admiration.
To dispose the mind to enthusiasm, ge-
nerally speaking, nothing is better, than to
view the works of great masters, and to read
good authors, either historians or poets, be-
cause of the elevation of their thoughts, the
noblenefs of their expression, and the power
which examples have over the human mind.
LONGINUS *


in his treatise on the
Sublime, advises those who are to write any
thing that requires the great and the wonder¬
ful, to look upon great authors, as à taper to
enlighten them; and to afk themselves -—-
Honp would Homer bave expressed this 2
Hou would Plato, Demosthenes, or Thucy-
dides, bave turned itè The painter accord-
ingly may, upon the like occasions, afk
himself— Hoie would Raphael, Titian, or
Correggio, have concerved, designed, ordered,
and painted, what l am going to repréfent à
Or else, as the same Longinus says, Let us
suppose à tribunal of the greatest masters,
before whom we must give an account of our
performance, what ardor would not the
painter feel on the bare thought of seeing such
excellent men, who are theobjects of his ad-
miration, and confidering them as his judges3
These hints are of use to all painters;
they will inflame those who are born with a
* Chap. 12.
power-




powerful genius; aijd even those, to whom
nature has not been so liberal, will by this
means feel at least some degree of heat
diffusing itself in their works.
I HAVE endeavoured to shew in dis-
coursing of invention, after what manner
we must chuse objects suitable to the sub-
ject; and I have now speaking of dispo-
sition, shewn the order in which those objects
must be ranged, so as to compose one ad-
vantageous whole. Thus, by joining toge-
ther invention and disposition, I have endea-
voured to give the best idea l could of that
important part of painting which is called
composition.
Answers to some Objections.
AMONG the objections which may be
made to what I have been observing, I find
two, which it is very proper to answer; one
is against the unity of the object, and the
other against enthusiasmn.
With regard to the former, it may be
urged, that the demonstration which has
been given of vision, to establish the unity
of the object, intirely destroys it, because
tis not necessary to confine the eye ; since,
in any part of the picture, to which it is
carried, it will naturally fix itself, and there-
by make an unity of object, without the aid
of the principles of art.




Of DISPOSITION.
To this I make two answers: First,
That ’tis not proper to leave the eye at li-
berty to gaze at random; because if it should
happen to be detained on any one side of the
picture, this will frustrate the painter’s in-
tention, who, according to the best ap-
proved probability, must needs have placed
his chief objects in the middle, and the by-
objects towards the sides of the picture, And
with good reason ; since upon such dispo-
sition often depends the knowledge of the
whole thought of the picture-: Whence it
follows, that the eye must be fixed, and that
the painter ought to determine it to settle on
that part of his piece, which he thinks most
proper for the effect of the whole.
ThE second answer is, That, with respect
to the senses, all objects of pleasure require
not only the agreeablenefs they have received
from nature, but also the help of art, to
make their effects more lively.
By the second objection it may be insi-
nuated, that enthusiasm often carries some
genius’s too far, and makes them infensibly
pass over many faults. But the answer is
easy ; such a transport is not true enthusiasm
because it exceeds the bounds of that exact-
ness and probability which I lay down. I
own, indeed, that one of the effects of en-
thusiasm is, that it often hides some fault
by means of the transport it generally causes:
But this is no great misfortune; for, in fact,
enthusiasm,




enthusiasm, with some faults, will always
be preferred to a correct mediocrity ; be-
cause it ravishes the soul, without giving it
time to examine any thing, or to reflect on
particulars; and yet, properly speaking, this
effect proceeds not so much from enthusiasm,
as from our minds, which sometimes, when
they are transported, exceed the bounds of
probability.
Ir it be still objected, that all I say of
enthusiasm may be ascribed to the sublime,
I answer, That this depends on the idea
which every one fixes upon these two words ;
and I shall at all times be ready to grant,
that they are much the same, notwithstand-
ing any difference I have made between
them.
OF




















Of Design
THE word defign, as it relâtes to
painting, is taken in threë diffefent
senies : First, it signifies the intire thought
of a work, lighted, shaded, and sometimes
even-coloured ; and, in this sense, it is not

considered as one of the parts of painting,
but only as the idea of the picture whiéh the
painter has in his thoughts. Secondly, it
signifies the representation of some part of an
human figure, or of an animal, or of a
piece of drapery ; all taken from the life,
in order to be put into some part of a
picture, and to stand for an evidence of
truth; and, in this sense, it is called study.
Lastly, it is taken for the boundary or out-
line of objects, for the measures and pro-
portions of exterior forms: And then ’tis
reputed one of the parts of painting.
Now if design be, as it really is, the
circumscribing of exterior forms, and if 1t
reduce them to such measures and propor-
tions as are proper for them, we may truly
say, that ’tis a fort of creation, which begins






to fetch, as out of notbing, the visible pro-
ducts of nature, which are the object of
painting.
Upon the subject of invention, we ob-
served, that it was the first in the order of
execution: But it is not the same in the
order of study ; for design must be learsied
before every thing, as it is the key of the
fine arts, as it gives admittance to the other
parts of painting, and is the organ. of the
thoughts, the instrument of our demonstra-
tions, and the light of ourunderstanding. The
young painter therefore ought not only to
begin with this part but to be thoroughly
master of it, that he may the more easily ac-
quaint himself with the other parts, of which
fhis is the foundation. Now, if design be
the. basis of painting, it follows that we can-
not bestow too much pains on making it
solid, that it may be able to sustain a
building which consists of so many parts as
that of painting.
I CONSIDeR design as consisting of
several parts, extremely necessary for every
one who desires to be an able artist; the
chief of which are, correctness, good taste,
elegance, character variety, expreffion, and
perspective.






CORRECTNESS is a term com-
monly used by painters to exprefs the con-
dition of a design which is faultless in its
meafures. This correctness depends on the
exactness of proportions, and the knowledge
of Anatomy.
There is à general proportion, founded
on the measures which are most proper to
constitute a good figure: We ought therefore
to study those authors who treat of Pro-
portzons, and have laid down the general
measures of human figures ; such authors,
I mean, as have thoroughly consulted na-
ture, and the sculptures of the antients.
BuT, as in each species which nature pro-
duces, she is not limited to one fort of ob-
ject only, and as diversity constitutes one
of her greatest beauties ; so there are parti-
cular proportions, which principally relate
to sexes, ages and conditions; and which,
even in these, admit of an infinite variety.
As to particular proportions, nature has fur-
nished as many as there are men in the
world ; but in order to make them just and
agreeable, we must have recourse to the
antique only, which is derived originally
from nature itself, and therefore may be set
up as a model, and will give a solid idea of
the beautiful variety.






SEVERAL able painters have measured
the antique statues in all their parts, and have
imparted to their pupils their studies on this
subject; but if their remarks have not been
made either publick or exact enough, we
have, in France, a more than sufficient
number of elegant antiques, either originals,
or moulded copies ; where every one may
find the lights and particulars necessary for
his instruction.
ThIS, however, is certain, that it is im¬
possible to reap any benefit from the measures
of the antiques, till we have studied them
with exactness, drawn after them with at-
tention, and, after obstinate practice, com-
mitted them to our memory. Vasari re-
oorts a faying of Michael Angelo; That
the compasses ought to be in the eye, not in the
hand. This fine remark has met with good
reception among all the painters ; but nei-
ther could he have made it, nor they have
propagated it, if they had not previously sup-
posed a thorough knowledge in the finest
proportions.
But we must not only take from the
antique the finest proportions, but every
thing else that may tend to the sublime, and
&
)
to perfection. Tis therefore necessary to
form as clear an idea of it as possible, sup-
ported by reason : For this purpose I shall
consider the antique in its origin, beauty,
and usefulness.









Of the Origin of the Antique.
THE word Antique originally signifies
any thing that is antient ; but we shall here
confine it to the works in fculpture, made in
the age when great men flourished, which
was that of Alexander the Great, when the
fine arts and sciences were in their per-
fection. I shall forbear to trouble the reader
with the names of the first sculptors, who,
through a long feries of time, brought
sculpture from its cradle, to fuch a perfection
as merits the name of Antzque, which it
now bears.
ThE praises which were in those times
bestowed on fine works, increased the num-
ber of good sculptors ; and the many statues
erected to the honour of fuch persons as
distinguished themselves by their merit, as
well as the idols with which they adorned
their temples, furnished still more matter
for great geniuses to work on, and to finish
their works in emulation of each other.
It was in those days that Polycletus, one
of the greatest of the antient Greeé sculptors,
refolved to make a statue which should have
all the proportions of a man perfectly werl
shaped : For this purpose he made use of
many patterns of nature. After he had
brought his work to the last perfection, it was
so rigorously examined by men of skill, and
there-




thereupon celebrated with so many encomi-
ums, that, by common consent, this statue
was called The Rule ; and became a general
model to all those who wanted to perfect
themselves in the art. And ’tis very pro-
bable, that this experiment having succeeded
in one sex, gave birth to several essays, not
N
only in the other, but even in the differeni
ages and conditions of persons.
IF Iam not mistaken, it is to this Poly-
cletus we may reasonably afcribe those mar-
velous works which we call Antiques, since
they were then brought to the degree of per-
fection in which we now see them. The
sculptors of those times continued to give
proofs of their skill, down to the reign of
the Emperor Gallienus, about the year 360 ;
when the Goths, who had no knowledge of
the fine arts, nor any regard for them,
ravaged all Greece. But since we look upon
the proportions of the antique as the
models of perfection, this naturally leads us
to speak
Of the Beauty of the Antique.
SOME have asferted, that the beauty of
the human body lies in a just agreement of
the members with each other, so as to make
a perfect whole. Others place it in a good
constitution, and vigorous health of body ;
where the motion and purity of the blood






diffuse on the skin such colours as are
both lively and fresh. But, according to
general opmnion, there is no definition of
the beautiful : Beauty, say they, is nothing
real ; every one judges of it according to
his own taste, and ’tis nothing but what
pleases.
Be it as it will, people are very little
divided in their sentiments about the beauty
of the Antique. Men of understanding, and
lovers of the fine arts, have always had a-
value for these incomparable works; that is,
not only in our days, when they are become
fcarce, but even in those times, when all
places were full of them, and when, as it
were, they peopled Greece and Rome. We
find, in antient authors, many passages,
which, in order to praise living beauties,
compare them to statues. The sculptors,
says Maximus Tyrius, by an admirable arti-
fice, chuse out of several bodies those parts
wbich seem to them the most beautiful, and
put all this variety together into one statue,
but this mixture is made with so much judg-
ment and propriety, that those artists seem to
bave no other model than one whole and perfect
beauty. And we must not think, says tne same
auchor, ever to find a natural beauty that can
dispute the prize with statues. Art has also
something more perfect than nature. Ovids
in the XIIth book of his Metamorpbosis, descri-
bing Cyllarus, the handsomest of the cen-






taurs, says, That so great was the vivacity
of his countenance, and his neck, shoulders,
hands, and breast were so handsome, that
whatever be had of man, might be affirmed to
be of the same beauty which is observed in the
most perfect statues. And Philostratus, speak-
ing of Euphorbus, says, That his beauty had
won the hearts of the Greeks ; and that it
came so near to the beauty of a statue, that
he might be taken for Apollo. And lower
mentioning the beauty of Neoptolemus, and
his likeness to his father Achilles, he inti-
mates that, in beauty, his father was as
much superior to him, as statues are to
bandsome men.
It was not among the Greeés alone, that
statues were erected to men of merit, and
converted into idols ; the Romans took the
same way to reward great actions, and to
honour their gods. The Romans, after con-
quering Greece, brought away not only their
finest statutes, but also their best workmen,
These instructed others, and have left to
posterity everlasting proofs of their skill;
as appears from many admirable statues,
busts, vafes, and bas-reliefs ; and from the
fine Trajan and Antonine columns. All
these antiquities we must look upon as
the genuine sources to which both painters
and sculptors must have recourse, in order to
diffuse a solid beauty over what their own
genius may suggest to them.









MODERN authors entertain the same
sentiments of the beauty of the antique: I
snall only quote Scaliger. Is it possible,
says he, to see any thing come up to the per-
fection of fine statues, since art has à liberty
of chusing, retrenching, adding and directing,
whereas nature has been always changing for

the worse ever since the creation of the first
man, in whom God joined the beauty of
form to that of innocence 3
Extract of a Latin
MS. of Rubens,
concerning the Imi¬
tation of the An-

tique Statues.

To some painters
the imitation of the
antique statues has
been extremely use
ful and to others per
nicious, even to the
ruin of their art. I
conclude, however
that in order to attain
the hightest perfection
in painting, it is ne
cessary to understand
the antiques nay to
be so thoroughly pos
sessed of his knowledge









that is may
diffuse itself everywhere.
Yet it must
be judiciously applied
and so that it may not
in the least smell of the stone. For several
ignorant painters, and even some who are
skillful, make no distinction between the
matter and the form, the stone and the
figure, the necessity of using the block, and
the art of forming it.
It is certains, how
ever that as the finest
statues are extremely
beneficial, so the bad
are not only useless
but even pernicious.
For beginners learn
from then i Know not
what that is crude
liny, stiff, and of
harsh anatomy; and
while they take them
selves to be good pro
ficients do but dif
grace nature since in
stead of imitating flesh
they only represent
marble tinged with
various colours. For
there are many things

















to be taken notice of and avoided which happen even in the
best statues, without the workman's fault: especially with regard
to the difference of shades; where the flesh, skin and cartilages, by their diaphanous nature
soften, as it were, the harshness of a great many out-lines, and
wear off those rugged breaks, which in statues, by the force
and depth of their shade make the stone, tho very opaque
appear still more opaque and impenetrable to light
than it really is. There are, besides, certain places






















in the natural,



which change their
figure according to the various motions of the
body, and, by reason of the flexibility of
the skin, are sometimes dilated, and af
other times contracted. These are avoided by
the generality of sculptors ; yet are some-
times admitted into use by the most excel¬
lent,




lent, and are certainly necessary to painting;

but must be used with moderation. To this
we must add, that not only the snade, but
also the lights of statues are extremely dif-
ferent from the natural; for the gloss of
the stone, and sharpness of the light that
strikes it, raise the surface above its pro-
per pitch, or, at least, fascinate the eye.
Ea quisquis sapien¬
He who has, with
discernment,made the
 proper distinctions in
these cases, cannot
consider the antique
 à statues too attentively
 study them too
 he carefully ; for we of
 this erroneous age, are
so far degenerate, that
we can produce no-
 thing like them t
Whetherit is,that our

groveling genius will
 not permit us to soar
to those heights which

the antients attained
 by their heroick sense,
and superior parts; or
that we are wrapt up
 in the darknefs that
overclouded our fa-
thers; or that it is the

will




 wiil of God, because
we have neglected to
amend our formet
 errors, that we should
 fall from them into
 worse; or that the

world growing old,
 our minds grow with
 it irrecoverably weak,
or, in fine, that na-
 ture herself furnished
 gi- the human body, in
 those earlyages, when
 itwas nearer its origin

and perfection, with

every thing that could
make it a perfect mo-

del; but now being
decay’d and corrupted by a succession of so
many ages, vices, and accidents, has lost its
efficacy, and only scatters those perfec-
tions among many, which it used formerly
to bestow upon one. In this manner, the
human stature may be proved from many
authors to have gradually decreased : For
both sacred and profane writers have related
the age of heroes,
many things concerning
giants, and Cyclopes, in which accounts, if
there are many things that are fabulous,
there is certainly some truth.





The chief reason
 why men of our age
 are different from the

antients, is floth, and
- want of exercise; for
most men give no
 other exercise to their
body but eating and
 drinking. No wonder
therefore, if we see so
 many paunch-bellies,
weak and pitiful legs

and arms, that seem
 to reproach themselves
 with their idlenefs :
 Whereas the antients
 exercised their bodies
every day in the aca-
demies, and other
 places for that pur-
 pose, and exercised

them so violently as

to sweat and fatigue

them, perhaps, too
much. See in Mer-
 curialis de arte gym-

how many

various exercises they
 took, how difficult,
and what vigour of
constitution they re-
 quired. Thus all those






 parts of the body
which are fed by idle-
- ness were worn away,
the belly was kept
within itsbounds, and
what would have
 otherwise swelled it
 was converted into
 flesh and muscles :
 For the, arms, legs,
t neck, shoulders, and
 whatever works in the
 body, are asfisted by
 exercifse, and nourisn’à
with juice, drawn in-

thus increase exceedingly both in strength and
size ; as appears from the backs of porters,
the arms of prize fighters, the legs of dan-
cers, and almost the whole body of watermen.
Thus far Rubens; and I have given his
own words for authorizing the truth of what
l have extracted from his manuscript, which
is in my possession.
In fine. The praises of the knowing,
the testimonies of authors, and the general
esteem of the most famous ages, which are
the strongest vouchers for the antique, tend
all to establish this single reason for the
beauty of it ; towit, because it is founded
on




on the imitation of beautiful nature, suited
to the object which is to be represented.

The several characters observed in the finest
antiques are, those of a God, an Hero, and
an ordinary person ; accordingly, we see in
Apollo, divinity; in Hercules, extraordinary
strength; and in Antinous, human- beauty.
SOme may say, that the taste for an-
tique, which appears to be founded on the
common consent of knowing men, did,
however, suffer a change in the times of the
Goths. I answer, that the Gothick manner
was introduced at a time when the wars
having destroyed the fine arts, workmen had
no other objects to revive them by, than the
imitation of such natural ones as casually
offered ; and as to embellishing them, they
employed their imaginations rather in such
difficult things as they believed would gain
them repute, than in cultivating good taste,
to which they were utter strangers.
The Goths cannot therefore be said to
have departed from the antique, because
they rejected, but because they were not at
all acquainted with it. All arts began with
the imitation of nature, and have been
brought to perfection only by good choice.
This choice, which is found in the antique,
has been made by men of excellent judgment,
who aimed at glory; by the way of science;
and, in order to attain it, examined the most
perfect natural patterns, in a country productive
of




of handsome men, and at a time that abounded
with great geniuss, when the fine arts were
assiduoussy studied, thoroughly examined,
and brought to à degree of perfection, which
is at this day the object of our astonishi-
ment.
WhAT more could be done to give pof-
terity a great idea of the antiqueà An idea
not derived from an insipid practice, or
from an overdoing manner which scholars
take from masters of a narrow mind, and
middling capacity; but springing originally
from nature, where truth appears in all
its purity, elegance, grace, and force, with-
out ever departing from its simplicity. It is
therefore the interest of all those who design
to look upon the naked antique, as nature
purified, and as the most certain rule of
perfection.
BUT as ’tis in vain to desire to profit by a
bare sight of fine things, if we do not well
conceive them, so it is impossible thoroughly
to understand the beauty of the antique,
any more than the truth in nature, without
the help of anatomy. We may, indeed, by
seeing and designing the antique, acquire a
certain greatness of design, and, in the main,
get a practice tending to good taste and de-
licacy; but these advantages, if void of
knowledge and principles, can only dazzle
the spectator by a specious shew, and by ill-
placed remembrances of things. A man
may


7




may be in raptures on seeing the sine works
of antiquity, and yet be far from knowing
the genuine source of those beauties which
he admires, at least, if he be ignorant of
that fundamental part of design, anatomy.
Ir then anatomy be the basis of design,
and enable us to discover the beauties of the
antique, I cannot but observe, that, the
knowledge of so much of it as the painter
and sculptor require, is easily attained; and
that the neglect of this attainment procëeds
only from its being thought to lead towards
dryness of design, and pedantry of manner.
But a little reflection will make it appear to
be far from corrupting the solid basis of
truth, and of correctness of out-line purity,
or spoiling the connexion of the muscles.
I FORMERLY writ, under a borrowed
name (a), An abridgment of anatomy, fot the
use of painters and sculptors, where the
demonstrations are very plain : I shall here
give some part of it, in order to facilitate
this science; and the rather, because those
who have need of it, imagine it to be
difficult.
Of Anatomy.
ANATOMY is a knowledge of the
parts of the human boay, but that re-
(a) Abregé d’Anatomie, par Tortebat.
lates




lates only to painters, who have need of
the bones, and the principal muscles that
cover them ; two points which are easily
demonstrable. Nature has furnished us with
bones forthe solidity of the body, and strength
of the members: To them she has fixed
the muscles, as exterior agents, to draw
them whither she pleases: The bones de-
termine the measures of length, and the
muscles those of bigness in the parts of
nature ; at least, ’tis the office of the mus¬
cles to settle the form and exactness of out-
lines.
36.
is indispensably necessary to be well
acquainted with the forms and joints of the
bones, because motion often alters their
measures ; and likewise to understand the
situation and office of the muscles, since the
most striking truth in design depends upon
them.
ThE bones of themselves are motionless,
and stir only by the help of the muscles.
The muscles have their origins and insertions.
By their origins they are fastened to a bone,
which they were never intended to stir; and,
by their insertions, to another bone, which
they draw when they please towards their
origins.
EVeRY muscle has its opposite muscle;
when one acts, the other yields, like well-
buckets, one of which descends as the orher
comes up; the acting muscle swells, and







ontracts next to its origin, the other that
obeys, dilates and relaxes.
The largest bones, and which are moved
with the greatest difficulty, are covered with
the largest muscles; these are often aided
by others, which are designed for the samc
office, and thereby increase the force of
motion, and make the part more apparent.
SEVERAL painters, by overswelling the
muscling, have thought to gain the reputation
of being skilful in anatomy, or at least would
shew that they were masters of it; but
they have shewn, by this means, that
they little understood it; since they seem to
be ignorant, that there is a skin which
covers the muscles, makes them appear more
gender and easy, and is a part of the
human body, and confequently of anatomy.
This truth is sufficiently proved by the
bodies of women and children, which are
is fully muscled as those of the most robust
persons.

THE authors of the antique figures have
not made a wrong use of their profound
knowledge in this part, by making the muscles
appear more than was prudent and necessary;
and their exactness, in this respect, shews
the attention they thought due to anatomy.
In short, how is it possible to judge of the
truth or falsity of an out-line, if we know
not for certain to what degree the mus-
cle, which makes it, ought either to swell







or relax, according to its office and degree.
of action. We often see, as has been said.
before, that, for want of this knowledge,
some persons, who admire an antique sta-
tue, do it for no other reason, than because
-
tis antique. And if you afk, why the out-
line of a figure of their ovn making is thus.
or thus, they can only answer, that they
saw it so in nature. And this is the case of
young people, and of. those who have no
morê knowledge than what they have derived.
from bare. practice.
We often observe, in the naked parts of
antique figures, and even in nature itself
certain swells, the reason of which we
cannot discover, without considering the situ-
ation and office of the muscle which is the.
cause of them. But the skilful in anatomy
see all in seeing a part, and know how to
remove from the eye what the skin and fat
seem to conceal, and what is hid to those
who are ignorant of this science.
I HAVE now said enough to fhew that
’tis impossible to be truly fkilful in design,
without a clear and distinct knowledge in
anatomy, as it relates to painting and scul¬
pture ; and this may be attained with little
trouble,: if we would not rather produce
monsters, than bestow some attention on so
necessary a point. As for the demonstrations,
I refer the reader to my aforesaid Abridgment
of anatomy.
of





Of Taste in Design.
The goût or taste is an idea, either
suiting the natural inclination of the painter,
and formed by education. Every school
has its taste in design, and, since the re-
establishment of the fine arts, that of
Rome has always been thought the best, as
being founded on the antique: which is-
most proper for forming a taste in design,
as I have a little before endeavoured to
Of Elegance.
elegaNCE in general is a manner
either of speaking or making things with

good choice, politeness and agreeablenefs,
with good choice, in rising aboye what na-
ture and painters usually produce: with po¬
liteness in giving such a turn to things, as
may strike men of delicate taste; and with
agreebleness in diffusing such a general re-
lish, as may please, and be within the reach of every one.
eleganCE is not always founded on
correctness, as appears appears from the antique, and
from the works of Rapbael. Tis often seen
in works, either incorrect, or otherwise
slighted; as in Correggio where, notwith-
standing his incorrectness in design, his ele-
gance
H 2




gance in the taste of it,,and in the turn
which he has given to his actions, must needs
be admired: In short, Correggzo rarely de-
parts from elegance.
BuT the elegance which is supported by
correctness of design, as it prefents to us an
image of perfection, so it answers fully our
èxpectation, fixes our attention, and elevates
the mind, after having struck it with an
agreeable astonishment.
EleGANCE of design may be further
defined to be a manner of embellishing ob-
jects, either in form or colour, or both,
without destroying the truth.
ELEGANCE, with respect to design, ap-
pears more eminently in the antiques, than
in any of the great painters who have imi-
tated them ; among whom, by general con-
sent, Rapbael is the chief.
Of the Characters.
IS not correctness only that gives spirit
to painted objects, but ’tis also the manner in
which they are designed. Every kind of object
requires a different mark of distinction ;

stones, waters, trces, hair, fcathers, and,
in short, all kinds of animals, must have
their different touchings, in order to express
the spirit of their characters; and even
naked human figures have their particular
marks of distinction. Some, to imitate flesh,
give,




give, in the extremities, an inflective stroke,
which has this spirit: Others, to imitate the
antique, shew, in their extremities, the
regularity of statues, that they may not
lose any of their beauty: We even observe
in the designs of the great masters, that, in
order to express the passions: of the soul,
they had made certain strokes familiar to
them, which exhibited their ideas in a more
lively manner than the painting itself.
THE word expression, in painting, is
usually confounded with paffion ; but their
difference is, that expression is a general
term, signifying the representation of an
object, according to its character and nature,
has a mind to give it, for the benefit of his
work: And passion, in painting, is an emo-
tion of the body, attended with certain
strokes or lines in the face, denoting an agi¬
tation of the soul. Thus, all paffion is ex-
pression, but all expression is not passion-
is no object in a picture which has not its
expression.
I MiGhT here treat of the passions of
the soul, but have found it impossible to give
such particular demonstrations of them, as
inight be of much service to painters; on the
contrary, Iconceive, that if they were fixed
by certain strokes, which the painter should
he obliged to make use of as essential rules,
this






this would be depriving the art of that ex-
cellent variety of expression; which has no
other principle than diversity of imagiations,

ne number of which is infinite, and pro-
ductions as new as the thoughts of men are
various. The same paffion may be finely
expressed several ways, yielding each more
or less pleasure in proportion to the painter’s

understanding, and the spectator’s discern-
ment.
In the paffions, there are two forts of
emotion; one lively and violent, and the other
sweet and moderate: Quintilian calls the
former pathetick, and the latter moral : The
pathetick commands, and the moral per-
suades: The one brings trouble, and shakes
the heart ; and the other calms the mind ;
and both require much skill to be well
expressed.
ThE pathetick is founded on the most
violent paffions ;: as hatred, wrath, envy,
compassion., The moral inspires mildnese,
tenderness, and humanity. The former pre-
vails in combats, and unforeseen and mo-
mentary actions ; and the latter in conver-
sations ; and both require a decorum and
propriety in the figures which compose the
scene.
Le BRUN has publissied a treatise of the
paffions; the definitions of which he has
taken mostly from what Descartes has writ-
ten of them. But that philosopher treated
only




only of the emotions of the heart, whereas
apinters want what appears in the face.
Now even if those emotions of the heart
dlid always produce tlie passions, according
to the definitions ’that are given of them, its
hard to know how those emotions constitute
thé lines in the face, by which they are re-
presented to the eye : Besides, the defini-
tions of Descartes are not always accommo-
dated to the capacities of painters ; who are
not all philosophers, though, in other re-
spects, they may not want sense, and good
natural parts. It is sufficient for them to
know, that the paffions are the emotions of
the soul, which is seized with certain sen-
timents at the sight of some object, without

waiting for order, or the judgment of reason.
The artist ought to consider this object with
attention, and endeavour to make it al-
ways present in his mind, and to afk himn-
self, What he would naturally do, if scized
with the same passion; Nay, he should do
inore ; he ought to put himself in the placc
heat or cool his imagination to such a degrec
of liveliness or calmness, as that passion re-
quires after it is thoroughly felt. The look-
ing-glass is a great help in this matter, and a
person, duly informed of the case, mighit
very well serve for a model or figure.
But it is not enough, that the painter
himself feel the passions of the soul ; he must






make them felt by others; and, among the
many characters by which one particular
passion may be expresed, he must chuse such
as he judges most proper to affect chiefly
men of understanding; which cannot be
done, in my opinion, without exquisite sense,
and sound judgment ; for nothing interests
the sgectator more in favour of the picture,
than tlie painter’s hitting his taste.
I.E BRUN’s demonstrations are certainly
.rned and fine, but too general : They
rtizty Ideed be of service to most painters ;
but yet other expressions of the passions may
be found as beautiful as Le Brun’s, though,
in this respect, he has been very happy.
GENERAL expressions are therefore use-
ful, because the particular ones proceed from
them, as the branches of a tree shoot from the
trunk. I would therefore advise every painter
to study them, and to mark on paper, with
a crayon, the lines or strokes which form
them; and, for this purpose, to copy after
the antiquc, and after nature, in order to
form such a general idea of the principal
passions as may suit his genius. For we all
think differently, and our imaginations are
according to the nature of our constitutions.
Tho the pafsions of the soul are most
visible in the lines of the face, they often
require the assistance of the other parts
of the body ; for, when the subject requires
the expression of some essential part, if- you
touch




touch the spectator but faintly, you give him
a coldness that disgusts him; whereas, if you

souch him to the quick, you give him an
infinite pleasure.
The head contributes more to the ex-
pression of the paffions, than all the other
parts of the body put together. These sepa-
rately can only shew some few passions, but
the head shews them all. There are some,
however, peculiar to the head; as humility
when it hangs down ; arrogance, when
it lifts itself up; languishiing, when it leans
on one side ; obstinacy, when, with a stub-
born and rigid air, it stands upright, fixed,
and stiff, between the two shoulders. Others
may be more easily express’d than described;
as shame, admiration, indignation, and doubt.
The head best shews our supplications,
threats, mildness, haughtiness, love, hatred,
joy, sadness, humility . In short, the face
discovers things in half-speech; its redness
and paleness, as it were, speak to us, as well
as the mixture of both.
ALl parts of the face contribute towards
expressing the sentiments of the heart : But
the eyes especially; which are, as Cicero
says, the windons of the soul. The paffions
they most particularly discover are, pleasure,
languishing, scorn, severity, mildness, ad-
miration, and anger; to which we might
add joy and grief, if they did not proceed
more particularly from the eye-brows and
mouth: But, when those two passions fall





in also with the language of the eyes, the
harmony will be wonderful.
The nose shews no passion in particular,
but asfists the other parts of the body by
raising the nostrils; which is as much an
expression of joy as of sadness. Yet scorn
raises the tip, and swells the nostrils, drawing
the upper lip up to the corners of the mouth.
The antients made the nose the seat of derision
— Eum subdolae irrisioni dicaverunt—
says Pliny. They also placed anger there ;
as in Persius-— Disce, sed tra cadat naso.
rugosaque sanna— But I take the nose to
be the seat of anger rather in beasts than
men ; and that it is only becoming in the
god Pan, who partakes very much of the
nature of the beast, to wrinkle up his nose
when he is angry, as other anials do, and
as Philostratus reprefents him, when the
nymphs tied him, and offered him a thou-
sand insults.
ThE motion of the lips ought, in com-
mon discourse, to be moderate ; because a
man rather speaks with his tongue than with
them; and the mouth must not be very
open, unless to express some violent passion.
A s for the hands, they obey the head, and
become its weapons and aid in time of need :
Action is weak, and, as it were,half dead, with-
out their assistance; their motions, which aré
almost infinite, create numberless expres-
fions, Is it not by them that we desire, hope,





promise, call, send back ' Are they not
the instruments of threatening, prayer, hor-
ror, and praise : Do we not by them approve,
refuse, fear, afk, express our joy and grief,
our doubts, regrets, pain, and admiration ;
In a word, we may affirm, since they are
the language of the dumb, that they con-
tribute not a little to speak a language
common to all nations, which is that of
painting
To say how these parts must be disposed
for expressing the various pafsions, is impos-
sible ; nor can any exact rules be given for
it, both because the tafk would be infinite,
and because every one must be guided in
this by his own genius, and the particular
bent of his studies. Let it be only remem-
bered, that the actions of the figures must be
perfectly natural. I cannot but think, says
Quintilian, speaking of the paffions, that
this part, though so fine and great may pos¬
sibly be attained, and that there is a road
which leads easily to it, and it is the study and
imitation of nature: for the spectators are
satisfied, when, in artificial things, they see
nature as she usually appears to them. In
effect it is not to be doubted, but that the
emotions of the soul, as seen in art, are never
so natural as those in the heat of a real
passion.
The best way to express the motions na-
turally is, for the artist to entertain the same
sentiments,




sentiments, and to fancy himself in the same
circumstances with the person he would
represent. For nature says Horace, lays
our mind open to all forts of chances , some-
times we have content; at other times we are
swelled with anger , sometimes we are intirely
weighed down with mortal disquiets, and then
the motions of the heart swell outwardly by
means of the tongue, which is its interpreter
Instead of the tongue, let the painter say, 6y
means of the actions, which are her- inter
preters—-How is it posfible, says Quintilian,
to give warmth to any thing, if you bave not
that warmth in yourselfe We must first be
touched ourselves with a pafsion, before we
can affect others with it. And hou must we
move and affect ourselves, continues he, since
the passions are not in our power à It is thus,
if Imistake not We must form to ourselves
the appearances and images of things absent,
as if they were really before our eyes ; and he
who forms and conceives those images with the
greatest force, will exprefs the paffions with
most advantage and facility. But let tne
artist take care, as we have already said,
that, in these images, the motions be natural ;
for some think they give much life to
their figures, in giving them violent and
forced actions, which we may rather call
contorsions of the body, than passions of the
soul: Thus are they at great pains to find out





some violent passion, where only a moderate
one was proper.
App to what is above, that great regard
must be had to the qualities of the persons
that are pafsioned : The joy of a king must
not be like that of a footman, nor a soldiers
nettle like that of a captain. And, in these
distinctions, consists the true discernment of
the paffions.
EVERY body is sensible, that the imi¬
tation of the visible objects in nature lies in
design and colouring. I have explained my
thoughts of the former in speaking of cor-
rectnefs of design, founded on the beauties
of nature, and the antique, and on the
assistance of anatomy. I have touched on
taste, diversity, elegance, character, and the
expression of the passions, according to the
relation which all these bear to design.
It only remains now to speak of colouring,
and to add what I have to say at present to
what I have formerly written on this head :
For the rest, if I have omitted any thing
that has a relation to design, I have done
it, because others have treated of those things
with success; and because it would be tire-
some to repeat what they have written, un-
less l could better illustrate it.










DRAPERIES.
DIVERSITY of climates, change of

seasons, and their inconstancy, have

laid. men under the necessity of cloathing
themselves, This necessity has beer accom-
modated to the rules of decency, and. de-
cency has given rise to various ornaments
invented for enriching dress, according to,
the taste of different nations, and the mode.
of different times. But as the use of stuffs
has been applied to many other things besides,
clothing, painters have comprised them all:
under the word Drapery.; and when they
would describe an artist who makes a proper
distribution of the folds, they say, He knows,
how to cast a drapery well. Now this
phrase of casting a. drapery is the more-
just, as the disposition of the folds ought
rather to seem the effect of mere chance,
than of labour and study : As there is skill
therefore in the adjustment of the draperies,
we shall endeavour to shew where it lies,
and of what consequence it is in painting.





The art of drapery is chiesly observed in.
hree things; viz.
I. The order of folds.
2. The diversity of: stuffs.
3. The variety of colouring in stuffs.
Of the order of Folds.
A 8 the eye must never be in doubt of its
object, the chief effect of draperies is, to
make us understand what they cover ; espe-
cially the, naked parts of figures; in such
manner, that the outward characters of per-
sons, and the exactnessof proportions, may
appear through them, at least in the main,
and as far as probability and art will permit:
Accordingly, after the example of the greatest
masters, the painter, before he disposes his
draperies, ought to draw his figures naked,
in order to prevent any doubtful meaning in
the folds, and that the eye may imagine it
sees what he conceals by the cast. of his
draperies. He must also take care, that the
drapery sit not too close to the partsof the
but that it seem to flow round, and,
body,
as it were, caress them, and that the figure
be easy, and have à free motion.
Let not the draperies which cover those
members, that are exposed to great light,
be so deeply shaded as to seem to pierce
them.; nor let those members be crossed
by




by folds, which are too strong; lest, by
the too great darkness of their shades, the
members look as if they were broken ; but,
retaining a small number of folds, let the
painter nicely distribute among them such a
degree of light as suits the whole mafs, of
which they are a part.
FoLps should be great, and as few as
possible , a maxim that chiefly contributes
•
to what is called the grand manner, be-
cause great folds do not so much divide the
sight, and their rich simplicity is most sus-
ceptible of great lights. We must never-
theless except such drapery as requires much
plaiting ; as it often happens in that of
women, and as we see in many an-
tiques ; for, in such cases, the painter
ought to groupe his folds, and range them
at the side of the members, which are
thus rendered more apparent and more
pleasing.
CONTRAST, which is so necessary in
the motion of figures, is as proper in the
order of the folds; for contrast, by break-
ing the lines which would otherwise have
too great tendency one way, raises in the dra-
peries, as well as in the figures, a fort of
contradiction, that seems to animate them :
The reason is, that contrast is à kind of
war, that puts the opposite parts in motion.
Accordingly, in proper places, the folds






ought not only to contraste themselves, but also
the members of the figures, when those folds
are great, and a part of a large drapery ; for as
to the under draperies, which stick more closely
to the naked figure, they are more apt to take
the shape of it, than to give it any contrast:
WHATEVER life the contrast may add to
draperies, and however necessary it may be
to make them pleasing, the painter must yet
make use of it with great prudence and pre-
caution. For; in upright figures; it often
happens, that the contrast cannot be practised,
without departing from probability. And in
such cases, the painter who knows to turn
every thing to his advantage, betakes him-
self to other principles.
FoLds well imagined give much spirit
to any kind of action ; because their motion
implies a motion in the acting member,
which seems to draw them forcibly, and
makes them more or less stirring, as the
action is more or less violent,
FoLps should be great according to the
quantity and quality of the drapery; and when,
through the slightness of stuffs, we are obliged
to use much folding, it must be so grouped
that the claro-obscuro may not suffer by it.
A JUDICIOUS repetition of folds, in a
circular manner, is a great help to the effect
of fore-shortenings.
IT’s sometimes proper, in certain parts,
to put out some folds, and put in others
more




more suitable to the painter’s intention,
either for spreading of light, or for silling
up the vacancies of some attitudes, or for
accompanying the figures, or for making
a sweet ground to them, or for hindering
their turnings from ending too quick, and
looking too harsh and unfinisned.
Rich ornaments make a part of the
beauty of draperies, when used with discre-
tion. But such ornaments ill become divini-
ties, and are always beneath the state and
dignity of heavenly figures ; whose draperies
ought rather to be rich in the greatneis and
noblenefs of the folds, than in the quality of
the stuff.
FoLDS made by mere practice, and
without the help of the natural, are usually
proper only for a single design; but, in
order to perfection, the painter should al-
ways consult the stuffs themselves ; because
in them the folds are true, and the lights
agreeable to the nature of the stuffs. I
would not however, blame those who have
acquired so great an experience in the na-
ture of folds and qualities of stuffs, as to
be capable, by memory, to express most of
them well.
To imitate truth justly, draperies ought
either to be set on a layman as big as the life,
or else upon the life itself; but care must
be taken, that such draperies have nothing
of the immobility of the layman.





SOMe painters make use of small lay-
men, on which they set either thin stuffs, or
wet papêr: But tho’ this method may be
useful to able artists, and is very good,
where a whole story is to be put together,
it can’t be so useful for particular draperies ;
because the stuffs, not having the same
weight as in the larger laymen; can’t shew
the folds in their true shapes.
Light and flying draperies become only
figures in great motion, or in the wind ; but
when in a close place, and free from violent
action, their draperies must be large; and by
their contrast, and fall of the folds, shew
grace and majesty.

Tis a great fault to make draperies too
heavy and cumbersome: they ought to be
suitable to the figures ; and ’tis wrong to
think, as some have done; that the larger
they are, the more they are grand and
majestick. A profusion of stuffs, on the
contrary, is an hindrance to the motion of
the figures, and rather embarasses them,
than makes them majestick.
These, I think, are the principal obser-
ations relating to the order of folds . I pro-
ceed, secondly, to speak
Of the Diversity of Stuffs.
AMONG the many different things
hat please in the composition of a picture,






variety of draperies is not the least consi-
derable. The order and contrast of folds
have indeed their share; but it is not enough,
that the stuffs themselves be variously cast,
they must also be of various forts, as far
as the subject will admit: Wool, linen,
cotton, and silk, as they are manufactured
a thousand different ways, afford the artist a
large field for choice; by which means he
may introduce into his work a diversity.
which is the more necessary, as it makes
him avoid a tiresome repetition of folds of
the same kind, especially when his piece
consists of many figures: Some stuffs natu¬
rally make broken folds, others more soft
and round: Some stuffs are rough-wrought,
others smooth and glossy: Some are thin
and transparent, others more firm and sub-
stantial. And this variety, whether , di-
spersed among many figures, or brought into
one, according to the subject, never fails to
produce a most agreeable sensation.
The general use of the same kind of stuff
in the figures of one picture, is a fault into
which most painters of the Roman school
have fallen, and which all those are guilty of,
who either paint by dint of practice only

or reduce the imitation of nature to an habit
which they have contracted. But the in-
genious painter will seek all opportunities
of introducing into his draperies that happy
diversity I have been mentioning : Let him
re-




remember, however, that itis, above all things,
indispensable, with regard to the difference
of ages, sexes, and conditions.
The antient sculptors were very fkilful
in casting their draperies: But, as the matter
they work’d on was of one colour and the
large folds, which receive the greatest light,
would have often appeared undistinguishable
from the naked paris, or at least have divided
the eye, they were obliged to fix it upon
the naked parts of their figures ; because, in
this case, nothing better could be done for
the advantage of their art. For this pur-
pose, they made use of wetted linen, or-
thin stuffs, which is the usual drapery of-
their statues. This remedy, by the good-
order of their folds, was certainly very in-
genious, and affords much light to those-
who can apprehend the reason of it. In
could produce many examples from anti-
quity in this point; but shall only mention
that of the bas-relief, commonly called,
The Dancing Women. The draperies which
cover the naked parts of those figures, and
shiew, in many seeming folds, those partss
agreeably, terminate behind the body, the-
repetition of which would appear a fault,
to an eye which cannot consider the fineness
and excellence of the work: But if we regard
the sculptor’s purpose, which was, to. shew the
naked partsof those figures with elegance, these
repetitions will be so far from appearing a fault






in sculpture, that they will seem to make à
kind of hatched shading, so dextroussy ma¬
naged as to set off the naked parts, and to give,
at the same time, a repose to the eye.
THUs have the antient sculptors, with
great skill and genius, invented several ways to
remedy the inconveniences jn the matter they
workd on, whether they proceeded fromn
the largenefs of folds, or the variety of the
stuffs with which their figures were cloathed;
having in all other respects, generally speak-
ing, given perfect satisfaction.
BUT painters, who may use all sorts of
stuffs, and, by means of colours and lights,
can skilsully imitate truth, would be as
much to blame, if they followed sculptors in
the multitude and repetition of their folds,
as sculptors would be, if they imitated
painters in the extent of their draperies. I
proceed in the last place to treat
Of the Variety of Colouring in Stuffs.
IF order, contrast, and variety of stuffs
and folds, constitute the elegance of draperies,
diversity of colours in those stuffs contributes
extremely to the harmony of the whole
together, in historical subjects. The artist,
who has it generally in has power to imagine
them as he pleases, must particularly study
the values of his colours when entire, their
effects when placed by one another, and
their





their harmony when broken. But these

points I shall handle in treating of colouring,
and, in the mean time, only here observe,
hat the colouring of draperies gives the
painter an opportunity of shewing all his
skill and address in the claro-obscuro. Titian
made use of this artifice in most of his
pictures ; because he was thereby at liberty
to give his draperies what colour he thought
most proper, either for making his ground,
or for spreading light, or for characterizing
objects by comparison.
BUT, after all, the management of dra-
peries is not so settled, but the painter may
give scope to his genius, in venturing on
unusual folds, which may have their merit.
There is not any effect in nature, where
chance shews more variety than in the cast
of the draperies: And thol art has usually
something to correct in their disposition, yet
chance often furnishes with folds more beau-
tiful and proper, than rules could ever
have produced. In fine, art cannot foresee
every thing: Art goes but a little way be-
yond general things, and leaves to men of
taste the care of supplying every thing else.
It is the painter’s part to make a good choice
of the effects which nature presents, and to
use them so as to diffuse over his performance
the marks of a happy felicity.
A MONg the painters who best underftood
draperies, Raphael, in my opinion, is the
best
.I4




best copy for the order of folds; yet l would
not derogate by this from the merit ef those,
who, withoat departing wholly from Raphael’ s
principles, have successfully taken greater
liberties in the characters of their folds, and
have even accompanied those freedoms with
grandeur and truth. The Vezetian and
Flemisp schools have excelled in shewing the
variety of stuffs; and Paolo Veronese is an
inexhaustible source of examples for an
harmonious variety of colours.
I sAY little of the other great masters in
draperies; the consideration of whose works
will make it evident, that the folds require
both order, and a proper choice ; that thè
difference of stuffs enriches a work, and
supports a necessary probability; and that
variety of colouring in draperies may con-
tribute very much to the effect of the claro-
obscuro, and to the harmony of the whole
together. In short, the works of those ex-
cellent masters will better demonstrate, than
all I can say, wherein the knowledge of
draperies lies, and of what importance it is
in painting.
An Abstract of the preceding Ovser-
vations relating toDraPeriEs.
by the word drapery, in painting, is
 meant all sorts of stuffs, whether

for cloathing or other use ; but, generally
speak-




speaking, it relates to cloathing. In which
art considers, 
I. The order of folds.
2. The diversity of stuffs.
3. The variety of colouring in stuffs,
Of the order of Folds.
THE figure must be designed, before it
be cloathed.

ThE drapery must not sit too close to
the parts of the body; but flow about them,
and, as it were, caress them.
The members must not seem to be broken
by folds too strongly shaded.
ThE folds must be great and few, as far
as the nature of the stuff will admit.
ThE folds must contraste one another,

and also contraste the members.
ThE folds, on many occasions, give life
to the action of a figure.
An y great vacancies in draperies must be
filled up with well adapted folds.
MaSteRS may shew practical folds ;
but, for perfection s sake, we should always
consult the life.
DRaPERiEs set on little laymen- may
be useful, but they are falsifying.
FLYiNgdraperies are proper only in open
places, or where the figure is in great-
motion.
Too much stuff in a drapery encumbers

the figure.





CHANCE often creates such beauties in
the casting of draperies, as art could not
foresee.
PainterS are much obliged to the
antient sculptors for the art of casting dra-
peries ; but the use which either makes of
them, is very different.
Of the Diversity of Stuffs.
IT causes a diversity of folds.
It delights the eye.
It ought to be generally practised, as
well in a single figure as among many,
especially to shew the different ages, sexes,
and conditions of figures.
ThE Roman painters, and those who
paint practically, are usually guilty of re-
peating the same stuffs.
Of the Variety of Colouring in Stuffs.
IT gives a picture harmony.
It characterizes the objects.
It shews the claro-obscuro.
RAPHAEL is the best copy for the order
of folds.
The Venetian and Flemisp schools are
best for the diversity of stuffs. And
PAOLO VERONESE, for the harmonious
variety of their colouring.






OF
LANDSKIP.
LANDSKIP is a kind of painting that
represents the fields, and all the ob-

ects that belong to them. Among all
he pleafures which the different talents of
painting afford to those who employ them,
that of drawing landfkips seems to me the
most affecting, and most convenient ; for,
by the great variety, of which it is suscep-
tible, the painter has. more opportunities,
than in any of the other parts, to please
himself by the choice of his objects. The
solitude of rocks, freshness of forests, clear-
ness of waters, and their seeming murmurs,
extensiveness of plains and offfkips, mix-
tures of trees, firmnefs of verdure, and a
ine general scene or opening, make the
painter imagine himself either a hunting, of
making the air or walking, or sitting, and
giving himself up to agreeable musings. In
word, he may here dispose of all things
o his pléasure, whether upon land, or in
water, or in the sky, because there is not
any




any production either of art or nature, which
may not be brought into such a picture.
Thus painting, which is a kind of creation,
is more particularly so with regard to
landskip.
Anong the many different styles of
landskip, I shall confine my self to two ;
the heroick, and the pastoral or rural ; for
all other styles are but mixtures of these.
THE heroick style is a composition of-
objects, which, in their kinds, draw, both
from art and nature, every thing that is-
great and extraordinary in either. The,
situations are perfectly agreeable and sur-
prising. The only buildings, are temples,
yramids, antient places of burial, altars
consecrated to the divinities, pleasure-houses
of regular architecture: And if nature ap-
pear not there, as we every day casually see
ner, she is at least represented as we think
she ought to be. This style is an agreeable
illusion, and a fort of inchantment, when
handled by a man of fine genius, and good
understanding, as Poussin was, who has so
happily expressed it. But if, in the course of
this style, the painter has not talent enough
to maintain the sublime, he is often in
danger of falling into the childish manner.
The rural style is a representation of
countries, rather abandoned to the caprice
of nature than cultivated: We there see
nature simple, without ornament, and with-
out






out artifice ; but with all those graces with
which sne adorns herself much more, when
left to herself, than when constrained by
art.
In this style, situations bear all sorts of
varieties : Sometimes they are very extensive
and open, to contain the flocks of the shep¬
herds: at others, very wild, for the retreat
of solitary persons, and a cover for wild
beasts.
It rarely happens, that a painter has a

genius extensive enough to embrace all the
parts of painting : there is commonly some
one part that pre-engages our choice, and so
fills our mind, that we forget the pains that
are due to the other parts; and we seldom
fail to see, that those whose inclination
leads them to the beroick style, think they
have done all, when they have introduced
into their compositions such noble objects as
will raise the imagination, without ever
giving themselves the troublé to study the
effects of good colouring. Those, on the
other hand, who practise the pastoral, apply
closely to colouring, in order to represent
truth more lively. Both these styles have
their sectaries and partisans. Those who
follow the heroick, supply by their imagi-
nation, what it wants of truth, and they
look no farther.
As a counterbalance to heroick landfkip,
I think it would be proper to put into the
pastoral,



pastoral, besides a great character of truth,
some affecting, extraordinary, but probable
effect of nature, as was Titian’s custom.
ThERE is an infinity of pieces wherein
both these styles happily meet; and whach of
the two has the ascendant, will appear from
what I have just been observing of their
respective properties. The chief parts of
landskip are, I think, their openings or
situations, accidents, skies and clouds, off-
skips and mountains, verdure or turfing
rocks, grounds or lands, terraces, fabrieks,
waters, fore-grounds, plants, figures and
trees : Of all which in their places.
Of Openings or Situations.
V
THE word site, or situation, signifies the
view, prospect or opening of a country :
It is derived from the Italian word fite ;
and our painters have brought it into use,
esther because they were used toit in Italy.
or because, as I think, they found it to be
very expressive.
SITUATIONs ought to be well put to-
gether, and so disengaged ’in their make,
that the conjunction of grounds may not
seem to be obstructed, tho we should ses
but a part of them.
SITUATIONS are various, and repre-,
sented according to the country the painter
is thinking of: As, either open or close,






mountainous or watery, tilled and inhabited,
or wild and lonely; or, in fine, variegated by
a prudent mixture of some of thefe. But if
the painter be obliged to imitate nature in a
flat and regular country, he must make it
agreeable by a good disposition of the claro-
obscuro and such pleasing colouring as may
make one soil unite with another.
Tis certain, that extraordinary situations
are very pleasing, and chear the imagination
by the novelty and beauty of their makes,
even when the local colouring is. but mode-
rately performed; because, at worst, such
pictures are only look’d on as unfinish’d, and
wanting to be completed by some skilful
hand in colouring: Whereas common situa-
tions and objects require good colouring

and absolute finishing, in order to please.
It was only by these properties, that Claud
Lorrain has made amends for his insipid
choice in most of his situations. But in
whatever manner that part be executed, one
of the best ways to make it valuable, and
even to multiply and vary it without alter-
ing its form, is properly to imagine some
ingenious accident in it.
Of Accidents.
A N accident in painting is an obstruction
of the sun’s light by ghe interposition of
clouds, in such manner, that some parts of
the




the earth shall be in light, and others in
shade, which, according to the motion of
the clouds, succeed each other, and pro-
duce such wonderful effects and changes of
the claro-obscuro, as seem to create so many
new situations. This is daily observed in
nature. And as this newnefs of situations
is grounded only on the shapes of the clouds,
and their motions, which are very inconstant
and unequal, it follows, that these accidents
are arbitrary; and a painter of genius may
dispose them to his ovn advantage, when
he thinks fit. to use them ; for he is not
absolutely obliged todo it. And there have
been some able landskip-painters, who have
never practised it, either thro’ fear or custom;
as Claude Lorrain, and some others.
Of the Sky and Clouds.
THEsky, in painters terms, is the ethe-
real part over our heads ; but more parti-
cularly the air in which we breathe, and that
where clouds and storms are ingendered. Its
colour is blue, growing clearer as it approaches
the earth, because of the interposition of va-
pours arising between the eye and the hori-
zon ; which, being penetrated by the light,
communicates it to objects in a greater or less
degree, as they are moreor less remote.
BuT we must observe, that this light be-
ing either yellow or reddish in the evening;
at




at fun-set, these same objects partake not
only of the light, but of the colour : Thus
the yellow light, mixing with the blue; which
the natural colour of the sky, alters it, and
gives it à tint more or lefs greenish, as the
yellowness of the-light is more or less deep.

This observation is general and infallible;
out there is an infinity of particular ones,
which the painter must make upon the na-
rural, with his pencil in his hand, when,
occasion offers ; for there are very fine and
singular effects appearing in the sky, which
it is difficult to make one conceive by phy-
sical reasons. Who can tell, for example,
why we see, in the bright part of some
clouds, a fine red, when the source of the
right which, plays upon them, is a most
lively and distinguishing yellow; Who can
account for the different reds seen in different
clouds, at the very moment that these reds
receive the light but in one place; for these
colours and surprising appearances seem to
hlave no relation to the rainbow , a phaeno-
menon for which the philosophers pretend
so give solid reasons.
ThESE effêcts are all seen in the evening
when the weather is inclining to change,
either before a storm, or after it, when it is
not quite gone, but has left some remains of
it; to draw our attention.
The property of clouds is to be thin and
iry, both in shape ande colour their shapes,







tho’ infinite, must be studied and chosen
after nature, at such times as they appear
fine. To make them look thin, we ought to
make their grounds unite thinly with them,
especially near their extremities, as if they
were transparent, And if we would have
them thick, their reflections must be so
managed, as, without destroying their thin-
ness,, they may seem to wind and unite,
if necessary, with the clouds that are next
to them. Little clouds often discover a
little manner, and seldom have a good effect,
unless, when being near each other, they
seem all together to make but one object.
In short, the character of the sky is to
be luminous; and, as it is even the source of
light, every thing that is upon the earth
muft yield to it in brightnefs: lf however
there is any thing that comes near it in
light, it must be waters, and polisn’d be-es,
which are susceptible of luminous reflexions.
BuT, whilst the painter makes the sky
luminous, he must not represent it always
shining throughout.
On the contrary, he must contrive his
light so, that the greatest part of it may
fall only upon one place; and, to make it
more apparent, he must take as much care
as possible to put it in opposition to some
terrestrial object, that may render it more
lively,by its dark colour; as a tree, tower, or
some other building, that is a little high.





This principal light might also be
heightened by a certain disposition of clouds
having a supposed light, or a light ingeniously
enclosed between clouds, whose sweet ob-
curity spreads itself by little and little, on
all hands. We have a great many examples
of this in the Flemisp school, which best
understood landskip ; as Paul Bril, Brugel,
Saveri And. the Sadelers and Merian’s
prints give a clear idea of it, and wonder-
fully awaken the genius of those who have
the principles of the claro-obscuro.
Of Off-skips and Mountains.

OFF-SKIPs have a near affinity with-
the sky ; it is the sky which determines ei-
ther the force or faintness of them They
are darkest when the sky is most loaded,
and brightest when it is most clear. They
sometimes intermix their shapes and lights;
clouds pafs between the mountains, whose
ops rise and appear above them. Mountains
hat are high, and covered with snow are
very proper to produce extraordinary effects
on the off-skip, which are advantageous to
the painter, and pleasing to the spectator.
THE disposition of off-ikips is arbitrary
et them only agree with the whole together
of the picture, and the nature of the country
we would represent. They are usually blue,






because of the interposition of air between
them and the eye: But they lose this colour

by degrees, as they come nearer the eye, and
so take that which is natural to the objects.
In distancing mountains, we must ob-
5
serve to join them insensibly by the rounding
, which the reflections make probable;
and must, among other things, avoid a cer-
tajn edginess in their extremities, which
makes thém appear in slices, as if cut with
scifsors, and stuck upon the cloth.
V
vE must further observe, that the air,
at the feet of mountains, being charged
with vapours, is more susceptible of light
than at their tops. In this case, I suppose
the main light to be set reasonably high,
and to enlighten the mountains equally, or
that the clouds deprive them of the light of
the sun. But if we suppose the main light
to be very low and to strike the mountains ;
then their tops will be strongly enlighten'd,
as well as every thing else in the same de-
gree of light.
Tho the forms of things diminish in
bigness, and colours lose their strength, in
proportion as they recede from the first plan
of the picture, to the most remote off-
skip; as we observe in nature and common
practice ; yet this does not exclude the use
of the accidents. These contribute greatly
to Hie wonderful in landfkip, when they are
properly introduced, and when the artist has.
of
a just idea of their good effects.



Of Verdure, or Turfing

I CALL turfing, the greennefs with
which the herbs colour the ground: This is
done several ways; and the diversity pro-
ceeds not only from the nature of plants,

which, for the most part, have their particular
verdures, but also from the change of seasons,
and the colour of the earth, when the herbs
are but thin sown. By this variety, a
painter may chuse or unite, in the same
tract of. land, several sorts of greens inter-
mixed and blended together, which are often
of great service to those who know how to
use them ; because this diversity of greens,
as it is often found in nature, gives a cha-
racter of truth to those parts, where it is
properly used. There is a wonderful ex-
ample of this part of landskip, in the view
of Mechlin, by Rubens.

Of Rocks.
THOUGH rocks have all sorts of shapes,
and participate of all colours, yet there are,
in their diversity, certain characters which
canriot be well expressed without having re-
course to nature. Some aré in banks, and
set off with beds of shrubs; others in huge
blocks, either projecting or falling back ;
others consist of large broken parts, conti-








guous to each other: and others, in short;
of an enormous size, all in one stone, either
naturally, as free-stone, or else through the
injuriès of tiine, which in the course of many
ages has worn away their marks of separation.
But, whatever their form be, they are usually
set out with clefts, breaks, hollows, bushes,
moss, and the stains of time; and these par-
ticûlars, well managed, create a certain idea
of truth.
Rocks are of themselves gloomy, and
only proper for solitudes; but, where accom-
panied with bushes, they inspire a fresh air ;
and, when they have waters, either pro-
ceeding from, or washing them, they give
an infinite pleasure, and seem to have a soul
which aniniates them, and makes them so
ciable.
Of Grounds or Lands.
A GROUNDor land, in painters terms,
is a certain distinct piece of land, which is
neither too woody nor hilly. Grounds con-
tribute, more than any thing, to the gra-
dation and distancing of landskip; because
they follow one another, either in shape, or
in the claro-obscuro, or in their variety of
colouring, or by some insensible conjunction
of one to another.
MULTIPLICITY of grofnds, though it
be often contrary to grand manner, does not
quite




quite destroy it; for besides the extent of
country which it exhibits, tis susceptible of
the accidents we have mentioned, and which,
with good management, have a fine effect.
There is one nicety to be observed in
grounds, which is, that in order to cha-
racterize them well, care must be taken, that
the trees in them have a different verdure
and different colours from those grounds ;
and difference, withal, must not be
too apparent

Of Terraces.
A teRRACE, in painting, is a piece
of ground, either quite naked, or having
very little herbage, like great roads and
places often frequented. They are of use
chefly in the foregrounds of a picture, where
they ought to be very spacious and open,
accidental verdure, and also with some stones,
which is placed with judgment, give a ter-
race a greatter air of probability.
Of Buildings.
painTERS mean by buildings any
structures hey generally represent, but chiefly
such as are of a regular architecture, or at
least are most conspicuous. Thus building
i not so proper a name for the houses of








country-people, or the cottages of shepherds,
which are introduced into the rural taste, as
for regular and showy edifices, which are
always brought into the heroick.
BUILDINGS in general are a great orna-
ment in landskip, even when they are
Gothick, or appear partly inhabited, and
partly ruinous: they raise the imagination
by the use they are thought to be designed
for; as appears from antient towers, which
seem to have been the habitations of fairies,
and are now retreats for shepherds and owls.
POUssIn has very elegantly handled the
Roman manner of architecture in his works,
as Bourdon has done the Gothick ; which,
however Gotbick, ’fails not to give à fub-
lime air to his landfkips. Little Bernard
has introduced into his sacred story, what I
may call a Babylonian manner; which, ex-
traordinary as it is, has its grandeur and mag-
nificence. 1 would not quite reject such
pieces of architecture; they raise the ima¬
gination, and l am persuaded, they would
fucceed in the heroick style, if they were
placed among half-distant objects, and if
we knew how to use them properly.
Of Waters.
MUCHof the spirit of landskip is owing
to the waters which are introduced in it.
They appear in divers manners ; sometimes
impetuous,




impetuous, as when a storm makes them
overflow their banks ; at other times re-
bounding, as by the fall of a rock ; at other
times through unusual pressure, gufhing out
and dividing into an infinity of silver streams,
whose motion and murmuring agreeably de-
ceive both the eye and ear ; at other times
calm and purling in a sandy bed ; at other
times so still and standing, as to become à
faithful looking-glass, which doubles all the
objects that are opposite to it; and, in this
state, they have more life than in the most
violent agitation. Consult Bourdon’s works,
or at least his prints, on this subject-: he is
one of those who have treated of waters
with the greatest spirit, and best genius.
WATERS are not proper for every situ-
ation. But, to express them well, the artist
ought to be perfect master of the exactness
of watry reflexions ; because they only
make painted water appear as real: For
practice alone, without exactness, destroys
the effect, and abates of the pleasure of the
eye. The rule for these reflexions is very
easy, and therefore the painter is the leis
pardonable for neglecting it.
BUt it must be observed, that tho water
be as a looking-glass, yet it does not faith-
fully represent objects, but when ’tis still ;
for if it be in any motion, either in a natural
course, or by the driving of the wind, its
surface, becoming aneven, receives, on its
surges,





surges, such lights and shades, as, mixing
with the appearance of the objects, con-
found both their shapes and colours.
Of the Foreground of a Picture.
A S it is the part of the foreground to
usher the eye into the piece, great care must
be taken, that the eye meet with good re-
ception; sometimes by the opening of a
fine terrace, whose design and workmanship
may be equally curious ; at other times, by
variety of well distinguisned plants, and those
fometimes flowered ; at other times, by
figures in a lively taste, or other objects,
either admirable for their novelty, or intro-
duced, as by chance.
In a word, the artist cannot too much
study his foreground objects, since they at-
tract the eye, impress the first character of
truth, and greatly contribute to make the
artifice of a picture successful, and to anti-
cipate our esteem for the whole work.
I AM sensible, that there are very fine
landfkips, with foregrounds, appearing to be

well chosen, and carrying a great. idea, but
which are, nevertheless, very slightly fi-
nisned : l own, indeed, that this slightness
ought to be pardoned, when it is ingenious;
when it suits with the nature of the ground,
and bears the character of truth : But it
must be owned likewise, that this effect. is
very


OfLANDSKiP. 139
very rare, and that it is to be feared, lest
this slight working should give some idea of
poverty, or of too great negligence: So that
in whatever manner the foregrounds of a
picture be disposed, l would have the artist
prescribe it as a law to himself, to finish them
with skill, and accurate workmanship.
Of Plants.
PLANTS are not always necessary in
foregrounds, because, as we have observed,
there are several ways of making those
grounds agreeable.. But, if we resolve to
draw plants there, we ought to paint them
exactly after the life; or, at least, among
such as we paint practically, there ought to
be some more finisned than the rest, and
whose kinds may be distinguished by the

difference of design and colouring, to the
end, that, by a probable supposition, they
may give the others a character of truth.
What has been said here of plants, may be
applied to the branches and barks of trees.
Of Figures.
IN composing landskip, the artist may
have intended to give it a character agreeable
to the subject he has chosen, and which his
figures ought to represent. He may also,
and it commonly happens, have only thought
of-




of his figures, after finishing his landskip-:
The truth is, the figures, in most landskips,
are made rather to accompany than to suit
them.
I KNow there are landskips so disposed
and situated, as to require only passing fi¬
gures ; which several good masters, each in
his style, have introduced, as Pouffin in the
heroick, and Fouguzer in the rural, with all
possible probability and grace, I know also,
that reszing figures have been made to appear
inwardly active. And these two different
ways of treating figures are not to be blamed,
because they act equally, though in a dif-
ferent manner. It is rather inaction that
ought to be blamed in figures; for in this
condition, which robs them of all connexion
with the landskip, they appear to be pasted
on. But, without obstructing the painter s
liberty in this respect, I am persuaded, that
the best way to make figures valuable is, to
make them so to agree with the character of
the landskip, that it may seem to have been
made purely for the figures. I would not
have them either insipid or indifferent, but
to represent some little subject to awaken
the spectator’s attention, or else to give the
picture a name of distinction among the
curious.
GREaT care must be taken to proportion
the size of the figures to the bigness of the
trees, and other objects of the landskip: If





they be too large, the picture will discover
a little manner; and, if too small, they will
have the air of pygmies, which will destroy
the worth of them, and make the landskip
look enormous. There is, however, a greater
inconvenience in making figures too large,
than too small; becausé the latter at least

gives an air of greatness to all the rest. But
us landskip figures are generally small, they
must be touch’d with spirit, and such lively
colours as will attract, and yet preserve pro-
bability, and a general union. The artist
must, in fine, remember, that as the figures
chiefly give life to a landskip, they must be
dispersed as conveniently as possible.
Of Trees.
I ALWAYS thought, that the beauty of
trees was one of the greatest ornaments of
landskip; because of the variety of their
kinds, and their freshness, but chiefly their
lightness, which makes them seem, as being
exposed to the air, to be always in motion.
THOUGh diversity be pleasing in all the
objects of landskip, ’tis chiefly in trees that it
shews its. greatest beauty. Landskip considers
both their kinds, and their forms. Their kinds
require the painter’s particular study and
attention, in order to distinguisn them from
each other ;. for we must be able at first sight
to discover which are oaks, elms, firs, sy-
camores,




camores, poplars, willows, pines, and other
such trees, which, by a specifick colour, or
touching
, are distinguishable-from all other
kinds. This study is too large to be required
in all its extent; and, indeed, few painters
have attained such a competent exactness in
it as their art requires. But it is evident,
that those who come nearest to perfection in
it, will make their works infinitely pleasing
and gain a great name.
BesiDes the variety which is found in
each kind of tree, there is in all trees a ge¬
neral variety. This is observed in the dif-
ferent manners in which their branches are
disposed by a sport of nature, which takes
delight in making some very vigorous and
thick, others more dry and thin; some more
green, others more red or yellow. The ex-
cellence of practice lies in the mixture of
these varieties. But if the artist can distin-
guisn the sorts but indifferently, he ought at
least to vary their makes and colours ; be-
cause repetition in landskip is as tiresome
to the eye, as monotony in discourse is to
the ear.
ThE variety of their makes is so great,
that the painter would be inexcusable not to
put it in practice upon occasion, especially
when he finds it necessary so awaken the
spectator’s attention ; for, among trees, we
discover the young and the old, the open
and close, tapering and squat, bending up-
wards



wards and downwards, stooping and shoot-
ng. In short, the variety is rather to be
conceived than expressed. For instance, the
character of young trees is, to have long
slender branches, few in number, but well
set out; boughs well divided, and the foliage
vigorous and well shaped: Whereas in old
trees, the branches are short, stocky, thick,
and numerous ; the tufts blunt, and the
foliage unequal and ill shaped : But a little
observation and genius will make us perfectly
sensible of these particulars.
In the various makes of trees, there must
also be a distribution of branches, that has a
just relation to, and probable connexion with,
the boughs or tufts, so as mutually to asfist
each other in giving the tree an appearance
of thickness and of truth. But, whatever
their natures or manners of branching be,
let it be remembred, that the handling must
be lively and thin, in order to preserve the
spirit of their characters.
TREEs likewise vary in their barks,
which are commonly grey; but this grey
which in thick air, and low and marshy
places, looks blackisn, appears lighter in a
clear air. And it often happens, in dry
places, that the bark gathers a thin moss,
which makes it look quite yellow ; so that,
to make the bark of a tree apparent, the
painter may suppose it to be light upon a
dark ground, and dark on a light one.
TRE




The observation of the different barks
merits a particular attention ; for it will
appear, that, in hard woods, age chaps them,
and thereby gives them a fort of embroidery;
and that, in proportion as they grow old,
these chaps grow more deep. Any other
accidents in barks may arise either from
moisture, or driness, or green moffes, or
white stains of several trees.
The barks of white woods will also af-
ford much matter for practice, if their di-
versity be duly studied : And this con-
sideration leads me to say something of the
study of landfkip, which I will do accord¬
ing to my own notion of it, without pre-
tending to prescribe my sentiments to others.
Of the Study of Landstip.
THE study of landskip may be considered
either with respect to beginners, or to those
who have made some advances in it.
BEGInners will find, in practice, that
the chief trouble of landfkip lies in handling
trees ; and it is not only in practice methinks,
but also in speculation, that trees are the
most difficult part of landfkip, as they are
its greatest ornament. But it is only pro¬
posed here, to give beginners an idea of
trees in general, and to shiew them how to
express them well. It would be needless to
point out to them the common effects of trees
and





and plants, because they are obvious to every
one, yet there are some things, which, tho
not unknown, deserve our reflection. We
know for instance, that all trèes require alr,
osme more, some less, as the chief cause of
their vegetation and productions; and for this
season all trees (except the cypress, and
osme others of the same kind) separate in
their growth from one another,
and from
other strange bodies as much as possible, and
their branches and foliage do the same :
Wherefore, to give them that air and thin-
ness, which is their principal character, the
branches, boughs, and foliage,. must appear
to fly from each other, to proceed ffom op-
posite parts, and be well divided. And all
his without order ; as if chancé aided na-
ture in the fanciful diversity. But to say
particularly how these trunks, branches, and
foliages, ought to be distributed, would
be needless, and only a description of
the works of great masters. a little re-
flection on nature will be of more service
than all I can say on this head. By great
masters, I mean, such as have published
prints ; for those will give better ideas to
young copyists, than even the paintings
themselves.
AMong the many great masters of all
schools, I prefer Titian’s wooden prints, where
the trees are well-shaped: and those which
Cornelius Cort, and Agostino Carracche, have
engraved.




engraved. And I say again, that beginners can
do no better than contract, above all things,
an habit of imitating the touches of these
great masters, and of considering, at the same
time, the perspective of the branches and
foliages, and observing how they appear,
either when rising, and seen from below; or
when sinking, and seen from above ; or
when fronting, and viewed from a point; or
when they appear in profile; and, in a word,
when set in the various views which nature
prefents them in, without altering their
characters.
Arter having studied and copied, with
the pen or crayon, first the prints, and then
the designs, of Titian and Carracche, the stu-
dent should imitate with the pencil those
touches which. they have most distinctly
specifech ifschejrppijtingeschnshf piesppeds
but since: they are icaree, others fhouig be
got which have a good character for their
touching; as those of Fouquier who is a
most excellent model : Paul Bril, Breugel,
and Bourdon, are also very good ; their
touching is neat, lively, and thin.
AFter having duly weighed the nature
of trees, their spread and- order, and the
disposition of their branches, the artist must
up the spirit of them throughout, either by
making them apparent and distinct in the
fore-




fore-grounds, or obscure and confused in
proportion to their distance.
After having thus gained some KnoW
ledge in good manner, it will next be pro-
per to study after nature, and to chuse and
rectify it according to the idea which the
aforesaid great masters had of it. As to
perfection iit can only he expected from
long practise and perseverance. This, me-
thinks is what concerns those, who, having
an inclination for landfkip, would take the
proper methods for beginning it well.
As for those who have made some ada
vances in this part of painting, it is pro-
per they should collect the necessary ma¬
terials for their further improvement, and
study those objects at least, which they
shall have most frequent occasion to represent.
Painters usually comprise, under the
word study, any thing whatever, which

they either design or paint separately, after
the life ; whether figures, heads, feet, hands,
draperies, animals, mountains, trees, plants,
flowers, fruits or whatever may confirm
them in the just imitation of nature, The

drawing of these things, I say, is what they
call study; whether they be for instructiop
in design or only to affure them of the
truth, and to perfect their work. Be it as ijt
will this word study is the more properly
used by painters, as in the diversity of






nature they are daily making new discoveries,
and confirming themselves in what they al-
ready know
As the landskip-painter need only study
such objects as are to be met with in the
country, l would recommend to him some
order, that his drawings may be always at
hand when he wants them. 1 could wish,
for instance, that he copied after nature, on
in general, and the different effects of each
kind in particular, with their trunks, foliage,
and colours. 1 would have him also take
the same method with some sorts of plants;
because their variety is a great ornament to
terraces on fore-grounds.
I wOULp have him likewise stady the
effects of the sky in the several times of the
day, and seasons of the year, in the various
dispositions of clouds, both in serene, thun-
dering, and stormy weather. And in the
off-skip, the several forts of rocks, waters,
and other principal objects.
ThESE drawings, which may be made at
times, should be collected together; and all
that relate to one matter, be put into a book,
to which the artist may have recourse at any
time for what he wants.
Now if the fine effects of nature, whe-
ther in shape or colour whether for an intire
picture, or a part of one, be the artist’s
study, and if the difficulty lies in chusing
those





those effects well, he must for this purpose
be born with good sense, good taste, and a
fine genius ; and this genius must be culti-
vated by the observations which ought to be
made on the works of the best masters,
how they chose nature, and how while
they corrected her, according to their art,
they preserved her character. With these
advantages, derived from nature, and per-
fected by art, the painter can’t fail to make
a good choice; and, by distinguishing be-
tween the good and the bad, must needs
find great instruction, even from the most
common things.
To improve themselves in this kind of
studies, painters have taken several methods:
And, Ibelieve, it will not be here imper-
tinent to mention those I have seen practised,
and of which I myself have some experi-
ence.
There are some artists who have de-
signed after nature, and in the open fields ;
and have there quite finished those parts,
which they had chosen, but without adding
any colour to them.
OTHERS have drawn, in oil-colours,
in a middle tint, on strong paper; and found
this method convenient, because, the colours
sinking, they could put colour on colour,
tho’ different from each other. For this
purpose they took with them a flat box,
.which commodioussy held their pallet, pen-






cils, oil, and colours. This method, which
indeed requires several implements; is doubt-
less the best for drawing nature more par-
ticularly, and with greater exactness, espe
cially if, after the work be dry and varnisn’d,
the artist return to the place where he drew,
and retouch the principal things after nature.
OthERS have only drawn the out-linès of
objects and slightly wasn d them in colours

near the life, for tlie ease of their memory
Others have attentively observed such partâ
às they had a mind to retain, and contented
themselves with committing them to theif
memory, which upon occasion gave thei
à faithful account of them. Others have
made dra wings in pastil and wash togenner.
Others, with more curiofity and patience,
have gone several times to the places which
were to their taste: The first time they
only made choice of the parts, and dfew
them correctly ; and the other tijnes were
as
apent in observing the variety of colouring
and its alterations through change of light.
Now these several methods are very
good, and each may be practised as best
fuits the student and his temper: Bijt they
fequire the necessaries ofpainting, as cédouis,
pencils, pastils, and leisure. Nature, how-
ever, at certain timés, prefents extraordinary,
but transient beautiés, and such as ccan be of
no service to the artift, who has nôt as Buch

time as is. necessary to imitate what she act-
mires.





mires. The best way, I think, to make
advantage of such momentary co-asions, is
this :
ThE painter being provided with 2
quire of paper, and a black lead pencil
let him quickly, but slightly; design what
he sees extraordinary ; and, to remember
the colouring, let him mark the princi-
pal parts with characters, which he may
explain at the bottom of the paper, as far as
is necessary for himself to understand them :
A cloud, for instance, may be markd A.
another cloud B, a light C, à mountain D,
a terrace E, and so on. And having re-
peated these letters at the bottom of the
paper, let him write against each, that ’tis
of such or such a colour ; or for greater bre-
vity, only blue, red, violet, grey, &c. or
any other shorter abbreviation. After this
he must go to painting as soon as possiblé;
otherwise most of what he has observed will
in a little time, slip out of his memory.
This method is the morg useful, as it mot
only prevents our losing an infinity of sud-
den and transitory beauties, but also hélps,
by means of the aforesaid marks and cha-
racters, to perfect the other methods I have
mentioned,
Ir it be afkd, Which is the properest
time for these studies; I answer that na-
ture should be studied at all times, becausg
she is to be represented at all seasons ; but
autumn





autumn yields the most plentiful harvest for
her fine effects: the mildness of that season,
the beauty of the sky, the richness of the
earth, and the variety of objects, are power-
ful inducements with the painter, to make
the proper inquiries for improving his genius,
and perfecting his art.
But as we cannot see nor-observe every
thing, ’tis very commendable to make use of
other mens studies, and to look upon them
as if they were our own. Raphael sent
some young men intoGreece, to design such
things as he thought would be of service to
him, and accordingly made use of them to
as good purpose as if he himself had de-
signed them on the spot: For this, Raphael
is so far from deserving censure, that he
ought, on the contrary, to be commended ;
as an example, that painters ought to leave
no way untried for improving in their pro-
fessions. The landskip-painter may accord-
ingly make use of the works of all those
who have excelled in any kind, in order to
acquire a good manner ; like the bees,
which gather their variety of honey from
flowers.
General




General Remarks on LAnDSEiP.
S the general rules of painting are the
basis of all the several kinds of it, we


must refer the landskip-painter to them, or
rather suppose him to be well acquainted
with them. We shall here only make some
general remarks on this kind of painting.
I. LANDSKIp supposes the knowledge
and practice of the principal rules in ber-
spective, in order to maintain probability.
2. ThE nigher the leaves of trees are to
the earth, the larger they are, and the
greener ; as being aptest to receive, in
abundance, the sap which nourishes them,
and the upper branches begin first to take
the redness or yellowness which colours them
in autumn. But ’tis otherwise in plants;
for their stocks renew all the, year round,
and their leaves succeed one another, at a
considerable distance of time, insomuch that
nature, employed in producing new leaves
to adorn the stock as it rises, does by de-
grees desert the under ones ; which, having
first performed their office, are the first that
die: But this effect is more visible in some
than others.
3. The under parts of all leaves are of a
brighter green than the upper, and almost



Of LaNDSKiP.
always incline to the silverisn; and those
which are wind-shaken are known from
others by that colour: But if we view them
from beneath, when penetrated by the sun’s
rays, they discover such a fine and lively
green as is far beyond all comparison.
4. ThERE are five principal things which
give spirit to landskip, to wit, figures, ani¬
mals, waters, wind-shaken trees, and thin-
ness of pencilling ; to which add smoke,
when there’s occasion to introduce it.
5. WhEN one colour predominates
throughout a landskip, as one green in
spring, or one red in autumn, the piece
wili look either as of one colour, or
else as unfinisn’d. I have seen many of
Bourdon’s landskips, which, by handling
the corn one way throughout, have lost
much of their beauty, tho the situations
and waters were very pleasant. The ingeni-
ous painter must endeavour to correct, and,
as they say, redeem the harsh unsightly
colouring of winter and spring by means of
figures, waters, and buildings ; for summer
and autumn subjects are of themselves ca
pable of great variety,
6. Titian and Carrucche are che Beft
models for inspiring good itaste, and leadimg
the painter into a good track, with regard
to forms and colours. He must wse all dis
efforts to gain a juft idea of the principles
which





which thofs great men have left us in their
works; and to have his imagination silled
with them, if he would advance by degrees
towards that perfection, which the artist
should always have in view
7. The landskips of these two masters
each us a great many things, of waich dis-
course can give us no exact idea, nor any
general priaciple. Which way, for example,
can the measures of trees in general be deter-
mined, as we determine thofe of the human
body : The tree has no settled proportions ;
most of its beauty lies in the contraft of its
branches, an unequal distributaon of boughs,
and, in short, a kind of whimfical variety,
vykich nature delights an, and of whieh the
painter becomes a judge, when he has tho-
roughly relished the works of the twa
masters aforesaid. But, I must say, in Ti-
tion's praise, that the path he struck out is
the surest ; because he has enactly iitated
nature in its variety with an exquifite taste,
and fine colouring : Whereas Carragche, tho
an able artist, has not, mare ghan others,
been stroe from manner in his landfkip.
8. OnE of the gneatest perfections iof
landfkip, in che variety it represents, às 2
faithful imitation of each particular cha-
racter As its greateft fault 1s, a licentious
gractice, wbick brings us zo do tthings by
roee.










9. AMONG those things which are painted
practically, we ought to intermix some done
after nature, to induce the spectator to be-
lieve, that all are so.
10. As there are styles of thought, so
there are also styles of execution. I have
handled the two relating to thought, to wit,
the heroick and pastoral; and find that
there are two also with regard to execution,
to wit, the firm style, and the polished ;
these two concern the pencil, and the more
or less ingenious way of conducting it. The
firm style gives life to work, and excuses for
bad choice; and the polished finishes and
brightens every thing ; it leaves no employ-
ment for the spectator’s imagination, which
pleases itself in discovering and finishing
things which it afcribes to the artist, though,
in fact, they proceed only from itself.
The polished style degenerates into the soft
and dull, if not supported by a good open-
ing or situation ; but when those two cha-
racters meet, the picture is fine.
II. HAVINg thus taken a survey of the
principal parts of landskip, having spoken of
the study proper for it, and made some
general remarks on this kind of painting ; I
question not but several readers, that this
work may be made less defective, wish me
to say something of the practice and use of
colours. But as every man has his own
particular




particular practice, and the use of colours
comprehends a part of the secrets in painting;
we must expect a minute account of them
only from tne friendship and conversation of
the ablest painters, and join their opinions to
our own experience.















PORTRAITURE
IF painting be an imitation of nature, ’tis
— doubly so in a portrait; which not only
represents a man in general, but such an one
as may be distinguished from all others.
And as the greatest perfection of a portrait
is extreme likeness, so the greatest of its
faults is to resemble a person for whom it
was not made ; since there are not in the
world two persons quite like one another. But
before we proceed to the particulars which
let us into the knowledge of this imitation,
tis necessary, for shortening this discourse,
to take a view of some general propositions,
which are preparatory to what l am going
to say, and will make amends for what I
shall omit.
I.
IMITATION is the essence of painting
and good choice is to this essence what the
vargues are to a man ; they raise the value of

it. For this reason, ’tis extremely the
painters interest to chuse none but good

heads, or favourable moments for drawing
them,





them, and such positions as may supply the
want of a fine natural.
II.

THERE are views of the natural, more
or less advantageous ; all depends upon turn-
ing it well, and taking it in the favourable
moment.
III.
THEre is not à single person in the world
who has not a peculiar character, both in
body and face.
IV.
Sinple and genuine nature is more pro¬
per for imitation, and is a better choice, than
nature much formed, and embellished too
artificially.
To adorn nature too much is doing it a
violence; and the action which attends it
can never be free, when its ornaments are
not easy. In short, in proportion as we
adorn nature, we make it degenerate from
itself, and bring it down to art.
VI.
SOME means are more advantageous than
others, to come to the same end.
VII.
We must not only imitate what we do
see in nature, but also what we may possibly
see, that is advantageous in art.
VIII.







VIII.
ThINGS are valuable by comparison ;
and it is only by this we are enabled to make
a right judgment of them.
IX.
PainteRS easily accustom themselves
to their own tints, and the manner of their
masters: And after this habit is rooted in
them, they view nature not as she really is,
but as they are used to paint her.
X.
TIsvery difficult to make a picture, thè
figures of which are as big as the life, to
have its effect near, as at a distance. A
learned picture pleases the ignorant only
when it is at some distance; but judges will
admire its artifice near, and its effect at a
distance.
XI.
KNOWLEDGE makes work pleasant and
easy. The traveller who knows his road,
comes to his journey’s end with more speed
and certainty than he who inquires, and
gropes it out.
XII.


Tis proper, before we begin a work, to
meditate upon it, and to make a nice co-
lourd sketch of it, for our own satisfaction,
and an help to the memory.
We cannot too much reflect on these
propositions ; and it is necessary. to be so
well ’acquainted with them, that they may
present



present themselves to our mind, of their
own accord, without our being at the trou-
ble to recal them to our memory, when we
are at work.
TherE are four things necessary to make
a, portrait perfect; air, colouring, attitude,
and dress.
1: Of Air.
THE air respects the lines of the face;
the head-attire, and the size.
The lines of the face depend upon exacta
ness of draught, and agreement of the parts ;
which all together must represent the phy-
siognomy of the person painted, in such
mannet, that the picture of his body may
seem to be also that of his mind.
It is not exactness of design in portraits,
that gives spirit and true air, so much as the
agreement of the parts at the very moment
when the disposition and temperament of the
sitter are to be hit off. We see several por-
traits, which, though correctly designed,
have a cold, languishing, and stupid air ;
whilst others, lefs correct in design, strike
us however, at first sight, with the sitter’s
character.
Few painters have been careful enough
to put the parts well together : Sometimes
the mouth is smiling, and the eyes are sad ;
at other times, the eyes are chearful, and the
cheeks lank; by which means their work
M
has



has a false air, and looks unnatural. We
ought therefore to mind, that, when: the
sitter puts on a fmiling air, the eyes close,
the corners of the mouth draw up towards
the- nostrils, the cheeks swell, and the eye-
brows widen, But in a melancholy air these
parts have a contrary effect.
ThE eyebrows, being raised, give a grave
and noble air; but if arch’d, an air of astc-
nishment.
Of all the parts of the face, that which
contributes most to likeness is the nose ; ’tis
therefore of great moment to set and draw it
well.
ThoUgh the hair of the head seem to
be: part of the dress, which is capable of
various forms, without altering the air of
the face, yet the head-attire, which one has
been most accustomed to, creates such a like-
ness, that we scarce know a familiar ac-
quaintance on his putting on a periwig some-
what different from that which he used to

wear. Tis necessary, therefore, as far as
possible, to take the air of the head-orna-
ment, and make it accompany and set off
that of the face, if there be no reason to the
contrary.
As to the stature, it contributes so much
to likenefs, that we very often know people
without seeing their face ; ’tis therefore ex-
tremely proper to draw the size after the
sitter himself, and in such an attitude as we
think



think fit; which was Vandykes method.
Here let us remark, that, in sitting, the
person appears to be of a lefs free make,
through the heaving of his shoulders; where-
fore, to adjust his size, ’tis proper to make
him stand for a small time, swaying in the
posture we would give him, and then make
our observation. But here occurs a difficulty,
which I shall endeavour to examine :
Whetber ’tis proper in Portraiture, to cor-
rect the Defects of Nature.
LIKENESS being the essence of por-

traiture, it would seem, that we ought to
mitate defects as well as beauties, since by
his means thé imitation will be more com-
plete : It would be even hard to prove the
contrary, to one who would undertake the
defence of this position. But ladies and
gentlemen do not much approve of those
painters who entertain such sentiments, and
put them in practice. I have known ladies
rankly own, that they had no value for a
painter who made a strong likeness; and
hat they had rather their pictures had much
ess resemblance, and more beauty. It is
certain, that some complaisance, in this
respect, is due to them; and I question not,
out their pictures may be made to resemble,
without displeasing them: for the effectual
likeness is a just agreement of the parts that





are painted, with those of nature; so that
we may be at no loss to know the air of the
face, and the temper of the person, whose
picture is before us. This being laid down,
I say, that all deformities, when the air and
temper may be discovered without them,
ought to be either corrected or omitted in
womens and young mens portraits. A nose
somewhat awry may be help’d, or a shriveled
neck, or high shoulders, adapted to good
air, without going from one extreme to
another : But this must be done with great
discretion ; for by endeavouring to correct
nature too much, we insensibly fall into a
method of giving a general air to all our por-
traits ; just as, by confining ourselves too much
to the defects and littleness of nature, we are
in danger of falling into the low and tasteless
manner.
BuT in the faces of heroes, and men of
rank, distinguished either by dignities, vir-
tues, or great qualities, we cannot be too
exact, whether the parts-be beautiful op
not: for portraits of such persons are to be
standing monuments to posterity; in which
case, every thing in a picture is precious that
is faithful. But after whatever manner the
painter acquits himself in this point, let him
never forget good air nor grace, and that
there are, in the natural, advantageous mo-
ments for hitting them off.




2. Of Colouring.
COLOURING, in portraiture, is an
effusion of nature, discovering the true
tempers of persons; and the temper being
essential to likeness, it ought to be handled as
exactly as the design. This part is the more
valuable, as ’tis rare and difficult to hit. A
great many painters have come to à likeness
by strokes and outlines; but, certainly, they
are few, who have shewn in colours the
tempers of persons.
Two points are necessary in colouring;
exactness of tints, and the art of setting
them off. The former is acquired by prac-
tice, in examining and comparing the co-
lours we see in life, with those by which
we would imitate it. and the art of these
tints consists in knowing what one colour
will produce when set by another, and in
making good what either distance or time
may abate of the glow and freshness of the
colours.
A painter who does nothing more
than what he sees, will never arrive at a
perfect imitation ; for though his work may
seem, on the easel, to be good to him, it
may not appear so to others, and perhaps
even to himself, at a distance. A tint,
which, near, appears disjoined, and of one
colour, may look of another at a distance,





and to be confounded in the mafs it belongs
to. If you would have your work, there-
fore, to produce a good effect in the place
where ’tis to hang, both the colours and
lights must be a little loaded, but learnedly
and with discretion. In this point consult
Titian, Rubens, Vandyke, and Rembrant's
methods ; for, indeed, their art is won-
derful.
The tints usually require three times of
observation. The first is, at the person’s first
sitting down, when he has more spirit and
colour than ordinary ; and this is to be noted
in the first hour of his sitting. The second
is, when, being composed, his look is as
usual; which is to be observed in the second
hour. . And the third is, when, through
tiresomeness by sitting in one posture, his
colour alters to what weariness usually
creates. On which account, ’tis beft to
keep to the sitter’s usual tint a little im-
proved. He may also rise, and take some
turns about the room, to gain frefh spirits,
and shake off or prevent tiresomeness.
In draperies, all forts of colours do not
suit all sorts of persons. In mens porkxaits,
we need only observe great truth, and great
force ; but, in womens, there must also be
charms; whatever beauty they have, must
appear in a fine light, and their blemishes
must by some means or other be sostened.
For this reason, a white, lively, and bright
tint,



tint, ought never to be set off by a fine yel-
low which would make it look like plaster,
out. rather by colours inelining to green,-
blue, or grey, or such others as, by their
opposition, may make the tint appear more
fleshy than usual in fair women. Vandyke
often made a fillemot-colourd curtain for
his ground; but that colour is soft and
brown. Brown women, on the other hand,
who have yellow enough in their tints to
support the character of fleshiness, may very
well have yellowish draperies, in order to
bring down the yellow of their tints, and
make them look the fresher; and, near very
high-colourd and lively carnations, linen does
wonders.
In grounds, two things are observable,
the tone, and the colour. The colour is to
be considered in the same manner as those
of draperies, with respect to the head. The
tone rnust be al ways different from the mass
it supports, and of which it is the ground,
that the objects coming upon it may not
seem transparent, but solid and raised. The
colour of the hair of the head usually de-
termines the tone of the ground; and, when
the former is a bright chesnut, we are often
embarassed, unless help’d by means of a
curtain, or some accident of the claro-
obscuro, supposed to be behind, or unless
the ground is a fky.





We must further observe, that where a
ground is neither curtain nor landfkip, or
such-like, but is plain and like a wall, it ought
to be very much party-colour’d, with al-
most imperceptible patches or stains; for,
besides its being so in nature, the picture will
look the more grand.
3. Of Attitude, or Posture.
ATTITUDES ought to suit the ages
and qualities of persons, and their tempers.
In old men and women they should be grave,
majestick, and sometimes bold : And gene-
rally in women, they ought to have a noble
simplicity, and modest chearfulness ; for
modesty ought to be the character of wo-
men ; a charm infinitely beyond coquetry !
and indeed coquets themselves care not to
be painted such.
ATTITUDEs are of two kinds ; one in
motion, the other at rest. Those at rest
may suit every person, but those in motion
are proper for young people only, and are
hard to be expressed ; because a great part
of the hair and drapery must be moved by
the air; motion, in painting, being never
better expressed than by such agitations. The
attitudes at rest must not appear so much at
rest, as ’to seem to represent an inactive per-
son, and one who sits for no other purpose
but to be a copy. And though the figure
that



that is represented be at rest, yet the painter
if he thinks fit, may giveit a flying drapery,
provided the scene or ground be not a cham-
per, or close place.
It is above all things necessary, that the
figures which are not employed, should ap-
pear to satisfy the spectator’s curiosity; and
for this purpose shew themselves in such an
action as suits their tempers and conditions,
is if they would inform him what they
really were: anc as most people pretend to
sincerity, honesty, and greatness of mind,
we must avoid, in attitudes, all manner of
affectation; every thing there must appear
easy and natural, and discover more or less
spirit, nobleness, and majesty, in proportion
to the persons character and dignity. In
short, the portraits, in this fort of attitudes,
must seem to speak to us of themselves, and,
is it were, to say to us — Stop, take notice
of me: l am that invincible king, surrounded
with majesty— I am that valiant com¬
nander who struck terror every-wbere, or
who by my good conduct, have had such glo-
rious success— Iam that great minister
who knew all the springs of politicks l
m that magistrate of consummate wisdom and
robity— Iam that man of letters who is
absorbed in the sciences- l am that wise
and sedate person, whom the love of philosopby
was raised above desires and ambition —-
m that pious, learned, and vigilant pre-
late



late — Tam that protector of the fine arts,
and lover of virtue-— I am that famous
artisan, wbo was so singular in his profession,
&c. And, in women, the language ought to
be — Tam the wise princess, whose grand
air inspires respect and confidence —
I am
that bigh-spirited lady, wbose noble manners
command esteem, &c.— Iam that virtuous,
— T am
courteous, and modest lady, &c.
that chearful lady, who delight in smiles
and joy, &c. And so of others. In a word
the attitudes are the language of portraits,
and the skilful painter ought to give great
attention to them.
BUT the best attitudes, in my opinion,
are such as induce the spectator to think,
that the sitter took a favourable opportunity
of being seen to advantage, and without
affectation. There is only one thing to be
observed, with regard to womens portraits,
in whatever attitude they are placed ; which
is, that they sway in such a manner, as to
give their face but little shade; and that we
carefully examine, whether the lady appears
most beautiful, in a smiling, or in a ferious
air, and conduct ourselves accordingly. Let
us now proceed to the next article.
4. Of Dress.
By the word dress l understand the
drapery which eloathes a person painted, and
the



the manner in which it is fitted. Every
person must be cloathed according to his
quality; and, in painting, it is only the
dress that can make a distinction of persons -
But, besides keeping to the rank and quality
of the person who is drawn, his drapery
must also be well chosen, and well cast.
Very rich cloaths seldom become men,
and much lacing is beneath their gravity.

women ought to be adorned in a negligent
manner, but without departing from their
dignity and nobleness; and when men and
women insist on other management, the artist
must seek his pleasure in imitating what they
would have done.
VARIETY of stuffs gives a work the
character of truth; but imaginary draperies
destroy it. At this time, most portraits. are
drapered in a very odd manner; but whether
this is, proper, we shall here endeavour to
examine.
The partisans for this new kind of dra-
pery alledge, that the French modes being
very changeable, portfaits become ridiculous
in five or six years after they are drawit ;
whereas the dresses, that are made after the
painter’s fancy, always stand, that wo-
meas habits have ridiculous sleeves, which
keep their arms locked up, in a manner that
is very stiff, and neither favourable to nature
nor painting; and that the custom which
has prevailed, by little and litile, of paint-
ing



ing draperies in this manner ought to be no
more followed in this particular, than in any
other.
OTHERS, on the contrary, maintain, that
modes are essential to portraiture, and are not
only of service to the person painted, but
also monuments of the times, that portraits,
as they are a part of history, ought to be
faithful in every respect; which, say they,
is so true, that we should, at this day, be
very sorry to see, in medals, bas-reliefs, and
ather antiquities, the Romans cloathed in
different habits from those they wore; and
that it would appear ridiculous to see their
portraits in a Greeé dress, as ours are often so
by being in a Roman; at least we should be
led by this means into an error. As to modes
growing ridiculous in six years, they answer,
That we must not impute it to the mode,
since ’twas once thought handsome; but
rather to the understanding, which is apt to
judge of things, not by their relation to-the
time when they exifted, but by their agree-
ment with the present. They add, that
although this aversion to mode may be ex-
cusable in real drefs, ’tis, nevertheless, in
painting, a weakness which the understand-
ing takes in at the eye; and that it ought
rather to be an useful diversion, and a pleasing
instruction, to see, that at such times people
wore broad bands ; at others, ruffs, bonnets,
hanging sleeves, caps, short hair, slafhed
doublets,



doublets, scallop’d point-bands, and the like;
which modes inform us of the times when
those persons flourisn’d, as the persons shew
is the times when those modes prevailed.
They alledge also the authority of antient
painters of repute; as Titian, Raphael, Paol
Veronese, Tintoret, fe Carracchis, Van-
dyke, and, in short, all portraitists before this
shifting of modes came into use, which the
women have introduced into France within
these twenty or thirty years.
Now to give some decision between these
two parties, the truth appears to me to be
this; that ’tis more difficult to give modish
habits some agreeable air in painting, than
to cloathe portraits handsomely, when the
painter is left to his own liberty. I think
also, that modisn habits might sometimes be
proper for family portraits, and sometimes
the drapery of some virtue, or attribute, or
Pagan divinity.
Of Practice in Portraiture.
I CANNOT but think, that every man,
having a peculiar cast of mind, has also a
peculiar manner of pursuing his ends; and
that one may have the same success, by
making different ways: It is also my opinion,
that every man ought in this respect to fol¬
low the bent of his own genius, and take
he road he finds the shortest, and most con-
venient.




venient. I shall therefore say nothing particular
upon this subject, but only observe in ge-
neral, that portraiture requires three different
sittings and operations ; to zoit, dead-colour-
ing, second-colouring, and retouching or
finishing. Before the painter dead-colour,
he must attentively consider what aspect will
best suit the sitter by putting him in dif-
ferent positions, if we have not any settled
design before us; and, when we have de-
termined this, ’tis of the laft consequence to
put the parts well together, by comparing
always one part with another; for not only
the portrait acquires a greater likeness, when
well designed, but ’tis troublesome to make
alterations at the second sitting, when the
artist must only think of painting; that is,
of disposing and uniting his colours.
EXPERIENCE tells us, that the dead¬
colouring ought to be clean, because of the
slope and transparency of the colours, espe-
cially in the shades; and when the parts are
well put together, and become clammy, they
must be judicioussy sweetened and melted
into each other, yet without taking away
the air of the picture, that the painter may
have the pleasure of finishing it, in propor-
tion as he draws. But if fiery genius’s do not
like this method of scumbling, let them
only mark the parts slightly, and so far as
is necessary for giving an air.





In dead-colouring, ’tis proper to put in
rather too little than too much hair about
the forehead; that, in finishing, we may
be at liberty to place it where we please, and
to paint it with all possible softness and de-
dicacy. If, on the contrary, vou sketch
upon the forehead a lock whjch may appear
to be of a good taste, and becoming the
work, you may be puzzled in finishing it,
and not find the life exactly in the same po-
sition as you would paint it. But this ob-
servation is not meant for men of fkill, and
consummate experience, who have nature
in their heads, and make her submit to their
ideas.
The business of the second sitting is, to
put the colours well in their places, and to
paint them in a manner that is suitable to the
sitter, and to the effect we propose. But
before they are made clammy, we ought to
examine afresn, whether the parts are rightly
placed, and here and there to give some
touches towards likeness, that, when we are
assured of it, the work may go on with
greater satisfaction. If the painter under-
stands what he is about, and the portrait be
justly designed, he ought, as much as pos-
sible, to work quick.; the sitter will be bet-
ter pleased, and the work will by this means
have the more spirit and life. But this
readiness is only the effect of long study and
experience ; for we may well be allowed a
considerable



considerable time to find out a road that
is easy, and such as we must often travel
BEFOrE we retouch or finish, ’tis pro-
per to terminate the hair, that, on finishing
the carnations, we may be abler to judge of
the effect of the whole head.
IF, at the second sitting, we cannot do
all we intended, which often happens; the
third makes up the loss, and gives both spirit,
physiognomy, and character.
IF we would paint a portrait at once, we
must load the colouring, but neither sweeten,
nor drive, norvery much oil it; and, if we.
dip the pencil in varnisn as the work ad-
vances, this will readily enable us to put
colour on colour, and to mix them without
driving.
The use and sight of good pictures give
greater light into things than words can ex-
press: What hits one artist’s understanding
and temper,may be disagreeable to another’s ;
and almost all painters have taken different
ways, though their principles were often the
same.
ThE famous Jabac, a man well known
to all the lovers of the fine arts, and a friend
of Vandyke who thrice drew his picture,
told me, that, as he once observed to him,
how little time he bestowed on his portraits,
Vandyke




Vandyke answered T, That at first he workd
bard, and took great pains, to acquire à re-
putation, and also to geta swift hand, against
the time he should work for bis kitchen. Van¬
dyke’ s custom, as Jabac told me, was this :
He appointed both the day and hour for the
person’s sitfing, and work’d not above
in hour on any portrait, éither in rub-
ing in or finishing; so that as soon as
ais clock informed him, that the hour was
ut, he rose up, and made a bow to the
sitter, to signify, that he had done enough
for that day, and then appointed another
hour some other day ; whereupon his ser-
want came to clean his pencils, and
brought a fresh pallet, whilst he was re-
ceiving another sitter, whose day and hour
he had before appointed.: By this method
he work’d on several pictures the same day,
with extraordinary expedition.
After having lightly dead-colourd the
face, he put the sitter into somé attitude
which he had before contrived; and on grey
paper, with white and black crayons, he
designed, in a quarter of an hour, his shape
and drapery, which he disposed in a grand
manner, and an exquisite tasté. After this
Jabac’s observation has, according to English tra-
lition, been made to Vandyke by others; and his answer
hen was, That he at first work d for reputation, but nou
er bis kitchen. If both reports be true, Vandyke seems
o have had a very early view of his kitchen.




he gave the drawing to the skilful people he
had about him, to paint after the sitter’s.
own cloaths, which, at Vandyke’s request,
were sent to him for that purpose. When
his disciples had done what they could to
these draperies, he lightly went over them
again; and so, in a little time, by his great
knowledge, displayed the art and truth which
we at this day admire in them. As for
hands, he had in his house people of both
sexes, whom he paid; and who served as
models.
I MENTION this conduct of Vandyke,
rather to gratify the reader’s curiosity, than
to excite his imitation; he may chuse as
much of it as he pleases, and suits his own
genius, and leave the rest. For my part, I
dislike no part of it, except that of sitting
only one hour, which I think too little.
I MUST observe by the way, that there
is nothing so rare as fine hands, either in
design or colouring. Tis therefore convenient
to cultivate, if we can, a friendship with
some woman, who will take pleasure in
ferving for a copy The way to win them
is, to praise their beauty exceedingly. But
if an opportunity serves of copying handa
after Vandyke, it must not be let slip; for he
drew them with a surprising delicacy, and an

admirable colouring.

is of great service to copy after-the
manners which come nearest to nature; as are
those




those of titian and Vandyke We must, at
such times, believe them to be nature itself,
and, at some distance, consider them as
such, and say to ourselves — What colour
and shall I use for such a partè And
then, coming near the picture, we ought to
examine, whether we are right, or not; and
to make a fixed rule of what we have dis-
covered, and did not practisé before with-
thout uncertainty. But to return to por-
I believe tis proper before we begin
colouring to catch the very first moments,
which are commonly the most agreeable,
and most advantageous, and to keep them
in our memory for use, when we are finish-
ing: for the sitter; growing tired with be-
in long in the first same place; loses those spirits,
which, at his first sitting down, gave beauty
to the parts, and convey’d to the tint more
lively blood and a fresher colour. In short,
we must join to truth a probable and advan-
tageous possibility which; far from abating
likenes serves rather to set it off. For
this end, we ought to begin with observing
the ground of a tint, as well what it is in
lights, as in shades : For the shades are only
beautiful as they are proportioned to the
light. We must, I say, observe, if the tint
be very lively whether it partake of yel-
lowness and where that yellowness is placed ;
because usually, towards the end of the





sitting, fatigue diffuses a general yellowness,
which makes us forget what parts were of
this colour, and what were not, unless we
had taken due notice of it before. For this

reason, at the second sitting, the colours
must be every-where readily clappd in, and
such as appear at the first sitting down; for
these are always the finest.
The surest way to judge of colours is by
comparison; and to know a tint, nothing 15
better than to compare it with linen placed
next it, or else placed next to the natural
object, if there is occasion. I say this only
to those who have little practised nature.
The portrait being now suppofed to be
as much finish’d as you are able, nothing re-
mains, but, at some reasonable distance, to
view both the picture and sitter together, in
order to determine with certainty, whether
there is any thing still wanting to perfect the
work.
Of political Conduct in Portraiture.
BUT it is not enough, that all these
precautions be taken, for making the por-
trait perfect; others must also be taken, for
making it thought so. In France, let a
portrait be ever so wonderful, if it has not
stood the criticism of the woinen, and had
their approbation, ’tis thought to be paltry,
and eontinues in oblivion ; for the complai¬
sance



sance that is shewn them, makes the men
echo back what they have determined. In
France, the ladies command and decide like
fovereigns; and the trifles which are to
their taste, are destructive. to the great man-
ners in painting. They would even pervert
Titian and Vandyke, if they were still living
and obliged to work for them. In order.
therefore, to avoid the vexation which such
inconsiderate judgments may occasion, ’tis
necessary to use some political conduct with
regard to persons and times.
The artist must never shew his work in
dead-colour to any but painters, who are his
friends, in order to have their opinion upon
it ; nor indeed is it proper to shew any
thing finish’d, unless it be fram’d and ver-
nish’d.
NoR must we, in the sitter’s presencc,
afk the opinion of people who are strangers
to the art ; because, seeing him in one view
and the picture in another, they will advise the
mending what they take to be amiss. Itwill be
an vain for the artist to offer his reafons ; for,
as people seldom care to retract, and by that
means to own, that they may be mistaken,
they will never be favourable. Tis best, there-
fore, not to give them any handle for de-
cision; or, if they will offer their opinion,
of their own accord, let some artifice be
employed to elude a long, tiresome, and
uselefs reasoning. Make them believe, for
instance,





instance, that the picture is not quite finisn’d;
or tell them, they are partly in the right,
and that you are going to retouch it; or any
thing of this kind, that may be able to silence
them immediatelys You know what Vafari
relates of Michael Angelo on the like occa-
sion. The Pope had been at Michael An-
gelo’s work-shop to see a marble figure he had
carved for him; and, having no skill himself,
he softly afk’d his groom of the chamber,
How he likd it: He answerd, That the
nose was too large.—-Whereupon the
Pope, raising his voice, said, as of his
own accord — The nose is too large.
Michael Angelo, who perceived what had
passed, told the Pope, That bis criticism
was just, and that he would go and mend the
fault in his presence. Accordingly, with his
mallet in one hand, and a chisel and some
marble-dust in the other, he put himself
into a working posture before the statue ;
and, after having knocked upon his chisel,
without touching the marble, and let the
dust fall by degrees out of his hand, he
turned about, and said to the Pope-— Ad-
esso, santissimo Padre che gliene pare3 What
does your Holiness think of it now; O7
Signor Michel Angelo, said the Pope, Gli
avete dato la vita. Ol now my dear Sir,
you have made the figure alive. Apelles
would afk nobody’s opinion; but, as Pliny
says, kept behind the cloth, and finding a





shoemaker’s criticism, on the sandal-strap of
a figure, to be reasonable, he mended it;
which. elated the poor mechanick so much,
that he began to joke the artist for something
in the thigh, which was not to his liking:
This obliged Apelles to tell him scornfully
That a shoemakers judgment should not exceed
the fandal. Thus, when those who pretend
to judge, shall justly find a fault in your work,
tis wisdom to profit by it, without hearken-
ing to them too mucl, or encouraging their
criticisi, because they will abuse your do-
cility ; and your praising them for the good
hints they may give, will provoke them to
offer bad ones. But in this the painter must
employ both art and good breeding, by
making proper distinctions between the per-
sons who talk and give their opinion of his
works.




















Of colouring

I FORMERLY publisned A Dialogue
on Colouring, where I endeavourd to
shew its value, and rank in painting :
But what l now write being handled by way
of principles, 1 thought colouring ought to
be treated in the same manner; that this
part of painting, which is so necessary to
all the rest, might join with them in making
one whole, and that the reader might the
more easily judge of it.
THERE are several people, who, speaking
of painting, uie the words colour and colour-
EI
ng, indifferently, to signify the same thing
and tho’ these two parts are distinguishable
enough, yet it may not be improper to ex-
plain what we mean by each of them.
COLOUR is what makes objects percep-
tible to sight: And,
COLOURING is one of the essential
parts of painting, by which the artist imi-
tates the appéarance of colours in all natural
objects, and gives to artificial objects the
colour that is most proper to deceive the





This part includes the knowledge of
particular colours, their sympathies and anti-
pathies, their manner of working, and the
knowledge of the claro-obscuro. And as I.
think this branch of art has been very little,
if at all, understood by a great many of the
ablest painters of the two last centuries, I
think myself obliged to give here as true an
idea of it as l can, in order to shew its merit.
SOMe also confound the simple or capital
colour with the local, tho their difference
be great ; for the simple colour is that
which does not by itself represent objects;
as pure white, z. e. without mixture; or
pure black, or pure, yellow or pure red,
blue, green, or other colours, first put on
the pallet, to make mixtures for a faithful
imitation of an object :. whereas the. local
colour, by its agreement with the place it
possesses, and by the assistance of some other
colour, represents a single object; as a car-
nation, linen, stuff, or any object, distinct
from others. And it is called local, because
the place it fills requires that particular co-
lour, in order to give the greater character
of truth to the several colours about it.
But to proceed :
The painter ought to consider, that as
there are two forts of objects, the natural,
or that which is true; and the artificial, or
that which is painted ; so there are two
sorts of colours, the natural and the arti-
ficial.



ficial. The natural colour is that which
makes all the objects in nature visible to us ;
and the artificial is, a judicious mixture of
the simple colours on the pallet, in order to
imitate those of natural objects.
The painter must therefore have a per-
fect knowledge of these two sorts of co-
lours : Of the natural, in order to know
which of them he ought to imitate; and
of the artificial, in order to compose a tint
proper for representing perfectly the natural
colour. He must know besides, that the
natural colour is of three forts : 1. The true
colour of the object. 2. The reflected co-
lour. 3. The colour of the light. As to arti-
ficial colours, he ought also to know their
value, force, and sweetness, both separately
and by comparison, that he may either ex-
aggerate by some colours, or attenuate by
others, as his subject requires.
For this purpose it must be considered,
that a picture is a flat superficies; that, some
time after the colours are laid, they lose their
freshness ; and that the distance of the
picture takes from it much of its brightness
and vigour ; and therefore, that ’tis impos-
sible to make up these three deficiencies
without the artifice which colouring teaches,
and which is its chief object.
A KNOWING painter ought not to be a
flave to nature, but à judge, and judicious
imitator



imitator of her. Let a picture but have

its effect, and agreeably deceive the eye, and
’tis all that can be expected in this point;
but this can never be attained, if the painter
neglects colouring. As it is certain, that
the whole cannot be perfect, if any part is
wanting ; and that he is not an able painter,
who is ignorant of some of the parts of
his art; so l would as much blame a painter
for neglecting colouring, as for ill designing,
or ill disposing his figures.
ThERE is, however, no part of paint-
ing where nature is always proper to be
imitated, that is, such nature as offers it-
self by chance. Though she is mistress of
arts, yet she seldom shews us the best
road ; she only hinders us from going
astray. The painter must chuse her accord-
ing to the rules of art, and if he does not
find her to be such as he looks for, he must
correct what offers to him. As he wha
designs, does not imitate all he ’sees in a

defective copy, but changes the faults into
the just proportions. So the artist must not
imitate all the colours which indifferently
present themselves to the eye ; but chuse the
most proper for his purpose; adding others,
if he think fit, in order to fetch out the
effect and beauty of his work. His objects
must not only be, each of them, fine, na-
tural, and true, but there must be also an
union of the whole together. Sometimes he
must



must lessen the vivacity of the life, at other
times he must exaggerate or improve upon
the brightnefs and force of the colours he
meets with, that he may thus express, with
greater spirit and truth, the character of his
object, without altering it. There are none
but great painters, and those are but few
who have arrived at this art; and this learned
exaggeration, or improvement, is so far from
weakening the truth of imitation, that it
gives more truth to what the artist imitates
after nature.
Let me here apprise the reader, that
speaking in general of painting, design, or
colouring, I always suppose them to be in
their perfection.
Those who object to colouring say, that

ve must needs afcribe to design a correctness
of proportions, an elegance of out-lines,
and a delicacy of expression; and that the
Roman school, which was Rapbael’s, has al-
ways endeavoured principally after these three
points, as the first and most perfect intentions
of nature, and made little account of coloür-
ing: wherefore the artist, say they, ought to
look upon design as his principal object;
and upon colouring, as only accessary.
I ANSWER, that the original intentions
of nature are not less visible in colouring
than in design ; that indeed these three
qualities ascribed to design, enhance its va-
lue ; but, on the other hand, that the artist
must



must have begun his studies with acquiring
them, and must be supposed to be a perfect
master of them: and yet they alone do
not constitute the painter; they only begin
him, and wait for their perfection from co-
louring, with regard to the whole com-
position.
GoD; in the creation of bodies, has
furnished his creatures with ample matter
for praising him, and discovering him to be
their author ; and, having stamped visible
colours on them, he has-given room to
painters to imitate his omnipotency, and to
produce, as it were, out of nothing, a second
nature, which exists only in their ideas.
In fact, all things on earth would be in con-
fusion, and bodies only perceptible by touch,
if diversity of colours did not distinguisn
them. The painter therefore who is a per-
fect imitator of nature, and supposed to be
a good designer, ought to make colouring
his chief object, since he only considers na-
ture as she is imitable ; and she is only
imitable by him, as she is visible ; and she
is only visible, as she is coloured. For this
reason, we may consider colouring as the
difference in painting, and design as its
kind* :
just as reason is the difference of
man ; because it constitutes his being, di-
stinguishes him from other creatures, and
x Alluding to the logical terms genus and differentia.
sets




sets him above them. For since the ideas of
things ought to serve only for bringing
them out of confusion, tis necessary to con-
ceive them by something which ’each has in
particular, and which cannot agree with any
thing else. If we consider the painter by
his invention, we rank him among the
poets; if by perspective, (as some say) he is
not distinguishable from the mathematician ;
and if by the proportions and measures of
bodies, we confound him with the sculptor
and geometer. So, tho’ the perfect idea of
the painter depends on design and colouring
jointly, yet he must form a special idea of
his art only by colouring, fince, by this
difference, which makes him a perfect imi-
tator of nature, we distinguisn him from
such as have only design for their object,
and whose art cannot come up to this perfect
imitation which painting leads to; and we
can only be understood to mean a painter.
Among the arts which have design in
we may reckon
common with painting,
sculpture, architecture,
and engraving ;
which are thus defined :
PAINTING is an art, which, on a flat
superficies, imitates all visible objects. Tis
of many kinds, and usually divided into
MOSAICK, FRESCO, DISTEMPER, OIL;
CRAYON, MINIATURE, and ENAMEL.
SCULPTURE is an art, which, by means
of design and solid matter, imitates the
palpable






palpable objects of nature: Tis usually
divided into
WHOLE-RELIEF, and BAS-RELIEF.
ARCHITECTUREis an art, that by de-
sign, and suitable proportions, imitates and
erects all sorts of edifices. Tis usually di-
vided into
CIVIL and MILITAKY.
ENGRAVING is an art, that, by means
of design, and incision into an hard matter,
imitates the lights and shades of visible ob-
jects, and is-divided into
WOOD, ENGRAVING, ETCHING,
and BLACK MANNER.
The * black manner which is of late
invention, is so called, because instead of
pre-
æ This being, it feems, but a late invention in
France, and our author very backward in doing justice
to English productions of that kind, we think ourselves
obliged to give the reader a fmall sketch of what we call
mezzotints. This invention is owing to prince Rupert,
who, after King Charles Il.’s restoration, made several
prints in that manner. The Prince laid his grounds on
the plates with a chanell’d roller, as the French do
theirs by close and cross-hatching ; perhaps, the only
difference between their method and ours. His succesz
gave occasion to one Sherwin to make some attempts in
the same way ; but he laid his grounds with an half-
round file, weighted with an heavy piece of lead. The
Prince, on sight of Sherwin’s prints, thinking his ser-
vants had divulged his seeret, sent for him ; who satis-
fving his Highness to the contrary, by shewing hiin his
of his rollers.
file, the Prince thereupon gave him one
To Sherwin sueceeded Isaat Becket, and William Faithorn:
And




preparing the plate, by polishing it, a ground
is laid upon it of close engraving, crofsing
every way uniformly ; so as, on taking a
proof, it shall appear very strong, and in-
tirely black.
ThE black graving therefore is that,
where, instead of a graver to form the strokes
and shades, they use a burnisher, to fetch
the objects out of darknese, and give them;
by dègrees, their proper lights.
The cutting of precious stones the reader
may ascribe either to sculpture or engraving :
yet people usually say,
grave-stones ; and ’tis
And after them, were Van Somer, Lens, Smith, Williams,
and Symons, old and young Faber George Whité, &c.
Among these, Smith and White seem to be the most
excellent. The former is still living ; and his collection
of prints (mostlv after Sir Godfrey Kneller’s paintings
perhaps the finest in Europe ; and his Duke Schomberg’s
Head, and The Holy Family, after a picture of Carlo
Maratti, are thought to be his best performances.
White died middle-aged, a few years ago; and though
his prints are but few, they are observed to have a fine
paint-like expression, (for he was a painter, and bestowed
much time on his plates) not to be found any-where
else. His best print is, Jobn Baptist Monoyer the
flower-painter’s head.
N. B. Both Prince Rupert’s and Sherwin’s grounding
tools have been laid aside some years ; and the
grounds are now laid with an hand-tool, some-
what like a shoemaker’s cutting-board-knife, the
edge whereof, having a fort of fine crenelling, raises
a thick imperceptible stipping, or ground on the
plate ; and was the invention of one Edial, a
smith by trade, who afterwards became a mezzo-
tinto printer.





very probable, that the workmen employed
in this were both sculptors and engravers.
WITHOUT. my being at the trouble to
define all these divisions, ’tis easy to observe,
that design, which is their Rind, that is,
common to them all, is determined by a
particular difference which constitutes what
is essential to each of these arts.
ThE end of the painter, and the sculptor,
is indeed imitation ; but they attain it by
different methods. The sculptor, by a
solid matter, imitating the real quantities of
objects; and the painter with colours, shew-
ing. the apparent quantity and quality of all
things visible ; so that he is not only obliged
to please, but even deceive the eye, by what
he represents.
To this ’tis usually objected, that design
is the foundation and support of colouring;
that tho. colouring depends upon it, yet it
no-wise depends on colouring; and therefore
the former is more necessary, more noble,
and more considerable, than the latter. But
not conclude any thing in favour of design
to the prejudice of colouring. On the con-
trary, we may infer from thence, that mere
design alone is not, as it is supposed to be,
the foundation of colouring, nor has a prior
existence to it, in any other sense but this,
that it must receive its perfection, with re





gard to painting, from colouring; and there
is no doubt but the thing which receives,
must have a prior existence to that which
is to be received.

Tis the same with all kinds of matters,
which must be disposed before they can re-
ceive the perfection of substantial forms.
The human body, for instance, must be
intirely formed and organized, before it re-
ceive the soul : This was God’s method with
the first man. He took earth, and, after
having given it the necessary dispositions, he
created the soul ; which he infused into it,
for perfecting it into a man. This body, as
to its existence, had no dependence on the
soul, because it was prior to the soul; and
yet no one will affirm, that the -body is the
more noble and more considerable part of
the man. Nature always makes her begin-
nings by means of things less perfect; and art,
in imitation of her, takes the same method.
The painter first rubs in his subject by means
of design, and afterwards finishes it by the
help of colouring; which, by giving truth to
the objects designed, gives them, at the same
time, all the perfection that painting is ca-
pable of.
As forbeing more or less necessary to make
a whole ; parts that are essential, are equally
necessary. As he is not a man, who has not a
soul- joined to his body ; so that is not
painting.




painting, whère colouring is not joined to


But if we consider design by itself, and
as ’tis instrumental in most parts of art, we
might, for its utility, prize it more than
colouring; as we prefer a large diamond be-
fore a plant, tho the meanest plant be in
itself more noble and valuable than all the
precious stones in the world.
A s every one pursues his own profit, and
considers things in this view ’tis no wonder
if design, coming more often into play, and
being consequently more profitable by its
mathematical demonstrations, and also by the
very draughts themselves, which, however
slight, let us into the thought of the work
proposed, should be more esteemed : But if
you set colouring aside, there will be nothing
in design but what may be performed in
sculpture ; which; if compared with a piece
of painting, must needs be imperfect, for
want of colouring. And this consideration
sets the painter above the sculptor, since ob-
jects skilfully painted have a more perfect
resemblance to the true ones.
Yet we cannot help allowing, that design,
perfect, as we suppose, and as we see it in
the antique, has several marks of elevation ;
which have divided the curious in their
choice of pictures for enriching their cabinets.
In effect, according to the subjects and figures
which the ancient sculptors had a mind to
represent,




represent, we discover in their sculptures the
terrible, or the gracious, the simple, or the
ideal of a great character, but always sublime
and probable. On this account we are much
in doubt, about the preference which ought
to be given to pictures ; whether we ought
to prefer such as are better designed than
coloured, of those which are better coloured
than designed. But from what we have said
of colouring with respect to painting, it
appears that we must not prefer the former,
if the design in the latter be not too bad.
And the reason is, that there is design in
other things as well as in pictures ; ’tis to be
found in good prints, siatues and bas-reliefs;
but finc colouring is only to be seen in a very
few pictures.
WERE l to make a cabinet of pictures,
I should fill it with all such as had any kind
of beauty ; but I should prefer-Titian’s to
all others, for the reasons l have given; and
indeed the price which his works bear among
the- curious, sufficiently justifies my opinion.
It must be granted, that some persons value
design, because of the esteem the world has
for it in general, and of the great numbers
of people, who, for its utility, have got a
manual habit of it, and love it much. To
solve this difficulty, we must inquire what is
understood by the word design.
In painting, this word has but two signi-
cations : First, it means the thought of a
picture,



picture, which the painter puts either on
paper or. cloth, in order to judge of what
he is contriving; and in this manner we
may design, not only a fketch, but a work
well connected as to lights and shades, or,
even a small picture well coloured. This
was Rubens’s method in almost all his designs;
and the most part of Titian’s, which are
almost all done with the gen, have been
performed in the same manner. Secondly,
we call design, the just measures, proportions,
and outlines, supposed to be in visible ob-
jects, which, having no other existence than
in the extremities of those bodies, do actu-
ally reside in the mind: And if painters
have made them apparent, by circumscribing
lines, and out of absolute necessity, it was
for the information of their pupils, and for
their own practice, in order to acquire with
ease an extreme correctness. And yet it
may be said, that the use of these lines is
like that of a centre for an arch in archi-
tecture ; where, after the stone-work is set,
the centre is struck ,: In the same manner,
after the pajnter has formed his figure, his
lines are of no further use, and must no
longer appear. And it is in this sense, that
design should be understood to be one of the
essential, parts of painting; but when we
give lights and shades to outlines, we can-
not do it without white and black, two of










the capital colours in painting, and whose
management comes under colouring.
YET I have met with several painters,
who would never allow, that design contains
only the proportions and outlines of visible
objects: They say, that this part is one of
the sorts of design I have desined, viz. The
thought of a grand picture before it is exe-
cuted ; whether that thought be only a
slight sketch, or be expressed in clare-obscuro,
and by all the colours proper for the great
work, of which this design is the specimen.
I BELIEVe the best answer to this will
be to say, that in such case design would no
longer be a part of painting, but the whole of
it ; since it would contain not only lights
and shades, but also colouring, and even in-
vention ; and then we must be always think-
ing of new terms, and afk these gentlemen,
By what name they would call that part of
design, which furnishes the objects that com-
pose an history ; And what name must be
given to that other part of design, which dis-
poses the colours, lights, and’shades '’Hence,
without further trouble, ’tis easy to con-
ceive, that ’tis no matter how we call
things, provided we understand and agree
upon their names. And as new terms would
be troublesome to the memory, I’think it
better to retain the old.
BUT let us not here pafs over in silence
the pre-eminencies of design; the chief of
which



which are these ; viz. First, It alone, with-
out colouring, produces many useful things;
for which reason, a great many, people are
content to have some fkill in design, without
troubling themselves about colouring. Se-
condly, It gives à taste for the knowledge of
arts, and enables us to make some judgment
of them; and, for this reason, designing is
lookd upon as à necessary part of young
gentlemens education, who have commonly
their masters for drawing, as well as for
writing. Lastiy, As this part comprehends
many other particular things, as the know-
ledge of the muscles, perspective, position
of the attitudes, and the expression of the
passions of the soul, it might therefore be
considered rather as an intire whole, than as
a separate part.
It cannot indeed be denied, that these
pre-eminencies in design are real and ex-
tremely useful: But then we here consider
design only as it relates to painting; and, in
this light, all its parts require colouring, in
order to make a perfect picture. For this
reason, we here consider design, with all
the parts it comprehends, not as a distinct
part itself, nor yet as an intire whole, but
only as the foundatian and beginning of
painting.
WE have before said, that the claro-ob-
scuro which is nothing but the knowledge
of lights and shades, was comprised in co-






louring: yet there are several painters who
will not allow it. They alledge, that the
only reason, which is assigned for it, is, that,
in nature, light and the claro-obscuro aré
inseparable ; and add, that the same may be
sald of design, because, without light, the
eye cannot perceive nor know in nature the
outlines and proportions of figures.
To this we may answer, that, in this
case, the hands might do the office of the
eyes ; and, after feeling a solid body; might
determine, whether it were round or square,
or what its form was : Whence it follows,
that, without light, the outlines and prod
portions of figures may be known.
BEIng upon this subject, I cannot for-
bear relating à late story of a blind sculptor,
who made portraits in wax, and very like:
He lived in the last century, and the story
à
was told me by a man of probity, who was
acquainted with him in Italy, and was wit¬
neis to what l am going to relate.
The blind man, this person told me,
was of Cambassi, in Tuscany; he was well
made, and something more than fifty years
of age, had a great deal of wit and good
fense, and delighted in talking and telling
things agreeably. One day, meeting him in
the palace of Justiniani, where he had been.
copying à statue of Minerva, 1 took occasion
to afk him, Whether he did not see a little,
because he copied so justly : I cant see at






ill, says he ; my eyes are at my fingers ends.
But then, said I— How is it possible, that,
bilind as you are, you can do such sine things à
He replied —Ifeel my original; Texamine
the dimensions, and the risings and cavities-
these I endeavour to keep in my memory , then
I feel my wax, and comparing one with the
ther by moving my hand backwards and
forwards several times, I finish my work in
the best manner I can.
In short, he did not appear to have any
light; since the Duke of Bracciano to prove
him, obliged him to make his head in a
very dark cellar, and it was found to be
very like. But, though this piece was ad-
mired by all who saw it, they failed not to
object to the sculptor that the Duke’s beard
was a great help towards likeness; and that
he could not have hit it so easily, had the
Duke been beardless. Well then, says the
blind man, give me another Whereupon
they proposed to him to make the head of one
of the Duchess’s maids; he accordingly under-
took it, and made it very like. I have also
seen a busto of Charles I. King of England,
and one of Pope Urban VIII. of this mans
doing, both after the marble, finely finish’d,
and very like. The greatest trouble he found,
as he confess’d, was in making hair ; because
of its pliablenefs to the fingers.
BUT, without going farther, we have at
Paris a busto, by this hand, of the late ex-
cellent




cellent Monsieur Hesselin, master of the trea-
sury-chambers, who was so well pleased
with it, and thought the work so wonderful,
that he desired the author of it to sit for his-
picture, that he might takeit into France as
a memorial of him. My curiosity induced me
to see this picture ; and, after having viewed
the face, I perceived that the painter had
set an eye on the tip of each of his fingers, to
shiew, that those he had elsewhere were use-
less to him. I have the more willingly re-
lated this story, as l thought it worthy of
the reader’s curiosity, and very proper to de-
monstrate the proposition before us, to wif.
That the knowledge of the claro-obscuro is
comprehended in colouring.
It is certain, that no one can fail, even
in great darkness, to perceive the contours
of a man or statue, and to judge of the risings
and cavities, by feeling about ; whereas it is
impossible to see any colour, or to make
any judgment of it, without the help of
light.
We perceive, by the story of this blind
man, that his art, which lay all in design,
afforded him an opportunity to gratify his
knowledge, and also some consolation for
the loss of so precious a sense as light; and
that if he had been a painter, he would have
been deprived of this consolation ; for co-
lour and light are the objects only of sight;
but



but design, as I have observed, is also the
object of feeling.

MIGhT also mention a more recent ex-
ample of blindness, in the late Sieur Buret,
one of the ablest sculptors of the Academy,
who, according to thé testimony of persons
of credit, lost his sight, by the small-pox, at
twenty-five years of age; which, however,
left him the pleasure and consolation of di-
verting. himself by working like the blind
man of Cambassi.
It is in this place we ought to treat of
the claro-obscuro, as an essential part of co-
louring; but as the treatise on this subject is
of some length, we shall set it after the pre-
sent discourse on colouring, and refer the
reader to it; the rather, that he may have
a more distinct idea of the knowledge of
lights and shades.
The agreement and opposition of colours
are as necessary as union and the cromatick
in mufick. This agreement and opposition
proceeds from two causes-; to wit from
their apparent and original qualities, and
from their mixtures. Their apparent qua-
lities proceed from their participation with
the air and earth. The aereal colours pre-
serve a lightness, which makes them look
lovely ; as white, fine ycllow blue, lake,
green, and such-like, of which may be


made an infinity of colours that will always
sympathize : The earthy, on the other hand,
have



have a heaviness, which, by mixture, de-
stroys the sweetnefs and lightnefs of the
aereal.
e-
Tis difficult to aslign the true phyfical
reason, why a colour is aereal or terrestrial;
yet we may conclude, that luminous colours
are sweet, and airy, and perfectly agree,
when mixed together. It is certain, how¬
ever, that some beautiful, sweet, and lu-
minous colours, instead of agreeing, destroy
each other, in the mixture ; as fine ultra-
marine mixed with white, or fine yellow or
fine vermilion. And though these colours,
set single one by another, have great bright-
ness, yet, when mixed, they make an
earthy colour, as ugly as possible.
WhENCE we may infer, that one of the
best ways to prove the sympathy or anti-
pathy of any two colours set together is, to
raise a third out of their mixture ; for, if
this third colour shews by its foulness, that
the two constituent colours are destroy d, we
may conclude, that these two colours haye
an antipathy to each other: If, on the con-
trary, that mixture makes a mellow, sweet,
and agreeable tint, which resembles their
original quality, ’tis an infallible proof of
their harmony.
ThE bodies of colours are also. another
principle, by which we may judge of
their agreement or repugnancy ; for some
have so much body, that they cannot bear





any other colour without taking away almost
entirely its natural qualities, as red oker, um¬
ber, indigo, and others, proportionably.
BuT even if neither art nor reason re-
quired harmony of colours, yet nature herself
shews it to us, and obliges even those to
mitate it, who copy her but servilely; for,
whether we consider the light as direct in
open day, or reflected in the shades, it can-
not communicate itself without communi-
cating also. its colour, which is sometimes of
one kind, sometimes of another. We have
an experiment of this in the light of the sun,
which, at noon, is very different in quality
from what it is in the evening or morning ;
and the moon has also a particular colour, as
well as the light of a fire, or of a flam-
beau.
BEFORE we quit this article of the har-
mony of colours, it must be observed, that
glazing is a mighty help to the sweetnefs of
colours, so necessary for expressing truth.
Few people understand it, because this know-
edge is generally the effect of long expe-
ience, accompanied with good judgment.
dappy is the man, who, when he views
he works of great masters, can penetrate
into the secrets of their art in this par-
ticular
ThE lovers of painting,
who are not
artists, must also be informed, that glazing
; made by colours transparent and dia-
phanous,



phanous, as having but little body, which
are thinly scumbled, with a fitch-pencil,
over colours that are more staring, in order,
to bring them down, and sweeten them
into an harmony with those about them.
HAving now spoke of the union of
colours, we must, in the next place, add a
word or two of their opposition. Colours
are opposite, either through their natural
qualities, when pure and simple, or else in
light and shade, when they make a part of
chie claro-obscuro.
This opposition in quality is called an-
tipathy ; it appears among such colours as
predominate, and destroy by mixture, as
ultramarine and vermilion; and the con-
trariety in the claro-obscuro is nothing but a
simple opposition of light with shade, with-
out any destruction : For tho nothing feems
more opposite than white and black, for ex-
ample ; the one representing light, and the
other the privation of light; yet, being
mixed, they maintain a kind of friendship
which cannot be destroyed; they make a
sweet grey, that partakes of both colours ;
and what shall appear black by the oppo-
sition of pure white, will seem white, when
set next to an intense black.
ThE same way of reasoning holds good
as to all other colours, where more or lesa
light alters nothing of their qualities.







It is certain, that this union and oppo
sition are evident in some colours ; but thie
difficulty of giving a reason for it obliges me
to refer the painter to his own experience,
and to the solid reflections which he may
make in the finest pieces of this kind, which
are very scarce and few; for in near three
hundred years, that painting has been revived,
we can hardly reckon six good colourists ;
whereas we may count at least thirty good
designers. The reason is, that design has its
rules founded on the proportions, on ana-
tomy, and a continual experience of the
same thing ; whereas colouring has not any

rules that are yet well known ; and the ex-
periments that are made, as they differ every
day, because of the different subjects that
are handled, have not been able to give any
fixed rules on this head : For which reason
1 am persuaded, that Titian gained more
help from his long and studious experience,
joined to the great solidity of his judgment,
than from any demonstrative rule he had
fixed in his mind. But 1 cannot say the
same of Rubens, who must always yield to
Titian as to the local colours ; tho, as to
the principles of harmony, he had discovered
such solid ones, that he was sure of pro-
ducing a good effect, and a good whole.
If my remark on Titian and Rubens be
just, those who desire to be good colourists
cannot take a better method than to study
the



the works of those two great masters, as
publick books of instruction. It will be
proper carefully to examine their works by
copying them for some time, the better to
apprehend them, and to make all the re-
inarks that appear necessary for establishing
principles. But it must be granted, that all
sorts of men are not capable of understand-
ing books, so as to profit by them ; for, in
order to this end, the mind must be so turned,
as to remark nothing but what is remark-
able, and to penetrate the very causes of the
effects which are admired in fine pro-
ductions.
SOME painters have copied Titian’s works
for a long time, examined them with care,
and, on the whole, made all the reflections
they could upon them, and yet have miss’d
the mark for want of attending to the pro-
per objects. For this reason their copies,
tho very much laboured, and, as they
thought, extremely exact, have fallen very
far short of the management in the originals.
Others, of more skill, and deeper reflection,
have procured copies of these pictures, to
pleasure themselves with looking at them,
and also to profit by them. This is very
commendable ; but if they would themselves
copy them, or at least the finest parts of
them, they would understand them more
thoroughly, and profit much better than by
bare looking. The truth is, these originals,
and




and all such others as are finely lighted and
coloured, are scarce, and it is difficult to
borrow them for any time ; yet love is in-
genious, and finds no difficulty insuperable.
In short, would we gain the good graces of
painting, the safest way is to labour hard,
nd make the necessary reflections; and then
we shall infallibly gain knowledge and faci-
lity : lf, for this purpose, we can’t procure
good originals, fine copies must serve ;
where we may chuse their best parts only,
if we think fit. We should also often visit
the cabinets of particular persons, and those
of the King, and of the Duke of Orleans,
ss often as possible.
The Luxemburg gallery is one of Rubens’s

finest performances: And Rubens has, more
than all other painters, made the way to
colouring easy and clear. The work I
mention is the helping hand, which may
save the artist from the shipwreck to which
he may have innocently exposed himself-
I HAVE always valued this work of
Rubens, as one of the finest performances
in Europe, if, in several parts, we set aside
he taste of its design, which is not the sub-
ect at present before us. I am sensible, that
many differ from my opinion of this great
man’s works, and that of a very considerable
number of painters, and curious men, who
have with all their might opposed my opi-
ion, when Ibrought to light, if I may so





say, the merit of this great man, who be-
fore was considered as a painter but little
above the common level; of these people,
I say, some yet remain, who without distin-
guishing the different parts of painting

especially colouring, of which we are now
speaking, value nothing but the Roman man¬
ner, the taste of Poussin, and the school of
te Carracchis.
ThEY object, among other things, that
Rubens’s works appear to have little truth,
on a near examination ; that the colours and
lights are loaded; and that, in the main, they
are but a daubing, and very different from
what we commonly observe in nature.
It is true, they are but a daubing ; but
it were to be wished, that the pictures that
are now painted, were all daubed in the same
manner. Painting, in general, is but daub-
ing ; its effence lies in deceiving, and the
greatest deceiver is the best painter. Nature
in herself is unseemly, and he who copies-
her servilely, and without artifice, will al-
ways produce something poor, and of a
mean taste. What is called load, in colours
and lights, can only proceed from a pro-
found knowledge in the values of- colours,
and from an admirable industry, which-
makes the painted objects appear more true;
if I may say so, than the real ones. In this
sense it may be asferted, that, in Rubens’s
pieces, art is above nature, and nature only
a copy



a copy of that great master’s works. And
of what import is it, after all, if things.
on examination, be not perfectly just, If
they appear so, they answer the end of
painting, which is not so much to convince
the understanding, as to deceive the eye.
This artifice will always appear wonder-
ful in great works ; for when the picture is
distanced according to its bignefs, it is this
artifice which supports the character, both
of the particular objects, and of the whole
together ; but without it the work, in pro-

portion as we remove from it, will appear
to remove from truth, and look as insipid as
an ordinary painting. Tis in such great
works, that Rubens is observed to have so
happily succeeded in this learned and appa-
rent load, by those especially who are ca-
pable of giving attention, and of examining
it ; for, to others, nothing can be a greater
mystery.
Of all the scholars of this excellent man,
Vandyke was hé who profited most by his
master’s instructions; and in speaking of
Rubens, one must-needs pay a particular re-
gard to this illustrious disciple; since, if he
had not so much genius as his master for
grand compositions, he surpassed him in
certain finesses of the art; and ’tis evident,

that, in general, his portraits have a delicacy
and freedom of penciling beyond any thing
else in that way.





Having now faithfully given my
thoughts on colouring, and its dependencies,
tis necessary to answer those persons who
think, that it is impossible to be master of
design and colouring at the same time -
Their strongest reason is, that in addicting
ourselves to colouring, we neglect design,
the charms of the one making us forget the
necessity of the other.
To this it is easy to answer, that if it be
fo, we must not impute it to colouring,
, but
to the mind, as being too narrow to attend
to two things at once. But it is not such
narrow capacities that painting takes up with,
Her only favourites are such minds as can
embrace many objects, or are so well turned,
and conduct themselves in such a manner,
that they never apply but to such things as
by degrees must increase their knowledge-
Their new studies do not make them forget
the old; on the contrary, the: former
strengthen the latter; they use all their
éfforts to poffess every study, as the necessary
means to arrive at their end. This was
Raphael’s character: The order and perspi-
cuity with which he conceived things; never
let him forget any thing; he daily improved
in knowledge, and strengthened his new
discoveries by such as he had formerly
made.
After the knowledge of colours, we
are led to treat of their use, management,
and



and operation ; three points, in the use of
which the painter’s greatest satisfaction
consists.
SENECA, speaking of the agreeableness
of painting, says, That it ytelds more plea-
sure in the execution, than when tis finished.
I am intirely of the same sentiment; be-
cause, in the course of the work, we handle
the principles and secrets of the art to our
 
own liking; we command them, as it were,

and every one makes them obey according to
his capacity and genius ; whereas, when the
work is finished, it commands the painter,
and obliges him to be satisfied with it, be
the performance what it will.
Here follow some maxims concerning
the use of colours.
PLinY says, That the antients painted
with four colours only, and out of them made
all their tints. But it is probable they
were anly for grounds, to prepare them for
receiving such other colours as gave the work
its freshinefs, vigour, and spirit.

WE must learn to view nature so ad-
vantage, in order to reprefent her well.
There are two manners of colouring her,
one depending on the habit which young
beginners form to themselves, and the other
comprehending the true knowledge of co-
lours, and their values when they come toge-
ther, and the proper temperament of their





mixtures, for imitating the various colours
in nature.
The memory of man is often limited
to a few ideas, which he is therefore obliged
to repeat. The way for the artist to avoid
a tiresome repetition, is, to have recourse
to that inexhaustible fountain, nature itself:

Nay, it is proper to anticipate his occasions
in this respect, by painting, after extraordi¬
nary natural objects, his various studies in all
the branches of the art, and painting them
on oiled paper that they may be of use to
him when he wants them.
The harmony of nature, in her colours.

arises from objects participating of one an-
other by reflexion; for there is no light
which does not strike some body, nor is
there any enlightened body which does not
reflect its light and colour at the same time,
in proportion to the force of the light, and
according to the variety of the colour. This
participation of reflexion in light and co-
lour constitutes that union of nature, and
that harmony, which the painter ought to
imitate. Hence it follows, that white and
black are seldom good in reflexions.
VarIETY of tints, very near of the same
tone, employd in the same figure, and often
upon the same part, with moderation, contri-
bute much to harmony.
The turti of the parts, and the outlines,
which insensibly melt into their grounds,
and



and artfully disappear, bind the objects, and
keep them in union ; especially as they
seem to conduct the eye beyond what it sees,
and persuade it, that it sees what it really
does not see; l mean, a continuity which
their extremities conceal.
Any loading or overcharge in colouring,
whether to cover a ground, or give distance to
work, or make good the injuries of time,
ought to be so discretely managed as not to
destroy the character of an object.

WE must avoid, as much as possible, the
repetition of the same colour in a picture;
but ’tis commendable to approach it by the
principles of union and elegance. A fine
instance of this we see in the marriage of
Cana, by Paul Veronese where several whites
and yellows meet harmonioussy.
The eye grows tired with viewing the
same objects ; it loves a well imagined va-
riety ; repetition is surfeiting in all things.
In painting, as in any thing else, things
become valuable only by comparison ; practice
and experience make us learned in this point.
COLOURS, which, either by mixture
lose strength, or become harmonious with
others, are called broken colours. Their
forts are infinite, and Paul Veronese, for his
happy success in this, may be a good copy.
In order to succeed in it, he affected to
make choice of light colours, which he made
more apparent by still lighter grounds. His




taste was chiefly for wrought stuffs, of a
sweet colour; these he purchased at great
expence, to paint after

iS wonderful that before, and even in
Raphael’s time, painters were so jealous of
their outlines, that they took no care to melt
them into their grounds. It is really pro¬
bable, that they were not acquainted with
the passages of antient authors, in praise of
melting one object into another ; for they
only observed regularity and preciseness in
their outlines.
So true it is, that there are times and
countries where people blindly follow the
prevailing practice, and where the skilful
draw in their pupils to their own habits, and
are looked upon by them as infallible. Hence
it appears, that it is a great happiness for
those who design to be painters, to fall into
the hands of able masters. But what com-
monly happens is this.
Arten the student has made a sufficient
progress in design, and resolved to follow
painting, he puts himself under a master,
whose sentiments he follows, and whose
works he copies. By this means his eyes
and understanding are so accustomed to these
works, that for all the rest of his life he sees
nature coloured in his master’s manner; and
yet, which is very extraordinary, suppose
both master and pupil to see nature very ill
I mean of a contrary colour to what she
really




eally has, and shew them any pictures of
Titian, or other good colourists, they will
nevertheless admire those pictures, but still
retain the tints-and colouring they have been
always used to ; so prevalent is habit, and so
hard to quit.
WhAT can we conclude from hence, but
either that habit has debauched the painters
eye, or he has been negligent in correcting
it? A thorough change is certainly very rare;
for habit having made an alteration in the
organs, ’tis hard to quit à manner we have
been always used to, and find easy in practice,
for one which will cost much trouble. Let
the pupil examine himself on this point,
and without losing courage; and, after having
discovered the right way, let him use all
endeavours to follow it.
After what I have said on the practice
of painting, Imust own, that l have passed
many things over in silence which relate to
this subject; but as what l have here com-
municated, I only learned by examining

with great attention, the works of the great
painters, especially those of Titian and Rubens,
and as the student himself must draw from
the -same source, 1 therefore refer him
thither: To Rubens, in the first place, be-
cause his principles are more apparent, and
easy to the apprehension; and then to
Titian, who leems to have polisned his
pictures,




pictures, I mean, to have made truth and
exactnefs more apparent in his local colours,
at a reasonable distance ; but yielding to
Rubens for grand compositions, and the art
of shewing, at a greater distance, the har-
mony of his whole together.


OF







OF THE
CLARO-OBSCURO.

THE knowledge of lights and shades,
which painting requires, is one of the

most important and most essential branches
of the art. We only see by means of light,
and light draws and attracts the eye with
more or less strength, as it strikes the ob-
jects of nature; for this reasor the painter,
who is the imitator of these objects, ought
to know and chuse the advantageous effects
of light, that he may not lose the pains he
may have taken in other things, to be an
able artist.
This part of painting includes two things,
the incidence of particular lights and shades,
and the knowledge of general lights and
shades, which we ufually call the claro-
obscuro. And tho, according to the force of
the words, these two things seem to be the
same, yet they are very different, because
of the ideas we are used to entertain of
them.

THE incidence of light consists in know¬
ing the shadow which a bedy, placed on a
certain



certain plane, and exposed to a given light,
ought to make upon that plane; a know¬
ledge easily attained from the books of
perspective. By the incidence of lights we
therefore understand the lights and shades
proper to particular objects. And by the
word claro-obscuro is, meant the art of
advantageoussy distributing the lights and
shades which ought to appear in a picture,
as well for the repose and satisfaction of the-
eye, as for the effect of the whole together.
The incidence of light is demonstrated
by the lines which are supposed to be drawn
from the source of that light to the body
enlightened ; and this the painter must

strictly observe , whereas the claro-obscuro
depends absolutely on the painter’s imagina-
tion, who, as he invents the objects, may
dispose them to receive such lights and
shades as he proposes in his picture, and in-
troduce such accidents and colours as are
most for his advantage. In short, as parti-
cular lights and shades are comprised in ge-
neral ones, we much consider the claro-
obscuro as one whole, and the incidence of
particular light as a part which the claro-
obscuro presupposes.
BuT in order to understand thoroughly
the meaning of this word, we must know
that claro implies not only any thing ex-
posed to a direct light, but also all such co-
lours as are luminous in their natures; and
obscuro,



obscuro, not only all the shadows directly
caused by the incidence and privation of
light, but likewise all the colours which are
naturally browii, such as, even when they
are exposed to light, maintain an obscurity
and are capable of grouping with the shades
of other objects: Of this kind, for instance,
are deep velvets, brown stuffs, a black horse,
polished armour, and the like, which preserve
their natural or apparent obscurity in any
light whatever.
It must be further observed, that the
claro-obscure, which contains and sup-
poses the incidence of lights and shades, as
the whole includes a part, respects that part
in a particular manner; for the incidence
of light and snade tends only to point out
precisely the parts enlightened and shaded ;
but the claro-obscuro adds to this precifenefs
the art of giving objects more relief, truth,
and apparency ; as I have elsewhere de-
monstrated.
BuT more plainly to discover the difference
between the claro-obscuro, and the incidence
of light; the former is the art of distri-
buting advantageoussy the lights and shades,
both in particular objects, and generally
throughout the picture ; but it more par-
ticularly implies the great lights, and
great shades, which are collected with an
industry that conceals the artifice. And in
this sense, the painter uses it for setting
objects



objects in a fine light, and reposing the
sight, from distance to distance, by an artful
distribution of objects, colours, and accidents;
and these are the three ways which lead tothe
claro-obscuro, as we shall further illustrate.
I. The Distribution of Objects.
THE distribution of objects forms the
masses of the claro-obscuro, when, by an
industrious management, we so dispose thém,
that all their lights be together on one side,
and their darkness on the other, and that this
collection of lights and shades hinder the eye
from wandering. Titian called it the bunch of
grapes, because the grape, being separated;
would have each its light and shade equally,
and thus dividing the sight into many rays;
would cause confufion ; but when collected
into one bunch, and becoming thus but one
mass of light, and one of shade, the eye
embraces them as a single object. This in¬
stance must not be understood literally,
either as to the order, or the form, of a
bunch of grapes; but only, as an obvious
comparison, to shew a conjunction of lights,
and also of shades.
2. The Bodies of Colours.
THE distribution of colours contributes
to the masses of lights, and to those of
shades,



shades, whilst direct light is of no other
assistance in this respect, than as it makes the
objects visible. This depends on the painter’s
management, who is at liberty to introduce a
figure cloathed in brown, which shall remain
dark, notwithstanding any light it may be
struck with; and the effect will be the
greater, as the artifice will not appear. The
same management and effect may be under-
stood of all other colours, according to the
degree of their tones, and the painter’s, oc-
casion for them.
3. Accidents.
THE distribution of accidents may be of
service in the effect of the claro-obscuro,
whether in light or in-shade, Some lights.
and shades are accidental : Accidental light
is what is but accessory to a picture, or
proceeds. from some accident, as. the light
of a window or flambeau, or other luminous,
cause, which is. nevertheless, inferior to the.
original light. Accidental shades are, for
example, those of the clouds: in a. landskip,.
or of some other body- supposed. to be out
of the picture, and giving advantageous
shades. But in the case of these: slying-
shadows, we must take care, that the sup-
posed cause of them be probable.
ThESe seem to me to be the-three ways-
of practising the claro-obseuro; but all Li
have



have said will be to little purpose, unless I
make the student sensible of the necessity of
the claro-obscuro, both in the theory and
practice of painting.
BuT of the many reasons for this neces-
sity, I shall chuse to mention four, which
seem to me to be the most important.
ThE first is taken from the necessity of
making a choice in painting.
ThE second proceeds from the nature of
mhe claro-obscuro.
ThE third from the advantage which the
claro-obscuro yields to the other parts of
painting. And
The fourth is dravn from the general
constitution of all beings.
The first Proof, taken from the Necessity ef-
making à Choice in Painting.
THE painter seldom finds satisfaction in
casual nature, as being generally short of
what he aims at. He must, by the help of
art, make as good a choice of her as possi-
ble, in all her visible effects, in. order to
bring her to some perfection. Now light
and shade are the visible effects of nature, as
well as the outlines of an human body, the
attitudes, the folds of draperies, or any
thing else that comes into composition ; all
these require choice, and therefore light
does the same. Now the choice of light is
nothing




nothing but the artifice of the claro-obscuro :

wherefore the artifice of the claro-obscuro is
absolutely necessary in painting.
The second Proof, taken from the Nature of
the Claro-obscuro.
THE senses in general have an aversion
for every thing that disturbs their attention :-
The eye is not satisfied with bare seeing; it
must also embrace its object with satisfaction,
and the painter must remove every thing
that would make it uneasy. Now the eye will
certainly be displeased, when directing itself
to its object, ’tis obstructed by others near it,
whose lights and shades are as apparent as
that object itself; and’tis as certain, that the
knowledge of the claro obscuro alone can
give to the fight- a peaceable enjoyment of
this object; for, as we have said before, it is
the claro-obscuro which prevents multiplicity
of angles, and hinders the eye from wander-
ing, by means of the groups of lights and
shades, of which it gives the knowledge-
Wherefore the claro-obscuro is of the greazest
consequence in painting.
The third Proof, drawn from the Adcantage
aehich the Claro obscuro yields to the other
Parts of Painting.
FIGURES ought to be well set and
distunced, their draperies well cast, and the
passions




passions of the soul finely expressed : In a
word, each object should be characterized
by a just and elegant design, and by a true and
natural local colour. But it is as necessary
to support all these parts, and give them a
good light, in order to make them the more
capable of attracting the eye, and of agree-
ably deceiving it, by means of the force and
repose which the knowledge of general lights
gives to a picture. This shews, what ad-
vantage the parts of painting receive from
the claro-obscuro, and consequently establisnes
the necessity of it.
The fourth Proof, drawn from the general
Constitution of all Things.
IT is certain, that all beings tend to unity.
either by relation, or composition, or har-
mony ; and this as well in things human as
divine, in religion as politicks, in art as na-
ture, in the facultie; of the soul as the or-
gans of the body. God is one, by the ex-
cellence of his nature: the world is one-
Morality brings every thing within the com-
pass of religion, which is one ; as politicks
makes every thing subservient to the govern-
ment of a state. All nature preserves, in
all her productions, an unity resulting from
the many members in animals, and parts in
plants ; and art assigns various precepts for
making one only work. The several con-
ditions



ditions of men fit them for commerce and
society, as the several wheels of a machine
act for a principal motion. The faculties of
the soul are, at one time, taken up.with
one thing only, in order to act well ; and the
organs of the body cannot satisfactorily en-
joy more than one object at a time; for if
you set many before them at once, they will
not fix upon any; and this multiplicity will
divide them, and intirely take away the
liberty of their functions. If, in a publick
assembly, two or three persons speak at once,
in the same tone, and with the same force,
the ear, instead of receiving what is said,
will be stunned with a confused noise. In
the same manner, if we present to the sight
many objects, distinct and equally apparent,
tis certain, that the eye not being able to
collect all those objects at once, will through
their division have some pain in coming to a
determination. Thus, as in a picture there
ought to be an unity of subject for the eyes
of the understanding, so there ought to be an
unity of object for those of the body. This
unity is only to be procured by the know-
ledge of the claro-obscuro, and without it
we cannot view an object with any ease or
satisfaction.
WhEN Ispeak of the unity of object in a
picture, I must be understood to mean such
a distance as tlie eye can reasonably take in
without heing distracted by many distinct ob-







jects, as usually falls out in a small number
of figures. Pictures may be large, and full
enough of work to contain three groups of
claro-obscuro; and then thelights and shades
of each group, being sufficiently spread, draw
and fix the eye for some time ; giving it
leave, however, to pafs from one group to
another; and yet these groups of objects, and
I
of the claro-obscuro, in the same picture, tend
so much to unity, that one of them ought
to predominate. For this reason the painter
is obliged to bring into this group the prin-
cipal figures of his subject as much as pos-
sible. This subordination of groups creates
a further unity, which we call the aehole
together ; but care must be taken, that these
groups neither range too much, nor look
starch, nor confused, nor be alike in shape;
for ’tis indifferent to the eye, whether the
masses of the claro-obscuro be of a convex,
or concave, or any other figure.
We must only observe, that tho in great
works the masses of light and shade necessa-
rily assist each other yet the masses of shade
must not so forcibly contribute to the repose
of the eye as to leave it in a state of inaction
with regard to the light masfes. The painter
should, in this point, imitate the orator,
who, when he would fix the attention of his
audience upon a certain particular passage,
which he would illustrate and enforce, be-
gins with something of less consequence,
and,




and, after having fixed the object in the mind.
of his hearers, he refreshes them with speak-
ing of something more temperate; but with-
out ever suffering their attention to flag.
In the same manner the painter makes luis
lights to shine, and supports them by masses
of brown, which repose the eye, withoirt
hindering its being entertained by objects
less apparent.
We may even sometimes introduce single
objects, but it must be done with prudence,
and they must be brown in the light inasses,
and light in the brown, either sor breaking
through too great silence in a picture, or for
loosening some figures, or for taking away
affectation from the work. In a word, the
whole should so appear as if every thing fell
out by chance.
But I must own, that every painter has
not the gift of thus conccaling the artifice of
the claro-obscuro, and executing it with in¬
dustry.. It requires as much reflection and
delicacy, as it starts new difficulties in every
new subject. The geniuses proper for it are
such as pierce through every thing, and
know how to acquit themselves happily of
what they undertake.
We might here add, as afurther proof ofthe
force and necessity of the claro-obscuro, the
praises which painters themselves always be-
stow on the works where that artifice appcars,
and also on the authors of them.






In effect, whoever will reflect on the
advantages which all the parts of painting
receive from the claro-obscuro, must own,
that any picture, be it ever so correct, and
ever so faithful in design, and local colour-
ing, is, without that artifice, dull and taste-
leis; whereas another painting, where the de-
sign, and the local colours are but tolerable, if
supported by the said artifice, will not suffer
the spectator to pass unconcernedly by ; it
will even call to him, and detain him for
some time, whether he have a taste for
painting, or not. What then would be the
effect, if the claro-obscuro was supported by
fine performance in other parts, and the
work was viewed by a good judge, or skil-
ful lover of painting ?
I THOUGhT it would not be improper to
give here the principal explications of the
effect of the claro-obscuro, to let the reader
at once into what has been said upon this
subject.
Fig. I. Plate II. proves the unity of an
object, as it has been treated in the discourse
of Disposition. We see there also a de-
monstration of objects entering the picture
in perspective. Both diminisn equally in
foree as they recede from the centre of vi-
sion. Their only difference is, that the latter
decrease in magnitude, according to the rules
of perspective, as they go off from the said
centre ; and the former, which only extend
to












































































to the right and left of that centre, grow
fainter by distance, without losing their forms
or bigness.
Fig. II. of Plate Il. sliews how to handle
at particular object, in order to give it relief;
which is, to use, in the fore-part, the most-
lively light, and strongest shades, always pre-
serving the reflécted lights, near the turning
on the side of the shade.
Fig. III. of Plate II. proves the necessity
of-grouping, for the satisfaction of the eye.
This was Titian’s great rule, and ought still
to be the rule of those who would observe
in their paintings that unity of object, which
with skilful colouring constitutes all the har-
nony of the art.
Fig. IV of Plate II. shews the necessity
of preserving unity of object in making
groups, according to the bignefs of the
picture, and the number of its figures ; for,
as we have said, we must, to please the eye,
six it by a predominant group, which, by
means of the reposes caused by à spread of
rights and shades, does not hinder the effect
of other groups, or subordinate objects; for,
of the objects are dispersed, the eye is at a
oss which to fix upon, and is in the same
ease with the ear, when many persons are
speaking at the same time.

MuCh more might be said on the subject
of lights and shades, which indeed is of-
reat extent; but l content myself with
giving





giving, according to my notion, an idea of
the claro-obscuro, and shewing the several
methods of practising it, together with its
absolute necessity in painting. Those who
would know more of it, may consult my
commentary on du Fresnoys poem, begin-
ning at the 2671b verse, and continued for
seven or eight leaves following.
SCULPToRs, as well as painters, when
they have occasion, may practise the claro-
obscuro by the disposition of their figures,
or by the place where their work is to stand.
The cavalier Bernini has left posterity some
illustrious instances of this in some churches
of Rome, where he has disposed the sculpture
to the lights of the windows, or else has
pierced the windows for an advantageous
opening, when he had leave, in order to let
in such a light as might produce an extra-
ordinary cifect, and awaken the spectator’s
attention ; but the skilful sculptor may go
yet further, by adding to the claro-obscuro
the local colours, if he understands them ;
Of this we have two wonderful examples at
Mons. le Hays in the Grenelleestreet, in the
suburbs of St. Germains. They are in two
cases; one is, the defcent from the crofs;
and the omet, the adoration of the shepberds.
These two subjects are so profoundly and
beautifully handled, that I believe the pub-
lick will be pleased with their description ;
and-tho I have drawn it with all possible
exactness,



exactness, yet l question not but the curious
will find it far short of the sublime, which
the abbot Zumbe, the author of those works,
has attained in all the parts of his art. It
would here be proper to say something of
the life of that illustrious man; but I have
thought it would be more so to reserve it
for a second edition, which is going to be
published, of my Lives of the Painters-
wherefore Ifhall here only give the descri-
ption of these sculptures : Which I have
subjoined to the end of this work, that the
order of my present discourses might not
be interrupted.













Which ought to be Observed in the
STUDY Of PAINTING.
MOST of the fkilful painters have
taken great pains, and spent many

years in the search of knowledges, which
they might have attained in a little time, had
they hit at first upon the right path. This
truth, of which all ages have been convinced
by experience, principally concerns youth;
and it is youth especially, who, while they
are greedily pursuing knowledge, have need
of light to conduct them orderly to the point
they aim at.
PAINTING may be considered as a fine
parterre, genius as the ground or soil, principles
as the seeds, and good understanding as the
gardener who prepares the earth for receiving
the seeds in their seasons, and raises all forts
of flowers both for profit and delight.
TiS






Tis certain that the genius, which gives
birth to the fine arts, cannot lead them
to perfection without culture ; that cultuze
is impracticable without the direction of the
judgment ; and that judgment is of no use,
unlefs grounded on true principles. We must
herefore suppose a genius in all our under-
takings, which would otherwise be lame
and imperfect. It must be owned, that all
ages are not equally rich in producing real
geniuses, and that art grows weak for want
of skilful men.: But this ought not to dis¬
courage such as endeavour to be as good as
they can. The earth yields according to its
strength, and the seed sown. Genius, in the
same manner, by cultivating, will always
produce something, more or less, in pro-
portion to its elevation and extent. Thus
genius has. its degrees, and nature has fixed
one for some things, and others for others,
as may be observable, not only in the several
professions, but even in the several parts of
the same art or science. In painting, for
nstance, one may have a genius for por-
traiture or landskip, for beasts or flowers;
but as all these parts meet in a genius proper
for history, it is certain, that such a genius
ought to preside over all the kinds of paint-
ing; and the rather, because, if it should
succeed better than others, this is the com-
mon. effect of its being more employd in
this part of painting; and because, feeling a
talent





talent for history, it has embraced this- part
with pleasure, and had more frequent oc-
this be said, without derogating from those
geniuses, which, after being inlarged enough
to succeed in history, have applied them-
selves, either occasionally, or through taste,
to one part of painting, rather than another:
For painting ought to be considered as a long
pilgrimage, where, in the course of the
journey, we discover several things capable
of diverting the mind agreeably for a while.
We consider the several parts of the art, and
stop in the way to it, as a traveller bates at
an inn ; but if we make our abode at that
inn, because we find beauties there agreeable
to our taste, or suiting our interest, and
therefore are satisfied to view, at a distance,
or rather to hear talk of our journey’s end,
we must never expect to finisn our pilgrimage,
and come up to the perfection of painting.
This is certainly the case of those, who
intend to be painters, and yet, passing thro’ thé
parts of the art, are stopped by the charms of-
some of them, without considering that perfect
painting arises only from the perfection and
union of them all. What is therefore of the
greatest importance, is the cultivation of that
genius which ought to preside over all the parts
of painting. History demands its whole appli-
cation and attachment, and forbids it to en¬
gage in any disputes that may delay its pro-
gress,



gress, or in any affair that may divert or en-
cumber it.
BUT a pupil’s disposition for instruction
may possibly cause an aversion in a master,
through fear of losing, in a small time,
the fruits of his long experience; for.
by imparting his lights, he may be either
equalled or surpassed by his pupil. To this
I answer, That to bury one’s knowledge in
this manner, is neither natural, christian-
like, nor politick. Tis not natural, because
nature’s property is to beget her like; nor
christian-like, since ’tis the part of charity to
instruct the ignorant , I mean, such as have
talents to learn; and ’tis impolitick, because
the master’s reputation spreads, and is pre-
served, by that of his disciples, who transmit
to posterity the glory of their instructors.
IF, among the fkilful painters, some of
the youngest plead interest against commu-
nicating their lights and secrets, and it be
thought a sufficient reason, yet we cannot ex-
cuse the more advanced in age, nor those
whose reputation is fixed; because, far from
running any risque, their good intentions will
be à fatisfaction to themselves, and procure
them the praise of others; for, What do
fuch masters: They only find methods for
removing difficulties, shortening time, and
putting their disciples in a way to perfect
their taste and genius.





I AM aware, that able painters (I mean
in general) may have taken different methods
of study, and therefore must lead their dis-
ciples by different roads, though all tending
to the same point. I know also, that there
are some, who, after having studied, without
order, and spent many years in the search
of a good method, have not found it till
very late, and who after being better in-
structed, and having disabused themselves,
would be very capable of pointing out to
youth the best methods of study; but my
surprize at the many years usually afsigned
for this study, obliged me here to give my
thoughts upon the subject, and upon the
order l could wish were observed in it.
I shALL not determine at what age one
ought to begin study, because, in all pro-
fesfions, genius and application are half the
work : Yet such as propose to be painters,
cannot set about designing too soon ; for, as
their genius comes to shew itself by practice,
they may be suffered to go on, if they have
any; or, if they have none, may be employd
about things for which they may seem to be
better turned. But if their inclination for
painting continues, care must be taken,
during their first exercises in design, to put
them in a method of reading and writing to
advantage, in order to prevent the general
indifference people have for reading, for
want of its being familiar to them in their
youth.




youth. And as painters stand in great need
of the helps arising from thence, the first
looks put into the student’s hands should be
such as are agreeable, and fitting his age, to
give him a taste for reading; and afterwards,
i1 proportion as the mind forms itself, no-
thing will better teach him to think well,
than good books.
BUT, at what age soever one begins
painting, every student advances, more or
less, in proportion to his genius. Some are
drawn by their genius, and follow it; others
are dragged by force . There are but sew of
these last. These make great progrefs in a
little time, and no age is set for them.
But, as we are laying down a plan for
study, I think the student should begin very
young, according to the usual custom of
pupils.
PLINY tells us, that when Alexander
be Great asfigned to painting the first rank
mong the liberal arts, he at the same time
ordered, that young people of condition
should before all things learn to design.
Alexander in so doing, could have no other
view than forming the taste of his principal
subjects, by that disposition to painting which
design gives the mind.
In effect, the first fruit of design is the
exactness creates in the eye of the designer;
and its first use is to make a general di¬
stinction in the characters of objects, and
then




then to imprint on the mind the principles
of what is good in the fine arts; and, at
last, the taste being formed by a progrefs in
these principles, the designer thus becomes
more capable of judging of the works both-
of art and nature.
ALExANDer, who did not propose to
make all those persons of condition painters,
commanded them, however, to begin de-
signing betimes, that they might thus be
qualified, all their life-time, to judge of
any object that offered.
PAoINTerS and sculptors have the greater
reason to observe this law in their early
youth, as it not only enables them to give
their opinions on the works of others, but
also to compose works of their own, of
which others are to judge.
The first thing which ought to be con-
sidered, in the pursuit of an art which we
propose to follow all our life, is to make a
proper distribution of our time, and to allow
each study as much of it as it requires. In
our younger years, for instance, when rea-
son is weak, and reflections unseasonable,
we ought to make advantage of the softness
of the brain, and purity of the organs, which
are then capable of any impression or habit
we would have them take.
Ie this be so, there are but two exercifes
proper for the student in his early years: The
one is, to accustom his eye to exactuefs, in
faith-



faithfully setting down on paper the di
mensions of the objects he copie and the
other, to use his hand to the crayon and
pen, till he has got a necessary facility in
designing ; for exactness of eye, and facility
of hand, are the two inlets to design.
Tis therefore of the last consequence to
young people, in order to begin painting
well, and to make a speedy progress in it,
not to discontinue these two exercises till
they are perfect in them/
Now, if this point be of great importance
to the student, 'tis more so to an academy ;
for if they will but attend to ehri own sup
port and advancement, theyb must look upon
it as necessary to admit no scholar, who has
not before sufficiently practised drawing after
designs and pasters, that is who has not
acquired an exactness of eye, and facility of
hand, in using the crayon; and that in the
judgment of the officers in exercise. My
reason is, that when scholars are received too
young and ignorant in to the academy-school
they waste a great deal of time there, without
maing any remarkable progress in
their pretended studies : and yet, after some
years, relying more upon the time they have
spent, than the progress they have madethey rashly set up,
as competitors, for the
prize, of which they are wholly unworthy.
Afterwards it happens in consequence of this






this, that those who pretend to the prizes of
painting, being chips of the same block of
ignorance, yield the same fruit, either bad.
or insipid.
The young student ought, in the next.
place, to learn geometry ; because, as he is.
now advanced so far as to reflect and reason
upon all the parts of painting, with which
it is necessary to be thoroughly acquainted ;
and as geornetry teaches to reason, and to
infer one thing from another; it will stand
him in stead of logick, and clear him out of
all his doubts and perplexities.
ThEN, as perspective presupposes geome-
try as the foundation of it, it is natural to
place it next, and to apply to it with the
greater attention, as nothing can be done in
painting without it.
By this time the student may be supposed
to have got an habit of copying with ease all
sorts of designs, and of designing all sorts of
pictures; and yet this habit must not be con-
sidered otherwise than as a disposition ne-
cessary for attaining design.
In this view the young student must con-
sider the imitation of fine nature as his chief
aim, and be acquainted with the exterior
characters of all the forms she produces.
And beginning with her master-piece, man,
he must understand anatomy, and human
proportion, because these two parts are the
basis of design. Anatomy establisnes the
solidity



solidity of the body, and the proportions
form its beauty. The proportions derive
from anatomy the truth of their outlines
and anatomy owes to the proportions tge exact
regularity of nature in her first intentions/
In fine, both these parts mutually assist to
make a design solid, and perfectly correct.
Tho' those two parts seem to be linked
together, yet it is best to begin with anatomy
as being the offspring of nature, whereas
proprtion is the product of arts ; and if pro
portion arise from good choice, goo choice
owes its origin to nature.
In the study of the proportions, the general ones must, in the first place,
be well
understood; I mean, such as generally suit
each part; so as to make a finished whole.
Thus, we must know, how an head, foot,
or hand, ought to be made, and, in short,
the whole body, in order to form a perfect
man.
But nature being various in her productions
we must observe what she produces
that is finest in the different characters
of men, arising from the diversity of their
ages, countries, and professions.
Nature indeed affords such a variety
as is infinit; but as her riches have their
allay, 'tis best, at first to hase recourse to
the antique for an exquisite choice in all the
ages and conditions of life. The antique
figures not only contain every thing that is most





most beautiful in the proportions, but are in
thémselves the very sources of grace, ele-
gance, and expression, and the study of
them is the more necessary, as ’tis the path
that leads to beautiful truth. And this we
must pursue, without regard to the time it
may take ; for, since the antique is the rule
of beauty, we must persist in designing after
it; till we have formed a just and strong idea of
it, that may help us to view nature in the best.
manner, and to bring her back to-her first
intentions, from which she often departs.
As the finest pattern we have for this
conduct, are the works of Rapbael, ’tis pro-
per to copy them at the same time, that
they may serve to guide us in the happy
mixture he has made of the antique with
nature.
HERe, by-the-bye, we must observe,
that in the antique there is a general taste
diffused over all the works of those times,
and a particular one characterizing each
figure, according to its agé and quality; and
this must be the subject of the student’s care-
ful reflections, according to the compass of
his improvement and penetration.
HAViNg spent the necessary time in the
aforesaid studies, we must now consider them
as steps, by whièh the understanding rises to
the knowledge, of the natural object, both
such as it is, and such as it ought to be.
By these first studies we discern the defects
of



of our copy, and how far ’tis short of per-

féction ; and our ideas inform as, what must
be added to, or taken from the life, to make
as perfect as we think- it ought to be.  :

Tis here therefore we ought to place
the study of the model ; which, with con-
rast and ponderation, completes the study-
of ithe attitudes.
As in setting a model ’tis necessary to find
in attitude that has a natural contrast, and
shews its finest parts, it is also necessary to
five it: relief and roundness : but as the relief
and. roundnefs of one particular object, is not.
sufficient in a company of figures ; and as, to.
please the eye, and for the effect of the
of lights and shades, which is called the
claro-obscuro ; it follows, that this study-
particular attention, and ought to be-the
more thoroughly mastered, as the claro-
obscuro is one: of the principal grounds of
painting, as its effect calls to the spectator,
is it supports the composition of: a picture,
and as without it any pains bestowed on
particular objects would be lost labour.
AFter this part of painting is well un-
understood, it is proper, in order to root it
deep in the mind, to view attentively the
rpints of those masters who best understood.
ilghts and shades, and to go to the bottom
of this knowledge, in order to confirm the






student- in that of the claro-obscuro. He
must also have a general acquaintance with.
the prints and designs of the great masters,
to shew him how they managed both in
composition and simple figures.

Goop prints, as well as good drawings,
are also proper to warm the genius, and ex-
cite it to produce the like. We are made
sensible of the character of each object by its
different drawing and handling; and, having
copied after good- masters, we perceive that
those fine touches and handlings are the
soul of design. These we must imprint in
our mind, in order to gain more disposition
and facility to observe in nature the man-
ner of expressing the character of objects.
The student must use all his endeavours to
feed his eye with the sight of these fine

things.
BUT, to rivet them in his memory and
understanding, it will be convenient to copy
and make extracts of their finest parts; such
as he most wants, or his genius chiefly leads,
him to., Tis in such cases that intelligent
and sincere friends, who often know our
weaknesses, and the bent of our-genius, bet-
ter than ourselves; may asfist us with their
counsels and knowledge, if consulted.
ThUs far painting and sculpture have
gone hand in hand’; for 1 suppose - the
sculptor to be used to designing on paper,
as l desire the painter, for his own profit, to
learn



earn to model,. Each of them must now
take a path of his own, in order to arrive
happily at his end, which is, the imitation of
nature . The sculptor must give relief to his
matter, and the painter use his colours on a
flat superficies. But my present design is
chiefly to direct the painter, in order to bring
him to the end of his career.
The method I have thus far pointed out,
only relates to the study of design; what I
have yet to say relates chiefly to colouring.
SEVERAL painters think, that the study
of design implies that of colouring ; because,
say they, several good designers, having too
ong enjoyed the pleafures and charms of
design, have so filled their mind with it,
that they left no room for colouring; or,
having made too great progress in design, they
soon grew tired of colouring, which was
uneasy to them. For which reason they
returned to the pleasure they found in their
abit of designing; for ’tis a pleasure to do.
what we can easily do.
ThESE reflections are certainly not
groundless. But to comply, in some mea-
sure, with the weakness of men who do
almost every thing by habit; I think that
the student should, in the course of design¬
ng, sometimes handle the pencil and colours,
to make this part, through early custom, a
pleasure to. him. But if we go to the bot-
tom of these inconveniences, they will not
appear





appear to proceed from not colouring early,
but from beginning ill ; Imean, either copy-'
ing at first after bad things, or being tutored
by a master who had not the principles of
colouring.
WE naturally quit a bad manner of de-
signing, as may be observed in those who
design; for they become more correct by
practice, and by change of object and model;
but it is very rare to exchange a bad manner
in colouring for à better : l say, that it is
not impossible, but very rare. Raphael,
Michael Angelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Juliò
Romano, and other great-masters of those
times, followed the schools and the practice
of the places where they were educated ;
and spent their whole lives withoût truly
understanding good colouring. Even in our
own times, Voet’s disciples, tho numerous,
and men of good sense, have not been able,
whatever they could do, to shalce off their
master’s bad manner. We have further
instances of youngpainters, who, by beginning
to copy pictures of trivial colouring, have
retained that manner in every thing they co-
loured ; making it as a glafs, through which
they saw nature coloured like their paintings.
From hence we may infer, that a young man,
who begins with copying an ill-coloured
picture, swallows’a poison, with which he
himself will taint all his future perform-







But a solid judgment, and goodeducation,
can surmount difficulties; and correct bad
taste, where the understanding is docile.
There is no reason ’therefore why we may

not place here the study of colouring,
leaving every student at liberty to refresh
himself sometimes, by interrupting the order
of study Iam going to lay down.
ThE student’s first care must be to begin
with copying what he finds best coloured,
most finished, and most freely. penciled in the
works of the great masters ; among whom
Titian, Rubens, and Vandyke, are of the Aarst
rank. Vandyke chiefly, with regard to be-

ginners, because his good colouring is joined

with freedom of penciling.
As colouring is not farther valuable than
it perfectly imitates nature, the student,
after having obtained some habit from the
best pictures, must also copy after nature.
herself, examine and compare it with, the
works of the great masters. This practice.
will accustom his taste to an idea of truthi,
and his eye t9 see truth without any cloud
or obstruction.
After having thus acquired a good
habit, and put his taste in a condition to
fear nothing, he may. copy pictures of all
manners, if he finds any thing in them to.
entertain the activity of his genius;. but,
like the bees, which gather their honey from
several good flowers, he should. chiefly copy
excellent




excellent pieces, such as are best for forming
a good manner. He should do the same in
the fine productions of nature, whether
figures, beasts, or landfkip, of which he may
make a collection, as well for common use
in the way of his business; as to keep up
his taste, or to feed his curiosity.
BeING come to this pitch, and so fur-
nished, the young painter may fly with his
obn wings, and, by reading or reflecting
raise his thoughts, and exercise his imagin-
ation, in composing variety of subjects,
adorning them with such choice of beauties
as nature affords in abundance.
But let him remember above all things
never to set about a picture till he has first
made a slight sketch of it in colours, where
he may give a loose to his genius, and re-
gulate the motions of it afterwards, in the
objects, and in the effect of the whole toge-
ther. This sketch must be made as quickly
as possible, after he has fixed his thought,
that the fire of his imagination may not have
time to evaporate; and, being only a loose
sketch, as we suppose it, he may afterwards
alter, add, or diminish, either in composition
or colouring, as he thinks fit.
Anp now having brought things to his
mind, he must, before he begins to dead-
colour the great picture, consult every. thing
he has by him that is most beautiful either
in nature or the antique, and proper for his
subject,



subject, and draw exactly after each of them
in their, proper places, to save hmself the
trouble and vexation of alterations, and do-
ing one thing twice.: In this point Ranhael
went further : His method was, to paste. as.
many papers together as made the size of
is picture; and after having correctly de-
signed, and put all things an. their places,
he transferred this cartoon to the ground he
intended to paint on.
Yet, if after all those precautions it should
still be necessary, for the effect of the picture,
to make some alterations, it will be prudent
not to neglect them ; the trouble will not
be great, and there will, besides, be no room
to reproach ourselves with any neglect.
The artist being now supposed to have
brought his work to good forwardness, he
must consider what place it is to be hung in,
and at what distance from the eye, and to
regulate the force of his colouring and
touches accordingly.
Of all geniuses, Ibelieve there is not any
which takes greater liberties than that for
painting, nor any which suffers the bridle
more impatiently ; nay, I question not but
several painters, besides some extraordinary
geniuses, have, without any order of study,
attained to a considerable reputation; though
indeed not without losing much time for
want of some method. But as, in a ma¬
chine,




chine, the bad disposition of the wheels
retards the motion, so the parts of painting
disorderly studied, confuse the understand-
ing and memory, and make things difficult
either to be understood or :remembred :
Wherefore the best way is, to put. our
studies into some order not inconsistent: with








A

DISSERTATION,
WHETHER
Poesy be preferable to PaintinG.
Tis not my design to majntain, that
painting excels poesy: T never doubted
out these two arts go hand in hand, and
equally deserve the same honours. I have
spoken of them accordingly, when occasion
offered; and in this I have only followed the
sentiments of the most celebrated authors.
But as people do not always agree, even in
I find there
points that are most received ;
are some persons of great distinction, who
have expressed their displeasure at my classing
poetry with painting. However much dis-
posed I may be to agree with them; T will
examine this with all the application l can a
for if Imust at length come into their senti-
nents, they will not disapprove of my de-
serring to do it, till I have disabused my-
elf.



