ounzeoby Google


 ie


4


Z


Mes.


7


6
A 



. lésl soo.
onzeo by Google


ui


1







































































































The art of drawing
and



PAINTING in Water-Colours.
WHEREIN
The Principles of DRAwInG are laid down
after a natural and easy Manner; and Youth
directed in every Thing that relates to this
useful Art, according to the Practice of the
best Masters.
To which are annexed,
Familiar Directions, whereby a Stranger in the
Art of Drawing may be readily taught to deline-
ate any View or Prospect with the utmost Exact-
ness; of colouring any Print or Drawing in the
most elegant Manner; and of taking off Medals,
&c., instantly, after a Variety of different Ways
never before made public; intermixed with curi-
ous Receipts for the Use of Painters, Statuaries,
Founders, E&c.
WIT H
InsTrUCTioNs for preparing, mixing, and managing all Sorte
of Water-Colours used in Painting, so as to represent Nature
in the greatest Perfection.
A NEW EDITION, corrected, and, besides other
Improvements, illustrated with COPPER-PLATES.




LONDON;
Printed for G. KEITH at the Bible and Crown, Gracecebury
street ; and J. RoBinson, at the Globe and Biele, Dacë-
bead. 1770. Where may be had Variety of Drawing-Books
Colours and Pencils.
Price ONE SHILLING.











































































































































































































The art of
DRAWING,
AND
PAINTINg in. Water-Colours, &c.


PART I.
The Principles, &c. ef DRAWIXG.
CHAP I.
Of DRAwinG in General.
RAwING is the Art of representing the
Appearances of Objects by Imitation; or
expressing, by Lines and Shades, the Formi
or Appearance of any Thing in Nature or Art;
the Copying of another Draught, or any Design
conceived in the Mind; and all this without the
Assistance of mathematical Rules.






The Art of Drawing, being an Accomplishment
not more elegant, agreeable and ornamental than
useful, is, therefore, by no Means to be neglected
in the Education of Youth, wherein any Genius
or Inclination that Way is discovered. Besides
its being of all Arts; the most universally ad-
mired and esteemed, there are few other Arts or
Professions to which it is not assisting: its great
UJse is not only confined to Painters, Engravers,
Gardeners, Embroiderers, Weavers, and many
others concerned in Designing; but the Mathe-
matician, Engineer, Architect and Navigator
daily practise it. All Designs and Models are
executed by it ; its Use appears in every Station
of Life, and it is equally admired by Children
and by Adults.
To be able, on the Spot, to take the Sketch of a
fine Building, or a beautiful Prospect, of any
curious Production of Art, or uncommon Appear-
ance in Nature, is not only a very desirable Accom-
plishment, but a veryagreeableAmusement. Rocks,
Mountains, Fields, Woods, Rivers, Cataracts,
Cities, Towns, Castles, Houses, Fortifications,
Ruins, or whatever else may present itself to View
on our Journeys or Travels, in our own or in fo-
reign Countries, may be thus brought Home, and
preserved for our future Use, either in Business or
Conversation. This Art transmits to our View
Things that are long since past, or would otherwise
perisn; reprefents to us the Deeds of People aud
Nations for many Ages dead, and preserves the
Features




Féatures and Resemblance of Ancestors; or other
valuable Persons, for many Generations. It is
therefore no Wonder that an Attainment so uni¬
versally useful and admired should be distinguished
as one of the highest Embellishments of liuman
Life, and be patronized and cultivated by all the
generous and ingenious Part of Mankind.
CHAP. II.
Of the proper Materials for DRAwinG.
EvHE Materials required in Drawing, are
black Lead-Pencils ; Crayons of black,
white ar red Chalk; Crow-Quill Pens; a Rule
and Compasses; Camel’s Hair Pencils, and In-
dian Ink.
Accustom yourself to hold your Pencil further
from the Point than you do in Writing, which-
will give you a better Command of it, and con-
tribute to render your Strokes more free and bold.
TheUie of your Pencil is to drawthe first Sketches
or Qut-lines of your Piece; as any Stroke or Line
that is amiss, may in this be more easily rubbed
out than in anyother Thing; and when you
have made your Sketch as correct as you can
with the Pencil, you may then draw carefully the
best Qut-line you have got, with your Crow-Quill
Pen and Ink. The Ink made Use of fof this Pur-
pose, must not be the common, but Indian Ink;
being much softer than the other, andnot running;
and,





and, by mixing it with Water, it may be made
to any Degree of Strength, and may be used in a
Pen like common Ink. After using the Ink, you
may wipe out the Pencil-Lines, by rubbing the
Piece gently with the Crumb of stale Bread.
Having thus got your Out-line discharged, your
next Work is to shade your Piece properly, as
you shall be directed below, either by drawing
fine Strokes with your Pen, where it requires to
be shaded, or by washing it with the Hair-Pencil
and the Indian Ink: As to the Rule and Com-
passes, they are never, or rarely, to be used,
except in measuring the Proportions of your
Figures after you have drawn them, to prove
whether they are right or not; or in Houses,
Fortifications and gher Pieces of Architecture.
Red Lead and red or black Chalk are used in
the same Manner as black Lead. White Chalk
and Tobacco-Pipe Clay are used in heightening or
giving strongLights, and in drawing on coloured
Paper. Pastils or Crayons are any Colours, mixed
with Tobacco-Pipe Clay, which, while soft and
in the Consistency of a Paste, is rolled up in Pieces,
about the Thickness of a Quill, and two or three
Inches in Length, and then dried; they are gene-
rally used on coloured Paper; and the Colours are
rubbed and wrought one into another, in such
a Manner that no Strokes appear, but the whole
looks as if it was done with a Brusn.








CHAP. III.
Of LigHt and Shade
It is the artful Management of Light and Shade
— that gives the Appearance of Substance,
Roundness and Distance, to whatever Bodies are
represented by Drawing. Draw a Circle on a
Piece of Paper; fill it up with any even Colour,
and it will appear to be a Body with a round Cir-
cumference and flat Sides : But by colouring it
stronger in the Middle, and causing it gradually
to weaken towards the Circumference, it will
receive a convex Appearance like that of a Bali
or Glabe : Wherever the Vivacity of Colour is
strongest,, that Part of the Object catches the
Sight first, and appears nearest to it: whereas its
Weakness and Goings off are more and more bro-
ken and faint, and seem to ffy farther off from the
Sight. In rounding the Païts of any Ohject, the
Extremities in turning must lose themselves insen-
sibly and confusedly, without precipitating the
Shadows into the Light, but the Passage of the
one into the other must be common and impercep-
tible; that is, by Degrees of Light into Shadow,
and Shadow into Light. Objects that are paint-
ed light must have a sufficient Breadth of Shadow
to sustain them; and dark Bodies must have a sud-
den Light behind, to detach them from the Ground,
or from those Objects that are placed belind them;







otherwise they will appear confufedly, as sticking.
upon each other; whereas the Opposition of Shade-
to a light Object, and of Light to a dark one,
gives a Projection, and separates them from other
Bodies.
There should be a Balance preserved between-
the Lights and Shadows : a broad Light ought-
riot to be introduced into a Draught without a
large Shadow. The nearer any Object is to the
Eye, it is seen so much tlie stronger and plainer 5.
tlie Sight is weakened by Distances, and the more
reicte any Object is, it is seen in a more imper-
fect Manner. Therefore, those Objects which are-
Placed foremost to the View, ought to be more-
sinissied than thosc that are cast behind; and they
should have such a relative Dominion over each
other, that as one Object by its Heightningss-
causes others to retire more backwards, so the
same Object must be chased and made to appear
farther fromthe Sight than others which are more-
strongly illuminated.
It is not sufficient that remote Objects be only
coloured in a more faint and languid Manner; but,
according to their Distance, the Parts must appear
more or less confused; the Eye not being able to
discover minutely what is far separated from it.
Pure and unmixed White either draws an Object
nearer, or carries it off to a greater Distance.
It it be accompanied with Black, the Opposition




of Light and Dark renders the Object more sensi-
ble, and brings it nearer to the advanced Part;
but pure White, being the lightest of Colours,
unless it be forced forwards, and supported by
Black, will sly off to the remotest View. As for
pare Black, it is the heaviest, most earthy, and-
most sensible of all Colours,: and- brings the
Objects nearer to the Sight: It must be placed
in Masses, be insensibly confused, and have its
proper Reposes.
The Representations of Bodics give them al-
ways such Lights as are most proper and conveni-
ent to their supposed Situations. If the Objects are
in the Fieldsor open Air, and the Sun not visible,
or obscured by Clouds, you must then introduce
almost an universal Light, though not warm and
strong, and your Shades must be faint: but when
the Sun is conspicuous, and shines in its full
Lustre, then the Light must be very strong and
bold, and the Shadows very dark. If the Objects
you represent be supposed in a Room, a little,
but not very much, illuminated, and you survey
it from without, and stand on a Level with the
Light that strikes upon it, the Shadows of that
Figure must be very soft, whereby the Figure it-
self will appear beauteous to the Eye; and will,
notwithstanding the Softness of the Shadow, seem-
as imbossed, and come boldly out. A small Light
illuminating a Body occasions the Shadows on
the dark Side to be large, and their Extremities






to be very bold. On the other Hand, a Light
makes the Shadows on the darker Side to be more
distinct and more soft in their Limitations.
Reflection is to be used in delineating glittering
or shining Bodies, as Glass, Pearls, Silver, &c.
Let the Cause of the Reflection, beit more or lefs,
be seen in the Thing itself. Place all your
Lights one Way through the whole Work; and
if the Light falls sideways on the Picture, the
other Side, which is the farthest from the Light,
must be made the darkest. That Part of the Body
must be made lightest which has the Light most
opposite to it; if the Light be placed above the
Head, then the Top of the Head must be made
lightest; the Shoulder must receive the next greater
Degree of Light; and thus must you continue to
fhiade, losing the Light by Degrees. By how
much one Part of the Body projects more than
another, it must by so much be made the lighter:
and, on the contrary, those Parts that bend in-
ward must be made so much the darker. Two
equal Lights must never be made in one and the
fame Picture ; the greater is to strike forcibly into
the Miedle, and with greatest Lustre on thofe
Parts of the Design where the principal Figures
and Strength of the Action seem to lie, diminisn-
ing it gradually as it approaches nearest the Ex-
tremities of the Piece.













General Rules for Drawing
BEGIN with plain geometrical Figures, as
P Lines, Angles, Triangles; Polygons, Arches,
Circles, Ovals, Cones, Cylinders, and the like,
being the Foundations of all other Proportions.
The Circle is of Use in the several orbicular Forms,
as the Sun, Moon, Globes, &c. The Oval in
giving a just Proportion to the Face and Mouth;
and the Square confines a Picture youare to copy,
&c. The Triangle is of Use in drawing a side
or half Face; Angles and Arches, in Perspective;
and the Polygon in Ground-plats, Fortifications,
&c. The Cone, in Spires, Steeples, Tops of
Towers, &c. The Cylinder, in Columns, Pil-
lars, &c.
Having brought your Hand to be fit and ready
in general Proportions, accustom yourself to give
every Object its due Shades, according to its
Concavity or Convexity, and to elevate or deprefs
the same, as the Object appears either nearer or
farther off the Light. Before you begin to work,
view your Original with close Attention; divide
it in your Mind into several Parts; observe the
Length, the Breadth, and the Similitude of each
Part; consider their Proportion to each other and
to the whole ; the Distances from one Part to the
other, and what Parts lie opposite to each other.





After you have done your Copy, view it afresh,
by comparing it with the Original, for the dis-
covering and amending of Faults, as it will not
only serve to perfect you in that particular Draught,
but will improve- your Knowledge of Lines and
Proportions in general, and in Time enable you :
for the nearest Imitations. The Qut-lines must
be drawn in a gliding Manner, large and smooth,
which will give them the Resemblance of Life and
Motion. You must preserve in your Draught a
strong Resemblance between the Parts and the
Whole ; every Member ought to be made to
agree ; strong Limbs have no Relâtion to a con-
sumptive Body; or decayed old Age; and the
Eyes, Legs, Hands and Feet, should be exactly
naired.
Having good Copies to draw after, learn to re-
duce them to other Proportions, either larger or
smaller, and this by frequent Practice. In draw-
ing Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, &c. with
their Leaves, Herbs, Trees, &c. of different ,
Kinds ; as also in the Imitation of Beasts, Fowls,
Fishies, &c. it is requifite not only to be perfect in ,
laying down the exact Proportions, but, before
you proceed to the shadowing and trimming your
Work, to be well acquainted in the general or out-
ward Lines; and this is still more necessary in
imitating the Body of a Man with all its Line-
aments, as Head, Nose, Eyes, Ears, Cheeks,
Arms and Shoulders; as also in the Drapery, or





fmitation of the Cloathing, and the artificial set-
ting off the outward Coverings, Habits and Or-
naments of the Body, in their natural and proper
Folds.

CHAP. V
Particular Directions for DRAWinG.
In drawing after a Picture or Print, you must
take Care to place it in such a Light that the-
Glofs of- the Colours may not interrupt yours
View, but so that the Light and your Eye may fall-
equally and obliquely upon the Piece. To this-
End you are to consider from what Point, and in-
what Direction the Eight falls upon the Objects,:
according to which Direction let all your Lights,
and Shades be placed throughout the Work..
That Part of the Object must be the lightest which-
has the Light most directly opposite to it; if the-
Light falls sideways on your Picture; you must
make that Side which is opposite to it lightest;.
and, on the contrary, that Side which is farthest
from it darkest. Let the Piece be placed at such
a Distance, that, upon. opening your Eyes,-you:
may view it all at once, and the larger the Picture
is, it fhould be so much the more placed off at
the greater Distance: but right before you, and
a little reelined.
Draw all your Ont-lines at first very faint with
the Feathers of a Duck’s Wing, or the Crumb of
Bread;




Bread; and these Out-lines should be drawn true,
and agreeable to the Pattern, before you begin to
shadow any Part of the Object. The Qut-lines
next the Light should be drawn more faint; and
when vou have drawn one Feature, it should be a
Direction for you, in some Measure, to draw ano-
ther, by observing with your Eye the Distance
from that to the next Feature, making afull Mark
at the Place with your Coal; then draw it, and
so to the next, till you have drawn the whole
Figure.
Then obserye the Middle of the Picture you
would copy, and touch upon the Paper with the
Point of your Coal ; afterwards observe the more
conspicuous and uppermost Figures, if there are
more than one, which you are to touch lightly
in their proper Places. Thus running over the
whole Draught, you will see, as it were, the
Skeleton of the Piece you are to draw.
Having made out these Sketches, view them
diligently, to see if they answer your Pattern or
not ; for the Gestures of the Life ought to shew
themselves eminently in the first and rudest
Draught of the Piece; correct and amend what-
ever you perceive amiss; adding and diminishing
as it varies from the Pattern, by which Means it
will be brought nearer and nearer to the Life.
Observe the Distance of one Limb,
Joint or
Muscle, from another, and the same in all other







Accidents of the Figure; their Length, Bréadth,
Turnings, &c.
Shadow next to the Light very
faintly ; and where you see bold and free Touches,
be not timorous in expressing the same. In draw-
ing a Head after the Life, or otherwise, take Care
to place the Features exactly right upon the Cross-
lines, whether it be a full Face or three-quarter
Face. In fore-shortening, you must make the
Crofs-lines to sly upwards, but where the Aspect
is downwards, they must be made downwards in
a circular Manner.
Having. drawn the Qut-lines true with a Coal,
you are to proceed to trace the same Lines again
with a Pen, Indian Ink, &c. drawing them with
more Exactness; ’and by imitating all the Hatches,
with their exact Distances one from another,
their Crossings, Turnings and Windings, with
more Boldness and Freedom, perfect your Design.
In drawing after a naked Body, all the Muscles
are not to be so plainly expressed as in anatomical
Figures; but that Side whose Parts are most appa¬
rent, and of Signification in the Performance of
any Action, must be made to appear more or lefs,
according to the Force of that Action.
In drawing young Persons, the Muscles must
not appear manifestly so hard as in elder and full
grown Persons ; the same Thing is to be observed
as to fat and fleshy Persons, and such as are very
delicate and beautiful: and in Women scarce any
Muscles




Muscles at all are to be expreffed, or but very:
little, unless it be in some very forcible Action;.
and then too they are to be represented very faint--
ly ; the like is also to be observed as to Children.
The Motion of the whole Body muit be consi-
dered in drawing of the Muscles; as in the risinc-

and falling of the Arms, the Muscles of the Breast
appear either more or less: the Hips do the like,-
according as they are bent outward or inward ;.
and it is the same chiefly in the Shoulders, Sidez.
and Neck, according to the several Actions of. 
the Body.
The Breadth and Largeness of a Picture is also-
to be considered; it should be larger about the Legs.
and Garments, shewing itself slender aboye, by
discovering one Shoulder. and hiding the other,.
which is shortened by turning the Body. But-
sometimes the Figure is to be represented biggest.
in the upper Parts, by representing either or both-
the Shoulders, or both the Arms ; shewing the:-
one Leg, and hiding the other; orboth of them
after one Manner, at Discretion. Neither ought:
this to be observed only in the whole Body, but.
even in every Part, so that in the Legs, when 2.
Muscle is raised outwards on the one Side, that.
which is directly on the contrary Side must be
drawn in and-hid, as it appears in the Life..
The Proportion of the Figure ought to be mul¬¬
tiplied by Degrees, in Proportion ofone to two,.
three.




three, four, &c. for herein the chief Skill confists;
the Diameter of the biggest Place between the
Knee and the Foot is double the least, and the
largest Part of the Thigh triple.
CH AP. VI.
Of drawing FacES.

IN drawing a Head, it is usually divided into
 four equal Parts. 1. From the Crown of the
Head to the Top of the Forehead. 2. From the
Top of the Forekead to the Eyebrows. 3. From
the Eyebrows to the Bottom of the Nose.
4. From thence to the Bottom of the Chin. But
this Proportion is not constant; those Features,
in different Men, being often very different as to
Length and Shape. In a well proportioned Face,
however, they are nearly right.
To direct you, therefore, in forming a perfect
Face, your first Business is to draw a complete
Oval, as you see in Plate I. Figure 1, in the
Middle of which, from the Top to the Bot-
tom, draw a perpendicular Line; and through
the Center or middle of this Line draw another,
directly acrofs from one Side to the other of your
Oval. On these two Lines all the Features of the
Face are to be drawn, as follows. Divide your per-
pendicular Line into four equal Parts; the first
must be allotted to the Hair of the Head; the second.
is fromthe Top of the Forehead to the Top of the
Nose, between the Eyebrows ; the third is from.
thence-




thence to the Bottom of the Nofe; and the fourtk
includes the Lips and Chin: TheLine across the
perpendicular one, or the Breadth of the Face, is
always supposed to be the Length of five Eyes; you
must therefore divide it into five equal Parts, and
place the Eyes upon it so as to leave exactly the
derstood only of a full front Face; for if it turns to
either Side, then the Distances are to be lessened
on that Side which turns from you, less or more, in
The Top of the Ear
Proportion to its Turning.
is to rise parallel to the Eyebrows, at the End of the
Diameter or erofs Line, and the Bottom of it must
be equal to the Bottom of the Nose;. the Nostrils
ought not to come out farther than the Corner of
the Eye in any Face; and the Middle of the
Mouth must always be placed upon the perpen-
dicular Line. The Mouth, when shut, is as
The following is an ingenious Device, which
perhaps may somewhat assist the young Practition-
er, in forming the Face according to its different
Turnings, and in placing the Features properly
thereon. Procure a Piece of smooth Wood, turned
for the Purpose, in the Shape of an Egg, which
is nearly the Shape of the human Head ; draw a
Line lengthways quite round it, as in the last Fig.
and divide this Line into two equal Parts, by ano-
ther Line drawn directly across it at right Angles.
The Features being drawn on these two Lines,
accord-




according to the Rules delivered above, will pro-
duce a Fore-right Face. Turn the Oval a small
Matter from the left Hand to the right, and the
Perpendicular will appear bent like a Bow, as
you see in Fig. 2; upon which the particular Fea-
tures are to be drawn, as in Fig. 3; always ob-
serving in what Manner the Nose projects beyond
the Round of the Oval. The same must be ob-
served, ff you’turn the Oval from the right Hand
to the left, as in Fig. 4; and if you incline the
Oval downwards, and to the right, the Lines of
the Crofs will appear, as in Fig. 5; and the Fea-
tures drawn on them, as in Fig. 6. If you turn
it upwards, reclining to the left, the Lines of the
Crofs will appear, as in Fig. 7, and a Face drawn
on them, as inFig. 8. A great Variety of Faces
may be shewn by this Oval, according as you
incline, recline, or turn it more or less.
But those Figures which come sideways are to
be drawn by Means of a Perpendicular, as in
Fig. 9, upon which the Forehead; Nose, Mouth
and Chin are tobe drawn, as you see in Fig. 10.
It is to be observed, that if the Face be fat, the
Gheeks will seem to swell; if lean, the Jawsbones
will stick out, and the Checks fall in; but ffit be
neither too fat nor too lean, it willbe nearly round.
Touch the Features lightly, where the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth and Chin should stand: then begin
to draw them more exactly, and so proceed till you
have finished the Face ; after which draw the Hair,
Beard and Shadows about it. You are to consi-
der




der all those chief Touches which give Life to a
Face, and that discover the Disposition of the
Mind : Thus the Mouth extended, and the Cor-
ners turning à little up, shews a smiling Counte¬
nance, &c. You must take Care that the Sha-
be light, because afterwards they cannot be ren-
dered more light; and remember, that they are
to be more faint and light in a fair, than in a
swarthy Complexion.
CHAP. VII.
Of the MEASURes andPROPorTions
of the several Parts of tbe Body.
x HE Ancients commonly allowed eight Heads
to their Figures, though some of them had
but seven ; however, the Moderns ordinarily di-
vide their Figure into ten Faces: Thatis, from
the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot,
in the Manner following. From the Crown of
the Head to the Forchead, is the third part of the
Face.. The Face begins at the lowest Hairs
which are upon the Forehead, and ends at the
Bottom of the Chin. The Face is divided into
three proportional Parts; the first contains the
Forehead, the second the Nose, and the third the
Mouth and Chin. From the Chin to the Pit
between the Collar-bones are two Lengths of a
Nose. From the Pit betwixt the Collar-bone
to the Bottom of the Breast, one Face. From
the




the Bottom of the Breast to the Navel, one
Face. From the Navel to the Genitals, one
Face. From the Genitals to the upper Part of
the Knee, two Faces: The Knee contains half
a Face. From the lower Part of the Knee to the
Ancle, two Faces. From the Ancle to the Sole
of the Foot, half a Face.
A Man, when his Arms are stretched out, is,
from the longest Finger of his rigkt Hand to the
longest of his left, as broad as he is long. From
one Side of the Breasts. to the other, two Faees.
The Bone of the Arm, called Humerus, is the
Length of two Faces, from the Shoulder to the
Elbow. From the End of the Elbow to the Root
of the little Finger, the Bone called Cubitus, with
Part of the Hand, contain two Faces. From
the Box of the Shoulder-blade to the Pit betwixt
the Collar-bones, one Face. If vou will be
satisfied in the Measures of Breadth, from the
Extremity of one Finger to the other, so that this
Breadth should be equal to the Length of the
Body, you must observe that the Boxes of the El-
bovs with the Humerus, and of the Humerus
with the Shoulder-blade, bear the Proportions of
half a Face, when the Arms are stretched out.
The Sole of the Foot is the sixth Part of the
Figure. The Thamb contains a Nose. The
Inside of the Arm, from the Place where the
Muscle disappears, which makes the Breast, call-
ed the pectoral Muscle, to the Middie of the Arm,





four Noses. From the Middle of the Arm to the
Beginning of the Hand, five Noses. The long-
est Toe is a Nosé long. The two utmost Parts
of the Teats, and the Pit betwixt the Collar-bones
of a Woman, make an equilateral Triangle.
For the Breadth of the Limbs no precise
Measures can be given ; because the Measures
themselves are changeable, according to the
Quality of the Persons, and according to the
Movement of the Muscles.
CHAP. VIII.
Of drawing the Boox at full Length.
IRST make your Oval for the Head, and hav-
I ing divided it, according to the Instructions
already given, draw a perpendicular Line from
the Top of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, and
measure out eight Lengths of the Head. This
Line is of special Use to direct you in placing the
Figure upright; and in the Action of the Pos-
ture, where it falls in, and where it swells out.
One Head’s Length from the Chin, you must
draw the Breasts; the third Measure reacheth to
the Navel; the fourth to the Privities; the fifth
to the Middle of the Thigh; the sixth to, the
lower Part of the Knee: the seventh to the lower
Part of the Leg; and the eighth to the Heel and
Sole of the Foot.






























Observe, in every Measure, what Touches
à there are of the Muscles. Draw that Leg first,
on which the Body stands; then draw the other;
and after that the Arms and Hands; but draw,

at first, all the Parts very lightly, with a Coal
only : because there is least Trouble in altering
and rubbing out the Coal. As for the Hands,
they are twice as long as they are broad, and
each of their Parts has its Length, Breadth, and
Thickness. The Nail’upon the Finger is about
half the Joint it is upon. The Length of the
Foot is à sixth Part of the Height of a Person;
and the Length is five Eighths more than the
Breadth. The Length of the Face and Hands
ought to be exactly equal, and makes but just
the tenth Part of a Person’s Height.
The Rules in drawing Children are as follow-
Some make a Child to contain five Measures of
the Head, viz. from the Top of the Head to the
Privities, three, and in the Thighs and Legs two
more ; the Breadth between the Shoulders, the
Length of a Head and a Half; the Breadth of the
Body above the Navel, the Length of onc Head ;
and the Breadtn of the upper Part of the Thigh,
is the third Part of two Lengths of the Head ;
the Breadth of the Knee is just the Measure there
is betwixt the Eyes and the Chin; the Small of
the Leg, and the Brawn of the Arm, are of the
Thickness of the Neck.







In general, let it be observed always to begin
with the right Side of the Piece you are copying,
for by so doing you will always have what is
done before your Eyes, and the rest will follow
more naturally, and with greater Ease; whereas
if you begin with the left Side, your Hand and
Arm will cover what you do first, and deprive
vou of the Sight of it; by which Means you will
not be able to proceed-with so much Ease, Plea-
sure or Certainty. As. to the-Order and Manner
of your Proceeding, in drawing the human Body,
you must first szetch the Head ; then the Shoul¬
ders, in their exact Breadth; then draw the Trunk
of the Body, beginning with the Arm-pits (leav-
ing the Arms till afterwards ) and so down to the
Hips on-both Sides; being sure to observe the
exact Breadth of the Waist. When you have
done this, then draw that Leg which the Body
stands upon, and afterwards the other, which
stands loose; then draw the Arms, and last of
all the Hands.
Take notice also of the Bowings and Bendings
of the Body, making the Part opposite to that
which bends correspond in bending with it. For
instance, if one Sidc of the Body bends in, the
other must stand oût answerable to it; if the Back
bends in, the Belly raust slick out; if the Knee
bends out, the Hain must fail in; and so of any
other Joint in tlie Baidy. Finally, endeavour to-
form all the Farts of your Figure with Truth,
and in juît Proportieii, nat one Arm or one Leg








bigger or less than the other; not broad Shoul-
ders with a thin stender Waist, nor raw and bony
Arms, with thick and gouty Legs, but let there
be a kind of Harmony and Agreement amongst
the Members, and an agreeable Symmetry
throughout the whole Figure.
But as the Essence of Drawing consists in mak-
ing, at first, a good Sketch, you must in this Par-
ticular be very careful and accurate; draw no
tered that to your Mind, you may then finisn one
Part after another as curioussy as you can. In draw¬
ing the Eyes, Ears, Legs, Arms, Hands, Feet,
&c. great Care, Study and Practice, are requisite:
This must be learned. by carefully imitating the
best Prints or Drawings you can get of Eyes,
Ears, &c. for as to the mechanical Rules of draw-
ing them by Lines and Measures, they are not
only perplexed and difficult, but also contrary to
the Practice of the best Masters. But the Actions
and Postures of thè Hand are so many and vari-
ous, that no certain Rules can be given for
drawing them that will universally hold good;
and as the Hands and Feet are difficult Membeis
to dtaw, it is necessary, and well worth while, to
bestow some Time and Pains about them, careful-
ly imitating their van ious Postures and Actions, so
as not only to avoid all Lameness and Imperfection,
but also to give them Life and Spirit.






In drawing a labouring Man, you must repre-
sent him with strong Limbs and ralsed Muscles
swelling and standing out, especially in bearing
Burdens, drawing Weights, leaping, walking,
combating, or such like violent Exercifes. In re-
presenting Persons afleep, you must carefully avoid
giving any such Postures or Actions in their lying
as would not in all Probability afford Rest; for a
great Want of Judgment would appear in repre-
senting their Limnbs or Bodies supported by their
own Force, and not by the Help of something
else.
With regard to the Representation of the Pas-
fions, Mr. De Piles observes, that it is absurd,
as well as impossible, to pretend giving such par-
ticular Demonstration of them as to fix theur
Expression to certain Strokes which the Painter
should be obliged to make use of, as essential and
invariable Rules. This, says he, would be de-
priving the Art of that excellent Variety of Ex-
epression, which has no other Principle than Di-
versity of Imagination, the Number of which is
infinite. The same Passion may-be expressed
several Ways, each yielding more or less Pleafure
in Proportion to the Painter’s Understanding,
and the Spectator’s. Discernment.
Though every Part of the Face contributes
towards expressing the Sentiments of the Heart,
yet the Eyebrow, according to Mr. Le Brun, is
the principal Scat of Expression, and where the
Passions




Passions make themselves most known. It is
certain, says he, that the Pupil of the Eye, by
its Fire and Motion, very well shews the Agita-
tion of the Soul; but then’it does not express the
Kind or Nature of that Agitation, whereas t’e
Motion of the Eyebrow differs according as the
Passions change their Nature. To express a sim-
ple Passion, the Motion is simple; to express a
mixt Pafsion, the Motion is compound. If the Paf-
sion be gentle, the Motion is gentle; if it be vio-
lent, the Motion is so too. We may farther ob--
serve, says he, that there are two Kinds of Ele-
vation in the Eyebrows; one in which the Eye-
brows rise up in the Middle; This Elevation ex-
presses agreeable, Sensations; and it is to be ob-
served, that then the Mouth rises at the Corners :
Another, in which the Eyebrows rise up at the
Ends and fall in the Middle, denotes bodily Pain ;
and then the Mouth falls at the Corners. In
Laoghter all the Parts agree, for the Eyebrows,
which sall towards the Middle of the Forehead,
make the Nose, the Mouth and the Eyes, follow
the same Motion. In weeping, the Motions are
compound and contrary, for the Eyebrows fall
towards the Nose, and over the Eyes; and the
Mouth rises that Way. It is to be observed also,
that the Mouth is the Part of the Face which more
particularly expresses the Emotions of the Heart;
for when the Heart complains, the Mouth falls at
the Corners; when it is pleased, the Corners of
the Mouth are elevated ; and when it has an





Aversion, the Mouth shoots forward, and rises
in the Middie.
The Head, says Mr. De Piles, contributes more
to the Exprefsion of the Passions, than all the other
Parts of the Body put together. Those separate-
ly can only shew some few Passions, but the Head
expresses them all. Some, however, are more
peculiarly expressed by it than others, as Humility,
by hanging it down; Arrogance, by lifting it up;
Languisnment, by inclining it on one Side; and.
Obstinacy, with a stiff and resolute Air, makes
it stand upright, sixed and stiff between the Shoul-
ders. The Head also best shews our Supplications,
Threats, Mildness, Pride, Love, Hatred, Joy and
Grief: The whole Face and every Feature con-
tribute something, but more especially the Eyes ;
yet though the Paffions of the Soul are most visible
in the Lines and Features of the Face, they often
require also the Assistance of other Parts of the
Body: Without the Hands, for Instance, an Ac-
tion is weak and imperfect; their Actions, which
are almost infinite, create nuinberless Expreffions.
mise, cail and send back ; they are the Instruments
of Threatning, Prayer, Praise, &c. by them we,
in a great Measure, approve, condenin, refuse,
admit, fear, afk, cxpress our Joy and Grief ; our
Doubts, Regrets, Pain and Admiration: but to
say how these Parts must be disposed for expressing
tie varsous Paffions, is impossible : nor can any
exact Rules be given for it, both because the Task
would




would be infinite, and because every one must be
guided in- this by his own Genius and the particu-
CHAP. IX.
Of DRAPERY.
In the Art of cloathing your Figures, or casting
 the Drapery upon themwith Elegance and Pro¬
priety, many Thirigs are to be observed: How-
ever, this Art consists chicssy in three Points, viz.
the Order of the Folds or Plaits, the different
Quality of the Stuffs, and the Variety of their Co-
lours. As to the Folds, they ought to be so manag-
ed, as that you may easily perccive what it is they
cover, and distinguishi it from any Thing else ; as
for Instance, that you see it is an Arm that is under
the Drapery, and not a Leg; or a Leg, and not an
Arm, &c. Again, the Folds ought to be large, and
a Contrast should be observed between them;
otherwise, in the first Place, they break and divide
the Sight too much; and in the next Place the
Drapery will be too stiff. As to the Quality of
the Stuffs, it should be well considered : some
Folds being abrupt and harsh, while others flow
more soft and easy. Again, the Surface of some
have à Lustre, while other: are flat and dead ;
and some are fine and transparent, while others
are firm and solid. The Variety of Colours, when
well managed, makes the greatest Beauty in Paint-
ing: Some are not equally agreeable with Respect
to each other; and some are never to be placed
near certain others.






The Drapery must never be made to adhere,.
or stick too close to the Parts of the Body; but it
must seem to flow round, and, as it were, embrace
them : yet in such a Manner as that the Figure may
be casy, and have a free Motion. A great Light-
ness and Motion of the Drapery are only proper
in Figures in much Agitation, or exposed to the
Wind. The Nudities of the Figure should always
be designed before you proceed to draw the Dra-
peries. Draw the Qut-lines of the Garments
lightly; then draw the great Folds first, and stroke
these into lesser; taking Care that they do not cross
one another. The Draperies that cover those Parts
which are exposed to great Light, must not be so
deeply shaded, as to seem to pierce them ; nor
should those Members be crossed by Folds that are
too strong; lest, by the too greai Darkness of their
Shades, the Members look as if they were broken.
Folds, in general, should be large and as few as
possible: However, they must be greater or less,
according to the Quantity and Quality of the Stuffs
of which the Drapery is supposed to be made; suit
the Garments to the Body, and make them bend
with the Body, according as it stands in or out,
strait or crooked, or as it bends one Way or ano-
ther; and the closer the Garment sits to the Body,
the narrower and smaller must be the Foids.
The Quality of the Person is also to be consider-
ed in the Drapery: For Instance, if they are Ma-
gistrates, their Draperies ought to be large, fine
and flowing; if Country-clowns, they ought to




be coarse and short; and if Ladies and Nymphs,
light and soft, &c. Folds well imagined give-
much Spirit to any Kind of Action, because their
Motion implies the like in the acting Member,
which seems to draw them forcibly, and make
them more or less stirring, as the Action is more
or less violent. An artful Complicatiun of Folds,
in a circular Manner, greatly helps the Effect of 
Fore-snortenings. All Folds consist of two Shades,
and no more, which you may turn with the Gar-
ment at Pleasure, shadowing the inner Side more
deeply.
The Shades in Silks and sine Linnen are very
thick and small, requiring.little Folds and a light
Shadowe Observe the Motion- of the Air or 7
Wind, in order to draw the loose Apparel all:
slying one Way : and draw that Part of the Gar-
ment that adheres closest to the Body, before yoû
draw the looser Part that slies off from it, lest by
drawing the loose Part of the Garment first, you
should mistake the Position of:your Figure, and
place it awry..
Rich Ornaments, when judicioussy and spar-
ingly used, may sometimes contribute to the Beauty
of Draperies. But such Ornaments are far below
the Dignity of Angels or heavenly Figures ; the
Grandeur of whose Draperies ought rather to-con¬
sist in the Boldness and Nobleness of tlie Folds,
than in the Quality of the Stuff, or the Glitter of.
Ornaments. Light and flying Draperies are pro-
per only to Figures in great Motion, or in the









Wind: but when in a calm Place, and free from
violent Action, their Draperies should be large
and slowing, that, by their Contrast, and the Fall
of the Folds, they may appear with Grace and
Dignity.
CHAP. X.
Of Drawing MIXED FiGURES.
IN order to draw the Form of any Beast, be-
 gin at the Forehead, with the Lead or Coal,
drawing downward the Nose, Mouth, upper and
nether Chap, ending the Line at the Throat-
Then viewing it; again, from the Part where you
firmerly begun, continue it over the Head, Ears,
and Neck, till you have given the full Compass
of the Buttock. Afterwards mark out the Legs,
and touching out the Breast with the Eminency
thereof, finish the Tail, Paws, Tongue, Teeth,
Beard, and the several Shadows.
In drawing Beasts, you must be well acquainted
with their Shape and Action, without which you
wiil never perform any Thing excellent in this
Way-; and whatever Beast you draw, you must
be sure to give a Sketch of the Landskip of the
Country natural to that Beast.
In drawing Birds you are to begin also at the
Head, continuing the Breast-line from under the
Throat down to the Legs; then begin at the
Pinion for making the Wing; this being joined to
the Back-line, the Figure will be presently finished.





The Eyes, Legs, and Tail, are to be drawn last;
the Feathers, beginning at the Head very small,
must fall backwards one Way in five Ranks, still
increasing till finished.
Infects, as Flies, Bees, Wasps, Grasshoppers,
Worms, and such like, are drawn with great
Ease, provided you, for the first Time, have the -
Original before your Eyes.
In drawing a Flower, begin from the Rose-tuft
or Wart in-the Middle, as in a Rose or Marigold-
with the yellow Tuft, which being made, draw
Lines equally divided from thence to the greatest
Compass or Extent of the Flower. They may be
drawn either fully open, or in the Bud; the Laaves
may first be drawn rudely, afterwards giving them
their Veins, or Jaggedness.
CHAP. XI..
Of Drawing LANDSKIPS, BUILDINGS, &c.
LL true Drawing consists in nicely measur-
 ing the Distances of each Part of your Piece
by the Eye. In order to facilitate this, you are to :
imagine in your own Mind, that the Piece you :
copy is divided into Squares : As. for Example ;
suppose, or imagine à perpendicular and an hori-
zontal Line crossing each other in the Center of,
the Picture you are to copy : Then suppose also :
two such Lines crossing your own Copy. Obierve
in the Original wnat Parts of tlie Design those





Lines interfect, and let them fall on the same Parts
ef the supposed Lines in your Copy. If you are
to draw à Landskip from Nature, take your Sta¬
tion on a rising Ground, where you may have a
large Horizon, and mark your Tablet into three
Divisions downwards, from the Top to the Bot-
tom : and divide, in your own Mind, the Land-
skip you are to take intothree Divisions also. Then,
turn your Face directly opposite to the Middle of
the horizontal Line, keeping your Body fixed, and
draw what is directly before your Eyes, upon the
Middle-divifion of your Tablet; then turn your
Head, but not your Body, to the left Hand, and
delineate what you view there, joining it properly
to what you had done before. Lastly, Do the same
by what is to be seen on your right Hand, lay-
ing down every Thing exactly, both with Respect
to Distance and Proportion.
Make the nearest
Objects in your Piece thehighest, and those that
are further off to shoot away lower and lower, till
they come almost level wlth the Line-of the Hori-
zon; lessening every Thing proportionably to its
Distance, and observing, also, to make your
Objects fainter and less distinct, the farther
they are removed from your Eye. Make all your
Lights and Shades fall one Way; and let every
Thing have its proper Motion, as Trees shaken
by the Wind, the small Boughs bending more,
and the large ones less; Water agitated by the
Wind, and dashing against Ships or Boats, or
falling from a Precipice upon Rocks and Stones,





and spirting up again into the Air, and sprinkling
all about: Clouds also in the Air, now gathei-
ed with the Winds, now violently condensed in-
to Hail, Rain, and the like ; always remembering
that whatever Motions are eaused by the Wind
must all be made the same Way.
Let the Work imitate the Season it is intended
torepresent; as, ifyouintend it fora Winter-Piece,
represent the Felling of Woods, sliding upon the
lce, Fowling, Hunting, &c. making the Trees
every where naked, or laden with Snow or Hoar-
frost; the Earth bare; the Air thick or heavy ;
the Water frozen, with Carts passing over it; &c.
Let every Site have its proper Adjuncts or ad-
ditional Graces, as the Farm-house, Wind mill,
Water-mill, Woods, Flocks of Sheep, Herds of
Cattle, Pilgrims, Ruins of Temples, Castles and
Monuments, with a thousand such other Things
proper to particular Subjects.
CH AP. XII.
Curious RuLESfor drawing any Object, in its
Qut-lines, as exact as Nature, with some far-
ther INSTRUCTIONs for Shadowing, &c.
without any Regard to the forementioned Rules, or
any Knowledge in the Art of DrAwinG.
TAKE a Sheet of the thinnest, or whitest

Brown-paper, and brushit over with Oil
of Turpentine, which will immediately render





it transparent: Then, after drying the Paper in
the Air, strain it upon a Frame, and fix it against
the Object you design to draw: This done, place,
right before it, a Picce of Wood with a Hole in
it, fit for one’s Eye to look through, and as you
meet any Out-lines of the Object on the transpa¬
rent Paper, trace them over with a Pencil, hy
which Means vou will obtain the just Propor-
tion, and true Representation of any Object in
its Qut-lines.
To render this still more elegant, observe the
Tracings of your Draught, wherever the Shades
are, and mark them with your Pencil, for all the
Art in the World can never dispose the Shades so
regularly, as one may touch by this Method, but
the Shades must be dra wn quickly after the Qu--
lines are drawn, not at different Times, because
the Sun instantly changes them.
Here observe, as in certain Objects you will
have fainter, stronger, and darker Shades, in.
your Remarks of them, to take such Memoran-
dums as may direct vou how to finisn them with.
Indian Ink, or other Colour, when-you sit down
to complete your Work. To this End the best
Way is, before you trace out your Object, to
prepare three Shells or Gallipots of Indian Ink,
mixed with common Water, viz. one of a very
faint Black, one of a middling Black, and one of
an intense Blackt, tirnberitig them 1, 2, 3, and
as you make vaer Observation on the Shades of
your Object, mark upon your Draught the same
Numbers





Numbers as they happen to appcar, so that after-
wards you may finish with Certainty.
In this Regard the transparent Paper is of great
Use; for being laid upon any Paper or Print in a
loose Sheet, all the Lines will be seen so perfectly
through it, that you may copy them with the
greatest Ease; and if the Print or Picture be
done by a good Master, you can see which Lines
are strong, which soft, and how to imitate them.
There is yet another Way to take Views and
Landskips, which some prefer to the transparent
Paper; and that is, either with white or black
Tiffany or Lawn strained upon a Frame, and
used in the same Manner as the Paper, except-
ing that, as the Black-lead Pencil is used to the
Paper, on the white Tiffany and on the Lawn,
you must use Charcoal very soft and finely pow-
dered ; bat on the black Tiffany very tender
white Chalk is to be used.
CHAP. XIII.
Stveral other curious and easy Methods of taking
VIEWs, copying DRAUGHTS, PRINTS, &c. :
to the greatest Degree of Accuracy.

1. A Draught may be taken regularly, from a
A Drawing, on transparent Paper, as fol-
lows. Take a Piece of Paper of the same Size
with that of the Draught; rub one Side of it with
sone Powder of Black-lcad, till it be well and





equally blacked, so that a Finger, touching it,
will hardly be tinged with the Blacking; then
take the Print, and laying the Paper underneath
it with the black Side downwards, upon another
Piece of white Paper of the same Size, pin the
three together in two or three Places : after-
wards, take a Pin or Needle, somewhat blunted
at the Point, and trace it over the Qut-lines of
your Picture, which, with a little Pressing, will
direct the black Paper to impress the white, so
as to receive every Stroke you draw; this done,
you may carefully correct what Errors you see
with-your Black-lead Pencil, cleaning the new-
made Draughts slightly with the Crumb of stale.
Bread.
2. As for the Draughts taken- on Tiffany or-
Lawn, they are only to be laid on Paper, that is,
such as is drawn with Charcoal upon white, and :
that drawn with Chalk upon black or-blue Pa-
per ; and then, giving each of them a Knock or-
two with a Hammer, the Charcoal or the Chalk,
will fall through them upon the Papers directly
in the Lines they were drawn, and give you the
true Representation of the Object drawn. from
the Life, in white Lines upon the black Paper,
and in black Lines upon the white.
Then strengthen these Shadows of Drawings
with your Black-lead Pencil, Chalk, or red’Oker,
upon the Pieces of Paper where they made the
Marks ; for otherwise, the Lines will easily be
rubbed out. But it must be observed that this
Amendment is to be made soon after the Lines ;





because those tender Draughts will quickly
vanisn, if Care is not taken to strengthen them
immediately. You are to begin this Operation
at the Bottom of the Drawing.
3. Another Way is, by taking a thin Piece of
Paper, and holding it against a Glass-Window,
particularly a sashed one, because the Interruption
of the Lead in. the smaller glazed Windows will
hinder Part of the Prospect; then draw what you
see from the Glass, and afterwards the Black-
lead Paper is to be used as- directed before.
4. There is another Way still which may be
more easy to the Hand or Arm of a Person not ac-
customed to drawing upon a Paper or Lawn
placed upright, which is by the Use of a Camera
obscura, though to help the Hand one may
hold a Baguette, or such a Stick in the left Hand
as the Oil-painters use to rest the right Hand upon;
or have some other Rest made for the right Hand,
as may be easily serewed up and down at Pleasure.
But thère is this Difference still between Drawing
a Piece of Perspective or View on a transparent
Paper, or Lawn placed upright against any Ob-
ject, and drawing by the Camera obscura, that
such a Piece will take in more of the View or
Object, and from a greater Distance than the Ca-
mera obscura will : However, the portable Ca-
mera obscura will, at first, be very easy to the
Arm of a Beginner, by Reason the Objects appear
on an horizontal Plane, such as a Tabie, and the
Hand



Hand having a proper Rest, will more easily fol-
low the Line represented on the Plane, with-
great Exactness.
The Camera obscura is a Machine or Appara-
tus vherein the Images of external Objectsare re-
presented distinctly, and in their genuine Colours,
either in an inverted or erect Situation. This Ma-
chine may be made as follows: Darken a Cham-
ber, onc of whose Windows look into a Place set
with a Variety of Objects; leaving only one little,
Aperture open in the Window. In this Aperture fit
a Lens, either a plane convex one, or one convex
on both Sides, so as to be the Portion of à large
Sphere. At a due Distance, to be determined
by Experience, spread a Paper or white Cloth on
the Wall, unless the Wall itself be whitened so as
to serve the Purpose; and on this the Images of
the desired Objects will be delineated invertedly.
In this Case, it is not more difficult to draw,.
or rather copy the Objects, though they are
reverse, than to draw or copy several Things
which we see upright on the Frames of transparent
Paper, Lawn, or Tiffany ; for to trace Lines will
be as easily done one Way as the other; and
though the Objects falling on the Paper or Cloth,
will, while you are drawing them, be reversed, it is-
but turning the Paper or Cloth upside down, when
they are done, and the Drawing will be right to
the Eye. But to obviate this Difficulty,, let the
Paper, or what is to receive the Objects, be
placed against the Back of a Chair, and let a
Person look on the several Objects represented





thereon over the Back of the Chair, and this
will set them right to the Eye. Or, if you would
rather have the Images appear erect, it may be
done either by Means of a concave Lens, or by
receiving the Image on a plain Speculum in-
clined to the Horizon under an Angle 450, or
by Means of two Lenses included in a Draw-tube
instead of one.
It is to be observed, that if the Aperture does
not exceed the Bigness of a Pea, the Objects
will be represented thereon, even though there
be no Lens at all. To render the Images clear
and distinct, it is necessary that the Objects be il-
luminated by the Sun; and they will be still
brighter if the Spectator sirst stay a Quarter of an
Hour in the Dark.
Care must be likewise taken that no Light
escape through any Chinks, and that the Wall be
not too much illumined. Farther, the greater Di-
stance there is between the Aperture and the Wall,
the larger and more distinct will the Images be5
but the Kays becoming thus too much dilated,
the Brightness of the Image is weakened, till at
length it becomes insensible. But the portablé Ca-
mera obscura is more proper for Beginners, as be¬
ing more easy for their Arm ; besides, the Ob-
jects appearing on an horizontal Plane may, of
course, be drawn with greater Exactness.
The Construction of a portable Camera obscura
may be as follows; Provide a wooden Chest, in the
Middle of which raise a little Turret either round





or square, open toward the Object. Behind this
Aperture incline a little plain Mirror, to an An¬
gle of 45° which will reflect the Rays upon a
Lens convex on both Sides, included in a Tube.
At the End of the Focus of the Lens, place a
Table covered with a white Paper to receive the
Image; and lastly, make an oblong Aperture to-
look through. By Means of this Machine the
Images will be exhibited perfectly like their Ob-
jects, each cloathed in their different Colours,
whereby any Person, unacquainted with designing
or drawing, will be able to delineate any Thing
to the greatest Degree of Accuracy and Justnefs ;
and those even well versed in Painting, will find
many Hints by it to perfect them in this Art.
5. Thus far we have shewn how any Person-
may copy a Draught, Print or Piece of Painting,-
or even make an exact Representation from the
Life; but we shall yet add two other Methods,
both easy and entertaining, not hitherto mention-
ed, for taking of Draughts or Drawings, which
are as follow Prick with a Pin the Qut-lines of
the Print or Drawing you design to copy, and then
laying the sanie on a Sheet of Paper, take a Pow-
der-puff or Tuft of Cotton, dipping it now and
then in Charcoal-dust, and beat it over the prick-
ed Lines through the Picture, by which means
you shall have full Directions marked on your
Cloth or Paper sufficient to finish a just Drawing.
6. The other Way is, by making such an Im-
pression from the Print as shall give ajust Copy of





it; and it is of great Use when we want to car-
ry every Stroke of the Engraver along with us,
which Method, if you are very careful, will in-
deed but very little sully the Print.
For this End, take some white or green Soap,
whien mix with such a Quantity of Water, as will
bring it to the Consistence of a Jelly ; with this
Mixture rub the Print, and with a wet Sponge
gently wet the Paper designed for receiving the
Impression, then laying it on the Print, cover all
with two or three other Picces of dry Paper, and
rub it very hard all over with any Thing that is
will have upon-it the Reverse of the Print you
rubbed it upon, with every distinct Line in the
Original, if you have been careful to rubitequally.
CHAP. XIV
SecRETSs for copying of Drawings, &c. continued,
als, for takingoff Medals, &c. various Ways,
with several other curious PREcePTS for the Use
of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, &c.
I. To take a Drawing with FIxEd Ink.
TAKE a thin Sheet of Paper, and rub it all
over with fresh Butter, as equally as possiblé;


then dry it well by the Fire, and rub the buttered

S.de with either Carmine, Lamp-black, Black-lead-
Powder, or blue Bice finely ground, till it is all
equally coloured; taking Care in rubbing on any of
these, that the Colours will not come off by a very





slight Touch of the Finger. Then lay the co-
loured Side of this buttered Paper upon a Piece of
clean Paper, and lay the Print you design to copy
upon the buttered Paper; afterwards with a fine
Pin, or a Needle blunted a little at the Point,.
trace the Out-lines of the Drawing carefully, by
on your white Paper; which may be touched
afterwards with Crayons, or the like Colour.
II. To take the Impression of a Print with REDInK.
Mix some Vermilion finely ground with Lin-
seed-oil, but not so much but what it shall still
be liquid enough to run or slow in a Pen. With
this trace the Lines of your Print; and then with
a Sponge dipt in Water, wet the Backside of the
Print, and turn the printed Side down upon a Piece
of white Paper, so as to lie smooth: then lay over
Part: and the lower white Paper will receive the
Imprefsion. But if you have à Linnen-press, it
is better to put your Papers between two of the
Leaves, and screw the Prefs as tight as you can,
by which Means you will have a fine Impression-
III. To take Draughts, WVritings, &c. with red
Loose INK.
Take some Vermilion finely ground, and mix
it with fair Water in a Gallipot with some Cotton
in it, so as that it may run very free in the Pen :
With this Mixture draw over all the Strokes of
your Print, imitating both the siner and stronger





Lines; then with a Sponge dipt in Gum-watar
wet a Piece of clean white Paper, and while it is
wet, turn the Print upon it; and pressing it well.
take off the Print, and you will sind all the Strokes
remain on the clean Paper; and as soon as it is
dry the Vermilion will be fixed to it.
This Sort of Ink has been used frequently in
wiiting any thing designed to be engraved; for
by turning the writing Side of the Paper down
upon a Copper-plate covered with Bees-wax and
wnite Ground, rubbing it very equally, the Im-
pression will be upon the Wax.
1
IV Taking Draughts with blue Loose Ink.
Vou may likewise make such a fort of Ink
wirh blue Bice and common Water as will run
very fineiy in a Pen, and serve for the same Use
as the former Ink.
V. Te take off a Drawing in a standing Red
COLOUR by tracing.
Take Vermilion finely ground, and mixing
it with a little fresh Butter, rub a clean Sheet of
Paper on one Side with this Mixture, so that it
may bear à slight Touch of the Finger without
leaving the Paper; then laying the coloured Side
of this Paper upon a clean Sheet, lay your Print
upon the other Side of the coloured Paper; and
then trace every Line you think proper, as al-
ready directed in tracing a Draught with sixed
Ink: But be sure to pin the thice Papers toge-
ther at the Corners, to prevent their stipping,





which would inevitably spoil your Work. This
Impression made by tracing will hold without
rubbing or pressing the Papers. The Quills of a
Swallow, after they are thoroughly dry, are ve-
ry good for tracing.
By mixing Carmine with some freshi Butter,
and colouring a Paper with it in the same Man-
ner, you will obtain a more beautiful Colour; and
by colouring a Paper in like Manner witn blue
Bice and Butter, you may have the Drawing blue.
VI. To take the natural or lively Shape of any
Herb or Tree.
First take the Leaf you would copy, and gent-
ly rub the Veins on the Backside of it with a Piece
of lvory, or some such like Matter, so as to bruise
them a little; afterwards wet the same Side gently
with Linseed-oil; and then press it hard upon a
Piece of white Paper, and you shall have the
perfect Figure of the Leaf, with every Vein in it
justly expressed: This Imprefsion being afterwards
coloured will seem truly natural, and may be use-
ful to such as would remember Plants.
VII. Another Way of painting the Leaves of
Plants, so that the Impression shall appear as
black as if it had been done in à Printing-prefs,
is as follows.
When the Leaf is dry, take such a Ball as the
Pressmen use for blacking the Types, and rubbing
it equally over with Printer’s Ink, strike it gently





all the Veins are blacked with the Ink; then
laying the Leaf on a flat Board or the like, with
t he Backside upwards, clap a Piece of white Pa-
per well moistened on the Leaf; and pressing it
pretty hard, but not so as to bruise the Fibres,,
you shall have a fine Impression.
But this may still be done to greater Advantage.
by means of a Piece of Wood in the Form of a
Cylinder, about a Foot long, and an Inch and a.
half diameter, the middle Part about six or eight
Inches long, being covered with a woollen Cloth
rolled three or four Times round it. With this'
Times backwards and forwards, and you will
But where Printer’s Ink is not conveniently
come at, the following Method may be made ufe
of. Rub the Back of the Leaf, as before directed,
with burnt Linseed-oil: Then; strewing some,
Powder of black Lead, or for Want of that, some
Charcoal or Small-coal-dust, or the Powder of
burnt Cork, upon a fmooth Board, so as equally
to cover it, stroke the Powder gently over; and
oiling the Back-side of the Leaf, clap it upon the
Board; and then laying the white Paper upon the
Back of the Leaf, press or roll it, as before.
If none of these Ingredients are conveniently
had, take Vermilion, and mixing it with fresh
Butter to the Consistence of Printer’s Ink, cover
your printing Ball with it: dawb it over the Back
of the Leaf, and take your Impreffion as before.









Where Vermilion is used, Bice may afso be
made Use of, either with Butteror Oil, by grinding
blue Bice with some burnt Linseed-oil, and use-
ing it as before : Thus, you may have a fine red
or blue Ink proper for Impressions of this Sort,
but the blue is preferable in colouring Leaves, be¬
cause it is an agreeable Colour for the green Sort.
It may be observed that the Reason why the
Back of the Leaf is the proper Side to make the
Impression from, is because the Ribs or Vessels
rise on that Side above the fleshy Part of it; and
therefore being coloured with any of those Inks,
they are the fittest. to give an Impression, where-
as in the Foreside of the Leaf, the fleshy Parts
rise, and these fine Fibres are sunk between them.
VIII. To take off the Leaveso Plants in
Plaister of Paris, so as that they may afterwards
be cest in Metal.
Those Persons who cast in Metal have fre-
quent Occasion touse Leaves of several Sorts, in
order to embellisn their Work ; these are gene-
rally made from Models done- by the Hand,
which take up a great deal of Time, and even at
last are imperfect: But the following Way, which
is communicated by a Gentleman from Itoly, is
greatly preferable, and much easier.
Soon after you have cropped the Leaf you de-
sire to take an Impression from, lay it between
the Leaves of aBook, till once it shall lie flat;
then, upon a smooth Board with a strong Gum-






water, made of Gum-arabic, fix the Foreside
or Front of the Leaf to the Broad ; when this is
done, raise round it a little Wall of coarse Paste,
half an Inch high; or, if you can conveniently,
surround your Piece of Wood with Paste-board,
or Card-paper, so close as that it shall hold a Li-
quid for some time; then oil the Back of your
Leaf, as directed below in the Method for casting
of Medals; and pour on Water and Plaister of Paris
as is there directed, which, when it is dry, will
give you an exact Impression of every- Vein of
the Leaf, and from which you may easily make
a Mould to cast in as you fancy.
I. An expeditious Method of taking the Impression of
any BUTTERFLY in all its Colours.
Having taken a Buttersly, kill it without spoil-
ing the Wings, which contrive to spread as regu-
larly as possible in a flying Position; then, with a
small Brush or Pencil, take a Piece of white Pa-
per, wasn Part of it with Gum-water, a little
thicker than ordinary, so that it may easily dry ;
afterwards laying your Buttersly on the Paper, cut
off the Body close to the Wings, and throwing
it away, lay the Paper on a fmooth Board, with
the Fly upwards; and laying another Paper aver
that, put the whole Preparation into a Screw-press,
and serew it down very hard, or otherwise prefsit,
letting it remain under that Pressure for the Space
of an Hour. Afterwards take off the Wings of
the Buttersly, and you will find a perfect Impres-
sion of them, with all their various Colours mnark,






ed distinctly, remain upon the Paper. When this
is done draw between the Wings of your Impres-
sion the Body of the Butterfly, and colour your
Draught of the Body after the Life.
X. To take off the Impression of Medrls.
This may be of Use to such as would preserve
to themselves good Specimens or fine Draughts
of curious Medals, especially as it is easily exe-
cuted, and with but a trifling Expence.
One Way is as follows. Take Isinglafs, and
breaking it in Pieces, dissolve as much of it as is
necessary over the Fire in a Quantity of Water
sufficient only to cover it, taking Care to keep it
stirring till the whole is dissolved. This done,
with a Hair-brushi, stroke some of the Glue over
the Medals whose Impression you would take,
after placing them as horizontally as you can,
and when you have covered them perfectly all
over, let them lie till the Glue is hardened; and
afterwards with the Point of a Pin, or Needle,
raise the Edge of the Glue from each Medal, and
the whole Impression of the Medal in Glue will
sly off as hard as a Horn, with all the fine Sharp-
ness of the Medal as it was struck.
This Glue may be made of whatever Colour
you please, by mixing the Colour in the Water
the Glue is boiled in. The Impression must be
dried immediately, but very regularly, and not in
a hot Sun, nor in any damp Place.





If you use Isinglass without any Colour mixedt
with the Water, you may, as soon as you take
the Impressions srom the Medals, breathe gently
on the concave Side of them, and then lay them
upon the thickest Sort of Leaf gold, which will
stick to them; and by fhining through the Isin-
glass will appear like a Gold Medal: But if we
would imitate a Copper-medal, we should mix
Carmine with the Water that we dissolve ous
Isinglass in.
Although Water may do very well for dissolv-
ing the Isinglass in for this Purpose, yet Brandy
or Spirits of Wine will give the Glue à much
greater Strength, so as not to be subject to soften
in a damp Air.
XI. To take the Impression of large Medals.
First rub the Medals gently over with a Tuft
of sine Cotton moistened or greased with Sweet-
oil; then having some melted Brimstone, enough
to cover the Medal half an Inch thick, put a Hoop
of Card-paper round the Edge of it, and pour the
melted Brimstone on it, but not too hot; as soon
as it is fixed and hardened, take off the Hoop of
Paper, and the Impression on the Brimstone will
come clean from the Medal, which shall serve
for a sharp and correct Mould wherein you may
cast another with Plaister of Paris. But Brim-
stone should not be used on Silver-medals, be-
cause it will effectually change their Colour.
Therefore, to take Silver-medals off, bind them.






round, after oiling them, with a Hoop of some
stiff Paper, as before, and mixing alittle Plaister
of Paris with Water, sill the Hoop with it; then
immediately sill the Case in a sprinkling Manner
with the same Plaister, till it hardens; and when it
turns dry, take it off from the Medals. But from
those Moulds cast in Brimstone that are concave,
you must igain cast such Medals in Plaister of Pa-
ris, and they will be convex, oiling the Mould and
using the Plaister of Paris as beforé. By this
Method you may take off any Medal or sine Bass-
relief with great Exactnefs, even so as to form
Medals from them in any fort of Metal.
XII. Another Way of taking off MrDAlsis as
follows.
Procure some thin Pieces of Lead, and placing
the Medal horizontally on the Top of a firm Post,
or any steady Place; lay a Piece of harder Metal
flat over the Lead ; and place a Piece of a round
turned Stick over that, such as is used in the
Staff of a House-brushi; saw off about five or six
Inches in Length; and holding that tight, with the
left Hand, on the Lead and flat Piece of Metal,
strike the Top of the Stick a smart Blow with a
large Hammer, and it will give the Lead a perfect
Impression of the Image of the Medal. But this
must be done by one single Blow to render the
Impression perfect.





XIII. Various Ways of taking off MedrLS.
Take the Shavings of Paper, and boiling them
till they are tender, pound.them well in a Mortar,
so as to reduce them into a Paste : then, boil them
again in Spring-water with a little Gum-arabic :
let this Mixture stand-some time to settle: then
pour off the Water, straining it through a Sieve
or Linnen-cloth, and the remaining Part of this
Mixture will be an excellent Ingredient either to
press into any Mould,. or upon any Medal : for
when the Paste is dry,. it will come off very
sharp.
Some Medals that are under-wrought cannot
be taken off this Way ; therefore, in such Cases
you should take common Glue, and melting it,
six a Hoop of Paste-board, &c. round the Edge
of the Medal, and pour on the Glue hot; the
Medal having been first oiled with a Tuft of
greased Cotton.
When the Glue is dry and hard, take off the
Hoop,. and the Glue will sly off from the Edges:
and it will, as being subject to bend and give Way,
which the Things formerly mentioned are not,
come very easily off. But the Glue ought to be
made strong, and should be poured on one third
Part of an Inch thick.
When an Impression has been taken by this
Means, you must then hoop your Mould of Glue
with either Card-paper or Pasteboard, as before






directed, taking Care to oil it so that no Bubblés
or Blisters may be seen; then you may cast your
Plaister of Paris in it, and you will obtain, by
these Means, a good Copy of the Medal. When
this is dry, the Glue will sly off, or may be
broken off, and there will remain a good Pattern
to cast from.
Also, a Putty may be made of Linseed-oil and
fine-ground Starch, which being well worked
together into a Paste will take a good Imprefsion
from any Medal. By means of these Moulds
you may cast good Medals of Bees-wax: but
they will come off-much sharper if the Mould be
in Brimstone, than if it be in Plaister of Paris. But
then your Wax should be as well blanched or
whitened as if it was used for Wax-candles; how-
ever it will be necessary to grease the Mould be-
fore the Wax is poured in; and though white
Wax is here recommended, yet it will not be
best thatthe Copy of the Medal be white, because
the darker Colours shew the Medal much better.
If you would have your Copy of a red Colour,
mix Vermilion with the Wax, while it is melting;
and if you would have it blue, put in Stone-blue
well beaten, or ground, into the melted Wax.
As soon as these Wax-medals are cold enough to
take off, you should lay some Leaf-gold upon them,
pressing it down gently with a Piece of Cotton,
without rubbing it backwards and forwards; and
that will gold vour Medal. When you cast Medals





in Plaister of Paris,, to make them look like Steel
or Metal, rub them over with a Tuft of Cotton
lightly greased with Oil: then strewing over them
some Powder of black Lead, rub them well with
such a Brushi as is used for the Teeth, till the
whole is equally covered, and this will give them
a fine Metal-gloss. You may make these Me-
dals in Plaister of Paris look like Box, by boiling
them in Linseed Oil; and this will harden them
to such a Degree as to bear the Brush, to clean
them when they turn foul, or dirty. If you
would have these Medals look of a yellow Colour,
boil a little Pearl Ashies in a Pint of Water, till
it makes a strong Lixivium; then put in half a
quarter of a Pint of French-berries: Boil this till
the Liquor is of a strong yellow, and use it with
your Plaister of Paris instead of common Water.
If you would have the Medals look green, the
fine, transparent Gum of Verdegrease mixed with
the Plaister of Paris, will give them that Colour;
and for à Silver-Colour, Leaf-silver or Tin-foil
may be used in the same Manner as the Leaf-
gold for the Gold-colour: for the Copper-colour,
German leaf-copper may be used.
XIV. To take off Impressions in Plaister of Paris
from COPPER-PlatEs.
Oil the Plates à little, and binding them about,
either with Card or other Paste-board Paper, pour
on them some of the finest Plaister of Paris and
Water; and finishing the Work with Plaister till





it becomes dry and hardens, you will have a fine
Imprefsion or Draught of the Lines on the Plate
in the Plaister, which you may make Use of to
draw from as you may have Occasion.
XV. To take off the fine Engravings from
WATCH-CASES, SNUFF-BOXES, &c,
Hold them over the Smoke of a Candle, till
they are quite black; then wiping off the Black
with the soft Part of the Palm of your Hand, lay
a Piece of white Paper, a little wetted with a
Sponge, over the Engravings; and over that clap
a thin Piece of Flannel, or brown Paper pressed
down very hard, which being rubbed, the Paper
next the Picture will obtain as fine an Impression
as if it had passed through a Rolling-press.






The Doctrine of Water-Colours
for illuminatins, &c. in the
best Manner
CHAP. I.
Of COLouRS in General.
OLOURS are to bedistinguissied as follows :
Cthe first is the White Colour; next, the
Yellow ; next the Orange; then the Red; after
that, the Purple; afterwards, the Blue; and
lastly, the Black. It is to be observed, that
White and Black are the Extremes of Colour:
Yellow is the lesser Point of Colour towards the
White; the next to that is the Green; and after
it the Blue.
With regard to the colouring of Prints, if the
Paper be pure white, you are to use no Colour on
it, unless in the shaded Parts; and then in painting
of Flowers, if they tend towards a reddisn Colour,
you are to use a faint Colour of Carmine with Gum¬
water, upon the Shades only; if bluish, use a littie
faint Indigo in Gum-water slightly passed over the
Shades, easily touching upon the Lights. Where
there is-a yellow Tinge, either use a faint Tinc-
ture of Gamboge, or of French-berries, which
will be described among the Yelliows: or if the
Whites have a purplish Cast, use a thin Cake on





the shady Side suffering the Colour only to shine
a little into the Light, which will give a Lustre
to the Whites; and if a greenisn Cast should be
there, use a very faint Colour of the Sap-green ;
or in Proportion of the Sap-green mixed with
the Verdigrease-green.
All these Colours mentioned for shading the
Whites may be found in the following Directions.
CHAP. II.
WHITES for Painting in Miniature.
HE best White sold for painting in
I.
Water-Colours is Flake-white: this is
better than white Lead ground, and if it be pure
far exceeds it in Beauty ; because the white Lead
is aptto turn blackish, especially, if it be used in
a hard Water.
2. But some recommend a White made of Pearl
and Oyster-shells reduced intoan impalpable Pow¬
der, so foft as to feel like Grounds of Starch, or
Hair-powder: this is by some called Pearl-white,
and will mix well with any Colour. But if you
use white Lead, first rectify it with White-wine
Vinegar, which causing a Fermentation, the
White will soon settle; after which pour off the
Vinegar, and wasn the White with common
Water. The Method of washing it is thus, Put
the Powder into a Glass of Water; stir it about
and presently pour off the Water, whileit is white,
into some other clean Glass, or Vessel : then
letting it settle, pour off the Water from it, and





you shall have an excellent White, to which,
when it is settled, you are to put as much Gum-
water as is necessary to give it a Glaze.
It is observable that white Lead will turn black
if mixed with Water that comes from Iron or
Clay; that is, in the Space of a Month or two,
you may perceive those Places where it lies thick-
est tinged with black ; and if it be mixed with
any other Colour, it will soon change or alter it.
3. Some recommend the Powder of Egg-shells
of the brightest Colour, and well cleaned andi
washed, as very good to be ground with Gum-
water; or you may put a twentieth Part of clean
white Sugar candied to grind with it in Water:
it must be ground as fine as possible; that is, to
the State of an impalpable Powder; and then use
it Some say it is better, if rectifyed Spirit of
Wine be poured on it, which will clear it from
any Dross that may be in it: this, it is probable,
must be poured off, when the Spirit of Wine has
done its Work; and then the Parts left behind
must be mixed with Gum-water again.
But it has been found by Experience that Egg-
g.
shell Powder is of very great Service, as a White,
in Water-Colours, and that itself and the Oyster-
shell Powders, well rectified and mixed with the
White of an Egg well beaten, will make an ex-
traordinary Mixture in other Colours, and will cor-
rect them from changingor altering their Qualities.
4. As to a White for illuminating of Prints, the
clear White of the Paper is to be left uncoloured,





and if it happens that the Paper is apt to sink, or
to spread any Water-colour that is laid upon it
more than is necessary ; then the Way to correctit
is as follows. Fix thePaper in such a Station as that
it may only receive the Colour you lay on to glaze,
just as far as you designed it; then take some
Starch boiled and prepared in Water, of a middle
Strength, and with a large Painting-brush, stroke
it over the Black of the Print; and after it has been
well dried in the Air, or Sun, put the Print in a
Book with a Weight upon it, to take out the
Crumplings which it may receive by wetting of it;
and thus will any Print be rendered fit to receive
Water-colours, which will be prevented from
running further than one would have them.
S. A fine White for Water-colours is made by
dissolving Filings of sine Silver or Silver-leaf in
Aqua fortis ; then evaporating the Aqua-fortis till
it looks like Chrystals in the Bottom of the Glass :
decant the other Part of the Aqua-fortis, and wash
the Silver five or six times in common Water, till
it is freed from the Aqua-fortis, which may be
known by tasting it; then dry it for Use. It must
be used with Gum-water, and a little Water of
Sugar-candy.
6. An incomparable fine white Lead-colour is
made by grinding choice white Lead well upon a
Porphyry with Vinegar, so that it turns blackish:
then take a Pot full of Water, and wafhiing the
white Lead in it very well, let it settle ; and pour-
ing off the Water, grind it again with Vinegar;
repeat this once or twice more; and you will have





an excellent White both for Water-colours and
painting in Oil.
7. Te make a good white for the ground, for Water
or Oil colours, proper in Miniature.
Take a Pound of Glover’s Clippings, put them
some time to steep in Water: then boiling them
in a Kettle, with twelve Quarts of Water, till
it sinks to two, strain it through a Linnen cloth
into a new earthen Pan: this is called Glove-glue,
or Size; and to know whether it be strong
enough, it is only necessary to tzy, when it is
cold, and has got its Consistence, whether it be
stiff and firm under the Hand.
The Glue being made, take white Chalk, and
reducing it to Powder, and melting the Glue, while
it is hot, put such a Quantity of White init, as to
make it so thick as Pap: then leaving it to steep for a
quarter of an Hour, stiritabout with a Bristle-brush.
Then taking some of this White put more Glue
to it, in order to make it brighter, for the first
or second Lay: this must be applied by beating
with the End of the Brush. Mind that you let every
Lay dry well before you put on another. If it is
Wood you work on, you must put on a Dozen;
but if it is thick Paper, six or seven are sufficient.
This done, take Water, and dipping a soft
Brush in it, and draining it with your Fingers rub
the Work with it, in order to render it the
smoother. When your Brush is full of White, you
must wash it again; and also change the Water
when it is too white. You may likewise sometimes





make Use of a wet Linnen-rag instead of a Brusni.
Your Work being very even, let it dry, and
when it is so, rub it with Shave-grafs, or à Bit of
new Linnen-cloth, to make it soft and free.
CHAP. III.
Of YELLOW.
1. HERE are some Objects which have the
Appearance of Gold shining through the
Colours of Green, Red or Blue, such as some fort
of Flies and Beetles, and the Cantharides. This
golden Transparency is very well imitated by lay-
ing sonie Gold-leaf on the shaded Part of the
Drawing, giving in a little to the light Side of the
Print. The Way of laying on the Gold-leaf, is
by washing the Part where the Gold is to be with
dry, by laying on the Gold as smooth and even as
pofsible; pressing it down close with Cotton. But
in doing this, Care must be taken that, in laying on
the Gum-water, you do not exceed the Limits you
would have the Gold appear to shine. In this
Case the Gold is toshineonly through the transpa¬
rent Colour which is to be laid on.
It must be observed, that the Gold-leaf will not
receive Water-colours regularly, and for that
Reason it must be stroked over with a little thin
Liquor of Ox-gall in a painting Brush of Camel’s-
Hair, by which Means it will receive any Colour
that you have a Mind to paint upon it, and will
hold it. The Greens may be first, the Verdegrease-





green or Sap-green (which Colours should be de¬
scribed in their Places ;) the Reds may be Lake or
Carmine; the Purples, Lake and fine Indigo, or
Carmine and Indigo; and for the Blues, Indigo
on the dark side, and on the light a little Stroke of
UItramarine-blue, just to shine into the Light,
which will have an admirable Effect.
2. There may be found upon Rose-trees, in
June and Juiy, a Kind of Beetle of a gold and
green Colour, which may serve for a Direction
in this Kind of Painting. But if Gold itself be
used, it will be best to polish it, which may be
done in the following manner.
There may be seen in some Manuscripts fine
golden Letters which rise above the Surface of the
Vellum or Paper: the Composition that raises
them thus is said to be made up of Vermilion and
the white of an Egg, whisked or beaten up to the
Consistence of an Oil, and worked together like
a Kind of Paste, and with a Stamp fixed to the
Vellum or Paper with Gum-arabic. On this Fi-
gure of a Letter wash some strong Gum-water
with a Pencil of Camel’s Hair, observing that the
Gum does not reach more than the Outlines;
then lay on the Gold leaf close with some Cotton,
and being dried, rub it with some dry Cotton; and
then polish it with a Dog’s-tooth: this will make
it appear as if it was really cast in Gold.
3. There is besides this another Way of working
in Gold, and that is performed by Shell-gold, but
then it must be pure Gold, and not that brought
from Germany, which turns green in a few Days
Time.




Time. Before you use this Gold, cover the fhrady
Parts with Vermilion; and after your Gold has
been well rectified with Spirit of Wine, lay it on
with Gum-water, which will readily mix with it;
and when it is dry, polisn it with a Dog’s Tooth.
In laying on Gold, it will be best to leave the
Lights without it, because it will make a much
brighterAppearance than if the Object was cover-
ed all over with it. But if, by Accident or other-
wise, the whole Piece happened to be covered
with Gold, there is no better Way to set it off,
than by tracing over the shady parts with Gall-
stone, or, what is much preferable, the Yellow
made of French-berries, the Composition of which
is treated of below- But it is the deepest that is to
be used in thisWay. A little Minium heightens it
very much. How the Minium is to be rectified may
be learned among the Reds. Observe to polisn the
Gold before you use the Minium on it.
After this Colour of the Gold, the Vellows shall
be treated of as they fail gradually in their strength.
4. The first Yellow is a kind of Straw-colour
and is made of Flour of Brimstone, which of itself
is fine enough to mix with Gum-water.
5. A commonWay of illuminating Prints is by
giving the Tincture of Gamboge for a Yellow; and
this may be of two or three forts, either fainter or
stronger; the last to be a Shade to the first, and to be
shaded with the Preparation of French-berries.
6. Mr. Boyle says, that if the Roots of Barber-
ries are cut and put into à Lixivium made strong
with




with Water and Pearl-asnes, there will be a fine
tried succeeded very well.
7. He likewise proposes anotherWay for making
a transparent Yellow, which is by boiling the Root
of a Mulberry-tree, washed well from the Earth, in
a strong Lixivium of Pearl-ashes and Water; this
will afford a yellowisn Juice, from which may be ex-
tracted a Tincture much deeper than the former.
8. Yellow Oker will likewise make another
good pale Yellow, but it is a Colour rather of
too much Body for illuminating of Prints; yet
after it has been well washed.
9. The Plant Celandine will afford another good
Yellow by infusingit in Water and pressing it gent-
ly, and then boiling theLiquor with a little Alum.
This yellow will ineline somewhat to Green.
10. But a yellow which some prefer to the rest,
and may be used in several Capacities of Lights, is
one made of Frenèh-berries, and prepared as fol-
lows. Boil two ounces of French-berries in a
quart of Lixivum made of Pearl-ashies and Water,
till the Liquor gives a fine tinge of Yellow to a bit
of Paper dipped in it; and then pour it off fromthe
Berries; let the Liquor cool, and bottle it up for use.
Then again, put a Pint of the same Lixivium to
the Berries, and boil them till the Liquor is as
deep-coloured as Gall-stone, and this will be fit
for the Shade of any fort of Yellows you can use.
This may be boiled tifl it produces a brown Co-
lour ; and will, with a little Ox-gall, serve to





shade any Leaf-gold that is laid on Paper, and is
much preferable to Gall-stone in imitating any
Gold-colour; and it answers well upon a Tinc-
ture of Gamboge, or any of the former Yellows.
11. Next to this may be reckoned the Tincture
of Saffron in common Water only, which affords
a bright reddish Yellow, such as would be re-
quired for an Orange-colour, in covering the
shadowed Parts of a Print; and when Saffron is
infused in rectified Spirits of Wine, there is no-
thing higher: but then it will sly, unless it be
loaded with Gum-arabic.
12. As for a deep Yellow, with a Body, Dutch
Pink comes the nearest of any to the forementioned
strong Yellow made of French-berries in point of
Colour: but the English Pink, which is still made
of French-berries, is of a lighter Yellow.
13. Also, a good yellow Colour for illuminat-
ing Prints may be extracted from the Roots of
Ginger; and with transparent Verdegrease it
makes a fine Green.
It is to be observed that the Englisn and Dutch
yellow Pinks are made with French-berries ground
to a sine Powder and boiled.
CHAP. IV.
Of ORANGE-Colour.
AN Orange-colour for washiing Prints is made
A by laying on a Teint of Gamboge; and over
that some Minium or red Lead washed, and ren-
dered sine and fit for Use; it not being fine enough





to paint with as it is bought at the Shops; and
besides it will change, or turn black in a few
Weeks, if it be not refined; but being well pre-
pared, it will be very lasting and beautiful. But
this you must take Notice of, that an Ounce will
not produce above twenty Grains of a good Colour
to stand the Test of Painters. This Colour may
be mixed with Gamboge upon a white Dutch
Tile, to render it of the Teint you would have it,
either softer or stronger; or else the Gamboge
may be glazed over, and strengthened with the
Tincture of Saffron, which will make it glare
into a strong Orange.
CHAP. V
Of MINIUM, the brightest RED LEAD; the
Manner of preparing it.
AHE Minium or red Lead is as heavy and
I
strong a Colour as most we have; and
prepared, is the most beautiful one, when it is
well washied and cleansed of its more weighty,
Parts, which cause it to turn black.
Mr. Boyle directs the preparing, or cleansing it
in the following manner. Put four Ounces of it
in a Quart of Rain-water; then stirring it, pour
off the Water immediately, and let it settle to the
Bottom of every Cup or Glass you pour it into;
then pouring off that Water, in a Day’s Time
you will have the Colour dry, and as fine as can
be desired. Afterwards put a little Gum-arabic
into each Glass or Cup, and as much Water as.
will moisten each of them.





Any of these may be afterwards used with Gum-
water; but if the Gum you put in itat first make it
strong enough to glaze it, then you need only add
to it common Water; and according as your
Colour is less or more gummed, use less or more
Gum-water; for it is of itself a dead Colour.
When you use this Colour, touch it gently on
the Yellow above-mentioned that is made of the
ycllow Berries, into the light Side; and if it wants
a Shade, you may put à little Vermilion upon it;
but Vermilion is too heavy to paint with, when you
would illuminate your Prints, because it hides the
Shades of the Engraving, though sometimes they
had better be hidden than appear; some generally
shade this Minium with Carmine, which gives it a
sine Effect, and renders it equal to the brightest
red Flower that is to be seen ; leaving still the
Lights uncoloured, only dafhing a little Way into
the Lights with the Minium.
When the Carmine has shaded the Minium, it
may be shaded again with Lake in the strongest
Part to bring it to a deeper-red.
CHAP. VI.
Of other REDS.
1. Scarlet-Red.
ScaRLeT may be represented on a Plane with
Minium a little mixed with Vermilion; but
if you have Occasion to paint a Flower of a Scarlet-
Colour on a Print, let your Lights as well as Shades
be covered thin with Minium; and the shaded





Parts glazed with Carmine, which will produce
an admirable Scarlet, such as is seen in the Flower
Scarlet Martagon.
2. Crimson-Red.
A Crimson-colour is represented with Carmine,
but it is necessary that the Buyer be informed that
there are several Sorts of it; some darker, and
some much coarser than others: therefore it
should never be bought by Candle-light, unless
of such as a Person can confide in : for between
the best and the worst there is ten Shillings an
Ounce Difference : nay indeed all the Money
that an Ounce will cost, because bad Carmine
will but spoil the Work.
3. Next after Crimson comes Lake, which is
of use in shading and heightening Carmine. But it
must be observed that in laying of Carmine upon a
Print, you must touch yourLights only with such a
thinTeint of it as can scarcely be observed ; laying
it on strong just on that Part of the Light which
enters upon the Shade, and afterwards laying some
Lake on the stronger Part of the Shade.
Lake is to be had in most Colour-shops ready
pregared in Shells for Water-colours.
To make a fine Lake, take half a Pound of
good Brazil, and boiling it in three Pints of Ley
made with the Asnes of Vine-twigs till half the
Ley be evaporated, let it settle, and then strain
it; which done, boil it again with fresh Brasil, a
quarter of a Pound ; Cochineal, two Ounces,
and Terra Marita half an Ounce, adding a Pint of
fair Water. Let this boil till it be half evaporated





as before : then set it by to settle, and strain it.
But when you take it off the Fire, remember to
put in an half Ounce of calcined Alum, reduced
to an impalpable powder, and dissolve it, by
stirring it about with a Stick, adding a quarter
In order to give it a Body, reduce two Cuttle-
fisn Bones to a very sine Powder, and putting in the
Powder, let it dry up at Leisure. Then grind it
with a good Quantity of fair Water, in which leave
it to steep, and afterwards strain it through a Cloth;
and making it up into a fewTablets, or Cakes, set
it to dry on a Card, or Paste-board. If you would
have this Lake redder, add Lemon-juice; and if
you would make it deeper, add Oil of Tartar.
Another Lake may be made as follows. Boil
Shavings or Shearings of Scarlet in a Ley of the
Ashies of burnt Tartar: this Ley having the Pro-
perty of separating the Dye from the Scarlet
Shreds. When it has boiled enough, take it
off, and putting in Cochineal, powdered Mastic,
and Roch-alum, boil the whole again, and while
it is quite hot, strain it two orthree Times through
a fine Bag; thefirst Time the Bag must be squeez-
ed with two Sticks from the Top to the Bottom ;
then the gross Matter remaining being taken out
of the Bag, wash it well. After this pafs the Li-
quor you expressed with the Sticks through the
Bag again, and you will find a Paste sticking to
the Sides of the Bag, which you may either spread
upon a Paste-board, or divide into small Parcels
upon Paper and set it aside to dry.





To make Lake-columbine, steep half a Pound
of the finest Brazil-wood of Fernambuca rasped in
three Pints of the finest distilled Vinegar, for at
least a Month, the longer the better. After which
seethe the whole in Balneo Mariae, till it boils up
three of four times; letting it settlé for a Day or
two. After this, prepare a fourth Part of pow-
dered Alum, and putting it in a clean earthen
Pan, strain the Liquor upon the Alum, and so let
it remain for a Day. Afterwards heat the whole
again till the Liquor simmers, and let it settle
twenty-four Hours; then reduce two Cuttle-Fish-
bones intoPowder, and having warmed the Liquor,
pour it in upon them, and stir it about with a Stick
till it be cold, and leave it again for twenty-four
Hours before you strain it. Kemember that it must
be first strained upon the Alum, before it is pourod
upon the Cuttle-fish-bone.
4. But à liquid Colour not much inferior to
Carmine itself may be made of the Raspings of
Brasil-wood: this Colour is the transparent Crim-
son, and is made as follows. Boil an Ounce of the
Raspings of Brasil-wood, sold at the Dry-salter’s
and at some Colour-shops, in twelve Qunces of
pale stale Beer and a little Alum, till the Colour
of the Liquor is as strong as you please, which
may be discovered by dipping a Slip of white Paper
into it. When this Colour is as you would have
it, pass it when cooled into a Linnen-cloth, and
bottle it up for Use.
And if you would bring this Colour to à Body,
take Ox-blood, and dry it till it can be reduced






to a Powder, which being done, mix it with the
Liquor, and it will communicate a Colour to it
little inferior to a middling Carmine: some say
-that the Blood of an Ox or Cow dried will make
a good Body for any Colour.
3. A Crimsan Colour from Mr. Boyle.
Take the Fruit of the Berry bearing Spinach,
which being pressed, will yield a beautiful red-co-
loured Juice; boil this, adding a fourth part of
Alum to it; then letting it cool, put it up for Use.
6. The red Beet-root baked with a little strong
Vinegar produces an elegant Red-coleur equal toa
Tincture of Carmine: then pour it on Alum, and.
it is fit for use, where Carmine should be used in
washing Prints, for it is à fine transparent red.
7. Another Grimson Colour for wasning Prints,
&c. is prépared as follous.
Put thirty or forty Grains of bruised Cochineal
into a Gallipot, with as many Dreps of Tartar-ley
as will just wet it and make it give forth its Co-
lour; then immediately adding to this M.xture half
a Spoonful of Water, or more, if the Colour be¬
still toa-dzep, vou will have a delicate purple-
liquor or Tincture. Then taking a Bit of Alum,
scrape very finely with a Knise a small Quantity
of it into the Tincture, and this will take away
the Puiple colaur, and make it a delicate Tinc--
ture. Strain it through a fine Cloth into a clean
Gallipot, and use it as soon as you can, because-
this is à Colcur that will always look exquisitely
sine if it is -con made use of; but will decay if
it stands lolg.





8. Indian Red.
Next to these is the Indian Red, which though
it is a Colour of a Body, yet is useful for a back
Ground for Flowers at a Distance, when used
with Gum-water.
9. There is also an Earth brought from the
Isle of Wight which has been found to mix ex-
tremely well with Gum-water, though being of a
viscous Nature, it requires less Gum than most
other Colours; and as it is naturally fit for Use
without grinding, and is viscous, so it will no
doubt mix with Oil as well as with Water.
There is one Thing very extraordinary in this
Earth, which is, that if you rub a Deal-board
with it, it will make the Board exactly of tha.
Colour of Mahogany- wood, and stain it so deep,
and with so much Strength, that it is hard to
get it out with washing.
CHAP. VII..
Of PURPLE.
Fine transparent Purple may be made either
A redder, or nearer the blue, as you would
have it, by boiling four Ounces of rasped Brazil-
wood in a Pint of stale Beer, with half an Ounce
of Logwood, or Campeachy-wood, till the Liquor.
is heightened to the Colour you desire, which may-
be known by dipping a Piece of Paper in it.
Ifyou find it too red, add an Ounce of Logwood
to the Brafil-wood, which will make it much near-






Method you may humour it to any Degree of
Purple, by putting in either more or less Log-
wood to the fornier Composition, and fixing the
Colour with Alum.
This will produce such a clear Purple as no Mix-
ture of solid Reds and Blues will do, and the Re-
ceipt has been for a long Time kept secret. It is
said, that the best purple Colour that can be made
may be composed between the Carmine and In-
digo, to strengthen which, on the red Side, you
may add Lake between the lighter and darker
Part; and so Lake, when it is used in the same
way on the foregoing Purple, or the liquid
Criinson, produces a very fine Effect.
The Colour may be varied, and made either
redder, by putting more Carmine, or bluer, by
using more Indigo, which, being mixed on a
white Dutch Tile, will shew itself.
A fine Purple-colour may be made of the grofs
Part or Sediment of Lake-columbine, both for
Oil and Water-colours, as follows.
Take the Sediment of Lake-columbine which
falls to. the Bottom of the Vial in which is the Bone
of the Cutile-fisn. Let it dry, and grind it; there
will be no Lake so fine as this; and if you mix it
with Lake, it will give it a berter Body, besides
more Srength and Vigour.





CHAP VIII.
Of BLUE.
HE Uitramarine-Blue is not only the first
but the best Sort of bright Blue we have,
as it gives a Spirit to all Paintings where Blues are
used. This Colour is made from the Lapis Lazuli
divested of its Gold, and ground into an impalpa¬
ble Powder, which is done as follows. Take half
a Pound of Lapis Lazuli, and putting it upon red-
hot Coals, let it stay there until it is red-hot: then
quenchingit in very strong Vinegar, and grinding
it upon Porpliry, or any such hard Stone, with
rectified Brandy to an impalpable Powder, make
aPastil with which the Lapis is to be incorporated :
for the making of this Pastil take Bees-wax, Tur-
pentine, Rosin andLinseed-oil, of each a quarter of
aPound; and melting the whole together over a slow
Fire, when it begins toboil, pour it into a glazed
Pot: this is the Paste of Ultramarine. Take of this
Paste a Quantity equal to that of the Lapis, kncad
them together upon the Marble, and being well
incorporated, I. tthem remain for one Night; after
which, to bring out the UItramarine that is in the
Paste, pour clean Water upon it, and knead it
with your Hands as Paste is kneaded, and the Ul-
tramarine will come out; for the receiving ofwhich,
place a Porringer or other proper Vessel under
your Hands, and let it settle in this Water till you
sce the UItramarine at the Bottom of it.
Ifyout Colour seems to be clammy or nasty, you
may correct it thus: Add theretoTartar, disselved






in Water, as much as will drown it, and let it rest
for one Day at least; then wasn it in warm Water,
and you will by that means have it correct and well
purified. Ultramarine must be chosen of a high
Colour and well ground, which may be known by
putting lt between the Teeth; for if it feels gritty
it is a Sign that it has not been well ground.
To know whether it be pure and unmixed, pat
a little of it into a Crucible, and heating it red-
hot, if the Powder docs not change its Colour
after Trial, it is certaisly pure ; but, on the
contrary, if there be any Change or black Specks
in it, then it has been adulterated.
2. The Prussian Blue is next to Ultramarine in
Eeapty, if it be used in Oil, though it is not agreed
on whether it will hold so well as the other, par-
ticularly as not having the Body of the Ultramarine-
The Prussian Blue does not grind well in Water,
because there is such an oily Quality in it that it
does not mix kindly with Water, and at the best
will change, as it is now prepared in the common
Way. Attempts have been made to make it a blue
Ink, which indeed has held the Colour for a
Month or two, but then turned to a muddy yellow,
And when you put your Pencil with Gum-water,
into a Shell of this Blue, you will find that where
the Water spreads the Blue will turn yellowish,
till the Bedy of the Colour is well stirred up; and
after all that can be done with this Colour in Wa-
ter, it will only serve to shade Ultramarine with :





but in Oil it may serve very well, for the present;
to supply the Place of Ultramarine.
3. Blue-bice is a Colour of good Brightnefs,
and is the next to the Prussian Blue. It is also a
Colour of a good Body, and will flow pretty well
in the Pencil, especially if it be well washed, as is
directed to be done of the Whites and Minium.
4. Saunders-Blue is also of very good Use, and
may serve as a Shade to Ultramarine, or the Biue-
bice, where the Shades are not required to be
very deep, and is of itself a pleasant Blue to be
laid- between the Lights and Shades of such a
Flower as is of a Mazarine-blue.
5. The Lacmus or Litmus-blue is another
beautiful Colour, and will run in a Pen as free as
Ink : being made of Lacmus, or, as some term
it Litmus, which is sold at miost Druggists-shops.
But as this Colour is never to be met with pre-
pared for Water-colours, we therefore shall give
the foliowing Method of preparing it, according
to Mrs. Mariana. Take an Ounce of Lacmus,
and boil it in about a Pint of small Beer-wort,
till the Colour is as strong as you would have it;
then pour off the Liquor into a Gallipot, and let
it cool for Use: it will soon become a Jelly, and
by Degrees will grow hard.
But this Colour is to be opened again and made
liquid by Water, so as to be us-d in Ink, anà will
be either paler or darker, as it is made tnicker or
tiinner. This affords a bright C. oir and hes
extraord inary Effects: for it is not onlya pearitral









but a holding Colour. This Colour, if it be
touched with Aqua-fortis, immediately changes
into a fine Crimson, little inferior to Carmine, and
sinks quite through the Paper, so as not to be got
out ; so that when it is used às a Blue, it is best
to keep it from Aqua-fortis, or such strong Acids.
It is a good Shade for Ultramarine or Blue-bice,
where the strongest Shades should not be ex-
tremely deep; and for colouring of Prints it is
very good, as it is a transparent Colour, and
goes a great Way.
6. Indigo- Blue makes the strongest Shade for
Blues of any other, and is a soft warm Colour
when it has been well ground and washied with
Gum-water, by means of a Stone and Muller.
It is made of what Lightness you please, by putting
more Gum-water to it; and by how much the
less Gum-water is put to it, the darker it will be.
to try it upon a Dutch Tile ; for it runs warmly
in the Pencil, and so perhaps may otherwise
prove too strong for your Design, which is al-
ways to be taken Care of, when a slowing Co-
lour is to be laid over the dark Shade of a Print;
which Shade will much heighten its Black ness,
and even make it appear quite black.
7. A sine Blue from Mr. Boyle.
Take of the blue Leaves of Rue, and beating
them a little in a stone-mortar with a wooden Pes-
tle, infuse them in Water, Juice and all, for four-
teen Days or more, washing them every Day till





they are, rotten; and at last beat them and the
Water together till they become a Pulp, and let
them dry in the Sun.
This will produce as good Bluc as Indigo, and
be much softer; but in order to keep it à long
Time, when you beat it the last Time, add a
little Powder of Gum-arabic to it, of which
you may put more or less as you would have it
more free or tenacious in the working. This is
an excellent Blue for shading, has a good Body
and ruiis warm in the Pencil.
8. A transparent Blue from Mr. Boyle equal to
Ultramarine.
This is a beautiful Blue, the chief Ingredientof
which is the Cyanus or blue Cornbottle-flower.
This Flower has two Blues in it, onc of a pale
Colour in the larger outward Leaves, the other
of a deeper Colour in the inner Leaves, or Mid-
die of the Flower. Both these will do, being
separated from the Buttons and Cases they grow
in; but the deep blue Leaves in the Middle pro-
duce by much the best Colour; this may be ob-
served by rubbing the Leaves while they are fresn,
so hard upon a Picce of good writing Paper, as
to press out the Juice, which will yield an excel-
lent Colour that will not fade for several Years.
Tniis Part of the Flower is t'erefore the principal,
and what may be depended on, and should be picked
from the rest of the Flower-leaves the same Day
it was gathered, or as soon afterwards as possibly
can be. A good Quantity of thcse middle-Leaves






being procured, press out what Juice you can from
them, and adding a little Alum to it, you will
have a lasting transparent Blue of as bright a stand-
ing Colour as can be desired, scarce inferior in
Beauty to Uitramarine, and very durable.
As for the outward Flower-leaves, which are
much paler, it is not certain that they will answer
the End, but some Trials may be made whereby
that may be known also. Let the Flowers be
gathered about the Beginning of June, or in July
or August, but the Preparation of the Colour, by
picking out the middle deep blue Flower-leaves,
and pressing out the Juice, must be done with all
the Expedition possible, or else they will lose their
Perfection.
It is probable that if the Leaves of these blue
Cornbottle-flowers were cured in the same Man-
ner as Saffron is, they would produce a much
greater Body of Colour, from-which a Tincture
mnight be drawn with more Ease, than if pressed
raw or fresn from the Field.
In order to do this such a Kiln must be prepar-
ed as is used for curing of Saffron, in which may
be made a small Charcoal-fire that may communi¬
cate a Heat to the Top of the Kiln, which is to be
covered with a Hair-cloth; upon this should be
laid four or five Sheets of white Paper, such as
is used in curing of S affron: afterwards a Parcel of
the picked Flowers are to be laid on to the Thick-
niess of two or three Inches, laying them close and
slat with a Knife, and sprinkling them with some
Gum-water. Then the Cake of Flowers is to be







covered with two or three Sheets of Paper, and a
Board, with a fmall Weight laid on for a few Mi-
nutes ; after which the Board is to be taken off,
and the Cake of Flowers to be turned on the Kiln,
taking hold of all the Papers with both Hands ;
and when it has been rightly placed, take off the
upper Papers, and sprinkle the Cake a second
Time with some Gum-water; then settling the
Cake again with a Knife, let the Papers be laid
on as before, with the Board and Weight for a
Minute or two; after which let the Papers be
turned again and again till the Cake of Flowers
becomes united, and of the Thickness of a Cake
of Saffron.
In this Operation you will find the Flowers
grow darker and darker every Time they are turn-
ed, till at length the Cake will look of a deep blue
tending to black, from whence a Tincture may
be easily drawn. During this Operation great
Care should be taken that the Fire does not scorch
the Flowers, but that it be as constant and gentle
as possible, which will be a sure Way to bring the
Cake to a good Colour.
But it will not be improper for any Person who
shall undertake the curing of this Colour to consult:
the Methods of curing Saffron, of which they may
be informed either in a Treatise of the Method of :
curing Saffron written by Mr. Dowglas, or in :
another by Mr. Bradley in his monthly Trcatise
of Husbandry and Gardening.





CHAP IX. Of Black
The proper Black for Water-colours is
Ivory-Black, which, if pure and well
ground, is of Use in Painting in Miniature, but it
is not proper for colouring Prints; being too heavy
a Colour, and hiding the beautiful Strokes of the
Graver, unless done with great Care: however,
if it be necessary to use black for darkening aPrint,
rather choose a strong Tincture of good India Ink
than the lvory-black ; but to colour Pieces in Mi-
niature use the lvory-black prepared as follows.
Grind the lvory-black well in Gum-water, till
youperceive a Kind of oilyLiquor settle to the Bot-
tom : this Liquor mix with as much of the lvorys
black as you think will be proper to make it flow
freely in the Pencil, and it will bear an extraor-
dinary Gloss; and if the Object is 'thining, such
as the Wings of some Beetles, mix with some of
it à little white upon a Dutch glazed Tile, till
you find it light enough to receive the Shade;
and- then make another lighter Mixture of the
same, which being used on the brighter Part of the
Subject will produce the Effect you desire.
CHAP. X.
Of GREENS.
1. GREENS are allowed by all to depend upon
the yellow and blue; and any green Co-








lour, whatever you please, may be made with
them. Gamboge is one of the first Yellows, which
may be made to produce five or six Greens with
Verdegrease, according as the Gamboge is in the
greater or lesser Proportion; if it abounds it will
make a tolerable Oak-green; and being mixed
with a greater Quantity of Verdegrease, it will
make a fine Grass-green.
2. But the Yellow which some prefer before
all others is made of French-berries (as already
described under the Yellows) which is, either
deeper or fainter as the Liquor they are boiled in
is more or less stained with them; if it be very
thin, it makes a good Glaze all over the Verde-
grease, and as it approaches nearer to Dutch-pink
or Gall-stone, commands almost any Colour we
want ; being agreeably mixed with the transpa¬
rent Verdegrease; and is still transparent.
3. In like manner, a yellow drawn from the
Roots of Barberries, and also that droyn from the
Roots of the Mulberry-tree, will in agreat measure
produce the like Effect, being mixed with the
transparent Verdegrease. As for the Verdegrease
itself, it produces a fine bluisn Green, flows easy
in the Pencil, and may even serve as an Ink to
write with.
4. The way of preparing the transparent Ver-
degrease is as follows. Take six Ounces of com¬
mon Verdegrease, (the distilled Verdegrease not
answering this Purpose so well) break it into little





Pieces, and boil it gently in a Quart of White-
wine-vinegar, keeping it continually stirring,
and, when you perceive it to boil, add a little
Tartar broken; and continuing still to stir it till
youfind the Liquor of such a Colour as you would
have it, that is, till it is of a fine transparent green
with a bluishi Cast, which you may know by dip-
ping in a Bit of white Paper, then pour it through
a Linnen-cloth into an open Vessel and set it to
cool; and when it is quite cold, bottle it up for
Use. Remember to cork the Bottle close, for
being exposed to the Air it will dry ; however, it
may be reduced again by common Water.
This Liquor should be touched upon part of
the Lights and Shades of a Print, and the Shades
afterwards coloured with Sap-green.
In the making of this Green, remember that it
be strong enough, because it cannot be strength-
ned afterwards without the Trouble of boiling it
afresh: but may at any Time be rendered as faint
as you please by mixing common Water with it.
5. Sap-green is a Colour like that of an Oak-
leaf, if.it be used thin with common Water: for
this as well as the formerwants no Gum: but if.
it be used strong it will produce as dark a Green
as any. It will be proper to try the Colour first
upon awhite Dutch Tile; andby thinningit with
Water vou may render it of what Strength you
please, and may brighten it very much by the
Addition of a very little Verdegrease.





There are twoWays of making Sap-green, viz.
First, take the Flowers of blue Flag-iris or Flower
de Luce, and press them while there is any Juice
to be got from them; boil this gently in a glazed
Pipkin, till it grows thick, adding à little Alum
to it, and it will make a very useful and lasting
Green. 
You must observe this, that in the boiling of
any Juice, &c. of the Colours before mentioned
you should always do it in an earthen Pipkin; for
if it be boiled in Vessels of Metal they will often-
times change it from the Colour intended.
The second Way to make a Sap-green, for the
washing and illuminating of Prints, is to take the
Juice of Buckthorn-berries, and though that Juice
simply will yield only a dark Purple of a very
bafe Hue, yet either of these Colours will mix
with the liquid Verdegrease above-mentioned,
and will make a delicate Shade for it.
6. There is besides these another Green, which
is admired by some Persons, that carries a good
Body with it, and a Degree of Transparency too,
(as it may be made) but, as it is commonly used,
is à Colour of a full Body and fit only for painting
in Miniature. This is made by mixing Dutch
Pink with Indigo to what Degree of Colour you
please : but the high Preparation of French-berries
with Indigo is much to be preferred to Dutch
Pink, especially as this answers all the Intentions
of Dutch Pink, and carries a Transparency with
it which the Dutch Pink has not.





CHAP. XI.
The Use and Nature of dry COLOURS.
1. BLUE-bice is the most excellent Blue next

to Ultramarine, which is too good to wasn
withal, wherefore we leave it out here, because
Blue-bice may do very well instead of it; and in-
deed both may be left out, since Smalt may be
used instead of them : however, itwill not work
so well as Blue-bice, which without doubt is too
good to use upon all Occasions; only when you
intend to bestow some Cost and Pains upon your
Work: otherwise, you may use no other Blue
in your Piece than Blue-verditer, with which you
may make a very good Shift without any other
Blue, that is, in any ordinary Work.
2. Indigo is a dark Blue that is used principally
to shade with upon other Blues. Indigo and
yellow Berries mixed together make a dark Green;
to shade other Greens in the darkest Places.
3. Blue-verditer is a very bright pleasant Blue,
and the easiest to work in Water: it is somewhat.
inelining to a Green ; and, being mixed with
yellow Berries, it makes a very good Green: this
is the Blue most used.
4. Verdegrease is a good Green but subject to
decay; when it is dry upon the Paper it will be
of a lighter Colour than it was when first laid on :
therefore to preserve it from that Fault, put some
Sap-green among it, to dissolve in it, which will
make it keep its Colour. There is a distilied






Verdegrease to be bought at the Shops that is a
far better Green than the other, but it is some-
what dearer and the other may serve instead of it.
5. Verditer-green is a light Colour seldom used
in any Thing but in colouring Landfkips, and
those Places that should appear afar off; and it is
good for fuch a Purpose, because it is somewhat
inclining to a Blue, but you may make shift to do.
any thing well enough without it, for a little
Blue-verditer mixed with Copper-green and a
little White make just such another Green.
6. Sap-green is a dark, dirty green, and never
used but to shadow other Greens in the darkest
Places, or else to lay upon some dark Ground
behind a Picture which requires to be coloured
with a dark Green; but you may do without this
Green, for Indigo and yellow Berries make just
such another Colour.
7: Copper-green is an excellent transparent
Green, of a fhining Nature, if it is thickened in
the Sun or upon a gentle Fire; and it is the most
used of any Green in washing, especially in
colouring of the Grass, Ground, or Trees, for
it is almost Grass-green.
8. Vermilion is the most perfect Scarlet-colour:
you need not either grind or wasn it; being fine
enough itself; only temper it with your Finger in
a Gallipot, or Oyster-shell, with Gum-water,
and it will be ready to use: if you put à little





yellow Berries among it, it will make the brighter
Colour; this is principally used for Garments.
9. Lake is an excellent Crimson-colour, with
which y u may shade Vermilion, or your yellow
Garmente, in the darkest Places; and being mix-
ed with white, vou may make a Sky-colour with
it; or a Flesn colour, by mixing white and a
little red Lead withit; andit is an excellent Colour
of itself for colouring Garments, or the like.
Indian Lake is the best Lake, but it is too good
to be used in wasniing Prints with, unless you in-
tend to bestow great Curiosity upon your Werk ;.
for the best Sort of ordinary Lake will serve well
enongh for ordinary Uses; and this also will be
somcwhat too costly, tnerefore instead thereof
you may use red Ink thickened upon the Fire,
which may serve your Purpose very well, better
even than Lake unless it is very good.
Observe, that if you would make a light Sky-
colour of your red Ink, or if you would mix it
among you: Flesh-colour, you must not thicken
it; but shade your Vermilion rather with Spanisn-
brown than thick red Ink, as it may serve very
well for that Purpose; but is not altogether such
a bright and clear Colour.
10. Red-Lead is the fiearest to an Orange-co-
lour, and putiing à little yellow Berries into fame
of it, will make a perfect Orange-colour: but if
you desire to make a Flesh-colour of it, you must
put no yellow in it. This Colour is used in





colouring Buildings or Highways in Landfxips
after being mixed with a little white. Besides,
this is the only bright Colour to shade yellow
Garments with, in order to make them look like
changeable Taffaty. It is good also to colour
any light Ground in a Picture, taking only the
thin Water of it; and so for several other Uses,
as you shall see Occasion.
II. Yellow Berries are most used in wasning
of all other Colours: they are bright and transpa¬
rent, fit for all Uses, and will be sufficient without
the Use of any other yellow.
12. Saffron is a deep yellow, if you let it stand
a good while : it is of Use principally to fhade
yellow Berries with instead of red Lead; and it
is somewhat of a brighter Shadow; but you may
make a Shift well enotgh without this Colour,
for red Lead and yellow Berries make just such
another Colour.
13. Masticote is a light yellow just like yellow
Berries and white; and therefore you may do well
enough without it, only for saving you the Labour
to mix your yellow Berries with white, when you
have Occasion for a light yellow; then you may
make use of it to colour a light Ground in a
Picture; in which Case, snadowit with the Water
of burnt Umber or red Lead; that is, the thinnest
Part of the Colour.
14. Ceruse is the best white, if it be good and
finely ground: or, for Want of it, white Lead





picked: either of these will serve well enough ;
for either of them being mingled with another Co-
lour will make it lighter, and the more so in-pro-
portion to the Quantity of either mixed with it.
15. Spanisn-Brown is a dirty brown Colour,
and of no great Use to colour any Garment with,
unless it be an old Man’s Gown, or to shade
Vermilion, or lay upon any dark Ground behind
a Picture, or else to shade yellow Berries in the-
darkest Places, when you want Lake or thin red
Ink.
It is the best and brightest Colour, when it is
burnt in the Fire till it be red-hot, though if you
would colour a Hare, Horse, Dog, or the like,
you must not burn it, but for other Uses it is best
when burnt: for Instance, to colour any wooden.
Post, Bodies of Trees, or any Thing else of
Wood, or any dark Ground in a Picture. It is-
not to be used about any Garments, unless you
would colour a number of old Men s Gowns or
Caps, standing together, on Account they must
not be all of one Colour: therefore for Distinction
and Variety’s Sake, you may use Umber unburnt
for some of them.
16. Printer’s black. is most used, because it is
eaiiest to be had, and serves very well in washing.
Vou must observe that you are not to put any
Black among your Colours to make them dark,
because it will make them dirty : neither should
you shade any Colour with black, unless it be






Spanish-brown, when you would colour an old
Man’s Gown or the like, that requires to be done
of à sad Colour.
17. Ivory burnt, or instead of that, burnt
Bone is the best Black, and is thus made; take
Ivory, or for Want of it some white Bone, and
put it into the Fire till it be thoroughly burnt:
then taking it out and letting it cool slit it, and
taking out the blackest part of it in the middle,
grind it for use.
CH AP. XII.
Directions for making Gum, Alum, or other Waters.
I. To make GUM-WATER.
TAkE an Ounce of fine white Gum-arabic,
and half an Ounce of clear, white candied

Sugar; dissolve these in a Quart of fair Water;
then passing it through a fine Sieve, or a Piece of
Muslin, bottle it for Use; and, as you have Oc-
casion to use it, pour out à little at aTime, re-
membering to keep it clear; for if it should prove
dirty or foul it will spoil your Colours. By add-
ing a little Coloquintida to the Solution of the
Gum, &c. it will prevent the Flies from spoiling
your Work, if it should chance to be exposed.
Or Gum-water may be made thus. Pour a
Quart of pure Spring-water into a Jar glafs, and
hanging in it, tied up in a fine woolen Rag, a









sufficient Quantity of pure white Gum-arabic
bruised, let it hang till the Gum is dissolved :
then putting your Finger into the Water, if you
find them stick together, as if they were glued,
your Water is too strong or full of the Gum; and
therefore you must put more fair Water to it;
and, if you find it too weak, you must put in it
mre Gum; adding, if there is any Occasion for
it, the Coloquintida as before.
With this Water most of the Colours are to
be tempered; and with so much of it, as that
being touched when dry the Colour will not
come off. It is to be observed that if the Colour
glisters there is too much Gum in it.
2. To make ALUM-WATer.
Boil four Ounces of Alum in a Pint of fair
Water, till the Alum is dissolved;. or thus, to
two Quarts of Spring or Well-water, put half a
Pound of powdered Roch-alum: dissolving it well
by boiling; then filtering it through brown Paper,
keep it up for Use.
Wet your Paper with this Water before you
lay on any of your Colours, and it will prevent
them from sinking in, and will besides add a
Lustre and Beauty to the Colour laid on. But
you must take Notice that if the Paper is not good
it must be washied over four or five Times with
a large Brush or Pencil; remember also that Alum-





raises standing Colours, and preserves them from
fading.
If you design to varnisn your Prints after they
are coloured, then wash them all over equally-
with white Starch, before you colour them, and
that being dry, lay on your Colours.
3. To make LIME-WATER.
Take some unslacked Lime, and covering it
an Inch over with fair Water and so letting it
remain for twelve Hours, pour off the clear Part
of the Water, and keep it for Use. By washing
with this Water you may change your Sap-green
into Blue.
4. To make PEARL-ASHES WATER.
Take about half an Ounce of Pearl-ashes,
and steeping this Quantity for twelve Hours in'
Rain or River-water, pour off as much of the
Water as is clear, and you will find it of excel-
lent Use with Brasil-wood in giving its Colours an
enlivening Lustre.
5. To make Size for Water-Colours.
Take half a Pound of the Cuttings of white
Gloves, and steeping them in Water for some
time, boil them with six Quarts of Water, till
it be consumed to one; then strain it through a
Cloth into an earthen Pan.
If, when the Size has stood till it is cold, it
feels firm under your Hand, then it is sufficiently








strong. You may prepare any Colours with this
Size, while it is warm, after dissolving it. The
principal Use of it is to prevent Colours from
hining by Candle-light as they would do if mixed
with Gum-water; on this Account the Scenes of
Play-houses are painted in Size.





















































0


1
v


2
V
0
2


1
e


5.


2





diitizeo by GOOgle


3


4


3


 d





2


2











4 
a


5


itzee by GOO


aede


9 


e


Oignizoo by GOOgl


V


dionizeo by Google


Digitized by


Og


