the artist’s assistant: comprising the arts of drawing, perspective, etching, engraving, mezzotinto scraping, painting, coloring maps.



THE
ARTIST's ASSISTANT
PART I.


OF MINIATURE PAINTING.
It is scarcely necessary for me to remark, that the first and
grand essential towards perfection, in this art, is a tho-
rough and well-grounded knowledge in the art of drawing,
both from the round and from lise; and although I did not
sit down to write a Treatise on Drawing, still I bez leave to
advise my. readers, whio wishi to arrive at perfection in the
pleasing art of Painting in Miniature, carefully to attend to
a vorrectness of drawing, as without that, however brisliantly
celoured their pictures may be, still the eve of the experienced
ariist, or connoisseur, will not he imposed upon by such gaudy
trappings, hut will instantly condemn it, and thereby cast an
indelible stain on the merit of a voung artist, whom not want
of real genius, hut actual negligence, brought into that mis-
fortune; for a well-drawn inafferently coloured picture, will
better escape the lash of the critic, than one badly drawii, and
ever so highly embellissied by colouring.
at Maiag vode Silgae ian aanghehanevaniegt
termed, a mannerist, by pursuing a particular plan of work-
ing; yet, in Miniature Painting, there is a certain degrae of
mechanical attention to be paid to the management of the
water colours, to preserve them clear and free from muddine s,
hich is much more difficult to attain than the management
hy him; observing the style of penciling and management of
the marking of his features, and colouring of his picture, from
the person sitting to him.






In the management of back-grounds, the young painter is
proper value, and on the other hand, of harmonizing the
what of similitude in the back-ground to a teint in the face,
which otherwise, in course of working to express a particular
part, might apncar too prevalent.
The liighest degree of perfection we esteem in a Miniature
Pattinx is, to sce a fine effect produced to the naked eve,
and an examining it with a magnifving glass, to discover that
tinwork in it; so certain has the artist been
or his toitat every stroke of his pencil told as much as
twentv secin an inserior in the art.
I would very particularly recommend it to a person who
commences Miniature Painting, and who has formerly been
copying either from large drawings, or from busts, to continue,
at his leifure hours, still drawing large in black and white
chaiks. as copying correctly from larger drawings, gives an
extreme facility to the hand, wlien it comes to draw smaller
figures.
ale egin hp, de a hend. on en ont nie or Loyse sih
should be brought as near as possible to the center of the
ivory, unless the person be very tall, in wliich case it must be
rather higher up, and if very low, the contrary. I shall now
conclude, with advising the young Miniature Painter to be
modest and attentive, not by overleaping the bounds prescribed
by the former, argue himself into too high an opinion of his
abilities, or for want of à due observance of the latter, prevent
the world from perceiving he was ever possessed of any of the
requisites necessary to constitute an artist.
Of Colours used in Miniature Painting.
In Painting tlie Face, the Yellows, that are used are five,
viz. Gall-Stone, Terra Sienna, Nottingham Oker, Roman
Oker, and Naples Yellow, the latter three of which are
Opaque Colours; the other tiansparent. The Greens are
confined to one, which is Sap-Green. Thie Blues are Verditer,
Prussian, Indigo, Smalt, Uitramarine and Antwerp.
The
Reds are Carmine, Drop Lake, Chinese Vermillion, and
Indian Red. Under the class of Reds, may also be put burnt
Terra Sienna, its colour inclining much that way ; though
more to the Orange. The only Browns, if any be used n the
face, and burnt umber and Terra de Cassell, and they are only
to be used in the mixture of dark Shadows under the nose, &c.





For draperies, we shall only add to the above colours
Lamp-Black, King’s Yellow, and Flake White.
Of the Nature and Qualities of Colours.
YELLOWS.
We shall first begin, with Gall-Stone, a genuine kind of
which is very difficult to be had in London; a spurious kind
being manu sactured from dried Ox-Gall, to which Colourmen
put Gum-Water, and so impose it on their customers for a
Colour, wliich is one of the finest and brightest in the world,
and a lasting one; although in Face Painting it should be
sparingly used: its worrderful brilliancy being apt to drown
all the other Colours. and make the workit is used in too warm
in its tints ; to get it genuine, apply to the slaughtermen, who
will examine the gail-hladders of the oxen, in many of which
gall-stones tbeing concrescences formed in the bladder) are
found; by this mode only, will the artist or amateur attain
possession of this unrivalled colour in its pure state.
Terra Sienna is à bright vellow earth, somewhat of a foul
greasy nature, it is used by some Miniature Painters as a warm
Yellow, hut when burned it is a beautiful Colour partaking
of three tints, Yellow, Red and Brown
Nottingham Oler is a bright Yellow Earth; it works well,
and is much in use amongst the Painters in London, but on
account of its heavy quality it must be used with caution, it
certainly is a lasting Colour and of much service in the fleshy
tints of the face.
Roman Oler is a Reddishi Yellow Earth of a very great
body, some Painters have used it with success in Miniature
Painting, as it works when properly portioned with guin-water,
extremely sharp and neat, and being in itself a warm colour,
it communicates that quality to the tints it is worked in.
Naples Vllow, although mentioned under the head of Yel-
lows, is a colour whicn though adopted by some Artists, is
not by any means in general use for Miniature Painting: it is
a pale gritty yellow, very hard to grind and prepare; is of a
very fickly hue, and has this very bad quality, that itsabsorbs
all colours that are either worked on it or mixed with it.
BLUES.
It is scarcely necessary to inform our readers, that of all
Blues ever in use, none can in the smallest degree be set in
competition with Ultramarine; its wonderful brightness and
permanency by far excelling them, but the misfortune Artists
labour under is, that like every other valuable article imported





from foreign countries, it is generally so adulterated, that it
is next to an impossibility to meet it genuine The ingredient
that it is mixed with, is Smalt, sinely gruund in water, and
then dried. But the way to detect the impnsition is, to put
a small quantity of what you should buy for Ultramarine on a
hroad case knise. and hold it over a candle, keeping tlie smoke
from tonching it, wlien if adulterated it will apnear in grey
spots, hut if puie, it will remain brilliant as before tlie trial.
Prussian Blue is a good Colour, and for which thcic is no
substitute in Miniature Painting. on account of its strenech of
effect and transparency; of it there are several kins, seme
very light coloured, others dark, the former is ons- a com
pound of the good kind, and is either whiting er some such
thing
The best and purest sort is dark and brittle.
Smalt is à very sine bright Blue, inelininz to purple, hut so
exccssively hard that nothing burt an agate flag and mulle: will
sufficiently pulverize it for sine uses.
In sume things it may be used when Ultramarine is not to
he had; it is a colour that does not work well, nor is it to he
denended on as to permianency.
Indigo is a useful Blue, though it must be sparingly used, on
account of its extrene depth of Colour nearly approachitig
to black, the best is called the rock Indigo. The way to
judge of its qualities is to bieak it, and if good it will have
a copperish hue; hut if bad it will he of a dead blackissi cast.
erditer is a sine Blue and much used by Miniature Painters,
not onsy in their sky grounds, but likewise in the delicate parts
of their saces, and in sincly expressing thie anatomy of ladies
and childten’s necks; it is a bcautiful colour, hut requires
to he very sinely ground on a very hard flag. Care should be
taken not to put tlie pencilit is used withi much in the mouth,
us its qualities are pernicious.
There has lately been brought sorward a Colour called
Antwerst Biue, it certainly is one of tle greatest deceptions in
the world, heing when dry à mest beautisul bright Elue, but
when wet and prepared a very dingy colour, and totally unsit
sor the face of a Miniature. It appears to he a compound of
Prussian Blue. Verditer, and some kind of Wliite, as vou will
perceive on hreaking a lunp of it, white specks all through
it. It may be used in blue draperies or back-grounds, but in
nothing elle.
Sap-Green, which is the juice of buck-thorn berries, is a
liighly useful colour, wlen judicioussy mixed withother volours,
producing warm fleshy tints wliich cannot be produced with-
out it. Its extreme thinness and transparency, is greatly in its
savour; and it does not change. Tliere are à variety of tints





under the tiile of Sap Green, some being of a yellowish cast,
others darker, and some very dark; the last is best, the berry
at that time being at its full growth and persection.
Carmine is a very fine bright crimson, inelining to the scar-
let, and is rather an opaque colour. Fromit a variety of sine
tints may he made, hut its being such a very hiigh red renders
it unfit to be used in delicate subjects, such as children, or sine
women. There are various kinds of it prepared by chemisis,
but the deep kind is the best, the lighter sort being frequentlv
made so by adulteration. If any crimson colour stands in
water it is this.
Drop Lake is made from the shearings of scarlet cloth, and
is a pleasing crimson colour; its inelining to tlie purple makes
it partieularly useful for tlie carnation tinits in painting delicate
subjects. There are many kinds of it at various prices, some
being nearly as bright and high-coloured as Carmine, Lake
heing of rather a purple crimson, is more transparent than
Carmine, and therefore by Miniature Painters more generally
used.
Chinese Vermiilion when good, is a charming bright red, and
useful in Miniature Pictures, though not to be freely used,
its opacity rendering it dangerous to mix much with other
colours; but by itself, in touching the under lip, and other
parts tliat require extreme brightness, it is of wonderful service.
lt is very difficult to find the real kind, the common Vermillion
mixed with Lake, or Carmine, being a general substitute; but
the spurious and the genuine kind very materially differ in tle
working, the former being thick and hieavy, the other the
contrary. It comes from China in small parcels of fourteen
ounces each, with Chinese characters marked on the cover,
but although this is the only mode of coming at the genuine
kind, still there are descriptions of people who contrive to
baffse artists in that particular, by counterfeiting the characters
on the covering of the packets.
Indian Red is of a deep purple cast, and is a most excellent
colour, not only for touching the deep red parts, but likewise
in the fleshy tints of mens pictures. It is a colour difficult to
prepare, being very hard and gritty; but it is to be bought in
the capital colour-shops, in London, ready for use, in an im¬
palpable powder, and works extremely well. It is useful in
bright back-grounds, and also in draperies.
BROWNS.
Umber is a yellowishi brown, very greasy, and mixes un-
kindly with water colours, and in a Miniature Painting useful






only for draperies, and even for them can be dispensed with;
but when properly burnt, is a charming reddisn brown, very
useful in many parts of Miniature painting, and works ex
tremely shiarn and neat.
Terra de Cassl, or Vandyke Brown, so called from the very
great estimation the inimitable painter of that nanie held it
in, is the finest rich brown in tne world. in itself, producing
a mure heautiful colour than can he formed by the junction
of any clours whatever. It is in general use amongst the
Oil and Water Painters in London. It is, in its natural state.
rather coarse and sandy, but when prepared it amply repays the
artist for his labour in doing so.
Lamp Black is the smoke of burning rosin, and is useful for
marking the pupil of the eve, for mixing in Hair Colours.
The smoke of a candle received
and in painting draperies.
on a plate, is found the best, being blacker than the common
Lamp Black.
King’s Yellow is a fine bright opaque colour, and is admira-
bly calculated for painting lace, gilt buttons, &c. &c. but is a
rank poison, therefore should be cautioussy used.
Flake White, or refined white lead, is useful in the Cloth
Draperies of men’s pictures, but not to be used by itself as a
white, for it will turn black, which circumstance should be
nicely attended to by all the artists. If used in Miniature
Painting for linen, &c. it should be immediately covered with
a glass, which method is the only one which stands a chance
of preserving its purity.
Of the Prcharation of Colours.
Amongst the number of necessary colours just mentioned,
there are three which require to be burnt, viz. Terra-Sienna,
Umber, and Lamp-Black. The method is as follows.
The colour is to be put into a crucible, which is to be
covered and placed in a hot fire, and when you think that the
lump of colour is red hot through, take the crucible off the
fire, and let the colour cool; but the Lamp Black is to be
prepared in a different manner. You take some of the com
mon kind, put it on a clean fire shovel, or plate of iron, over
the fire, it will immediately, on receiving the heat, begin to
smoke, on the ceasing of which your Lamp-Black is freed
from the oily substance it originally contained, and fit for im¬
mediate use.
GUM WATER.
Chuse the large white pieces of Gum Arabic, which is
brittle, and easily comes to pieces in your fingers; also that
which






wiich is clear, put it into a clean vial, and pour some water on
it, which is well strained, and divested of all sandy particles.
Make vour Gum Water about the thickness of barley-gruel,
that is so thick that vou can feel it in your fingers. Note, the
freshier made your Gum Water always is, the better.
To grind Colours and firepare them for the Pallet.
You must provide yourself, if possible, with an agate flag
and muller, but if that cannot conveniently be had, glass ones
may answer, though not quite so well. The glass muller and
flag must be lightly roughened with fine flour emery, which
will give it à furface that will continue a long time. After
being particularly careful that your flag, &c. are quite clean,
you lay some of thie colour to be ground, on it, brusing it
whilst dry, gently with the muller; then put a few drops of
water on it, and grind it very carefully, not making it too
wet. as that will prevent it from keeping sufficiently under the
muller. When you think it is finely ground in the water, take
your pallet knife, or a thin edged picce of ivory, scrape your
colour together in a little heap on your flag, which let dry for
a short time, then add your Gum water to it gradually, having
a piece of ivory near you, on which you are frequently to lay
some of the colour with a camel-hair peneil thin, and when
you perceive the colour in the smallest degree to shine when
dry, it is gummed enough, when you are to scrape it off your
flag. and transser it to your pallet.
Note. There are some colours which will not bear a suf-
ficient quantity of gum to make them shine, without injuring
their qualities, as Smalt, Ultramarine and Verditer Blues.
OF HAIR PENCILS.
Manner of choosing them, &c.
Pencils for Painting in Miniature are not made of Camel’s
hair, but of the tips of squirrel’s tails, and of these there are
two kinds, the dark Brown, and yellowisni red. Pencils made
of the latter kind, are called Sable Pentils, and are of a stiffer
nature than the others and bear more than double the price.
They certainly are a useful kind of Pencil, as long as the
sine flue at the end of the hair remains, on account of their
elasticity; but the instant the flue is worn off, they, froin their
harshness, become useless; however they may be dispensed
with, as nopencil can be superior to one made of the common
kind of hair. We here caution our readers against an error,
too prevalent, amongst young Miniature Painters, which is




that of preferring a very small pencil for their work, vainly
hoping by the assistance of such a one to execute their picture
with more neatness and accuracy: but in this, as before
observed, they will, not only by their own experience, but
by their intercourse with eminent Miniature Painters, find
themselves egregioussy mistaken, the finest and most highlv
finished pictures being executed with a middle sized pencil,
the point of which being not only sufficiently neat, but from
its body containing a quantity of colour in fluid, enables the
artist to give that melsow firm touch wliich is so generally
admired by connoisseurs in the art. The young artist is there-
fore advised to choose a middle sized pencil, with a good spring
and point, both of which he will know by drawing the peneil
lightly through liis mouth, and touching it on his thumb-nail,
if he finds it on being moderately wet to spring again into its
form, after being bent, it is a good sign; but as there are
manv peneils possessed of that quality, which are desicient in
another material one, namely, that of a good point; that
must be very cautioussy looked to, by turning the peneil round
on the nail, in every direction, observing the hairs at the point
keep equally together of a length, and none shooting out on
either side swhich is often occasioned by the peneil maker
putting the hair into the quill with a twist in it) all these
defects being carefully guarded against, you are sure of
being in possession of a very principal material for Miniature
Painting-
IVORY.
Method of choosing, Bleaching, and preparing it.
Of lvory there are various kinds, the distinction of which.
in this art, is of very material consequence; but l must first
inform my reader, that lvory newly cut, and full of sap, is
not easily to be judged of. the general transparency it exhibits
in this state, almost preeluding the possibility of discovering
whether it be coarse grained or sine, streaky, or the contrary,
unless to tiie artist, who by a long course of experience is
familiarized to it. The best way to discover the quality of it
is by holding it grainways to the light, then holding it up
and looking through it, still turning it from side to side, and
very nafrowly observing whether thete be any streaks in it,
this you will, unless the ivory be frelhly cut, easily discover;
and in this you cannot be too particular, as it is an observation.
of manv experienced painters, that a good piece of lvory
is half the work done.  There is à species of lvory which





is very bad for painting on, although it has no streaks in it,
being of a horny coarse nature, wliich will never suffer the
colours to be thrown out in the brilliant manner a finer species.
of ivory will. you are therefore not oily to be cautious in
choosing ivory free from streaks, but likewise that which has
the finest grain and close. Having instructed in the mode of
choosing ivory, we now procced to treat on the manner of
preparing it for painting on.
You are to heat à fmoothing iron in so sinall a degree that
you can hold your hand on the face of it, so long as you
can reckon three or four, in moderate time, then put your
ivory between a clean piece of folded paper, on which place
the hot iron, turning vour ivory frequently, until it becomes
a transparent white, for you are to observe that very particu
larly, an opaque whit: not answering for face Painting in
Miniature, as it would give a harssiness and unpleasant appear
ance to your picture. When you think your ivory is suffici
ently white for your purpose, lay it under some flat weight
until it cools, as thiat will prevent its warping. You then
proceed to prepare it, for which purpose you must pound some
pumice-stone in a mortar, as clear and fine as you can, which
put into a fine linen or cambrick bag, tying it about midway,
tight, but leaving room for the pumice dust to sift through the
bottom. Then get a long mustard-bottle, perfectly clean and
dry, in which suspend the pumice dust, covering the top with
the muzzle of the bag, so as nothing can come out, then
shake the bottle smartly in your hand, when the fine particles
of the pumice will fift out, and remain at the bottom of the
boitle, thereby preventing any coarse grains from being amongst
what you are going to use, wliich would very materially injure
your ivory. Your pumice dust being prepared, scrape the
leaves of ivory with a sharp pen-knise, uiitil the scratches of
the cutting saw be entirely obliterated, then take either a piece
of Dutch polishing russi, or a piece of middling fine patent
glass paper, (the latter of which is the handiest) and carefully
polish your lvory with it, not by passing your hand backwards
and forwards, but in a circular manner, until you have it
pretty level, then strew some of your pumice dust on the
ivory, and put a few drops of water on it, which done, with
your muller work on it in a circular manner, as before, until
you find every part has equally received the puniice, which
you will know by its exhibiting à dead grave appearance, thofe
parts which have not received the pumice continuing to fhine
in spots, which you must still labour to do away with vour
pumice and muller. When you find it pumiced to your satis-
faction, take a clean sponge and fair water, with which gently






to rub it hard for fear of giving the ivory a gloss that would
prevent vour colours from taking on it so pleasant as you could
wish; after this lay your ivory to dry, and in a few hours it
will be fit for use. Then you are to paste it on a piece of
wove paper, by touching the back of it merely at the edges; as
Gum Water, or any other cement, heing put near the center
of your ivory, will cause a dark unpleasant spot perhaps to
appear through, in the very part where your face is to be
painted.
Purple is formed of either Ultramarine, Prussian Blue,
Smalt, or Indigo, mixed with either Carmine or Drop Lake.
of
UItramarine, although the most beautiful and brilliant
Colours by itself, yet in any mixture it loses that perfection,
but it still retains a sufficient share of brightness to render it a
desirable teint in the purplishi grey shadows of tlie face.
Prussian Blue, mixed as before mientioned, makes a bright
or dark purple, according as the quantities of either colours
are portioned; but Indigo makes still darker, owing to its
great natural depth of colour. Smalt and Carmine, or
Lake, form nearly the same tint as Uitramarine, and may
be used nearly for the same purposes.
GREY.
Of Grey Tints there are various kinds, aceording to the
subjects they are required for, and the parts thev are to be
placed in. A warin grey tint may be made by duly portiening
burnt Terra Sienna, Prussian Blue, and Drop Lake, the more
Tetra Sienna in it tlie warmer the tint; the more Prussian
Blue and Lake, the colder. Another Grey Tint which has
heen used, with success, by some eminent Miniature Painters,
is composed of Prnssian Blue, and Chinese Vermillion, but
on account of the unkind manner with which Vermillion
incorporates with any other Colour, it required a greater
portion of Gum than ordinary to make them work or keep
together. A third Grey Tint, which is an excellent one,
is formed of Drop Lake, Sap Green, and Prussian Blue.
OLIVE TINTS.
A very sine Ofive Tint is formed of Gall Stone, Notting-
ham Oker, and Carmine, or Lake; and another of Sap
Green and Lake simply.






A beautiful Hair colour. either dark or light, according to
the quantities of colours, is made of Carmine, Lamp-Black,
and Sap Green. Thie manner of forming it is only to be
aquired by practice, but the knowledge of making it, when
once attained, will be found worth the time disposed of in
tte trial. That very difficult tint which is often to be met
with. in children’s hair, by the proper junction of these colours
will be produced to perfection. Other Hair Tints may be
made of Terra-de-Cassel simply, or by the addition of Lamp¬
Black. Somc excellent painters make all their Hair Tints of
burnt Terra Sienna, Lamp Black, and Nottingham Oker,
the latter being added onlvwhen there is light hair wanting to
be represented. Burned Umber has been substituted for Terra
Sienna, along with the Lamp Black, and forms a good tint,
but care must be taken to avoid either the greenisn or reddisn
cast, which it is apt to produce.
Tints for sine Linen, Gauze, &c.
Of all teints in transparent painting, such as the Miniature
works of the prefent day, thiere is none more difficult to ascer
tain, than the one at present we are about to treat on, for this
reason, the delicacy not only of mixture, but tlie delicacy
of touch would require a painter to be what no man ever was,
purpose which a man might hit on this day, to-morrow he
might not be so fortunate in, nor might he be so happy in
that exquisite touch, which conveys the idea of beauty in the
thinness and folding of sine linen or gauze, the true painting
of which often stamps the character of an artist, and, in the
general opinion, throws a veil over the defects in other parts
of the picture, which the more experienced connoisseur would
readily point out. We shall therefore only observe, that any
of the teints, under the head of Grey, will, properly managed,
answer the purpose. Having now pointed out the manner of
preparing the delicate transparent teints for Miniature Painting,
we shall proceed to treat on the grosser ones, namely those for draperies.
Of Colours proper for Men s Draperies.
We shall, under the above head, make some general obser
vations ; the first of which is, that in all Cloth Draperies
for men’s portraits, it is necessary to add some Flake White,
as it not only gives the colour the dead appearance which cloth
exhibits,



exhibits, but likewise its being incorporated with the Flake
hite, gives it a body which bears well against the face,
gires value to it, and makes the flesh teints appear to more
advantage ;the next observation is, that in grinding up your
draperies you are to make them appear several degrees lighter
in colour than vou want them to be when dry, for this reascal,
the Flake White is a colour so very heavy, that after you
sloat in vour coat, it will sink to the bottom, and leave jour
colour several degrecs darker than when it was wet; and
finally, you are not to be too heavy or thick in floating in
xour draperies, but merely to see that your colour be evenly
sjread over the part whereon your coat is to appear.
It is necessary to inform the young artist that there are four
rechnical terms in Miniature Painting :-namely, Floating,
Wafhing in, Handling, and Maiking. The first procefs,
which is floating, and is chiefly used for Draperies, is thus
drapery is to be, grind up your colour on your flag suot puiine
a quantity of Gum Water, that would make it fhine, as it
would frustrate your purpose) then take a large soft hair peneil,
and having previoussy laid your ivory on a very level table, sill
vour pencil plentifully with the colour, and lay it quick all
over the parts of the ivory vou want covered, seeing that it
runs on every part equally, which if kept in a proper fluid
state, it will readily do; then lay it in some place to dry,
wliere it is not likely to receive dust, when you will have a
with colour, and giving a very broad stroak rather faintly, as
in beginning the hair, back-grounds, and likewise on laying
on the general flesh tint of the sace. It is also used in the first
touches of the dark shadows which ever ought to be begun
faint and broad. Handling is the manner in which all the
washing in; and lastly, Marking, consists in the sharp spirited
touches given to the different fcatures; in order to give that
animated appearance so necessary to constitute a fine picture.
Plack Diapery is fermed of Lamp-Black burnt, and Flake
White, and must be laid in with a good deal of the latter,
as otherwise it would be very difficult to manage the shadows,
so as to produce a pleasing effect.
Blue Drapery may be made of either Prussian Blue, or
Antwerp Blue, mixed with White. Indigo being too much





inclined to a blackish cast, and as before observed of the
Black, a good deal of the Flake White must be mixed with it
for the same reason.
Green Drapery is well made of King’s Yellow, and Prus-
sian, or Antwerp Blue, and it is scarcely necessary to observe.
the more Blue, tlie darker tlie Green, and the more Yellow
the contrary.
Yellow for officers facings, or the like, cannot be so well
represented by any colour as King's Yellow, as above-menti-
oned, laid thin, with a moderate quantity of gum in it.
Drab colour is well represented by a judicious mixture of
Umber, in its raw state, and Flake Wliite.
A Queen’s Brown, as it is called, is made of burnt Roman
Oker, a little Lamp Black, and Lake, with Flake White
amongst it.
Claret colour may be well represented hy a mixture of Terra-
de-Cassel, a little Lamp Black, and Lake. The more Black
and Lake the deeper the colour.
Dark Brown can be formed by a junction of Nottingham
Oker, Lake, and Lamp Black.
Lilac is made of Carmine,
Prussian Blue, and Flake
White.
Grey can be formed only of Lamp-Black, Flake White,
and the smallest quantity of Lake, laid in very thin.
Reddissi Brown is best made of Indian Red, very little
Lamp-Black, and Flake White.
Scarlet for officers pictures, &c. is a colour very difficult
to lay down rules for making, as in some pictures it is dange¬
rous to make it too bright, for fear of hurting the effect of the
face, by its brilliancy catching the eye too readily; conse-
quently, if the subject you are painting from life, be very pale.
you run a very great risk indeed by annexing a very bright
scarlet to his picture. The management in that point, we
must, therefore, leave to the young artist himself to judge of,
and only mention that a very bright scarlet is made of Chinese
Vermilsion and Carmine, ground together swithout any Flake
White) and if you want it still rendered brighter, when it is
dry, fill your peneil with plain Carmine, mixed with thin
Gum Water, and glaze over it nicely; but if on the con-
trary, you wish to sadden, or take away a share of its brilliancy,
add a little Flake White to it, and that will have the desired
effect.
Of Painting the Face in Miniature.
You are first to provide yourself with a mahogany delk for
painting on, which is a box about fourteen inches high, and






a foot broad on the top; there is to be a lid covered with
green cloth, which is to have a pair of small hinges at the
front, and to lift occasionally with a supporting rail at the
back, and notches so as readily to adjust it to any height, you
may choose it in the same manner as a music desk. About
the middle of the green cloth there is to be a slip of very thin
mahogany, glewed at each end, but the centre of it left free,
to fasten your ivory by, slipping it between tlie mahogany and
green cloth.
I'he next thing vou are to observe is the choice of your
light, which in this kind of painting cannot be too particularly
attended to, it not leing like Oil Painting, where the rays of
the sun may be kept out with blinds, &c. without causing any
material inconvenience. A north light, or as nearly as possible
to it, ust be attained. If there be more than on window
in the room, the second must be closed, so as to admit no
light, and the one you sit at is to have a green baize curtain
against the lower part of it, to reach about a foot higher
than your head, as you fit at your Painting Desk, with
left hand towards the light.
Place your setter at thie distance of about a yard and half
from vyou, in that point of view, by which the shadows will
not only have their proper effect in marking the fcatures fo as
a pleasing one; for the young artist may rely on it. that no
person of any description ever yet sat for a likeness. but would
wisn to have that likeness as favourable as possible. This
outlines of the face, and in this be very particular, as

much depends on it.
When you have them drawn cor
rectly, and that even in such state there appears to vour
own eye a degree of likeness to the subject sitting for yous
begin to lay in the colour, faintly, of the iris of the eye, thel
shiadows under the eye-brows, in a grey teint, and under the
nose rather a warm purple, in broad faint washes, ever keeping
this in your mind, that you must, in the process the of painting
face of a miniature Picture, go on faintly at the beginning, and
niot hurry in your colours, as such conduct will, to a certaintv,
inake vour taints look dirty, and your picture harsh and dis-
Having. as before observed, laid in your grey
agrceable.
teints where your Ihadows are to fall, go on heightening them
by degrees, working in hatches with a middling full pencil, not
too wassiy, nor too dry ; as the former would be the means
of muddving your colours, and the latter would make them
raw. When you think you have pretty strongly marked out,
and worked up the shado-ys, mix a wassi of either Gall Stone,
er Nottingham Oker, and Drop Lake, with which faintly go






over the fleshy parts of the face, where the shadows do not
come, and then proceed to heighten the carnations on the
checks, the colour of the beard, if any such appears, still
working in the handling manner as already mentioned, in
various directions: so as that after some time working, the
intersections appear like so many nice points or dots, which
appearance, in fine pictures, leads the inexperieneed artist to
imagine that the picture was entirely dotted in, and is thereby
led into a thousand errors and difficulties. There is a general
rule you are to observe, that it is much easier to warm the
teints of your face, than to cool it, by working proper colours
over it. It is therefore adviscable to begin with cool Greys,
and Purples, and towards the finishing of the picture, to add
warmth, if necessary, by gradually working such colours as
Gall Stone, Terra Sienna, or the like, over, in addition to
the Carmine or Lake that may be necessary to produce the
teint of nature. On the subject of managing the colours in
painting a Miniature, it is unnecessary to say any thing more,
shall therefore onsy advise the amateur, or young artist, to
procure a good Miniature Picture, painted by some eminent
artist, and to closely copy it, calling these observations often
to his aid, an attention to which, we dare venture to say, will
favilitate, his improvement.
Instructions for Painting in Wax Crayons.
Painting in Wax Crayons is an Art at present scarcely
known, and when properly managed produces a very pleasing
effect. It differs very materially from the former stile of
instead of pipe clay, which is the basis of dry crayons; it also
hinute drawings, and not mouldering away or rubbing off the
paper; but it requires the assistance of washes in water colours
to improve its effects, as from the nature of the wax the
frequent workings over of the crayons would cause glassiness
that would prevent their taking hold in the latter part of the
finishing, so as to produce the strength required; therefore, it
is to be observed, that the water colours are to be used on
beginning the picture, and in finishing it. The crayons to be
judicioussy worked on the water colours, when they produce
the appearance of an elegantly finished stippled engraving,
coloured in the plate. The tooth or grain of the paper catch¬
ing the crayons in dots (when worked gradually with a light
hand) in a wonderfully pleasing manner.







We shall now proceed to the instructions, which we shall
nsed in making the crayons; the colours fit to be incorporated
with it; the choice of paper; and the mode of using the
crayons.
The wax proper to be used in making crayons, must be

bleached bees-wax, entirely free from adulteration either by
spermaceti or tallow. It must not only, be pure, but likewise
of the hardest kind, of which the Russian wax is the best,
although in colour not quite so fine as the American or English
wax; but its hardnefs gives a firmness to the crayons, and
preyents a greasiness which softer wax would create.
following, viz. for yellows, king s vellow or yellow oker; for
nese vermillion; for browns, umber burnt and uuburnt; for
blacks, lamp black only ; As to compound teints, they are to be
produced by a judicious management of tlie water-colours over
thie crayons; and this rule, with respect to the colours proper
none are fit for the purpose, but such as, in their dry unmixed
state, will mark on paper pretty freely; for the reader may
prevent any hard colour from working, that was incorporated
with it.
Having procured the kind of wax mentioned, vou are to
have a nice glazed white pipkin, perfectly clean and free fromn
any greasy particles; and having previously ground your
colours on a flag with your muller, perfectly fine, in fair water,
and dried; put a sinall quantity of wax into the pipkin, which
you are to place over a very slow fire ; when the wax is entirely
dissolved. by the gentle heat, lfor if it bubbles it is spoiled
gradvally sprinle in your colour, stirring it with an ivory pen
cil handle, until you find it perfectly mixed; at the same time
observing, that you do not overload the wax with colbur, as
it will make the crayons too brittle; nor are you to put in too
little colour as it makes them faint and work greasy; so a
medium is t, be observed, to ascertain wliich, practice only
will conduce. There are some colours, such as vermillion,
which if it receives too great a heat, turns black; and that
must be very cautioussy observed, as vermillion, in this kind
of painting, is a highly useful colour; as is also lamp-black,
a harder kind. of crayon, from which it is to be made by
mixing some of it, in its raw state, with strong glue, letting it
unstructions for caleining colours for Miniature Painting;) then





pulverizing it on your flag  and mixing it with vour wax, as
lent for giving shaip touches in dark parts, and for making
sketches to refresn the memory ; is much superior to Italian
chalk, as nothing will cause it to rub or spoil. it remain-
ing as immoveable as writing ink, and working extremely
pleasant.
The paper fit to be used in wax cravon painting, must be of
the wove or vellum kind; but as of this there are several forts,
it is necessary to mention, that it must be of a middling fine-
ness, for if too coarse, the grain will catch the cravons in dots
so remote from each other, as to make your work look unplea-
fant; and, if the paper be too fine, it will not catch the cray-
ons as it ought, but clog your painting without produeing any
effect. The only rule, therefore, for choosing your paper, is
to go to the stationer’s, and taking a small piece of soft black
crayon in your pocket, inquire for wove paper, and by gently
rubbing the crayon on a few sheets of different kinds, you will
then become a judge of what paper is the best for your purpose,
which experience you will attain without any expence worth
nientioning: having procured this necessay article to your satis-
faction, you then proceed to work.
The desk you are to work on must be much larger than
the one mentioned for Miniature Painting, this kind of work
being often used for larger sizes than that stile of painting is.
Having your sitter placed in the same manner as pointed out
in the treatise on Miniature Painting, with a soft piece of
charcoal sketch faintly the distances and forms of the features;
then touch them in more strongly with vour crimson or black
crayon, still altering until you are perfectly certain you have
a correct outline, which in this kind of painting is absolutely
neceffary; for if in your fair drawing you commit an error in
our outline, you never can alter it, the crayons being in their
nature so adhesive, that nothing will remove them. Having
on your first sheet made your outline correct, rub the back of
tlie face part with crimson crayon, thie hair part with a suitable
coloured one; and the drapery, if white, with black; then
laying the paper, on a fair sheet go over the lines of your
sketch with a tracer, when you will transfer, in a very neat
manner, vour outline ready to colour in. You are then to
mark in the seatures of your sitter more strongly with crayon
or water-colour, and a fine pencil; ever observing when you
nse it, to work over with a suitable coloured crayon, as it is
that which will give it the beautiful dotted appearance so much
to be admired.







Having marked in the features sufficiently strong to put the
Likeness out of danger of being spoiled, make a wasn of Yel¬
low Oker entirely over the fleshy parts, deepening its teint
according to your Subject, wasn in the colour of the Eyes,
Lips, Hair, &c. all which being dry, work with your different
colour Crayons on the parts, until you produce the effects
required; silling up any Interstices of the Crayons with dots of
Water Colours and a fine Pencil; as to the teint for your linen
shades, the Black Crayon will produce that in every degree,
the paper answering for the lights of any coloured drapery, for
then you are to wash in and shadow it with the Crayons
Your paper is to be perfectly dry, otherwise the work will
appear glazy; but even should that be the case, hold it before
the fire, and the shining appearance will instantly vanisn.
With respect to vour back grounds. as this stile of Painting is
intended to be light and fketchy, Sky and Back grounds, are
den Prelits aty Colour, to whatever taint you find pleafing.
which will give a proper value to the appearances of your
Wax-Cravons. Your drawing either of Portrait or Landscape,
being finished, have ready a large flat board, on which you
are to stretch a sheet of Royal Paper; and having pasted the
back of vour drawing with some flour paste mixed with
Isinglass, lay it on the Royal Paper, and carefully prefs it in all
directions with a soft towel or handkerchief wlien your work is
completed.
Of Gilding upon Glass.
THE art of Gilding upon Glass, which is a revival and
improvement upon attempts made many years ago, is chiefly
used for decorating the borders of prints, in executing name
plates, and inscriptions for various purposes; as also for orna
mental decorations in a variety of elegant works, with different
colbured grounds; but as Black is the most general one in
demand, Ishall first proceed to treat on that, in two ways of
performing it.
You are to procure some of the finest Isinglass, which vou
will distinguissi by holding between you and the light, when
that which is white and transparent is the best, and the contrary
is totally unfit for this purpose :-you are to dissolve it in very
clean water, pretty thick, and strain it through a linen cloth,
then into a tea-cup of very clean milk-warm water; put about
the size of a small pea, of the Isinglass jelly, which let gently
incorporate with the water, then having your glass that is to be
gilt, quite clear, and free from any dirt or grease, get some




leaf gold, the lefs porous in the beating, the better, put it on
agilding cushion, and cutit in pieces sized for the purpose, accord-
ing to the breadth you want to have your work gilt; then touch
with a hair pencil, dipped in the thin Isinglass water, on the
glass, and while moist, lay on your leaf gold, piece by piece,
until you have the parts you want covered. The leaf will
instantly adhere to the glass; then place it withiin air of the
fire, in a slanting position, until it dries, which will be in a
few minutes. While it is gently warm, take a piece of clean
cotton wool, and rub the gold to the glass smartly, until you
not only find the superfluous pieces of leaf gold gone, but that
likewise the back of the part gilt receives a kind of polisn; then
proceed to lap on a second coat of gold, in the same manner
as the first, drving it as before, and polishing it; and so a
third coat, which is full sufficient, and to gild properly can
be dispensed with. Then take the size of the print, or dra
ing, which is to be framed, and laying it on the gilt part of the
glass, mark where the corners are to come, with a hair pencil,
and some dark colour, after which, being provided with a long
wooden ruler, and a pointed picce of ivory, draw two parallel.
lines out of your gold, and with a mahogany or deal stick,
pointed cautioussy, work away the superfluous part, leaving
the gold fillet, which is to encompass you picture, sharp and
neat; when if you have a mind to ornament it by any other
lines to appear black, in the centre, lay on your ruler, and
with vour ivory point scribe them, and then varnisn, having
some Black Japan, to which a little burnt Lamp-Black has
been added, to deepen its colour. Paint it all over
part of your glass, and the space between it and the edge, then
set it to dry, which will take place in a few hours, when you
are to lay out the breadth of the black line, that is to be inside
your gilding, seribe it with a sharp point, and cut away the
waste black, with a graver, or some sharp instrument.
lf you want to cut figures, or any kind of ornament out of
vour gold, after your glass is gilt, have a drawing of your
design on paper, at the black of which rub some powdered
Red Chalk, and the smallest quantity of fresh butter, lay the
paper on the gold, and with a bluntish ivory point, go over
the lines of the drawing, and they will be nicely transferred
on tlie gold; when vou can, with an ivory point, trace them
from the drawing you have by you; and then by mixing any
But the most important secret in the glass gilding, is, in an
instant after your glass is blacked, taking away the parts where





vour gold is to appear, and the remainder of the black to stand
fast, by which means the black gilding work is done in one half
the time, and with half the gold leaf. The process is simple,
and is thus performed: -You are to get the very best Black
asn, Baesgieganie Pae a ervegy egans
which you must add a very small share of burned Lamp-Black,
very finely ground, in spirits of Turpentine, then, with a large
flat varnisn brush, give vour glass one even thin coat, holding
it between you and the light, observing that it does not appoar
a thick dead black, but exhibits a degree of transparency, and
not too much so, as to prevent its appearing a good black at the
right side of the glass. Aster this, you are to have your letters,
or ornaments, drawn on paper, as before-mentioned, and trace
it in the same manner on your black varnifh, when it is per-
fectly dry; the drawing will be very critically transferred to the
black. You are then to get a fine needle, and fix it in a
wooden handle, firmly, with which you are to scribe the out¬
lincs of what black is to come out, through the varnisn, so as
not an edge hangs to the main body of the black. Then take
some thick brown paper, dipit in water, and squeeze it gently,
and spread it over the parts of the Varnish you want to detach
from the glass, and in a few minutes, by raising one edge of
tlie black, it will all peel away as elean from the glass as if it
never was on it, in an instant. When all the black you want
is taken out, lay vour glass to the fire, and the remaining part
of the Vamnisn will instantly become hard as ever, and ready
to have the gold put on.
THE ART OF DYEING.

THE theory of dyeing is far from being thoroughly known,
or established: though many facts and observations, and

particular processes, have been offered for this purpose.
We
shall collect the principle of them in the sequel of this article.
The basis of a just history of dycing, must be a theory of
light and colours.. Two things, it may be observed, are

chiefly aimed at in the enquiry of colours: the first to increase
the materia tinctoria; the second, to six those colours we have.
In order to these, it may be remembered, that soie colours
are afisiarent; as those of flowers, the juices of fruits, and those




of animals. Others are latent, and only discovered by the
effects which the several species of salts, and other things, have
on them.
Concerning the afsarent colours of vegetables and animals,
and the effects of different salts in changing them srom one
colour to another, we have many instances in Mr. Boyle,
collected and ranged in a new order by Dr. Lister: as, 1. That
acid salts advance the colours of flowers and berries; thus they
make the infusions of balaustia, or pomegranate-flowers, red
roses, clove-july-flowers, mezereon, peas-bloom, violets, and
cvanus-flowers, of a very fine red, and the juices of the berries
of lirrustrum, of black cherries, and buckthorn-berries, of a
much fairer red. To the same purpose it is observed, that
acid salts make no great alteration upon the white flowers of
jasmine and fnow-drops.
2. Urinous salts and alcalies, on the contrary, quite alter
the colours of the flowers last named, as well as the juices of
the berries above mentioned, from red to green.
3. Urinous salts and alcalies advance, at least they do not
hurt, the colours of the juices of vegetable leaves, woods, and
roots. Thus urinous spirits and alcalies make the vellow infu-
sions of madder-roots, red; of Brasil wood, purplisn; of lig-
num nephrilicum, blue; the red infusion of log-wood, purple ;
and that of the leaves of sena, red.
4. Acid salts quite alter the said infusions from red, or blue,

to yellow.
5. Cochineal, which of itself is red, upon the infufion of
oil of vitriol, an acid salt, strikes the most vivid crimson that
can be imagined; and with urinous salts, and alcalies, it will
be again changed into an obscure colour betwixt a violet and a
purple.
6. All red, blue, and white flowers, are immediately, upon
the effusion of an alcali, changed to a green colour, and thence,
in no long process of time, they tunn yellow.
7. All the parts of vegetables which are green, will, in
like manner, strike a yellow with an alkali.
8. What flowers are already yellow, are not much changed,
if at all, by an alkali, or urinous spirit.
9. The blue seeds-husks of glastum sylvestre, old gathered,

and dry, diluted with water, stain a blue, which, upon the
effusion of ley, strikes a green: which said green, or blue,
being touched with oil of vitriol, dyes a purple; and all these
three colours stand.
10. On the tops of the funges tubuloses are certain red
knots, which, upon the effusion of ley, will strike a purple,
and stand.





As for the latent colours in animals and vegetables, discovered
to us by effusion of salts, they likewise are very numerous.
We will only mention a few. 1. The milky juice of the
lactuca sylvestris costa spinosa, & fonchus asper & lavis, upon
the effusion of ley, will strike a vivid flame colour, or crimson;
and, after some time, quite degenerate into a dirty yellow.
2. The milk of the cataputia major, upon the effusion of
ley, especially if it be drawn with a knife, and have anv time
stood upon the blade thereof, will strike a purple or blood-
red colour, and soon after will change into a dull yellow.
3. The common hawthorn-caterpillar will strike a purple, or
carnation, with ley, and stand.
4. The heads of beetles, primroses, &c. will, with ley, strike
the same carnation colour, and stand.
5. The amber-coloured scolopendra will give, with ley,
most beautiful and pleasant azure, or amethystine, and
a
stand.
It remains to be observed, 1. That in all the instances above
mentioned, whether vegetable or animal, there is not one
colour truly fixed; though there may be some use made of
them as they are. By not truly fixed, we mean, not proof
against salt and fire ; for what seem to stand, and be ley-proof,
are either wholly destroyed by a different salt, or changed
into a much different colour, which must needs prove à stain
and blemisn when it shall happen in the use of any of them.
2. That both the apparent and latent colours of vegetables are
fixable; an instance whereof we may observe in the seed-hulks
of glastum, and the use dyers make of the leaves of that plant,
after due preparation.
3. It is probable, from the same instance, that we may learn
from the colour of some part of the fruit, or seed, what colour
the leaves of any vegetable, and the whole plant might be
made to yield for our use.
4. That the latent colours of vegetables are pre-existent and
nôt produced; from tlie same instance of woad, and likewise
from this, that the milky juice of-lactuca silveris affords of
itself a red serum.
That the change of colours in flowers is gradual and con¬
sait.
9. That the colours of flowers, which will not stand with
ley, seem to be wholly destroyed by it, and irrecoverable.
Thus one part of a violet leaf, under the affusion of ley
is changed very soon into yellow, and will never be revived
into à red by an acid salt; but if anothier part of the same leaf
be still green, it will be revived.





7. The dryness seems to be à means, if not of fixing,
yet
of bringing the vegetable colour into a condition of not
wholly and suddensy perishing by the otherwise destroying
alcali.
8. That those plants, or animals, which will strike different,
yet vivid colours, upon the affusion of different salts, and stand,
as the cochineal, and glastum, are of all others to be reckoned
the best.
Many more valuable colours may be drawn from the vege-
table kingdom, if the world would be at the pains of enquiring
more minutely into the properties of plants.
With respect to the theory of dyeing, it is farther to be
observed, 1. That all the materials, wliich of themselves give
colour, are either red, yellow, or blue; so that out of them,
and the primitive fundamental colour, white, all that great
variety, which we see in dyed stuffs, arises. 2. That sew of
the colouring materials (as cochineal, soot, wood-wax, or
woad) are in their ontward and first appearance, of the same
colour, wliich by the slightest solutions in the weakest menstrua,
they die upon cloth, silk, &c. 3. That many of the colour-
ing materials will not yield their colours without much grind-
ing, steeping, boiling, fermenting, or corrosion by powerful
menstrua; as red wood, weld, woad, arnotto, &c.
4. That
many of the said colouring materials will of themselves give
no colouring at all, as copperas, or galls, or with much disad-
vantage, unless the cloth, or other stuff to be dyed, be first
covered or incrustated as it were with some other matter,
though colourless, aforehand; as madder, weld, and brazil,
with alum. 5. That some of the colouring materials, by the
help of other colourless ones, do strike different colours from
what they would alone, and of themselves ; as cochineal, and
brazil. 6. That some colours, as madder, indigo, and woad,
by reiterated tinctures, will at last become black. 7. That
though green be the most frequent and ommon of natural
colours, yet there is no simple ingredient, which is now used
alone to Mye green with upon any material ; sap-green, the
condensed juice of the thamnus, or buckthorn berry, being
the nearest ; and this only used by country people. 8. There
is no black thing in use wliich dyes black; though both the coal
and the blacker, by how much the matter, before it was burnt,
was whiter, as in the famous instance of ivory black. 9. The
tincture of some dyeing stuffs will fade even with lying, or with
the air, or will stain even with water; hut very much with
wine, vinegar, urine, &c. 10. Some of the dyers niaterials
are used to bind and strengthen a colour: some to brighten it;







some to give lustre to the stuff, some to discharge and take off
the colour, either in whole or in nart; and some out of fraud,
to make the materials dyed, if costly, to be heavier. 11. Sonie
dyeing ingredients, or drugs, by the courseness of their bodies,
make the thread of the dyed stuff seem coarser; and some by
shrinking them, smaller; and some by levigating their asperi-
ties, finer. 12. Many of the same colours are dyed upon dif-
ferent stuffs with different materials; as red-wood is used in
cloth, not in silk; arnotto in silks, not in cloth; so that they
may be dyed at several prices. 13. Scouring, and wassiing of
stuffs to be dved, is to he done with apptopriate materials ; as
sometimes with ox galls, sometimes with fullers earth, some-
times with soap: this latter, however. is pernitious in some
cases, where pot-ashes will stain or alter the colour. 14.
Where great quantities of stuff are to be dyed together, or
pieces are very long, hroad, thick, &c. they are to be differ-
ently handled, both in respect to the vessels and ingredients.
15. In some colours- and stuffs the tingent liquor must be boil-
ing; in other cases only blood-wari, in some it may be cold.
16. Some tingent liquors are fitted for use by long keeping;
and in some the virtue wears away by the fame. 17. Some
colours, or stuffs, are best dyed by reiterated dippings ever into
the same liquor at several intervals of time; and some by con¬
sone cases, the mattet of the vessels wherein the liquors are
heated, and the tinctures prepared, must be regarded ; as that
the kettles be peuter for the bow-dye. 19. Liitle regard is
had how much liquor is used in proportion to the dyeing
drugs; the- liquor being rather adjusted to. the bulk of the stuff.
as the vessels are to. thie breadth of the same; the quantity of
dyeing drugs being proportioned to the colour higher or lower,
and also to. the stuffs; as likewise the salts are to thie dyeing
drugs.
Concerning the weight which colours. give to. silks, for in
them it is most taken notice, of, as being sold by weiglit, and
heing a commodity of great price; it is 'observed, that one
pound of raw silk loses four ounces by washiing out the gums,
and natural sordes. That the same scowered silk may be
raised. to above thirty ounces from the remaining- twelve, if it
be dyed black, with certain. materials. That the reason why
black colour may be dyed the heaviest is, that all ponderous
drugs may be dyed black, being all of colours lighter than it;
whiereàs, perhaps, there seem to be sen or no materials
wherewith to increase the weight ofsilk, which will consist with




fair light colours; such as will, having been used, as white
arsenie to carnations.
Of thines used in dveing., especially black, nothing increases
weight so much as galls , boy means wliereof black silks reco-
ver the weight wliich they lost by washiing out their gum. Nor
is ir counted extraordinary, that blacks should gain about four
or six nunces in the dving unon each pound. Next to galls,
old fustie increases the wvight ahout 14 in 12. Madder about
an ounce in the pound. Weld half an ounce. The blue fat,
in deep biues of thie sisth stall, adds no considerable weight.
Neither do logwond, cochincal, or aronotto; nor even
copperas itself, where galls are, not used. Slipp adds much to
the weight, and gives a deener black than copperas, which af-
fords a gond exeuse sor thie dyers that use it.
DyinG Ingredients, or the Alatcria Tinctorin, are best re-
duced under tvo hieads. Colorata, or those which properly
zive the colour. And Non-colorata, used to prepare the stuffs
for better taking the dye, and to heighten the lustre of the
colours.
As to tlie colouring ingredients, colorantia colorata, we have,
1. Iron and steel, or what is made from them, which are used
in dving blacke: though how they contribute thereto is not so
obvious: we know that green oaken hoards become black by
the affriction of a faw; a green sour apnle cut with a knise,
turns of the same colour; the white grease wlierewith the
wheels of tarriages are anointed. hecomes likewise hlack, by
means of the iron boxes wherewith the  have is lined, and the
friction between the nave and the axle-tree ; and that an
ouken stick becomes black by a violent friction against other
wood in a turning-lath; and the black colour on earthen-ware
is given with scalings of iron, vitrified. From all which it
seems to sullow, that the business of blacking lies in tlie iron,
and particularsy in its ustulation or astriction. Be this as it
will. cedieras, the most usual ingredient for dring black, is
the salt of the nyrites wlerewith old iron is incorporated. And,
wlierever this is used, some of tlie astringents are to accom-
pany it. 2. Red wood chopped, and ground in a mill, is used
for dyeing clotsi rigs, &c. of the coarser fort. Its tincture,
which isa sort of brick-colour, is gut out by long boiling it
with galls, and the cloth with it. It stands better than brazil.
3. Brazil chopped also, and ground, dyes a pink-colour, or
carnation, nearest approaching cochineal: it is used with alum:
with pot-ashies it also serves for purples. It easily stains.
4.
Madder gives a colour nearly approaching the Bow-dye, or

new scarlet: those called bastards-scarlets are dyed with it.
It endures much boiling, and is used both with alum and argol,






and holds well. The biightest dyes with madder are made by
over dyeing the stuff, and then discharging part of it, by back-
boiling, in argol. It is used with bran-water instead of white
liquor. 5. Cochineal, used with bran-liquor, in a pewter

vessel, with aqua fortis, gives the dye called among us. though
improperly, searlet in grain. Too much acid takes off the in¬
tense redness of the colour, and turns it towards an orange, or
flame-colour. With this colour, the Spanish leather and
wool, used by ladies, are dyed. 6. Arnotto gives an orange¬
colour. especially to silk, linens, and cottons; for it does not
penetrate cloth: it is used with pot-asnes. 7. Weld, by the
tesp of pot-ashies, vields a deep lemon-colour; though it is
to live all sorts of yellow. 8. Wood-wax, or green-
lled also genista tinctoria, and the dyer’s weed, has the
ie ef- ’ as weld, though its use is chiefly confined to coarse
clotiis. Itis set with pol-ashies, or urine. 9. Fustic is of two
forts, young and old: the former, chopped and ground, vields
a kind of reddish orange-colour: the latter a hare-colour, dis-
tant several degrees of gellow from the former. It spends
with or without salts, works either hot or cold, and holds
firm. 10. Wood soot, containing not only a colpur, but a
salt. needs nothirg to extract its dye. or make it strike on the
stuff. The natural colour it yields is that of honev; but it is
the foundation of many other colours, on wool and cloth
only. 11. Woad, ground, or chopped with a. mill for the
purpose, is made up into balis; which being broken, and
strewed on lime or urine, is used with pot-ashies. or sea-weed,
and gives a lasting blue. The lime or chalk accelerates the
fermentation of the woad, wliich in three or four days will
work like a guile of beer, and be covered with a greenish froth
or flower. An intense woad-colour is almost black ; that is of
a damascene-colour. It is tlie foundation of so many colours,
in different degrees or shades, that the dyers have a fcale
whereby to compute the lightness and depth of this colour.
12. Indigo is of the like nature, and used for the same purpose
as woad, only that it is stronger. 13. Logwood, chopped and
ground, yields a purplish blue: it may be used with alum.
Formerly it was of ill repute, as a most salse and fading colour;
but, since it has been used with galls, it is less complained of.
The dyeing materials are generally applied in decoctions
made in water, more or less strong, according to the occasion;
sometimes by only dipping the stuff in the vat of dve; some-
times by boiling it therein; and sometimes by leaving it a day
or more to steep. As to the alum, in dveing silks, it is always
applied cold, in which state alone it contributes to’the brightnefs
of the dye.




The non-colouring ingredients are, certain restringent, or
binding materials, as galls, sumac. alder-bark, pomegranate-
peel, walnut-rinds and roots, sapling-bark, and crab-tree-bark.
Certain salts, as alum, argol, salt-petre, sal ammoniac, pot-
ashes, lime. and urine. Liquors, as well water, river-water,
aquà vitae, vinecar, lemon-juice, aqua fortis, honey, and mo-
lasses. Gumis. as tragacanth, arabic, mastic. and fanguis
draconis. Sin-ctis, or abstersives, as soap. fuller’s earth, lin-
seed oil, ox gall. &c. Metals, and Minerals, as steel-filings,
stippe, and pewter; to which add copperas, verdigris, anti-
mony, litharge, and arsenie Lastly, bran, whcat-flour, volks
of eggs, leaven, cummin-seed, senugreek-seed, agaric and
Among the non-colouring drugs, then, from the mineral
kingdom come: 1. Copperas. steel-silings, and slippe, (the
stuff found in the troughs of old grind-stones, wliereon edge-
tools have been ground) these are used for all true or Spanish
blacks, though not for the Flanders black. 2. Pewter, dis-
solved in aquà fortis, used for the new scarlet or Bow-dye.
3.
Litharge, though not owned or allowed. is used to add weight
to dyed silks. 4. Antimony, used chiesly for thie same pur-
pose, thobgh it also contains a tingent sulphur; wliich, by pre-
cipitation, &c. affords a great variety of colours. 5. Arsenic,
used in dying crimson, on pretence of giving a fine lustre.
6.
Verdigris, used by linen-dvers, in their yellow and green co-
lours. 7. Alum, much used, though with what intent is not
agreed on; whether to fix the dye, to render water a proper
menstruum to extract the tingent particles of certain hard
drugs; or to scower tlie sordes, whiich may interpose between.
the stuff and the die, and hinder their due adhesion; or to in-
tenerate the hairs of wool, and heir stuffs, that they may
better imbibe their colours; or to contribute to the colour
itself, as copperas does to galls, in making hlack, or juice of
lemons to cochineal, in carnations, or aqua fortis impregnated
with pewter in the Bow dye; or, which seems most probable.
to serve as a vinculum between the cloth and the colour, as
clammy oils and gum waters do in painting ; alum being a sub
tance whose aculeated particles, dissolved with hot liquors.
will enter the pores of stuffs, and on which the particles of
dving drugs will catch; though it may also serve another use.
viz. to dry up certain particles which disagree with the colour
to be superinduced; to which add, that it may also serve to
brighten colour, by incrustating thie stuff to be dyed with
its crystals, on which the dye coming to be applied, has a finer
effect than if it were applied on a fcabrous matter, such as an
unalumed cloth is. 8. Bran, and bran-water; whose flower




entering the pores of the stuff, levigates its suiface, and thus
renders tlie colour laid on it more beautiful; much as woeds
to be gilded, are first smoothened over with the white colours.
9. Salt-pere, used chiefly in aqua fortis, in the Bow-dye, to
brighten colours by back-boiling. For which purpose, to
Argol is more commonly used. 11. Lime, or chalk. used in
the working of blue vats.
Non-colouring ingredients of the animal kind are,  r. Honey
2. Yolks of eggs.
2. Ox-gall : though this, and the two last,
are only used by a few particular dyers, to seower, promute
fermentation, and inerease weight. 4. Stale urine, used as a
lixivium to seower, also to help tlie sermenting and lieating of
woad; though it is also used in the blue fats instead of lime.
In reality, as it discharges the yellow wherewith elue and most
greens are compounded, it is used to spend weld withal : vet it is
known, that the urine, or cold mud of pissing-places, will
dye a well-feasured piece of silver of a golden colour: it being
with this snot Batli-water, as imagined) that the Bath six¬
pences, &c. are prepared.
To the class of non colouring ingredients. mav also be ad-
ded water, hy dyers called white liqunr, whiich is of two soris:
I. Well-water, used in reds, and in other colours wanting re-
stringency, as well as in dying stuffs of a loose contexture, as 
callico, sustian, and the several species of cotrons, but bad
for blues, anl making yellows and greens look justly 2.
River-wuter, softer and sweeter than the former, and dissoly-
ing soap better, used in most cases by thie dvers, for wasninz,
rineing, &c. their clotlis after dying. 3. Liquor absolutely so
called, which is bran liquor made of one part bran, and five
of river-water, boiled an hour, and put in a leaden cistern to
settle : four or sive days in summer turn it too sour, and render
it unfit for uie. Its office is to contribute to the holding the
colour. It is known, that starch, which is onlv the flour of
bran, makes a clinging paste, whch will conglutinate paper
though not wood or metals. Accordingly bran liquors are used
to mealy dying stuffs, as to madder, wlich is rendered clammy
and glutinous by being boiled in bran-water. and thus made
to stick thie better to the dyed stuff. 4. Gums tragacantli,
arabic, mastich, and sanguis draconis, aie uied in dying silk,
chiefly to give it a glossiness, which may make it seem finer,
stisfer, and to increase its weight.
The Ait of Dyeing may be divided into as many branches
as there are different colours to be communicated, and sorts of
different stuffs to be the subjects of it; but we shall only treat
of a few which are most importanit.





DyeinG of Cloths, Serges, Druggets, and other woollen
Mannsactues. With respect to black, in cloths and stufts of
price, it is begun with a strong decoction of woad and indigo,
which gives a deep blue.
The use assigned for this blue
ground is that tlie dloth, having already a considerable body of
colour, may require dels of tlie blackening materials. and
consequently he leis wekened, than if it was dved directly
from white to black: besides, blue is essential to the produc-
tion of the black dye; for without either a blue ground, or a
blue superadded to tlie vitriol and galls, no other than brown
dyes are obtained. Logwood is the material which anlds black-
ness to tlie various shades of brown produced by vitriol and
gall; and this black dye, though not of tle most durable kind,
is the most common. On blue cloth, a good black may be dyed
by vitiiol and galls alone; but even here, an addition of logwood
contributes much to improve thie colour. A hundred pounds
of woollen cloth, dyed first to a deep blue, require for the
black dye about five pounds of vitriol, five of galls, and thirty
of lugwood. The galls, beaten into moderately fine powder,
and uied up in a bag, are boiled for a little time in a copper of
water sufficienily for working the cloth in. The blued clothi,
after being steeped in river water, and drained, is in this state
put iuto tlie boiling decoction of the galls, and kept turning
therein for two hours or more ; the bag of galls being now and
then squcezed, in order to extract their virtues. The log-
wood, being rasped and shaved into small chips, or pulverized,
is boiled in another copper for several hours; and this liquor is
usually prepared a considerable time before it is used, as its
colour improves by keeping. When this liquor is made of a

scalding heat the vitriol is thrown into it; and as soon as it is
dissolved, the galled cloth is put in. A boiling heat should
never be used after the vitriol is added to the liquor, because it
would augment thie corrosive power of the salt, and impair the
beauty of the colour, by hastily extricating part of the ferru-
ginous matter of the vitriol in an ochery form, before it can
come sufficiently in contact with the astringent substance with
which the cloth is impregnated. The cloth is continually
turned about in the liquor, and occsiaonally taken out and
aired, which operation contributes to. secure the colour. After
two hours continuance in the dye, the cloth, having received
a good black, is taken out, washed with cold water, and paf-
sed through the fulling-mill. Supersine cloth is fulled three
times witli warm solution of soap, by which the superfluous
colour is discharged, and the cloth softened. Tlie cloth is
improved neither in beauty nor durableness of colour, by being
repeatedly passed through the dyeing liquor, or by increasing





the quantity of ingredients first used, after it has once a-quired
a full black colour. Our dyers use a small quantity of verdi-
gris for some of the sunerfine black cloths: but this is more
frequently used by the French.
Simple greys, which are no other than-shades of black, are
dyed nearly in the same manner as the’full blacks; only by
using à less proportion of the dyeing ingredients, or continuing
the cloth in the liquor for à shorter time. These simple greys
are dyed from white cloth without any previous ground of blue
or other colours There are also a multitude of compound
greys and browns produced from cloth dyed blue, red, yellow,
brown, or of colours compounded of these, by darkening
them with the black dye. Scarlet is dyed with kermes and
cochineal, with which may also be used agaric and arsenic
Crimson scarlet is given with cochineal, mastich, aqua fortis,
sal ammoniac, sublimate, and spirit of wine. Violet scarlet,
purple, amaranth, and pansy-scarlets, are given with woad,
cochineal, indigo, braziletto, brazil, and archil. For com-
mon reds, pure madder is used, without any other ingredients.
Crimson-reds, carnations, flame, and peach colours, are dved
according to their several hues, with cochineal, mastich, with-
out madder or the like. Crimson-red is prepared with Roman
alum, and finissied with cochineal. Peach-colour must be
Orange-aurora, or golden-yellow, brick-colour, and onion-
peel colour, are given with woad and madder, tempered ac-
cording to their respective shades. For blues, the dark are
given with a strong tincture of woad: the brighter, with the
fame liquor as it weakens in working. Dark-browns, miniins,
and tan-colours, are given withi woad, weaker in decoction
than for black, with alum and pot-ashies; after which, they
cochineal is added. Peail-colours are given with galls and
copperas ; some are begun with walnut-tree roots, and finish-
ed with the former; though, to make them more serviceable,
they usually dip them in a weak tincture of cochineal. Greens
are begun with woad, and finished with weld. Pale-yellows,
lemon-colour, and sulphur-colour, are given with weld only.
Olive-colours of all degrees are first put in green, and taken
down again with soot, more or less, according to the shade
required. Feulemort, hait-colour, musk, and cinnamon-
colour, are given with weld and madder. Nacarat, or bright
orange red, is given with weld, and goats-hair, boiled with
pot-ashes. Fustic here is forbid, as a false colour.





THE
ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.

PART II.
OF DRAWING.
DRAWING is the art of representing, by outlines and
shadows, the various productions of nature and art, and
of enlarging and contracting objects in the most exact propor-
tion.
This art recals to our memory things long since past, and
rescues from oblivion the deeds of our illustrious ancestors, at
the same time that it revives their image in our mind, by pre-
serving their features for many generations: in short, it may
be said to be the silent, but most expressive language of nature,
which speaks to the eye, is understood by all nations, and
conveys an idea where even words themselves would prove
deficient.
After giving some general directions for the attainment
of this truly polite and rational amusement, which is the
basis on which all the rest of the arts depend, we shall con-
sider it more particularly under the following heads, and
lay down the most copious and intelligible rules for each
respectively, viz.
Copying of Draughts-Enlarging and Contracting-Imitation
of Life-Drapery-Landscasie-Light and Shade-History.




The implements necessary for drawing, are-a ruler, com-
passes, charcoal, a black-lead pencil, penknife, port-crayons,
black, white, and red chalk, crayons, Indian ink, crow-quill
pens, camel’s-hair pencils, fitches, paper of several forts, and
porte-solios.
General Rules for Drawing.
The first thing to be observed is the choice of proper ori-
ginals; and here we would recommend Le Clerc’s Principles
of Drawing, as the easiest and best calculated for the instruction
of beginners. This may be had, price 2s. 6d. at most of the
booksellers in Great Britain.
Having provided this, begin with the outlines of the several
features, as the eyes, nose, mouth, cars, &c. as they occur in
the book. Pactise these often over, till you are quite master
of them; then proceed to a profile, or side face, after that to
an oval, or full face; always remembering, that each of these
must be perfectly attained, before you venture to proceed
further.
When vou can copy a face correctly, the next thing is, to
draw the several limbs or parts of the body, as the hands, arms,
legs, feet, &c. then go to the body itself; which having done,
you will be able to undertake a whole figure, observing care-
fully the exact proportions and bearings of one part with the
other.
The learner ought to be particularly cautious that he does
not attempt a whole figure, before he has made himself master
of the several parts: for this is beginning his work at the wrong
end, and is almost similar to a man attempting to raise a build¬
ing without a foundation.
As for beasts, birds, plants, &c. we deem it useless to give
directions for drawing them, as it is well known, that he who
has so far improved his ideas as to be able to draw a human
figure cotrectly, will find it no difficulty to perform every other
branch of this art.
Sketch or draw all your outlines faintly, with a piece of
soft charcoal swhich may be knoin by the pith in the middle)
cut to a point like a pencil; and when vou see any thing amiss,
whisk it out with a handkerchief or feather, correct your errors
with a black lead pencil, and compare your work with the
original, till every part of them correspond. This done,
finifh your outlines with black lead or Indian ink. This ad-
vice, properly attended to, will save you an infinite deal of
trouble, in drawing over and over again, to your no small
disconragement.




If you prefer Indian ink, rub it with water upon a marble,
and with a crow-quill pen perfect your outlines; then rub out
the marks of the pencil with bread. Keep three or four dif-
ferent shades of ink in the hollows of your stone, to distinguish
your distances, reserving one of the holes for water.
When vou are thoroughly versed in the outlines. your next
business will be to learn to shadow: but of this hercafter, under
thie articles of light and shade.
Be not too hasty at first setting out, which will but impede
your progress, and hinder your improvement; whereas, by
bestowing a litile more time, you will attain perfection sooner
than you can well imagine, and expedition will come of itself
as you become more experienced.
Of Cohying of Draughts.
When you would copy a print or drawing exactly of the
same size, rub the back of it with the dust of red chalk or
black lead; lay this upon your paper, and pin it down at the
four corners ; then with a blunt point trace the outlines and
breadths of the shadows; which done, having carefully ex-
amined it, to see that nothing be omitted, take it off, and finish
it with the pencil or pen.
Another way to make an exact copy, and at the same time
to preserve the original, is to lay a piece of transparent paper
upon it, and draw the outlines thereon with a black lead pen¬
cil; then between that and the paper you intend to draw
upon, place a piece of thin post paper, reddened or blackened
at the back; after which, proceed to trace and finish it accord-
ing to the foregoing rule.
lf you would reverse your original, you need only turn
the transparent paper, with the drawing you have made upon
it, downwards upon the post paper, and trace it as above
Of Enlarging and Contracting.
Divide your original with a pair of compasses into any num-
ber of squares, and rule them across with a black lead pencil
from side to side, and from top to bottom.
Then, having your paper of the size vou intend, divide it
into the same number of squares, either bigger or less, as you
enlarge or contract it.
Place your original before you, and draw square by square
the several parts; observing to make the part you are drawing
fall into the same part of the square as it does in your original.
To prevent mistakes, number the squares both of the original
and copy.







Then outline it with Indian ink, rub out the marks of the
pencil with bread, and shade it at pleasure.
Of Imitation of Life.
Let the person you draw after be of a proportionable size,
and well shaped: place him in the easiest and most natural at-
titude; then with your charcoal sketch faintly the head, or
any of the limbs separately; which having carefully done, pro-
ceed to finisn with your pencil.
When you have sufficiently practised the several parts or
limbs, you may draw the whole figure, in whatever attitude
you think proper to place it; beginning with the easiest, and
proceeding, by degrees, to the more difficult postures, as time
and experience shall enable vou.
Be sure to finish your ontline so correctly, (marking all the
muscles as they occur) that, even before you give it any shadow,
it may have some resemblance of the person.
The true proportion which one part of a human figure
bears to another, will be seen in the figure you draw from;
which may serve as a standard to examine your drawing by ;
except where the figure is to be fore-shortened, in which case
nature will be the best guide.
In drawing of a likeness, care must be taken to express the
passions in the most lively manner; which is to be done by
observing the peculiar cast and disposition of every feature,
with the exactest nicety; and as this is, of all the parts of draw¬
ing, by far the most difficult, it will require a more than ordi¬
nary attention, and should be last attempted.
Of Drapery.
Drapery is the art of cloathing your figures with elegance
and propriety.
When your naked figure is outlined, first draw the outlines
of the draperv lightly, then the greater folds, and afterwards
the lesser; observing never to let them crofs each other.
Particular regard is to be had to the quality of the drapéry:
as the folds of stuff or woollen cloth are more abrupt and
harsh, and those of silk more slowing and easy. Linen, cam-
brick, ganze, &c. as their substance is lighter than either, re-
quire à still greater delicacy in expressing the waving of the
folds, by the faintness of their shadows.
The drapery should not stick too close to the body, but
must seem to flow round as it were; yet in such a manner, as
that the motion of the figuie may be fiee and easy. A great
lightness and motion of the drapery slinuld only be used, when
the sigures are supposed to he in iuch agitation, or exposed to
the wind; hut in a calm place, and fice from violent action,





their drapery should be large and flowing, in order to give
them a more graceful appearance.
Let the loose parts of the drapery, blown by the wind, all
flow one way; and draw that part which lies closost to the
body, before vou draw those which sly off.
Suit your garments to the body, and make them bend with
it: the closer the garment sticks to the body, the narrower and
smaller must be the folds; and if it fits quite close, there will
be no folds at all, but must only have a faint shadow, to re-
pesent the part of tlie body which lies under it.
By observing diligently in what manner the drapery flows
upon any person standing or sitting before you for that purpose,
you will’see in what manner do dispose your folds and shadows,
according to the unerring rule of nature.
Of Landscahe.
Landscape represents the face of the country as it appears
to our view, with all the vatious objects analogous tlereto; as
towns, castles, churches, houses, trees, hiills, cattle, rivers,
rocks, &c.
Be careful to augment or lessen every object, according to
its distance, making the most remote object fainter and lefs-
distinct, as they appear to the eye, and enlarging them pro¬
portionably as they draw nearer.
Shew the sky cloudy, or clear, as occasion requires; and
if you introduce the sun, let it be rifing or setting; either of
which representations will give an additional grace to your
picture, as they represent nature in its liveliest and most agree-
able appearance.
Adapt every part of your landscape to the season of the
year, and the time of the day vou intend it to represent; and
dispose your lights and shades with consistent propriety.
Lastly, we would recommend it to practitioners in this noble
art, to rise early in a fine morning, that they may have a better
idea of the harmony and beauty of the works of the great
Creator; which would wonderfully replenissi their minds, as
to colour and effect.
Of Light and Shade.
The true distribution of light and shade in a picture is abso
lutely necessary to be known; as it not only determines the
proper distance of one object from another, (without which
the whole would be an undistinguishable mafs of confusion)
but it gives likeness to each respective object its substance,
roundness, and effect.
Shadowing is performed with the pen or peneil; in either
of which great judgment is required.





Having made vour outlines correct, the first thing is to ob-
serve from which side of the original the light comes in; which,
if natural, is either from the right hand or left; for whenever
the light appears in the middle of the picture, and seems to
glare more than ordinary, it is caused by a candle, a lamp,
or some other luminous bodr, which is called an artificial
light.
Lay on your little tints first, disposing them as you see
they are done in the original; and then proceed to the deeper
ones, till you come to the darkest parts of all : for yon may
at any time darken your shadows, when you cannot lighten them.
Let all vour shadows in the same place fall on the same
side; that is, if the right side of a man’s face be dark. so must
the right side of his body, arm. leg, thigh, &c. But if the light
side be darkened by the opposition of some other body inter-
cepting the light, it must receive a contrary shadow.
Make vour shadows fainter as they grow towards the light,
breaking them gradually, that they may not appear too sudden
orharsh.
If you shade with black lead or with crayons, vou may
blend your shadows, and soften them one into another. as
you require, with a stump made of paper or glove leather
rolled and tied hard, and cut almost to the point, with which
vou may also weaken your shades where they are too strong.
When part of the body projects over or before anothers
the part projecting must receive a stronger light: those parts
that bend inward must be made so much the darker, and sha-
dowed deepest next the light.
Two equal lights must never be made in the same picture :
the strongest light should fall upon the middle of the piece,
(where the principal figures ought to stand) diminishing gra¬
dually towards the extremities.
By frequently examining into nature, vou will have an op-
portunitv of improving your ideas of light and shade, and will
be enabled to form a proper judgment of the effect which the
different rays or degrees of light will produce in a picture; for
which reason you should never let slip an opportunity of re-
marking the various appearances you meet with.
Of History.
This branch of drawing presents to our view tlings past,
present, and future.
An historical picture must describe the transactions repre-
sented, in a manner so clear and conspicuous, as to convey
an idea of it to our minds, as fully as could be done by a ver-





hal description; and care must be taken to preserve such ana-
logy or connection between the figures, that not one may
seem to be introduced but for some end or purpose. And as,
in dramatie writing, it is essential to make every person
speak consistently with the part he represents, so here it will
be equally necossary to observe the same propriety of character,
and make every figure look the sentiment it is intended to
express.
OF PERSPECTIVE.
PERSPECTIVE is the art of delineating oljects (as they
appear in nature upon a plain surface) according to their
distance and height perpendicular to the horizon, between the
object and the eye.
This art is of great consequence to those who would excel
in drawing, etching, engraving, carving in bas-relief, or paint-
ing; for being well understood, the artist will be enabled to
know when to adhere to the strictest rules, and when to depart
from them with propriety.
Exhlanation of the Terms used in Pershective.
1. Base or fundamental line, is the bottom line of the draw-
ing on which the person is supposed to stand, with his face
towards the point of sight.
2. Perpendicular is à line drawn upright with respect to any
part of the base.
3. Parallel lines are lines equidistant from each other, as
the horizon to the bafe.
4. Horizon is the most distant part of a plain, where the
clouds, seeming to touch the earth, limit the sight. The ho¬
rizontal line gives the height of the eye ; for we cannot see any
thing above the horizon which does not exceed this height.
Yet the summit of a mountain may be above the horizon,
though its foot be far beneath it.
5. Point of sight is that pait of the horizontal line where
all the visual rays centre in a point.
6, Visual rays are beams of light conveying the likeness of
any object to the eye or sight, and the knowledge thereof to
the mind or understanding.
7. Point of distance are supposed points set off on the hori-
zontal line, at equal distances on each side the point of sight.
3. Diagona,



8. Diogonel lines are those drawn from the points of distance
to the extremities of the base line.
9. Abridgment of the square is the line where the diago-
nals intersect or crofs the visual rays, and must always run
parallel to the base. It is only made where the sight is limited
by a perpendicular, as the farther end of a church, hall, room,
&c. And supposing a person to stand thereon, a parallel
line drawn through the point of sight, will seem to pafs through
the eyes, and will consequently shew what height that person
ought to be¬
10. Point of direct view. This is nothing more than the
front view of a house, church, &c. or in other words, a geo-
metrical elevation raised from a plan or ground plot, and
comprehending an equal space on both sides of the point of
sight.
11. Point of oblique view, is when we see the object side-
ways or aslant. Example: Suppose a person was to draw a
view of a canal with some remarkable building he is desirous
the shew more distinct, he must place himself (on the base or
fundamental line) opposite to that building, that the ray of
light may be more oblique; by which means the admired
building will be less foreshortened, and appear to greater ad-
vantage, the points of sight being still before him, though not
in the middle of the picture.
12. Accidental points are those where objects end in the
horizontal line, but neither in the points of sight or distance,
and serve for streets, houses, chairs, roads, &c. which take
different directions. As for example: Suppose a street leading
to the point of sight, and from it two others branch, the one
on the right hand, the other on the left, and take a different
direction; these two last streets make what we call accidental
points, terminating in some part of tlie horizontal line, on
each side of the point of sight. The same is. to be observed
in a grove, park, &c, where the walk you are in directs imme-
diately to the point of sight, and the avenues branching out on
either side terminats also in different parts of the horizon.
lchnography is the plan or ground plot of any object that
is to be raised in perspective.
Scenography is the art of bringing any thing raised in per-
spective from an ichnographic plan to its due proportion, ac-
cording to the distance in which it is placed; that all objects
may be diminished according to their distance in a picture, in
the same degree as they are diminished by distance in a na-
tural prospect. A scenographic view may be either direct, or
oblique.




OF ETCHING.
ETCHING is a method of working on copper, wherein

the lines or strokes, instead of being cut with a graver,
are eaten with aqua fortis.
This art, being executed with greater case and freedom than
engraving, represents curious subjects better, and more agree-
ably to nature, as landscapes, ruins, and small, faint, or remote.
objects, buildings, &c.
The principal inaterials for this art are, the plate, hard and
soft ground, (the first for winter, and the other for summer,)
a dabber, turpentine varnish, lamp black, soft wax, and aqua
fortis.
The tools are, an oil rubber, a burnisher, a scraper, a hand
vice, etching boards, esching needles, an oil stone, and a
parallel ruler.
The plate may be had of any size, and well polisned, fit for
use, of the copper-smiths in London
Directions for laying the Ground.
Having provided yourself with a plate of the size of the
print or drawing you intend to copy, rub it well with an oil
rubbert mde e van Hie rsl ien eos rob it vel wien an on
charcoal used in polishing it, entirely disappear; then, wiping
off the dirty oil with a linen rag, dip vour singer in some clean
oil, and touch it over every part of the plate; after which,
with your burnisher, polisn the plate till you can see your face
in it: and in case any sand-hole flaws appear, the scraper will
assist you in taking them out. The marks left by the scraper
are to be taken out by the burnisher, till nothing appear.
Having fixed your hand-vice at one end of the plate, with a
rag and whiting, clear the plate carefully from grease; then
heat it over a charcoal fire, or lighted paper, till it will melt
the ground, which is to be laid on thinly, and dabbed all over
with the dabber, till it is persectly smooth and even; then
warm the plate again, and holding it up with the ground
downwards, smoke it all over with a large candle, taking care
that the snuff of it do not touch the ground, and waving the
candle continually over every part, so that the ground may
not be burnt by heating it more in one place than another.
If the plate be large, you may bind four penny candles to-
gether.







Directions for Tracing.
The first thing to be done, swhile the plate is cooling, after
the ground is laid) is torub the back of your print or drawing
all over with a bit of rag or cotton, dipt in the scrapings of red
chalk, and shake off the loose dust, or wipe it off gently with
a clean rag. Place the red side upon the plate, making it fast
at eaeh corner witha little bit of foft wax. Lay your etching-
board under your hand, to prevent bruising the ground ; then
with a blunt etching-needle trace lightly the outfines and
breadths of the fhadows, till the marks of them appear apon
the ground, which you must take care not to penetrate by
tracing too hard.
As great nicety is required in this part of your work, it will
be necessary now and thon to lift up one corner of your origi-
nal, and examine whether every part be traced before you take
it off, as it will be extremely difficult to lay it down again in na¬
former pofition.
Directions for Etching.
Having carefully traced your original, take it off, and lay
a silk or linen handkerchief next the plate, and over that your
etching-board; then proceed to the etching; for which ob-
serve the following directions, which are adapted to every par-
ticular branch, as landscapes, shipping, portraits, history, ar-
chitecture, &c.
Distances in landscapes, or the faint parts of any other pic-
ture, are the first to be done; and these are to be worked
closer, and with a sharpet pointed needle: the darker parts
must be etched wider, and with a blunter needle, but, to
prevent mistakes, the needles may be marked, according to
their different degrees, and the uies for which they are intended.
As for the very faintest parts of all, they are to be left for tlie
graver; or dry needle; of which hereafter.
ruler, till frequent practice enables you to do them well enough
without.
The needles may, when necessary, be whetted upon your
oil-stone, keeping them turning in your hand, so as to whet
them equally all round. The oil-stone will be further useful
in whetting the scraper, which is to be rubbed flat upon the
stone, and with a steady hand, keeping vil constantly upon the
stone.






Of Biting, or Eating in the Work with Aqua Fortis.
Pirst examine your work carefully, to see that nothing be
omitted; and if any scratches appear upon the ground, or mis¬
takes be committed in the etchings, they are to be stopped out,
which is done by covering them with a mixture of lamp-black
and varnish, laid on thinly with a hair pencil, which when
dry, will resist the aqua fortis. But it will be best to stop out
these, as they occur to you in the course of you work; for
by this means they will be less liable to escape your notice ;
and when the varnish is dry, you may etch over it again, if
required.
The next thing is, to inclose the work with a rim or border
of soft green, or other coloured wax, about half an inch high,
bending the wax in the form of a spout an one corner, to pour
off the aqua fortis: and that it may not run out at any other
part, take care to lay you wax so close to the plate, that no
vacancies be left.
Your aqua fortis must be single; and if too strong, as will
be seen in the biting, take it off, and mix it with a little water,
shaking them together in a bottle; and when, by often using,
it becomes too weak, it may be strenghened by mixing it in
a bottle with a little double aqua fortis. The bottle which
contains the aqua fortis should have a large mouth, and a glass
stopple.
Let the aqua fortis lie on the plate a fhort time, wiping off
thie bubbles, as they arise, with a feather, which may remain
upon the plate while it is biting; after which, take it off,
and wash the plate with water ; and then let it dry ; by scraping
off part of the ground from the faintest part of the work, try
if it be bit enough; and if not, stop out the part you have
tried with the lamp-black and varnish; and when that is dry,
pour on the aqua fortis again.
When the faint parts of your work are bit enough, stop
them out, and proceed to bite the stronger parts, stopping
them out as occasion requires, till the whole work is suffici-
ently bit: then warm the plate, and take off the soft wax;
after which, heat the plate till the ground melts, pour on a
little oil, and wipe the whole off with a rag. When the
ground is taken off, rub the work well with the oil-rubber,
and wipe the plate clean ; then proceed to finish it with the
graver, according to the following directions.





OF ENGRAVING.
THE tools necessary for engraving are, the oil-rubber, bur-
nissier, scraper, oil-stone, needles, and ruler, alrcady
mentioned to be used in etching; also gravers, compasses, and
a sand-bag.
Gravers are of two forts, square and lozenge. Three of
each sort should be provided. Fhe first is used in cutting the
broader strokes, the other for the fainter and more delicate.
No graver should exceed the length of five inches and a half,
the handle included, excepting the strait lines.
The sand-bag, or cushion, is used to lay tlie plate on, for
the conveniency of turning it about. The oil-stone must be
of the Turkey sort.
Of Whetting and Temhering the Graver.
As great pains are required to whet the graver nicely; par-
ticularly the belly of it, care must be taken to lay tlie two
angles of the graver. which are to be held next the plate, flat
upon tlie stone, and rub them steadily till they are polished like
a mirror, and till the belly rises gradually above the plate,
as that, when you lay the graver flat upon it, you may just
perceive the light under the point; otherwise it will dig into
the coppet, and it will be impossible to keep apoint or execute
thie work with freedom. In order to this, keep your right arm
close to your side, and place the fore-finger of vour left hand
upon that part of the graver which lies uppermost on the stone.
When this is done, in order to wliet the face, place the flat
part of the handle in the hollow of your hand, with the belly
of the graver upwards, upon a moderate slope, and rub the
extremity or face upon the stone, till it has an exceeding sharp
point, which vou may try upon your thumb-nail. The oil-
stone, wliile in use must never be kept without oil.
When the graver is too hard, as is usually the case when
first bought, and may be known, by the frequent breaking of
the point, the method of tempering the steel is as follows :
Heat a poker red hot, and hold the graver upon it within
half an inch of the point, waving it to and fro till the steel
changes to a light straw colour; then put the point into oil to
cooi; or hold the graver close to the flame of a candle, till it be
of thie colour, and cool it in the tallow: but be careful either
way not to hold it too long, sor then it will be too soft; and
in this case the point, which will then turn blue, must be





broken off, and whetted afresn, and tempered again, if re-
quired. But be not too hasty in tempering; for sometimes a
little whetting will bring it to a good condition.
Of holding the Graver.
Cut off that part of the handle which is upon the same line
with the belly, or sharp edge of the graver, making that side
flat, that it may be no obstruction.
Hold the handle in the hollow of your hand; and extend-
ing vour fore-finger towards the point, let it rest upon the
back of the graver, that you guide it flat, and parallel with
the plate.
Take care that vour fingers do not interpose between the
plate and the graver; for they will prevent you from carrying
the graver level with the plate, and from cutting your strokes
so clean as they ought to be.
Directions for Engraving.
Let the table or board vou work at be firm and steady :
upon which place your sand-bag, with the plate upon it, and
holding the graver as above directed, proceed to business in
thie following manner :
For straight strokes hold your plate firm upon the sand-bag
with your left hand, moving your right hand forwards; lean¬
ing lighter where the stroke should be fine, and harder where
you would have it broader.
For circular or crooked strokes, hold the graver stedfast,
moving your hand or the plate, as you see convenient.
Learn to carry your hand with such-a sleight, that you
may end your stroke as finely as you began it; and, if you
have occasion to make one part deeper or blacker than an-
other, do it by degrees : and that you may do it with greater
exactness, take care that your strokes be not too close, nor
too wide.
In the course of your work, scrape off the barb or rough-
ness which arises, with the belly of your graver; but be care-
ful, in doing this, not to scratch the plate; and that vou may
see your work properly as you go on, rub it with the oil-rubber,
and wipe the plate clean, which will take off the glare of the
copper, and shew what you have done to the best advantage.
Any mistakes or scratches in the plate may be rubbed out
with the burnisher, and the part levelled with the scraper,
polishing it again afterwards lightly with the burnisher.
Having thus attained the use of the graver, according to
the foregoing rules, you will be able to finish the piece you had
etched, by graving up the several parts to the colour of the
original,




original, beginning, as in the etching, with the fainter parts,
and advancing gradually with the stronger, till the whole is
completed.
The dry needle (so called because not used till the ground
is taken off tlie plate) is principally employed in the extreme
light parts of water, sky, drapery, architecture, &c.
For your first practice, copy such prints as are openly
fhaded ; the more finished ones being too difficult, till you
have gained farther experience.
N. B. To prevent any obstructions from too great à degree
of light, we would recommend the use of a sashi, made of
transparent fan paper, pasted on a ftame, and placed sloping
at a convenient distance between your work and the light.
This will not only preserve the sight, but, when the sun shines,
cannot possibly be dispensed with.
OF MEZZOTINTO-SCRAPING.
THIS art, which is of late date, is recommended to the
practice of the ingenious reader, for the amazing ease

with which it is executed, especially by those who have any
notion of drawing.
Mezzotinto prints, are those which have no etching or
strokes of the graver, but whose lights and ihades are blended
together, and appear like a drawing of Indian ink.
The materials used in this art are,
The copperplate, oil-stone, grounding tools, scrapers, bur-
nisher, and needles.
Directions for laying the Mezzotinto Ground.
Mark off, upon the bottom of the plate, the distance you
intend to leave for the writing, coat of arms, &c. then laying
vour plate, with a piece of swanskin flannel under it, upon
Your table, hold the grounding-tool in you hand perrpendicu
larly, lean upon it moderately hard, continually waving your
hand in a right line from end to end, till you have wholly co
vered the plate in one direction: next crofs the strokes from
side to side, afterwards from corner to corner, working the
tool each time all over the plate, in every direction, almost
like the points of a compass; taking ass possible car not to let
the tool cut (in one direction) twice in a place. This done, the





plate will be full, or, in other words, all over rough alike, and
would, if it were priuted, appear completely black.
Having laid the ground, take the scrapings of black chalk,
and with a piece of rag rub it over tlie plate : or you may, with
two or three candles, smoke it, as before directed for etching.
Now, take vour print or drawing, and having rubbed the
back with red chalk dust, mixed with white lake, proceed to
trace it, as before directed.
Directions for Whetting the Grounding Tool.
lf a tooth of the tool should break, it may be perceived in
the working by a particular streak or gap, which will appear
in the ground in a straight line; in which case the tool must be
whetted on the back, holding it sloping, and in a circular
manner, like the bottom of the tool.
Directions for Scraping the Picture.
Take a blunt needle, and mark the outlines only; then
with a scraper scrape off the lights in every part of the plate,
as clean and as smooth as possible, in a proportion to the strength
of the lights in your picture, taking car not to hurt you out
lines : and that you may the better see what you do, with the
thumb and fore-finger, of the left hand, hold a piece of trans-
parent paper, sloping, just over your right hand, and you will
soon be à judge of the different tints of the work you are
doing: scraping off more or less of the ground, as the dif-
ferent strengths of light and tints require.
The use of the burnisher is, to soften or rub down the ex
treme light parts after the scraper is done with, such as the tip
of the nose, forehead, linen, &c. which might otherwise, when
proved, rather appear misty than clear.
Another method used by mezzotinto-scrapers is, to etch the
outlines of the original. as also of the folds in drapery, marking
the breadth of the shadow by dots, which havingbit of a pro
per colour with aqua fortis, according to the directions before
given, take off the ground used in etching, and having laid the
mezzotinto ground, proceed to scrape the picture as above.
Four or five days before you think the plate will be ready
for proving, notice must he given to the rolling-press printer to
wet some French paper; as no other will do for this work, and
as that time is necessary for it to lie in wet. When the proof
is dry, touch it with white chalk, where it should be lighter ;
and with black chalk, where it should be darker: and when
the print is re-touched, proceed as before for the lights, and
for the shades use a small grounding-tool, as much as you





judge necessary to bring it to the proper colour; and when you
have done as much as you think expedient, prove it again, and
so proceed to prove and touch, till it is entirely to your mind.
When the plate tarnissies in the part where you are at work,
a little vinegar and salt, kept by you in a phial, will take it off,
wiping it dry with a clean rag.
Avoid, as much as poffible, over scraping any part, before
the first proving, as by this caution the work will appear more
elegant.
OF PAINTING UPON GLASS.
PAINTING upon glass is an art which has generally ap-
L peared difficult; yet there is no representation can be
more elegant than that of a picture done well in this manner:
for it gives all the softnefs that can be desired in a picture,
and is easy to work, as there are no outlines to draw, nor
any shade to make, but the colours are put on without the
trouble of either.
The pictures are those done in mezzotinto; for their shades
being rubbed down on the glass, the several lines which re-
present the shady part of any common print, are by this means
blended together, and appear as soft and united as in drawing
of Indian ink.
Provide such mezzotintos as vou like: cut off the margin ;
then get a piece of fine crown glass, the size of your print (as
flat and free from knots or scratches as possible) clean the glass,
and lay some Venice turpentine, quite thin and smooth, on
one side thereof, with a brusn of hog’s hair. Lay the print
flat in water, and let it remain on the surface till it sinks; ’tis
then enough: take it carefully out, and dab it between somc
papers, that no water may be seen, yet so as to be damp.
Next lay the damp print, with its face uppermost, upon
a flat table; then holding the glass over it, without touching
the turpentine till it is exactly even with the print, let it fall
gently on. Press tlie glass down carefully with your fingers in
several parts, so that the turpentine may stick to the print;
after which, take it up; then, holding the glass towards you,
press the print with your fingers, from the centre towards the
edges, till there be no blisters remaining.





When this is done, wet the back of your print with a
sponge, till the paper will rub off with your fingers; then rub
it gently, and the white paper will roll off, leaving the impres-
sion only upon the glass; then let it dry, and with a camel’s-
hair pencil, dipt in oil of turpentine, wet it all over, and it
will be perfectly transparent, and fit for painting.
Colours prosier for Painting upon Glass.
The several sorts of colours ground in oil for this purpose,
and tied up in bladders, may be had at all the capital colour-
shops in Manchester.
WhitesFlake white, podium.
Blacks-Lamp black, ivory black.
Brouns-Spaniss brown, umber.
Reds.- Rose pink, vermillion, red lead, Indian red, lake cinnabar.
VellowsEnglish pink, masticot, English oker, spruce
Blues-Blue bice, Prusfian blue, Saunder’s blue, smalt.
Greens-Verdigrease, terra vert, verditer.
The ultramarine (for blue) and the carmine (for red) are
rather to be bought in powders, as in that case they are less
apt to dry, or be lost: and as the least touch of these will give
the picture a cast, mix up what you want for present use with
a drop or two of nut-oil upon your pallet, with your pallet-
knife.
The pallets and knives may be had at most of the colour-
shops and ivory turners.
To get the colour out of the bladders, prick a hole at the
bottom of each, and press it till you have enough upon you
pallet for present use; because the colours are apt to dry and
skin over.
Then lay a sheet of white paper upon the table, and taking
the picture in your left hand, with the turpentine side next you,
hold it sloping (the bottom resting on the white paper) and all
the outlines and tints of the print will be seen on the glafs; and
nothing remaitis but lay on tlie colours proper for the different
parts, as follow:
The Method of using the Colours.
As the lights and shades of your picture open, lay the lighter
colours first on the lighter oarts of your print, and the darker
over the shaded parts; and having once laid on the brighter co-
lours, it is not material if the darker forts are laid à little over
them; for the first colour will hide those laid on afterwards.





Rads--Lay on the first red lead, and shade with lake or
carmine.
Yellous-The lightest yellow laid on first may be shaded
with Dutch pink.
Blues-—-Blue bice or ultramarine, used for the lights, may
be shaded with indigo.
Greens-Lay on verdigrease first, and then a mixture of
that and Dutch pink. This green may be heightened by an
addition of Dutch pink.
When any of these colours are too strong, they may be
lightened to any degree, by mixing white with them upon your
pallet; or you may darken them as much as vou please, by
mixing them with a deeper shade of the same colour.
The colours must not be laid on too thick; but if trouble-
some, thin them, before you use them, with a little turpentine
Take care to have a pencil for each colour; and never-use
that which vou have used for green or for any other colour,
without washing it first well with turpentine oil, as that colour
is apt to appear prédominant when the colours are dry.
Wasn all the pencils, after using, in turpentine oil.
Your glass, when painted, must stand two or three days
free from dust, before it be framed.
OF PAINTING IN CRAYONS.
RAYONS are to be had in boxes, every colour parti-
tioned off separately, to prevent their mixing.
The best are those of Switzerland.
The different colours are white, black, yellow, orange, red,
purple, blue, green and brown; and each of these have their
several shades, excepting the two first.
Directions for using them.
The paper to be used on this occasion, is rough Venice
paper, of a white-brown colour, and the stiffer the better.
That fort called Cape paper, is found to-be the best, because
upon that the colours best distribute themselves. By this me-
thod, figures may be drawn in their proper colours as they ap-
pear



pear to the eye. because the colôurs may be matched with the
crayons, and the crayons being dry, will not alter their colour;
but the colours. when wet. appear deeper than when dry,
wliich is apt to deceive a voung beginner.
Another way to make the necessary preparations, is to take
some of the tliickest and smoothest light-blue or othes paper,
and get a straining frame from a frame-maker’s of carpenter’s,
on which strain some coarse Scotch or lrish cloth, drawing and
fastening it withi small tacks round the edges, till it be quite
smooth; after which, with a sponge and fair water, gently wet
the blue paper, and then with a brush or rag paste the paper
all over, and lay it carefully on the cloth, exactly even with
the straining-frame; after which take it up, and laying white
paper on the table, place the blue paper downwards, with
one hand keeping the straining-frame steady, and with the
other keep the cloth close to the paper: do this very caresullys
and taking it up, lay it on the table with the blue paper up¬
wards, and a piece of paper under your hand, and rub it close
to the straining-frame, without touching any other part, then
let it stand to dry: after which set it on an easal, which mnay
be had at the colour shops, and proceed as follows :
Make the first sketch or rough draught with charcoal; then
with black, white, or red chalk, correct wliat you see amiss.
The outline being thus completed, rub in your crayons ac-
cording to their proper colours, and then with your finger or
fitch soften and blend them together.
OF PAINTING IN WATER COLOURS.
THE materials necessary for this art are, gum, colours,
hair-pencils, fitches, a pallet, and pen-knife.
The colours in general are, white, black, brown, red,
yellow, blue, and green.
The several species of each are as follow:
WhitesFlake white, Spanisn white, white lead.
Blacks-Burnt cherry stones, ivory black, lamp-black.
Brouns-Spanish brown, Spanish liquorice, uniber.
Reds.-Burnt oker, carmine, cinnabar lake, Indian lake,
Indian red, red ink, red lead, vermillion.
3O2




Yellows—Englisn oker, gall-stone, gamboge, masticot, dark
and light, oker de luce, orpiment, pink yellow, dark and light,
Roman oker, saffron.
Blues—-Blue bice, blue verditer, indigo, smalt, ultramarine.
Greens-Green bice, green pink, sap-green, verdigris,
verditer.
Most of the colours may be had ready prepared in shells,
as also the hair-pencils, at the colour-shops, in powders. If
you use the latter, a grind-stone and muller must be provided,
which are to be of pebble, and may be had at any stone-
cutter’s.
Directions for making the following mixed Colours.
Assi ColourWhite and lamp black; or indigo and black ;
or cherry-stone and white, shaded with ivory black.
Bay Colour--Vermillion, with a little Spanish brown and
black.
Bright Red-Indian lake and native cinnabar.
Carnation.-Lake and white, shaded with lake/
Changeable Silk.-Red lead and water of masticot, shaded
with sap-green.
Cloud ColourWhite; light masticot; or lake and white,
Flame Colour-Vermillion and orpiment; or red lead and
masticot; heightened with white.
Flessi Colour--White, with a little lake, and red lead; and
yellow oker for a swarthy complexion.
French Green.-Light pink and Dutch bice, shaded with
green pink.
Glass Grey-- Ceruse, with a little blue of any kind.
Hair Colour Masticot, umber, yellow oker, ceruse, oker-
de-luce, and cherry-stone black.
Lead Colour- Indigo and white.
Light Blue--Blue bice heightened with ceruse or spo-
dium.
Light Green Pink and smalt, with white, if need rer
quire.
Lion Tawney--Red lead and masticot, shaded with umber.
Miry. Cinnabar lake and white lead.
OrangeRed lead and a little fine masticot, shaded with-
gall-stone, and lake.
Orange Tawney--Cinnabar, light pink, and a little masticot,
shaded with gall-stone and lake.
Pearl Colour-- Carmine, with a little white, shaded with
lake.
Popinjay




Popinjay Green.-Green and masticot ; or pink and a little
ndigo, shaded with indigo.
Purple Indigo, Spanish brown and white; or blue bice,
with red and white lead ; or blue bice and lake.
Russet—Cherry-stone black and white.
ScarletRed lead and lake, with or without vermillion; or
carmine and Indian lake; or native cinnabar and red lead,
shaded with Indian lake.
Sca Green- Bice, pink and white, shaded with green pink.
Séy Colour--Light masticot and white, for the lowest and
lightest parts; red ink and white for the next ; blue bice and
white for a third degree; and blue bice alone for the highest
part of all. These are to be all softened into one another at
the edges, so as not to appear harsh.
Sky Colour for Drasiery-Blue bice and Venice ceruse; or
ultramarine and white, shaded with indigo.
Straw Colour-Yellow masticot, and a very little cinnabar,
shaded with a dark pink.
Violet Colour--Indigo, white and cinnabar lake; or fine
Dutch bice and lake. shaded with indigo; or htmouse, smalt
and blue bice; the latter most predominant.
Water-Blue and white, shaded with blue, and heightened
with white.
Directions for using the Colours.
YOUR pencils must be fast in the quills, and sharp-
pointed after you have drawn them through your mouth.
Before you begin, have all your colours ready before you,
and a pallet sor the conveniency of mixing them; a papar to
lay under your hand, and to keep your work clean, as well
as to try your colours upon; also a large brush called a fitch,
to wipe off the dust when vour colours are dry.
Lay your colours on but thinly at first, deepening and
mellowing them by degrees as you see occasion. The quioker
you lay them on, the evener and cleaner your drawing will
appear.
Take care to preserve all your colours from dust; and be
fore you use them, wipe your shells and pallet every time
with a fitch.
When you have done your work, or would lay it aside,
he careful to wasn out your pencils in warm water.
For face painting, mix up a little carnation or flesh-colour
with gum-water, in a shell by itself. If it be for a fair com
plexion, mix vermillion and white flake together; and for a





swarthy one, after the form of a litile masticot, or English
oker, both.
Let your flesh colourbe always lighter than the complexion
you would paint; for, by working on it, you may bring it to
its true colour.
In a large shell, or upon your pallet, lay your different
shades of flesn colour, at a convenient distance from each
other; and always have ready à sufficient quantity of white,
to lighten your shades.
For the checks and lips use a mixture of lake and red lead,
or carmine, as occasion requires; and for blue tints (as under
the eyes and in veins) indigo or uitramarine and white.
For grey faint shadows, use white, English oker, sometimes
masticot; for deep shadows, white. Englisn oker, umber;
for darker shadows, lake and pink, which makes a good fleshy
colour.
In colouring landscapes, at fiist only lay dead colours all
over the piece, leaving no part uncovered ; and be not over
curious in this
part of the performance, but rather use à maf-
terly freedom; and the work, though seeminglv rough to the
eye, will have a good effect when placed at a distance.
Let not the roughness of the colour discourage you; for
it is easy to be softened by degrees. with the other shadows,
observing only to sweeten and heighten them according as the
light falls.
In some places lay on strong touches, and in those places
bring your work up together to an equal roundness and
strength; tempering and sweetening your colours with
a
sharper peneil than the first, than the lumps or harsh ridges
be left, but that all your shadows may be dispersed, soft and
smooth, gliding gentlv, as it were, into one another.
You are not to finish any part before the other, but work
up all the parts gradually alike, till you see nothing wanting
to complete vour picture.
Having laid vour dead colours, begin first with the lightest
parts, as the sky, sun-beams, &c. then the yellowish beams,
which are to be done with masticot and white ; next the blue-
ness of the sky, with ultramarine or smalt alone. For purple
clouds, only mix lake and wlite, making your colours deeper
as they go upwatds from the horizon, except in tempestuous
skies. The tops of distant mountains must be worked so faint
that they may seem to lose themselves in air.
Bring your colours forward as your distance decreases;
painting your first ground next the horizon downwards of a
bluish sea-green, and as you advance forward, of a reddisni or





darker green, till you come to the fore-ground itself, which,
as it is to be the darkest part of all, do with a dark green,
shaded with a dark brown or yellow; which rule of shadow
will also serve for the trees on each respective ground.
All distant objects are to be iade imperfect as they appear
to the eye, as has been already observed under the article of
light and shade.
In colouring trees. boughs, and branches, touch in all the
darker shades first, raising the lighter leaves above the darker
by adding masticot to the dark green, which may be made
with bice, pink and indigo, for the uppermost of all, which
are to be done last : touch lightly the extremeties of the leaves
with a little green masticot and white, and set off the darkest
shadows with sap-green and indigo.
These rules are adapted to general appearances; but the
learner may deviate from them as nature shall dictate.
With regard to drapery, fruit, flowers, and other branches
of painting, the best observations are to be taken from the
objects themselves, or the most curious and exact representa-
RECEIPTS FOR THOSE WHO PAINT IN WATER
COLOURS.
To make Gum Water.
DISSOLVE one ounce of pure white gum arabic, and

half an ounce of double-refined sugar, in a quart of
spring water; strain it through a fine sieve or piece of muslin,
and bottle it off for use, keeping it free fromdust.
Another Way.
TAKE some gum arabic of the whitest sort, bruise it, and
tie it up in a piece of woollen cloth, and steep it in spring
water in a glass or earthen vessel, till the whole be dissolved.
If it be too stiff, add more water; and if too thin, more gum.
With this water you may temper most of your colours;
using such a quantity, that being touched when dry, the colour
will not come off. If the colour shine, there is too much
gum in it.





To keep the Flies from your Work.
WHEN you have made your gum-water according to either
of the foregoing directions, add thereto a little coloquinida,
which will preserve your work, when exposed, from being
spoiled by the flies.
Te make Liquid Gold for Vellum-Painting, Fans, &c.
GRIND the finest leaf gold with strong gum-water very
fine, adding as you grind it more gum-water, as you see
necessary. When vou have ground it as fine as you can,
wash it in a large shell; then temper it with a little mercury
sublimate, bind it in the shell with a little dissolved gum, shake
and spread it equally all over the shell, and use it with fair
water only.
To make Liquid Silver for the fame Purhiose.
The process for this is the same with that of liquid gold,
only observing, in the using it, to temper it with glare of eggs,
instead of water.
To make the Glare of Eggs.
Take the whites, and beat them with a spoon till they all
rise in a foam; let them stand all night, and they will be cla-
rified into good glare.
To recover Liquid-Silver that has contracted Rust.
If your silver, by length of time or bad weather, become
rusty, cover that part of your work with juice of garlick, which
will effectually recover it.
To keep the Colours from Sinking.
Boil four ounces of roch allum in a pint of spring water,
tillit is thoroughly dissolved; then silter it through brown pa¬
per, and keep it for use. Before you lay on your colours, take
a sponge, and wet the back of vour paper with this water while
it is hot, This will not only prevent the colours from sinking,
but will also give them an additional beauty and lustre, and
preserve them from fading. If your paper is not good, it must
be washied three or four times with this water, drying it every
time. If your prints are to be varnished, wash them all over
with white starch before you begin to lay on your colours.




To make Size for painting Scenes, and other Candle-light
Pieces.
Steep a quarter of a pound of the cuttings of white glove
leather in water for some tine; then take them out, and boil
them in three quarts of water till it wastes to a pint, and strain
it through a cloth into an earthen pan. When the size is cold,
if it feel firm under your hand, it is strong enough. You may
prepare any colours in this size while it is warm, and it will
take off the glare which would appear upon them by candle-
light if mixed with gum water.
To recover Coloars when decayed.
rosemary, and with a few drops of it temper your colours,
which. however dead and faded, will recover their bloom
and brilliance.
This water or spirit will prevent tlie bubbles in white and
umber, which is troublesome in grinding.
Pink-The single pink does not admit of so great a variety
as the carnation; but is nevertheless so variegated as to make
it an agreeable slower for sattins, silks, &c. The most com
mon are either white or crimson; others are striped white and
red ; others are white spotted with red ; others edged with
red; all which may be worked according to the rules for the
other flowers so diversified with the same colours. The leaves
and stalks are bluishi green; only at the joints there is for the
most part a vellowissi tinge, which is also at the bottom of
the cup and scales.
PAINTING ON SILKS, SATTINS, &c.
WHEN the outline is made according to the artist’s
fancy, a wasn of isinglass should with care be laid on,
to take away the glare and sleekiness of the sattin, otherwise
the colours will not work freely: the isinglass to be melted in
very clear water, over the fire, so as not to be very glutinous ;
otherwise it will discover the sattin, and consequently spoil
the colours.
In the foregoing rules we have recommended, for the most
part, the leaving the paper for the light parts of a flower, and





working with colours mostly transparent; but here the lights-
are to be made by a small tincture of the colour of the in-
tended flower mixt with the flake white, so much as just to
make a degree from the colour of the sattin; if white, or of
any other colour, to be mixed proportionably to the colour of
the flower: for instance, if a blue flower, the bice or verditer,
a very small quantity of it with the white, using less of it pro-
portionally as the shades grow darker; and in the most dark,
indigo alone may be used, it being by that tine rendered
opaque enough; but great care must be used not to lay the
colours on too thick; otherwise they will crack : a litile
sugar-candy will be found necessary, when mixed with guin-
water, as a preventative to that inconveniency. If a flower
happens to be of so deep a colour as not to admit of any pure
white in the lightest of the parts, a sort of priming of white
should be laid on; after which, when dry, begin with the
ground colour of the flower, proceeding gradually with the
shades, as in the above directions, which, with the selected
examples we have annexed, peculiarly chosen from nature for
the purpose, we hope will be sufficient for our ingenious stu-
dents in this most delightful amusement.
OF COLOURING MAPS, AND OTHER PRINTS,
IN WATER COLOURS.
VAVING, as yet, seen nothing published upon this sub¬
Hject that is authentic, I have thought fit, for the sake of
those who are inelined to ingenuity, to set forth the way and
manner of doing this work, it being an excellent recreation
for the gentry, and others who delight in the knowledge of
maps; which by being coloured, and the several divisions dis-
tinguished one from the other, by colours of different kinds.
do give a better idea of the countries they describe, than they
can possibly do uncoloured.
Now to perform this work after the best manner, there must
be provided in the first place a lye, made with tartar and gum
water.
To make the tartar lye, do thus: take two ounces of the
best white tartar, which is a stony substance that sticks to the
side of wine vessels, and is sold by the druggists.





Wrap it up hard and tight in half a sheet of cap paper, wet
it thorouglly in water, and put it into a clear sire, either of
iood or sea-coal; let it remain therein till it be red hot quite
thirough, then talte it out withi a pair of tongs. andeput it imn¬
mediately into apint of water, and with vour singer rub it well
to pièces; put it ini» a long narrow glass, and in a day or
two the Black will all settle. and the lve will become pure
and clear: pour oit tlie lye into a clean glass, and keep it cluse
stopped for use.
To muke gunn-water, take three ounces of the best and
clearest gumn arabic. wliich is sold at tlie druggists, and heat
it as small as yon can bruise it; thien put it into a pint of fair
spring water, and let it dissolve therein, which will be much
hastened hy shaking tle botile two or three times a day very
well, thit tlie gum that is dissolved may mix the better with
the water that is ahote it; and wien it is all dissolved, if there
appear anv foulness in it. sirain it through a rag into a clean
earthen dissi, and put it into a glass, and stop it for use.
Remember, that too much of this ought not to be made at a
tinie; for if tlie gum he kept too long dissolved in tlie water,
it will rot and be of no use; you must therefore always
olserve to make it fressi once in two montlis, or tliree at the
farthest.
In the next place, vou mest prepare or make your
colours for uie, and tlie best for this work are those that sol-
low: naniely,
Copper green, and that is made thus : take a pound of right
French verdigrease, made at Montpelier, this being thie best,
for the verdigrease made at any otlier place will fade; to this
add three ounces of cream of tartar ; beat them both into a
sine poiyder, and take care, uhile tlie verdigrease is in the
in our mouth to breailie tiirnugh, else the subtle powder of
the verdigicase will he apt to offend: and when this is done,
mix hothi the powders into two quaris of wates, and boil it
in an earthen pirkin tiil it boil away a quart, then strain it nut
when coid, and put the liquor into a glass, stop it up, and let
it stand to settle till tne liquor be very clear, so you will have
à delicate green; but sometimes the verdigrease not being al¬
ways of a geodncss, thie colour may not he deep enough fur
some uses. In this case put some of it into a broad earilien
dith, and set it over a charing-dish of coals. and by à gentle
lieat diminissi so much of the siquor, till by trying on a paper,
and letting it dry, tlie colour please you; and liere you are to
note, that if it shine toe much wlien dry, it is not right; for it





is not rightly made except it just shine, and if you cannot make
the colour deep enough by evaporating by heat, the abounding
liquid, without making it shine too much, it were better to
add some more verdigrease, and boil it up again till it become
a deep transparent green. lf vou would make but a pint of
this you must take but half the quantity of each; and you
are also to take notice, that this is a colour that will keep
many years without decaying, if the glass that contains it be
The next colour needful to be made is a stone colour, or
a liquor’ of myrrh, which is thus done: take a pint of your
tartar lye, and add to it one ounce of the best myrrh in pow¬
der, which vou can get at the druggists, and boil it till the
myrth is dissolved. which will be done in a little time: let it
settle, and pour off the clear for use. wliich you must close
stop up; this is also a tincture that will never decay, and may
be made fainter or deeper, by boiling more of the liquor away,
to make it deeper, or by adding water te make it fainter.
And, in the last place, there is required a crimson colour,
which is speedily made thus:-Buy at the druggists, some good
cochineal, about half an ounce will go a great way; take thirty
or forty grains, bruise them in a gallipot to fine powder, then
put in them as many drops of the tartar lye as will just wet it,
and make it give forth its colour; and immiediately add to it
half a spoonful, or more, if the colour be yet too deep, and
you will have a delicate purple liquor or tincture. Then take
a bit of allum, and with a knife scrape very finelv a very little
of it into the tincture, and this will take away the purple co-
lour and make it a delicate erimson. Strain it through a fine
cloth into a clean gallipot, and use it as soon as you can, for
this is a colour that always looks most noble when soon made
use of, as it will decay if it be made too long.
Indigo is another colour used in colouring of maps.
This is bought at the shops that sell paint, and it must be
ground very fine on a stone, as you do oil colours, with a little
tartar lye to niake it give its colours, and look the brighter;
when it is ground perfectly fine like a thick syrup, add gum
water to it till it he thin enough for your purpose, and keep
it in a glass close stopped up. but it will seitle so, that when
you use it vou must stir it exceeding well up from the
bottom.
For a yellow, gamboge is the best; it is sold at the drug-
gists in lumps, and their way to make it fit for use, is to make
a little hole with a knise in a lump, and put some water into
the hole, stir it well with a peneil till the water be either a





deeper or fainter yellow, as your occasion requires, then pour
it ints a gallipot, and temper up more, till you have enough
for your purpose.
Red lead is also a colour much used in this work, and so is
orpiment; both which you may buy at the colour shiops very
well ground. so tliat they need only to be tempered with gum-
water, to be fit for use.
Blue bice is also often used, which needs only to be tem-
pered with gum-water; and when men design to be curious,
they may uie instead thereof ultramarine, wliich is the best
and most glorious of all blues, vet extremely dear; though
small papers of it, at about two shillings price, may be bought
at some colour-shops, which if carefully used, will go a great
way : it need only be tempered in a very small gally-pot, with
some gum-water, till it lie on the paper with a sine and almost
transparent colour.
There is likewise an exceeding glorious red or crimson
colour, named carmine, which is exceeding dear; yet about
half a crown’s worth will go a great way in the uses to which
it is put: it is tempered with guin-water, and gives several
degrees of colour, according as it is thick or thin tempered.
Vermillion is also used in some cafes.

This is a glorious
scarlet, that needs only to be tempered with gum-water; for
it may be bought very finely ground to powder at the colour
shops: only it is to be noted, that this colour shews much
brighter when dry, if glazed over with some thick gum-water,
wliich is made by puiting two ounces of gum arabie to half a
pint of water, or lels.
And for some uses burnt umber, ground very sine with
water as thick as possible, and then tempered with gum-water
to à due thickness, and then it makes a good transparent
colour.
There is another colour needful in this work, which is a
most pleasant grass green, and that is made thus: take a lump
of gamboge, and make a hole in it, then put therein some
copper green, stir it about with a pencil, and from a willow
copper green it turn to a grass green, which you may make
deeper, or lighter as you stir it about a longer or lesser time.
Of the Practice of Colouring Maps.
The colours being prepared as before directed, the only
way to colour maps well, is by a pattern done by some good
workman, of which the Dutch are esteemed the best: three
or tour such maps, coloured by a good aitist, are sufficient to
guide a man in tlie right doing of hiis work; but if he cannot




obtain this, he may, by a few trials, grow a good artist in a
short time; for this is only attained by practice; and is a
man spoil half a score maps in order to get the knack of
colouring a map well at last, there is no man that is ingenious
will grumble at it.
Thie art of colouring right may be attained by practice, as
was said, but the hardest thing is to know rightly how to make
and prepare the colours properly, without suffering them to
sink into it: all that are here mentioned will lie fair and
pleasant to the eye, and it is the fairneis of the colour is this
art of mappainting; but if the paper be not gend and strong,
no art can make the colours lie well; therefure in buyieig
maps, chuse those that are printed on tlie thickest and strongest
paper.
The Practice of working Oil Colours, and painting Timber-work,
after the manner of comnon Painting.
THAT which Ihere call common painting, is only the way
and manner of colouring all kinds of wainscot, doors,
windows, posts, rails, pails, gâtes, border-boards for gardens, or
any other materials that require either beautv, or preservation
from the violence of rain, or injury of weathier; the method of
doing which, I shall lay down in the plainest manner possible.
Suppose, then, that there he a set of pallisadoes, or a pair
of gates, or some posts and rails to paint, and l would finish
tliem in a stone colour: first look over tlie work, and take
notice wliether the joints be open in the gates, or whether
There are any large clefts in the posts; for it these are nor well
sccured, the wet will insinuate itself into those desects, and
make the quicker dispatch in ruining the whole work; let the
first businels therefore be, to stop up these places smooth and
even, with a putty made of whitening. and linseed oil, well
heaten together on the grinding stone, with a wooden. mallet,
to the consistence of a very thick dough, and with this let all
the crannies, clefts, and other defects, be perfectly filled ur,
that it may he equal to the surface of the stuff, then proceed
to the priming of the work with some Spanissi browni, well
ground and mixed with very thin linseed oil : with this do over
the work, giving it as much oil as it will drink up, this in about
two days will be tolerably dry, then if you would do this woik
substantially, do it over again with the same priming colour;





when this is thoroughly dry, then take the white lead, well
ground and tempered up, not too thin, for the stiffer you work
it tlie better body will be laid on, and the thicker coat of co-
lour that your timber is covered withal, the longer it will
last. Let this colour be well rubbed on, and the whole surface
of the work be so entirely covered, that there remain no creek
nor corner bare, which you may easily perceive by jobbing in
the point of a bristle brush; let this first colouring dry, and
then go over it à second time, and if you please a third also;
the charge will be à little more, but the advantage will be much
greater.
This course is sufficient for any kind of timber work that
requires onsy a plain colour; wliether you thus cover the work
with a stone colour, or else with a timber colour in umber and
white, or lead colour in indigo and white, that of the white
being the cheapest of the three by much; nay, I have known
some lay over their work, only with a coat of Spanissi brown.
by tempering it up more stiffthan was done for the two sirst
primings. which in some respects is cheapest of all, and pre-
serves the timber perhaps as well as any. Now he that is able
to bring the work thus far on, has proceeded to the highest
pitch of that common painting, that aims at preservation
beyond beauty, though something of beauty is necessarily in-
cluded in this also; but this is not all--for he that is arrived
thus far, is in a fair way to other perfections in the art of paint-
ing: but for the pannelling of wainscot, with its proper
shadows, and for imitating olive and walnut wood, marble,
and such like; these must be obtained by ocular inspection, it
being impossible to deliver the manner of the operation by
precept without example, and1 am bold to affirm, ghat a man
shall gain more knowledge by one day’s experience, than by a
hundred spent to acquire it in souie other way.
advise therefore all those that desire an insight into this
business, to be a little curious, if opportunity offers, in ob-
serving the manner of a painter’s working, not only in grinding
his colours, but also in laying them on, and working them in:
in all these observing the motion of his hand in managing of
any kind of tool, and by this means, with 3 little imitation,
oined to the directions here given, ldoubt not but in a fhois
tine you may arrive to great proficiency in the business of
common painting.
Note-That when vou have made use of your colours, if
there be occasion for a small cessation, till the work be finished,
in this caseit is best to cover your colours in a pot with -water,
for that will prevent their drying, even in the hottest time.





And for your pencils, they ought, as soon as you have done
working, to be well washed out in clean linseed oil, and then
in warm suds, for if either oil or colours be once dried in the
brusn or pencil, it is spoiled for ever.
It has been observed, that timber laid over with white,
when it has stood some time in the weather, the colour will
crack and slirink up together, just as pitch does, if laid on any
thing that stands in the sun; the cause is, that the colour was
not laid on with a stiff body, able to bind itself on firm and
fast.
lf you shall at any time have occasion to use either brushes
or pencils that are very small, as in many cases there will he
occasion, vou ought then to dispose of the colouis you use
upon a pallet, which is a wooden instrument, easy to be had
at any colour-shop, and there work and temper thiem about
with your pencil, that the peneil may carry away the more
colour; for vou are to note, that if apencil be only dipped in
à pot of colour, it brings out no more than what hangs on
the outside, and that will work but a very little way; whereas
if vou rub the pencil about in the colour, on the pallet, a good
quantity of colour will be taken up in the body of the peneil;
and besides all this, you may work a pencil better to a point on
a pallet, than you can do in apot; the point of a pencil being
of the greatest use in divers cases, especially in drawing of lines
and all kinds of flourishing.
A Catalogue of the several Colours used in hainting with Oil.
Whites-The principal of all whites is white lead.
Of this colour there are two forts, the one called ceruse,
which is the most pure and clean part; the ntlier is called by
the plain name white lead.
Besides white lead and ceruse, there is another fort to be met
with sometimes, which they call flake white.
BlacksLamp black, lamp, or candle black, ivory black,
willow charcoal.
Reds.-Vermillion is the most delicate of all light reds,
being of itself a most perfect scarlet colour.
Lake, especially the richest sort, is the best of all dark reds,
being a most pure crimson.
Red lead is the lightest of all reds now in use: it is a fandy,
harsh colour, and such a one as is not easily ground very fine,
although you bestow much labour on it.
Spanish brown is a dark dull red, of an horse fleshi colour;
it is anearth, but there is some of it of a very good colour,
and pleasant enough to the eye, considering the deepness of





its colour: it is of very great use amongst painters, being
generally used as the first or priming colour, that they lay
first upon any kind of work, being cheap and plentiful, and
a colour that works well, if it be ground fine, as you may
do with less labour than some better colours require : the
first fort is the deepest colour, and most free fram stones:
the other sorts are not so good to give a colour to the
eye, but yet they serve as well as any other for a prim-
ing colour.
Vellows-Yellow oker is of two forts; one called plain
oker, the other spruce oker; the one is a much lighter colour
than the other.
Pink yellow.
Orpiment is that colour which some call yellow arsenic.
Masticot is a good light yellow for most uses, especially in
making greens, of which several sorts may be framed out of
this colour, being mixed with blue.
Greens-Verdigrease is the best and most useful green of all
others.
Green bice is of a fandy nature, and therefore not so much
used.
Green verditer is also a sandy colour: neither of them bear
any good body, and are seldom used but in landscapes, where
variety is required.
Blues.— Blue bice bears the best body of all bright blues used
in common work, but it is the palest colour.
Blue verditer is of no good body, something sandy, and of
no very good colour itself, being apt to turn greenisn, and
being mixed with a yellow, makes a very good green.
Indigo is a dark blue, if worked by itself; to remedy
which, whites are usually mixed, and then it makes bui
2
very faint blue.
Note-That the longer this colour is ground, the more
beautiful and fair it looks.
Smalt is the most lovely blue of all others.

NoteThat of thiis colour there are two forts; the finest
is that which is called oil smalt.
Umber is a colour that really has no affinity with the others
before mentioned, being neither white, black, red, yellow,
blue, or green; yet it is a colour of as great use as any of the







What Colours are most suitable, and set off best one with
BY setting off best, I mean their making each other
Dlook most pleasant; for two of some particular colours
put together, or one next the other, shall add much to the
beauty of each other, as blue and gold, red and white, and
such like;-but green and black put togethier, look not so
pleasant, neither do black and umber, or haw colour, and
such like.
All yellows then set off best with blacks, with blues, and with reds.
All blues set off best with whites and yellows.
Greens set off well with blacks and whites.
Whites set off well enough with any colour.
Reds set off best with yellows, whites and blacks.
Gold looks well enough upon a white ground, especially if
the matter to be gilt be carved.
Gold and black shew very well.
Gold on timber colour shew also very well.
So does gold and horse-flesn colour, made with the finest
Spaniss brown.
But the most glorious ground of all others for gold are
the vermillion red, the smalt blue, and the lake, laid on a light ground.
Of some Colours that arise from Mixture.
Asni colour is made of wliite lead and lamp black; if a deep
asn colbur, then take more black; if a light one, then take
but little black, and must white.
A lead colour is made of indigo and white.
A colour resembling new oaken timber, is made of umber
and white lead.
A flesn colour is compounded of lake, white lead, and a
little vermillion.
A buff colour, take yellow oker and white lead.
For willow green, take verdigrease alone.
For a light willow gieen, take verdigrease and white.
For grass green, take verdigrease and pink.
A carnation is made of lake and white.
Orange colour, yellow oker and red lead.
A light timber colour, mix spruce oker and white, and a
very little umber.
Brick colour, red lead, a little white and yellow oker.





For a straw colour, take white, and a little yellow oker.
Olive wood is imitated with oker and a little white, veined
over with burnt umber.
Walnut tree is imitated with burnt umber and white, veined
over with the sane colour alone, and in the deepest places
with black.
Pails and posts are sometimes laid over with white, which
they call a stone colour.
Sometimes posts and pails are laid over with indigo and
white, wlich is called a lead colour.
Window frames are laid in white, if the building be new,
but if not, then they are generally laid in lead colour, or
indigo and white, and the bars with lead.
Doors and gates, if painted in pannels, then the shadows
of a white ground are umber and white, but if laid in a lead
colour, then the shadows are listed with black.
It is impossible to set down all those variety of colours that
may be produced by mixture. They that would see more, may
peruse Dr. Salmon’s Polygrafice, where they will find great
variety. But those which I have here given an account of,
will sufficiently seive for common painting.
Some Directions for mixing of Oil Colours for divers Purposes,
in the art of colouring Prints with Oil Colours.
Colours for several Faces.
FOR faces that are accounted fair, take white lead, a little
 vermillion, and a small touch of lake.
For the lips, take more of the vermillion and lake than you
did for the face.
For a brown face, take burnt oker and white.
For tawiiy moor, take cullens earth, a little burnt oker, and
a little white.
Colours for Hair.
For a brown hair, mix umber and a little black and white.
For a yellow hair, take stone oker, white lead, and a little
vermillion.
For flaxen hair, take white lead, stone oker, and a little
cullens earth.






Linen is done with white lead or ceruse.
Silver is done with white, a little smalt, and some white
masticot.
Gold is done with red orpiment and white masticot, of each
an equal quantity.
Colours for Garments.
For blue garments, the best smalt, and white lead.
For a grass gréen, mix verdigrease and a little pink yelloiv.
For a willow green, mix verdigrease and a very little white.
A sea-green is made by mixing green verditer, pink, and
white lead.
A French green is made by mixing pink and indigo.
A carnation, by mixing lake and white lead.
A crimson is made by mixing vermillion, lake and white.
A fcarlet is only vermillion laid on alone.
A cherry colour is made by mixing vermillion and white
lead.
For vellow, lay on either yellow orpiment or yellow maf¬
ticot: if your yellows are more pale, then mix white with the
former.
For an orange colour, mix red orpiment and a little ver-
million.
For a purple, mix smalt, lake and white.
For a violet, mix bice and lake.
A straw colour is made with white and yellow oker, and a
very little umber.
An afhi colour is made by mixing black and white.
Achesnut colour is made by mixing umber, lake and white.
A dove colour, or the wings of an angel, take white, a
little lake, and a little smalt.
Colours for Trees.
For bodies of trees, take pink, yellow, white lead, yellow
oker, and a little black.
For the leaves of them that are near the eye, take verdi
grease and pink, or if dark coloured, then take indigo and
pink.
For leaves of trees farther off, take green verditer, pink,
and white lead.
For them that are farthest of all, take terra-verd, and white.
Colours for Grounds behind a Picture.
Nore, That light hair requires a dark ground, and a dark
hair a light ground.





Ground colour for a picture with light hair is made with
umber, white and black.
A ground colour with dark hair is made with umber and
white.
For Ground in a Landscape.
Take pink, oker and white, with a little green verditer.
For country houses at a distance, take white lead, yellow
oker, and smalt; the same colour serves also for houses of
stone.
For brick houses or walls, take yellow oker burnt, and white
lead, if the work be far off: but if near, then Indian red, and
a little white.
For pails of wood or other timber work, of what kind so-
ever, in country cottages, take umber, white, and a little oker.
Sky Colours
Are made of smalt and white for the highest skies, more white
for the lower, and yellow mixt with a little vermillion for the
lowest of all.
How to make a Size for Gilding both with Gold and Silver.
THE operation is thus, for the making of gold size:--
Take yellow oker, and grind it on a stone, with water,
till it be very fine, and afterwards lay it on a chalk stone
to dry: this is the common way. Or you may wash your
oker, for when it is washied, to be sure nothing but the purest
of the colour will be used; and besides, it is done with less
daubing.
When your oil and oker are thus prepared, you must grind
them together as you do other oil colours, only with fat dry-
ing oil, but it is somewhat more laborious, and must be ground
very fine, even as oil itself; for the finer it is, the greater lustre
will your gold carry that is laid on it.
Here note,That you must give it such a quantity of vour
fat oil, that it may not be so weak as to run when you have
laid it on, nor so stiff that it may not work well; but of such a
competent body, that after it is laid on, it may settle itself
smooth and glossy, which is a chief property of a good size.
Silver size is made by grinding white lead with fat drying oil,
some adding a little verdigrease, to make it bind.




How to Gild with Gold or an Oily Size, either Letters or
Figures, &c. &c.
WHATSOEVER vou would gild must first be drawn

 with gold fize, (the making of which has been men-
tioned) according to the true portion you would have gilt,
whether figure, letter, or whatever else it be: when you have
thus drawn the true proportion of what you would have gilt,
let it remain till it be sufficiently dry to gild upon, (which
you shall know by touching it with the end of your singer) for
if vour finger stick a little to it, and yet the colour come not
off, then it is dry enough, but if the colour come off on your
finger, thenit is not dry enough, and must be let alone longer:
for if you would then lay vour gold on, it would so drown
it, that it would be worth nothing; but if vour size should be
so dry, and the gold will not take; sor wliich there is no re-
medy but new sizing; therefore you must watch the true time,
that it be not too wet or too dry ; both extremes being not
at all convenient.
When your size is ready for gilding, take vour book of leaf
gold, and opening a loaf of it, take it out with your cane ply-
ers, and lay it on your gilding cushion, and if it lie not smooth,
blow on it with your breath; which will lay it flat and plain,
then with a knife of cane, or for want of it, an ordinary poeket
knife, that hath a smooth sharp edge ; with this sbeing wiped
very dry on vour sleeve, that the gold stick not to it) let your
leaf of gold be cut into such pieces or forms as your judgment
shall think most suitable to your work.
When you have thus cut your gold into convenient forms,
then take your gilding pallet, t’tis a flat piece of wood, about
three inches long and an inch broad, upon which is to be
glewed ’a piece of sine woollen cloth of the same length and
breadth,) and breathe upon it to make it dampisn,that the gold
may stick to it; with this tool take your gold (by clapping it
down on the several pieces you had before cut into forins) and
transser it to your size, upon which clap it down according to
discretion, and your gold must afterwards press down smooth
with a bunch of cotton, or-a hare’s foot; and this you must
do piece hy piece till you have covered all your size gold;
and after it is fully dried, then with your hare’s foot brush
off all the loose gold, so will your gilding remain fair and
beautiful.
If your work to be gilt be very large, open your book of
leaf gold and lay your leaf down on your work without cutting




it into pieces, and so do leaf by leaf till vou have covered quite
over what you intend to gild: and if some particular places
should miss, take up with a small bunch of cotton a piece
of leaf gold, cut to a fit size, and clap it on, that the work
may be entirely covered; and if the gold be to be laid in the
hollows of carved work, you must take itup on the point of a
camel hair pencil, and convey it in, and with the said pencil
dab it down till it lie close and smooth.
How to Gild with Silver.
In laying on silver upon an oily size, the same method in
all respects required as for gilding with gold, save only in this,
that the size upon which silver is laid, ought to be com¬
pounded of a very little yellow oker, and much white lead;
for the size being of a light colour, the silver laid on it will
look more natural, and retain its own colour better, the whiter
the size is.
Note, That the common painters do now generally in gild-
ing, use more silver than gold, in most works that are not
much exposed to the air, to wliich they afterwards give the
colour of gold, by means of the lacker varniss, whose use is
now so common, that if they gild any thing that stands free
from the weather, they only gild with silver, and so give it
the colour of gold with lacker varnist, made of gum lake, dis-
solved in spirit of wine, and laid over it.



























