dd dd ddddddd dede ededededd  de e dede ode de de de  de den de dedege-
********
ig iel Oc se g Isy &t.
** IS*
 EIa
 ****
********
rars O2se W sel
2
*
* 5
Ia ***S
*******
B*’SA
A  75 Xe
*********
B*SN DiiS* 
&
7
er
***44 3
44*4 4
*E*
*E**
Stis EA Etg e
GE B  a  à
76X
2.
gaa
2n
3.
2
t
*** 
 
71
** i  
Maee  
ever
2 *s
4
t
X
s.
4
** 
My  an
***
v 
g.
e4
4 5
6
6L

*OX
a a   
244*3
Wene eneent ven
Wen
de  e de de
Vaaen *
a an a
a '
**
*
 p sen, p vae n 
*****
 g le sal
*****
***
*Ie *
sg su 3
 S12
9c
e*e Bils S6 *e 
******
2e-
****
GME J  6 4a
d E A E Wo  
*
e 3
*
*se * VOG*E*T ***EEVGEECZ-
**6
& BE SVOiEn
       de de ed i de de.
TH E
T
ranslator’s Preface to the Reader.
***.
HE author’s known abilities and great reputation in Holland,
24
Ja have justly recommended him to the esteem of the most
T
Ma
EN
xa knowing there; l thought it very proper to make him speak
eK.
.
*a* Englisb; and the rather, (to use his own reason) for that, though
many excellent authors have written on Painting, yet, in bulk,
they seem rather to cry up the art and artist than lay down solid rules for
attainment: to whichI may add, that those authors are mostly useless to
an Englisbman, and few or none copious enough to answer general pur-
pose ; nor at best are of general. service in Engiand, where fresh and fair
nature is preferred before the brown and warm colouring of some other
countries, especially Italy, where the best books have been written on the
subject : but principally, for that l think, nothing has been published here
so learned, full and complete, and so well explained by plates and ex-
amples, as the author will be found to be ; nor perhaps, wherein portrai-
ture (a branch which England mightily affects) is so copioussy handled.
The author learned the rudiments of his art under his father, and at
Amsterdam (whither he came young from Luttich, the capital of a bisho-
pric of that name in Germany) where he settled, lived, and died, gave
early proofs of the skill and erudition for which he was afterwards famed.
Accordingly, he pursued history, and its chief ornament emblematic
learning : and, having made some proficiency in those two capital branches,
he congeived that other things must be easy of course, as being but rivu-
lets flowing from those main springs: wherefore, it is probable, by what
he writes, that in their turns, he practised portraiture and the other
parts in such manner as to qualify him to criticise on all of them.
A
But
Digitzed by GOOGlC


The TRANSLATORS PREEACE.
But his thirst for the arts stopped not here: he was persuaded that so
inquisitive, so laborious a genius as his, was as proper for a plate as the
pencil, and therefore at times, he etched a-great number of prints from his
own designs, which have met with good reception abroad, especially in
Germany, where a set of them have been copied to good advantage.
As his practice was as useful, laborious, and universal as that of any
painter of the age, so also was the theory whereon he built it. It does
not appear that he ever visited France or Italy, or any other academy:
neverthelefs, Rome, France, England and Germany know him in his
works; and at home he made himself master of such a fund of classic em-
blematic, historical and discriptionary learning, prints and books on paint-
ing, architecture, antiquities and other requisites, and was so well ac-
quainted with the works of the best masters, that he becume a good cri-
tic. By this means and through his great industry, his outline appears
true and easy, his colouring warm, soft and expressive, and his compo-
sitions noble, learned and just.
Amidst his fatigues he preserved the pleasant humour which reigns in
several parts of this work; particularly in the odd description of the
Flood, Book 2. Chap. 10. and the contest between Antiguo and Modo,
Book 3. Chap. 5.
But what rendered him most dear to the age he lived in, was his kind
and fatherly instruction and encourageinent to young artists, and his com-
municative advice to painters in general, who made him frequent visits,
which they acknowledged, in often chusing him the umpire of their dis-
putes on art, esteeming his decifions as oracles.
This public spirit, this love for his art, as they were always conspicuous
in him without mercenariness, so they remained with him to the last : for,
notwithstanding his loss of sight, (the effect of two close an application to
etching by candle-light, as many imagine, and as he himself almost ac-
knowledges) he, as Mons. Gericke, rector and professor in the Royal
Academy of Arts at Berlin, and painter to the king of Prussia, observes
in the preface to his Version of the author’s Drawing-book, made
weekly, a thing not to be paralleled in any other master, the center of a
eircle, consisting of young students, whom he instructed in drawing (by
which he got a maintenance) and like the sun dispensed his beams to all
around him.
Under his great affliction, the painters, his cotemporaries, knowing he
had stored a large collection of remarks on the art, for his private amuse-
ment, almost generally intreated him to reduce them to some order for
public




public benefit; which, notwithstanding his loss of sight and age, they
thonght him still capable of doing.
His inability for painting, an amusement to his chagrin, his friends re-
qustes and a design to be thoroughly informing to promising tyros, sway-
ed him to a compliance: and how well the work was received may appear
from the commendatory copies of verses penned by the best poets of tht
time, and prefixed to each of his thirteen Books, which l havc omitted
in the translation, as being of no significancy to an Englisb reader.
The aforesaid remarks aud observations were originally in French; and
in compiling, the author made several additions to them, even while the
sheets were printing off, which may possibly make the work seem in some
places, less smooth than otherwise it would be, though certainly the bet-
ter for them; judging with Plato :
Non enim tadet bis dicere quod bene dicitur.
He tells us, that if connexion in general be not so well observed as might
be wished, it was occasioned by doing the work piece meal, and taking
things as they arose : and that, ifhe be thought to speak too freely, and
censure other mens works toe-rashly, it should be considered, that as a
man, he has his failings in common with others. Nevertheless, ifhis rea-
sons be impartially examined, he questions not an aquittal : e For, says he,
lf any works be read without love and impartiality, the labour and instruc-
tion is lost. Wherefore, he who would teach fundamentally and well,
must avoid prepossession, weigh duly what seems odd to him, and inquire
and reason thoroughly before he fixes either his thoughts or opinion of
He also says, that if he be any where found to prescribe rules
things.
which he has not always followed, it is owing to his dark condition, where-
in his memory and idcas became more vigorous, bright and intent, and
consequently his judgment more strong, acute and refined, by continual
reflexions on the art, than when he had his sight and was busied in his
employment. For further satisfaction in this point, see Chap. 8, of the
Book of Colouring.
It now remains to be observed, that as his chieftalent lay in history, the
noblest branch of painting, and allowing the greatest frecdoms, so the
heat of his zeal, and the many inconveniences attending portraiture,
might possibley induce him to speak à little too freely of the latter in Book7.
However, I hope he will be excused, since he notwithstanding fails not
afterwards to be very particular in his instruction on that head. And if
what he advances, in Book 9. Chap. 12. touching the representation of






the first Person in the Trinity, give any offence, l only observe, that
though his reafons are plausible, yet he modestly concludes, that herein a
painter must be very discreet, and not abuse the liberty allowed him by
Scripture, and the consent of the Fathers, &c. Wherefore, since such things
are not allowable by Protestants, (of whose communion the author pro-
fesses to be )l no further maintain the point than to say, l could not, in
justice to the work, leave out the chapter which treats of it.
But a principal satisfaction I think necessary to be given, touching the
verbal or descriptionary tables, occurring in several parts of the work.
These, though at first view they may possibly seem dull and tiresome,
yet when duly considered, will appear to be master-pieces in their kind,
and not only display the authors solid learning, but also his great in-
dustry in inforcinghis precepts by every method. For, as it is evident that
he has spared for no pains, both by discourses and examples, to evince
the doctrine of disposition, motion, pasfions, contrast, colouring, har-
mony, light and shade, reflexions, draperies, grounds, ornaments, and
generally every thing which can constitute a good composition; so l can¬
not but observe how wonderfully he reduces all those parts to practice in
the said tables, and thereby illustrate divers things and essential circum-
stances, which could not be so well’done either by discourses or in any
other manner. In a word, they are summaries of the whole, and the best
instructions for performance, and to inform the judgment of a lover of
painting; and therefore the work would have been incomplete without
them. It is certain, that by such precepts as the author lays down, the
greatest masters in history have made themselves famous; and by these,
even face-painters have attained the looseness and freedom, I may say,
the historical management we discover in their best pieces. But the au-
thor stops not here ; for he fails not every where to inculcate emblematic
and hieroglyphic learning, a part of knowledge which, though much
overlooked, is very hopeful and necessary in almost every branch of
painting.
On the whole, as his great reading appears by the number of authors he
quotes on this occasion, and as he endeavours to be generally useful, even
to the handling of architecture, statuary, engraving, etching, and mez-
zotinto; so it is hoped, the work will prove here, as it has done abroad,
A System of the Art of Painting. And l may pofsibly, in due season,
also publish the Drawing-book of the. same author ; a work as entertain-
ing as profitable to lovers and artists.






WHOEVER will study arts and sciences, must expect both trouble
and labour, without repining because his expectation is not im-
mediately answered, or the end just in view: this is so true, that even
the greatest masters are not always alike successful. But if delays seem
tiresome. let us duly ponder where the obstruction lies, and whether a
master cannot help us over it: surely, if we be not too full of ourselves,
we may meet with such an aid ; according to Cato :
Ne pudeat, quee nescieris, te velle doceri ;
Scire aliquid, laus est, culpa est, nil difcere velle.
Englifhed,
Ne’er be afhamed to learn what may be taught,
Since the refusal is a greater fault.
Experience has taught me, that we must seck the sciences, not they us.
Ovid shews us, by the fable of the nut-tree, that the more it is beaten
the more plentiful the fruit.: But men must not postpone things to the de-
cline of their lives, in expectation that the fruit will fall of itself. Therefore
seek vou a friend, and master early and in time; for he will, in both
capacities, satisfy your purpose: always considering, that as it would be
ungenerous in him to deny his help when afked, so it would be worse in
you to refuse it when offered ; if you think, that for this reason you are
under an obligation to instruct others--Do as you would be done by.
He who finds the true friend in the good master, ought to think him an
invaluable treasure : such a one should have returns in the highest marks
of gratitude, which the least unthankfulness must not sully; disdain not to
impart to him your difficulties ; for though in other respects he may be
your inferior, yet such inferiority can never reproach you.
But above all things, be not presumptuous ; because such a weakness
crushies our attempts, and at last leaves us in ignorance. The philosopher
spoke great truth, in saying, e That many would have attained sciences,
Contrarily, you
had they not thought that they possessed them already.
must not be dismayed at rising difficulties; for others have arrived at the
art under greater: their sure paths we tread, their by-ways we avoid ;
which is certainly a fhiort means of getting more knowledge in less time :
in which I wish these my following labours may be some help and
furtherance.







Emblematic Table of the Art of PAINTING.
PAINTING, in a grand apartment, as a beautiful virgin in her prime,

of a majestic, modest and attentive countenance, sits on a square
black piece of marble, adorned with geometric and optical diagrams: her
hair chesnut, and on her head a golden diadem: her dress consists of a
blue breast-ornament, red gown, white under-coat, and a black girdle
embroidered with silver.
Nature, with her five breasts, stands before her, which she represents
with the pencil in her perfection.
Theory is naked, being only girt with a blue scarf, and stands on the
right side of Painting, whose locks she lifts up with her left hand, and, whis-
pering in her ear, points to a picture with her right hand : on her head a
pair of compasses, with the points upwards.
On the left side of Painting is Practice, in the form of a sedate matron,
kneeling on one knee: she holds in her left hand a line and peneil, and
compasses with the points downwards, and with her right derects the
hand of Painting to the picture : her head dress, yellowish white, and her
garment, darkish yellow, with the right sleeve turned up to the elbow: her
upper-garment, of dark green inclining to black, lies by her on the floor.
Behind Painting stands Judgment, somewhat exalted, lighting her with
a large torch: he is adorned with a purple garment, powdered with golden
stars, and lined with gold stuff : by his side an egale.
Above him is lris, sitting on a cloud, and resting her left arm on the
rainbow, the extremety of which reflects on Painting s pallets: her garment
is white, and head-dress blue.
To the left of the apartment is Anteros, seen lifting up a daik curtain
from behind which through a window some rays of the sun dart on Nature,
he is crowned with laurel ; has a small bloodish-red garment, and holds a
torch: before him lies a palm-branch.
At the further end of the apartment, rising a stephigher we see through
a large gateway, into another :on the sides of this gateway, stand in niches,
History on the right, and Poesy on the left: over the gate is a white
marble bust of Pallas, resting on a pedestel, on which is carved a sphinx.
This latter apartment is hung with dark-grey stuff, and set out with pic-
tures in round frames, of history, architecture, landscape, portraiture, seas,
cattle, flowers, fruits, still life, &c.







EXPLANATION.
At the end is Fame, seen flying through a large open window, sounding
her trumpet. And,-In the Off-scape is raised a pyramid.
EXPLANATION.
PAINTING is here represented as a beautiful virgin in her prime, of
a majestic, modest and attentive countenance ; because at thoie years
the mind exerts its greatest vigour and perseverance, and lets nothing es-
cape unheeded. She sits on a square black piece of marble ; because that
colour is unchangeable and naturally asfistant to the others; and the geo¬
metric and optical diagrams on it, point out her building on the infallible
mathematics. Her Hair is chesnut, because that colour is the most lasting
and best befits these years: her head-attire is a golden diadem, alluding to
yelloW, one of the three capital colours. Her breast-ornament and gown
are red and blue signifying the two other capital colours, which by their
sweet mixture, and expression of light and shade by the girdle, charm and
enterta in the eye.
Accomplished Nature, with her naked secrets, is the object of her imi-
tation, by consulting Theory ; who, naked, is partly girt with a blue scarf,
as shewing, by her continual contemplation, that she possesses something
divine, and a perfect knowledge of all things visible.
She stands to the right of Painting, and lifting up her locks, inspires her
with such exalted thoughts as bring the art to perfection, and fit it for great
things: prompting her further, with the right-hand figure on the picture,
to the depth of the sciences. The pair of compasses on her head shew her
continual round of thoughts, in contemplating divine secrets.
Practice holds in her left-hand a line pencil and compasses with the point
downwards ; signifying the constant service she offers to Painting. Her
sedate ness shews that she is seldom found but in age : with her right-hand she
directs that of Painting to the picture, thereby to animate her to continual
practice. Her yellowish-white head-dress and darkisn yellow garment fig-
nify, that through age and close application to the art, she little heeds out-
wards attire, and therefore neglects to shift her dress-her right sleeve turn-
ed up shews her readiness for business. Her dark green upper garment
on the floor tells us that she brings all things to-light out of the obscurity
of nature.. The tools in her left-hand are the necessaries for painting. The
open compasses pointing downwards shew, that she measures terrestrial
things.
Judgment ready to bring painting to perfection, enlightens her with the
rays of his divine sxill; represented by the torch, as a burning light, by
which




which the ancients expressed divinity. His purple garment lined with gold.
stuff, and powdered with stars, signifies the heavenly influences, constantly
keeping their due course and order. The eagle by his side, tells us that
he is Jupiter’s bird, and soars highest and bears thunder-bolts.
Tris on a cloud and her arm on the rainbow : the various colours thereof
reffect on Painting’s pallet recommends to her a careful and artful’ temper-
ing and use of the various, yet gradually unites colours. Her white garment,
and blue head-dress shew, that she ought to execute neatly her heavenly
conceptions.
Anteros, standing to the left of the apartment, and lifting up a dark
curtain, with a palin-branch at his feet, denotes, as brother to Cupid, love
for the art. The poets feign of this palm branch, that he, being long at
variance with his brother, at last got it out of his hands. His opening
the dark curtain shews, that love for the art dispels darkness and confufion;
so that the rays of the light illuminating Nature renders her more agree-
zeal for the art; which, being arrived at perfection, merits an everlasting
laurel.
History and Poesy standing in niches on each side of the gate, tell us.
that they are the principal aids to l’ainting, supplying her with rich thoughts
and proper materials for practice and ornament.
The bust of Pallas represents the goddess of wisdom, the promoter of-
art and the white marble the purity of her knowledge.
The sphinx on the pedestal shews that as this wise monster is feigned
to devour those who could not solve his riddles; so the art suffers those
to die in ignorance, who do not penetrate her secrets.
The further apartment is hung with dark-grey stuff, the better to fling.
off the composition.
The pictures with figures, architecture, landscape,&c.are the performances.
of the art. Their hanging in round frames raises our attention, as well for
their nice disposition as the contrast thay cause in the architecture; their
placing with respect to the subjects, is also very agreeable; and their round-
ness implies moreover infinity and that the names of the professors of pain-
ting, in their respective choices, are born with immortal praises and ho-
nours on the wings of loud fame ; which is to crown them in after-ages.
The pyramid in the off-scape is raised, according to the custom of the an¬
cients, to the eternal memory of excellent and great men ; with this inscirp-
tion,Aterna memoriæe sacras-Sacred to eternal memory.






CATALOGUE
A
OF THE
PAINTERS and other A RT IST S
Mentioned in this NORK.
Polydore
Correggio
Cademy, Fr.
Lairesse, Sen.
Poussin
Da Cortona, Beret.
A Albani
Pynakker
Dominichino
Lastman
Apelles
Lely
Dou, Gerard’
Raphael
Bakker, old and
Rembrant
Durer, Albert
young
Lievens John-
Van Dyk
Van Loo
Rottenhamer
Bamboccio-
Everdingen.
Mantegna
Bambocciades.
Matsys, Quintin
Ruysdaal
La Fage
Barocci
Metzu
Da Fiori.
Savry, Rowland.
Bart holet
F. Segers.
Du Gardin, Char.
Michael Angelo.
Berchem
Mieris-
Genouille
Spagnolet
Bloemart
Georgione
Mignard
Testa
Bol, Hans
Goltzius
Mola, Francisco
Tintoret
Bril
Moller
Guido
Titian
Brouwer
De Heem
Moucheron
Del Vagâ, Pierino
Breugel
Van der Neer
Verelst
Hemskirk, Mar.
Le Brun
Netscher
Jordaan
Vermander, Ch.
Caracci
Ostade
Veronese
Julio Romano
Caravaggio, Poly.
Vouet
Penni Gio, Fran.
Carlot
STATUARI E
S.
Jews
Michael Angelo
Prometheus
Afsyrians and Chal-
Keyzer
Phidias
Quellin
deans
Praxiteles.
Quënoy
Leysippus.
Bernini
Daedalus
EN.


EN GRAVERS.
Edelinck
Audran
Natalis
Le Potre
Berry
Goltzius
Perelle
Schoonebeck
Marc, Antonio
Perrier,
Seth’s Children
42
Bloteling
Van der Meulen
Pietro Santi
Visscher, Senior
Boulanger
ARCHITECTS ;
Egyptians
Greeks :
Romans
Serlio
Babylonians
De l’Orme
Santoritio-
Vignola
Cadmus
Palladio
Scamozzi
Vitruvius
Cataneo
cd en
c  d sede b des ORsORRORSOS
Ot
O Go d So sd oRdy de
2
Eg GOSGGGBSOG G Gee De PeGOT66Oy
7-
ACAT ALOGU E
OF THE
A U T H O R 8 guoted in this WOR K.
Damantius
Aristides
Cato
Dionysius, Areop.
Catullus
Aristophanes
Dionysius, Halie.
A Asopus
Censorinus
Aristotle
Dorotheus.
Alcinous
De la Chambre
Asconius
Eliezer, Rabbi
Alex. ab Alexandro
Chrysippus
Ambrosius
Epicharmus
Athanasius
Cicero
Athenaus
Claudianus
Eucherius
Augustinus
Claudius Saturni.
Euripides
Anacreon
Basilius
Coeverruvias, Di.
Bede
Antisthenes
Euscherus
Eusebius
Aphrodisius Alex.
Bidloo
Concilium, Nicae.
Cnjacius, Jacobus
Blondus
Apollodorus
Euthymits
Curtius, Quintus
Boccatius
Fabius Pictor
Apollonius Tyan.
Cyrillus
Bossé
Appianus
Festus, Pompeius
Democritus
Flavius
Le Brun
Appion
Demophoon
Florus
Caesar, Julius
Apsinis
Demosthenes
Callimachus
Fritschius
Apuleius
Carpzovius
Diodorus, Siculus
Frontinus,
Archias
Julius
Dion
Cartari, Vincent
Galtruchius
Ariosto
Gellius,
Googl
Dic


A LIST OF AUTHORS, &c.
Philostratus
Gellius, Aulus
Suidas
Lactantius
Goeree
Phurnutus
Leon
Tacitus
Pindarus
Grammaticus, J.
Linschot
Taffo, Torquat.
Plato
Gregorius, Nazi.
Terence
Lipsius
Pliny
Groenewegen
Longinus
Tertullian
Plutarch
Lucianus
Grotius, Hugo
Theagenes
Lycurgus
Polemon
Huigens
Theophilus
Hyginus
Macer Bebius
Pollux, Julius
Thucydides
N
Tibullus
Macrobius
Polybius
Heliodorus
Herodotus
Timaeus
Porphyrius
Martial
Proclus
Merian
Hefiod
Titus Livius
Propertius
Muretus, Anton.
Valerius Maxi.
Hesy chius
Varro
Pythagoras
Hieronymus
(
Vasquius,
F Niceron
Hirtius
Quintilianus
Ferdi.
Vegetius
Nigidius
Ripa, Cae’sar
Homer
Veranius
Olaus Magnus
Fran
De Salgado,
Hoost
Origenes
Vermander
Horace
Scholasticus
Orosius, Paulus
Hortentius
Vincentr-is
Virgil
Seneca
Orpheus
Jamblichus
Servius
Ovid
Da Vinci,
Josephus
Sextus
Papinius
Vitruvius
Hispa.
Isidorus,
Vondel
Pausanias
Silins Italicus
Ifocrates
Persius
Socrates
Xenophon
Junius
Petronius
Solinus
Zenodotus
Justinus
Pherecydes
Solon
Zoroaster
Juvenal
Qucronius
Labeo, Cornelius





























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































TH E
art of painting.
BOOK 1.
Of PENCILING, SECONDTINt, and BEAUTY.






CHAP. I. Of Handling the Pencil.


THE handling the peneil is two-fold, and the two manners very


different from each other; the one sluent and smooth, the other expe-



ditious and bold; the former is proper for copying neat and elaborate


painting, and the latter for copying bold compositions, as big as the



 life: but he who practises the former manner, has this advantage
above the other, that being accustomed to neatness, he can easily execute the
bold and light manner, it being otherwise difficult to bring the hand to neat paint-
ing; the reason of which is, that, not being used to consider and imitate the full¬
neis of small objects, he must therefore be a stranger to it; besides, it is more
easy to leave out some things which we are masters of, than to add others which
we have not studied, and therefore it must be the artist’s care to finisn his work
as much as poffible.
It is ridiculous to hear the disciples of great masters boast, that, by copying
great things, they certainly obtain a great and firm manner, and a fat and bold
bencil; and therefore are induced to disrelish every thing that is neat and elaborate ;
but, after all they, can say, it is certain, that he who can handle best, must study
that manner which most exactly exhibits the different natures of the objects which
he is to reprefent ; for there are no other handlings of advantage to a painter, than
the two before-mentioned.
But further, to convince any one, that a great and bold handling contributes
nothing to the art, let us place a piece thus painted, at a due distance, and then
see whether the penciling makes it look more natural : this advantage it may









perhaps have, it may bring in more money, since so happy a master can dispatch
double the work of another, through the bent of imagination fitted to the
expedition of his hand. Each branch has a peculiar handling adapted to the nature
of the objects to be represented ; as, the landscape-painter, in the leafing of the
trees ; the cattle-painter, in the expression of wool and hair; the ornament-painter,
in foliage, branching, &c. and the flower-painter, in’thin penciling.
Painters are also observed to use, some, long-haired, others short-haired pencils;
this thin, that stiff, colours; but, notwithstanding any such differences, all is
reduceable to the two handlings aforesaid; yet in such manner, as that neither of
them ought to appear but for the advantage of the artist only, the art being a
theory of the mind, and the handling, a manual practice, consisting of penciling
in an orderly and determinate matter, for representing an object certainly and
quickly, and without muddling.
Many are of opinion, that this is a gift of nature peculiar to some only; and thov
I cannot entirely disown it, yet must say, that it lies more in practice : and though
we see many painters, in the decline of their lives, fall into an hard and muddy
manner, yet that argues not against my position, since it happens either through
inclination, or want of better foundation in their Youth.
How often do we see masters known by their disciples, Little and slovenly masters
never bring up neat and curious painters, though it sometimes happens, that a
neat master may rear a slovenly disciple. And the reason is plain; for good
instruction is not aloné sufficient, without a due and perfect apprehension of it;
carelessness being the usual parent of a bad picture; and so infecting an evil will
continue, as long as the artist remains in his ignorance.
It is certain tnen, in order to obtain a good handling, that a right and early
apprehension of instruction, and thorough sight of faults, are absolutely necessary :
when these points are gained, the artist must endeavour at the three following
essential qualifications
I. Boldness of hand, in the dead-colouring.
2. More care, cireumspection and labour in the second colouring, and,
3. Thorough patience and attention in the re-touching or finisning a picture;
the nigher to perfection, the more care.
These three qualities are as essential to a painter, as the three Graces to V'enus.
Our first work then must be, to lay both lights and shades bold with a broad and
full-coloured pencil, one by the other, even and without muddling; and then,
gently moving the pencil to and fro, up and down, as the nature of the object re-
quires, we thereby unite the colours, and fetch out the relief : with this caution never-
theless, that the lights must not be scumbled too much into the shades, or the
shades into the lights. Thus the work will have a good effect.
By proceeding in this manner, we shall perceive no very particular handling
in our work, and therefore it must be a good one; for the first colouring is hid
by the second, as that is by the third, wherein lies the neatness.
Having hitherto spoken chiesly of painting in little, and its manner of handling,
I shall, in the next chapter, lay down Instructions for painting as big as the life.




Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty.

CHAP. II. Of Painting after the Lije.
HE who paints after the life, and finds it difficult, through years and inabi-
Hlity, to make a good compofition, must not undertake things beyond his
strength; if ten figures be too much, let him take five; if these be too many,
two or one, nay, an half figure ; for little and good is preferable to much and
bad. Again, if he have no genius for draperies, let him study the naked, as
Spagnolet, Carbot, and other masters did; but then, like them, he must labour to
excel in that branch; for a middling artist will neither get honour nor gain.
Here let me advise you.
1. To gain a thorough knowledge of form or proportion, and the passions, that
you may not only give your figures their natural motions, but that it may also well
appear what causes those motions.
2. Express properly the condition and dignity of your figures by their carriage;
whether they be private persons of either sex, great men, or deities.
3. Seck the colouring, not in Spagnolet or Carlot, but in Nature herself; let your
carnations be as natural as pessible ; the fresn and fair you must paint so; and the
yellow or russet must be of those colours.
But, above all, industriously avoid inclining to a particular manner ; do not main-
tain that warm, glowing, or brown colouring is best; (a bat is, in his kind, aa
beautiful as a parrot) for then-you will certainly err; and, since men are too apt
to hug their faults, your care must be, to be known by a good manner and
handling.
Now, for our artist’s safer conduct, we shall lay down the following precepts
for the right ordonnance of a piece.
1. Let him chiesly consider, where the piece is to be fixed, in order to. place
right the horizon, and point of sight.
2. Let him consider, what force the light has in that place, and thereby, whether
the painting must have strong lights and broad shades, as being near a windor; or,
more faint and melting light, as removed further into the room. This we may soon per-
ceive in a landscape, or other within-door painting, and whether the shades should
be strong, or not; since it is certain, that the objects, whether great or small,
have different effects in these two instanees. And now, if the perspective be also well
managed, and the colours laid frefh and proper, and well handled, by gently uniting them uith
large pencils, the piece will be good.
If this handling and melting of colours be not yet understood, Ishall clear the
point in the following instance : Take what colours your object requires, be they
red, blue, green, violet, &c. lay them broad and distinct by each other, without
scumbling; then, viewing them through a piece of lantern-horn, you will perceive
à perfect umnion of colours, and that none of them lie distinct, though, in fact, they do.
This fully illustrates what I say of a fluent or smooth pencil; Now the effect is
the same when we paint in varniss, or tough or fat oil ; because painting with
starved colours, on a dry ground, can never effect this smoothness.









In painting after the life, we ought to use large pencils; and though to some,
this may seem an useless admonition, because great paintings require such, yet I
must recommend it, because some use common-sized and worn ones, which so
muddle the work, and fill it so full of hairs, that it will bear scraping. This
evil is so stealing, that at last it becomes habitual, and then the painter neither
minds or sees it himself.
Because there are two forts of pictures; the one moveable, the other fixed; the
former hung at pleasure in halls or rooms, the latter for ceilings, or far above
the eye, each of them calls for a distinct management. Niches in galleries, as near
the eye; must be ranged in the clafs of moveable pictures, as well as portraits ;
wherefore they ought to be neater handled, though sometimes placed higher, at
other times lower.
If it be afked, whether an upright piece, forty or fifty feet deep from floor to-
cieling, ought to be smoothly handled, and finished throughout : I say, No;
but rather to be so painted, as high as you can reach ; less finished in the middle,
and less than that as it advances in height; and yet with such general care, that
all parts seem to have à like force and finishing. And though we find a different con-
duct in Jordaan’s magnificent triumphal piece in the House in the Wood, near
the Hague, yet that can be no rule ; because the painting being large, the eye
cannot distinguissi, whether the upper parts be less finished than the under; more-
over the figures are bigger than the life.
But here, methinks, a difficulty may be started : Suppose, in a room where
such a large piece is, another were to be painted by it smaller; (as a single figure
no bigger than the life) how shall we manage, in order to give this latter picture
the same force as the former; l answer, That force and warmth lie in the colouring,
not in the roughness of a picture ; whence it is, that the small picture must be handled in.
the same manner as the great one, to make them look agreeable ; for heightening
and shading it with the same force, will produce the same effect : And if not im-
mediately by the pure strength of colours, yet by scumbling and glazing we fetch
it out. But then, say some, it cannot have a due conformity with the life; be-
cause, on comparing it with the large picture, it seems less than the life: I
answer, That this objection must not make us exceed the common size of nature,
since no such large men, as in the great picture, are to be found in nature; and
if any such were, their parts would look too big, their skins rougher, pores
coarser, hair more bushy and strong, &c. than we see in nature: But the con-
trary may be practised in a cieling-piece, where the composition is mostly hiero-
glyphic and fictitious.
I proceed now to shew more amply a good manner or handling.







CHAP. II. Of Dead-colouring; and how to perform it with Cer-
tainty and Expedition.
THE most certain and regular way is, to begin the picture from the depth
or bointain, (especially when a landscape is introduced) fince all things muft
suit and fall in with the lights and darks of the air, and the several tints of the piece be modi-
fied and governed by it; as indeed must also the light on the fore-ground, and the force of the
figures; otherwise the effect will be disagreeable and uncertain.
But if the main composition consist of figures, or other large objects only, it is
better to begin where you intend the greatest force, whether it be on the first or second
distance, and then work to the off-part of the picture.
Now, in order to proceed with certainty, we must take care that general harmony
of parts be well observed; that the tints and colours be justly managed, according
to the laws of depth and distance, so that nothing appear offensive to the eye ;
and then the work will be in a fit condition for second colouring, with little
trouble.
Many painters indeed err, in not knowing where to begin rightly, and, only
consulting what objects they like best, heedlessly fall on them first : For instance,
if it be a gold vase, they begin with that, and then proceed to a blue drapery,
then a red one, &c. Others begn with the nudities, and so run through all the
nakeds in the picture ; by which strange disjunction the work becomes mis-shapen,
and the painter made more uneasy, than by an ill-primed cloth.
But such painters never think on any means to extricate themselves out of this
labyrinth: To what purpose is it to shew them their error, They are satisfied
with what they have done; and salve all by saying-- The picture is but dead-coloured;
on finishing it shall be otherwise; what is now too light shall be brought down, and what too
dark heightened. — But all this while, the work does not go forward ; the rising
difficulties pall the fancy, and the work is in a bad condition for second colouring.
CH AP. IV. Of the second Colouring, and its Requisites.
r Fa piece be well dead-coloured, and have a’good harmony and decorum, we
certainly render the second colouring the more easy; for then we can unbend our
first general thoughts, and apply them solely to lay neatly and finisn particular
parts, and so to work on the former good ground. But, to do this in the best
manner, we must, as I have said, begin from the greatest lointain, the sey, and work
forwards from thence : By this means we have always a wet ground to melt in with the
out-lines of the forward figures, which otherwise they would not have ; besides
another pleasing advantage, that the piece goes forward, all parts well supported,
and a good harmony in the whole : Whence the eye must be satisfied, and the
mind continually spurred. This management is one of the prime qualities of a
Painter ; for what can encourage him more, than an asfurance that he works on 2







sure basis, and which he finds without seeking it) But unhappy is he who works
disorderly ; for muddling on one thing as long as his fancy for it lasts, and then
thoughtlesly proceeding to others, and dwelling on them in the same manner, he
misses the necessary, becoming air of his piece; and, at last, all appears out of
joint, and disrelishing.
Having come thus far, we proceed to the manner.
The French call it
CHAP. V. Of Retouching, or Finisbing.
Retoucher; we, Revise.
HOW fure a Painter is, having got thus far; let experience and his own
reflection be judges ; for the figures having their proper distances, strengths

and effects, and all parts due harmony and keeping, nothing remains but to give
the piece the last force of light and shade.
To do which well, rub your piece (or so much as you think you can paint of it
at one time, and before the vernisn grow dry) with a good thin picture-varnissi,
mixed with some fat white oil ; then work on this wet ground, by clapping your
lights on the lightest parts, and, by a gentle scumble, unite them with the wet
ground aforesaid, and the tenderness of the nudities and draperies, in such degree,
as is necessary for each; then put in the yellow, or glow of the reflections. If,
after all, the lights of the nudities should be here and there too strong, reduce
them, by mixing a little light oker, vermilion, brown red, lake, or asphaltum
(according as the colour is tender or strong) underthe vernisn, glazed thinly over
them; then heighten upon this with such a colour as you think fit : Do the same
by the draperies. Thus the work will succeed, and the colours be prevented
from going in, in drying.
CHAP. VI. Of the second Tint, and the Relief it occastons.
THERE are many who, whatever pains they take, cannot be brought to
They, who have
relisn a thing, in which they find so much difficulty.

long practised after nature, are vexed to see the works of other masters better
coloured, and more pleasing than their own : Insomuch that, with difficulty,
they re-assume their professions, and then, eagerly hoping to do wonders, find
their old vexation still return.
Would these men rightly search the cause, their trouble would end; for,
because of our inferiority in knowledge, yet we must not be therefore discouraged;
but (as I faid) study where the fault lies. Let us then make good reflections on
neat pictures, in order to profit by them; and also converse with better masters
than ourselves.






Of Penciling, Second Tint, and Beauty.
It is to be lamented, that these men sometimes see fine things in another master,
but can give no reason for it, because they work rather by accident, or chance,
than on sure principles : As was the case of a young Painter some years ago, who,
shewing me some of his pieces, said,This piece I painted six years ago, this four,
and that less; yet can perceive no difference between them in goodness:--Now, though
the difference was visible, the last pieces appearing better managed, in all parts,
than the former, yet he would not believe me; saying, That, notwithstanding all
his endeavours, his pictures were grey and muddy, when others were clean and plea-
sant, and their lights broad :-l lay on my colours, says he, fine and warm as they do,
and then expeditiousty scumble them into each other; now, pray tell me, what must tken occa-
sion this foulness? I told him—Certain Painters, with whom you daily converse,
spoil you; and, as long as you follow them, all my advice is to no purpose : As for your
thoughts and ordonnances, I like them very well, but distike your handling; you do not lay
on your second tint clean enough; (by the second tint, I mean that which is laid on the
light parts, towards the out-line, by means of which, all relieved or round parts
are forced to unite with the ground, and to go off rounding) this you must lay on
clean and beautiful, in the same colour as that of the light; but it must not be muddy,
and like shade ; for being also lighted by the day, the darkness, and its grey, can
have no effect upon it; relief, or roundness, being nothing else than a light re-
ceding, or going off, which ought to partake more or less of blue, in proportion to
the colour of the Carnation; which, if yellowish, the second tint must be greenish;
if red, the tint must be violet; and if a white colour, the tint is a medium be¬
tween the two colours aforesaid. From all which premises it is easy to apprehend,
that this second colour is to be got and mixed with blue; but not with a foul colour,
because it then loses its flehhiness.-Here he asked me, In what manner then he
should make it darker; l answered, that, as the distance of objects causes faint-
ness in colouring, and what we call air makes a bluissi interposition between us and
them, so he must mix nothing with his tint, but fine blue, or smalt, in proportion
to such distance : This is a colour, if I may so say, which gives no colour, or
does it without much alteration. This conduct relates not only to nudities, but
also to landscapes, grounds, stones, draperies, and, in fine, to every object, having either
roundness or distance. Moreover, another perfection, necessary to this tint, is,
that we must not let it be too dark upon the relief; because a broad light looks majestic
and fine, when, between it and the broad shade, a tender difference only appears.
—He returned me thanks, and I went off.
There are many who know not the importance of the things they slight, and, in
comparison with others, think them of no great moment. As was the case of an-
other Painter, who, copying a piece of Poussin, observed nicely the colouring,
tempering even the half shades and tender tints exactly on his pallet; but,
having finished the piece, he, in other pictures, fell again into his old road: He
himself saw very well a greât difference between this piece and those others, and
was sorry for it. But the mischief lay in not retaining the manner which he had
before imitated with so much pains; and this occasioned his slightness.
We find even Painters who believe that the second tint must, upon extremities,
be quite dark, mixing in it the colour of the ground; and say, the great Mignard












did so ; which I intirely deny : It is true, that once I read a small treatise, written
by the famous Bosse, entitled, Le Peintre Converti, or, The Converted Painter; in
which, among other things, he pretends to prove, that Mignard made his second
tint too dark, on the extremities of his objects: But 1 say, that it must not be
understood from thence, that he muddled the tint with a fouler ground-colour; but
rather, that, in proportion to the lightness or darkness of the ground, he made it
either lighter or darker, without using any red, yellow, or black in it, as they
pretend. Moreover, we know the vast difference between a foreright face, and a
fore-shortened one; that the one on the near side grows larger than the other ; as
the faces in plate I. plainly shew: Which, by observing or neglecting, gives the
The greatest difficulty some Painters meet with, is, that one of the qualities of
a good picture lies in a broad light; this they imagine to consist in a slatness, rea-
soning thus: lfit be truth that a picture, with such lights, is best, more round
ones must needs be worse. A very loose argument certainly l Since nature and
daily experience of round objects teach us the contrary, especially when it is not
sun-shiny weather.
Ihave said before, that the contour or out-line ought to unite in the tints of the
ground, that, going off from the more enlightened parts, it may not appear so much
as the others : To illustrate which, we exhibit here in plate 1. aforesaid, a round
pillar A. against a ground, half light, half shade; so that the light side of the
pillar is set off by the shade of the ground, and the shade of the pillar by the light
side of the ground. Now, it must needs follow, in order to obtain the relief,
that the shade of the pillar ought to be made lighter on the extremity, that it may
round off towards the light ground ; otherwise it would be but a semi-circle. On
the opposite side it is the same, except that the light does preserve itself, and its
own colour; because the air, which interposes, causes the out-line to recede and

fall back ; and in the shade the same, with this differerce only, that there it is
doubled by the lightness of the back-ground, partaking more or less of its colour.

If this be not well apprehended, let the next example explain it: Place
globular body against a light yellow ground, as in the said plate; then, viewing
it at some distance, you will perceive the out-line on the shaded side, tenderly to
melt into the ground, without any hardness. This relates to the roundness only.
Now let us observe, how much the colour partakes of it: lf this ball be of

blue colour, the extremities will be greenish against the yellow; if the ball be
violet, they become purplisn; and if the ball be yellow, as well as the ground,
they will be more yellow in the shade, as we have already taught in treating of
the naked. The superficial roughness or smoothness of the ball causes little alte-
ratior, except with respect to its nearness to, or distance from, the ground.
Looking now on the light side of this ball, we shall find, that if the ball be
lighter than the yellow ground, the colour of the ground cannot have so much
force on it; since the superficial colour of the ball cannot be overcome by a lesser
colour than it, and therefore the yellow ground cannot add to its colour; whence
it happens, that the meer interposition of the air causes the relief, or the out-line to
round and go off.


















































































































































































Again, were the ground darkish or black, yet, the diminishing of the colour,
caused by the interposition of the air, will be neither less nor more, but will be more
or less set off by the ground, and seem lefs round.
Artists err in thinking, that the half tint, which is laid next to the extremity
on the light side, and called mezzo-tint, is the same with that placed between
light and shade, under the name of middle tint; for this last is a whole tint, and
the other but an half tint, and not so broad as the mezzo-tint, which more than
half mixes with the shade, and consequently is bluer; although some give it upon
the edge of the light side another colour, more like shade than the colour of the
object. The mistake of which we have already shewn.
But when the light is fronting (or comes directly from before) then this
mezzo-tint is half mixed with the middle tint. Let me not here be misunder-
stood; for I speak not of the side-light, which painters generally use.
From all which premises it is plain, that this tint, though called mezzo-tint,
or broken tint, cannot be considered as shade, since it partakes of the light.
Again, it happens frequently, that, in the same piece of painting, some objects
are rounder or darker upon the extremities than others : which ought to be so,
when, by means of the obliquity of the point of sight, we can discover more than
the semi-diameter, of their roundness in some, and but a semi-diameter or less, in
others ; as in the two pillars in the plate aforesaid: for if the point of sight be
in the midale of the piece, and the light fall in it obliquely from the right side,
then the objects on the right side will have a broader shade, and those on the left
a broader light; as these two pillars plainly evidence.
But if now, on each side of these two pillars, were some other pillars placed
alike distant from the point of sight, and both cut from top to bottom through
their centers, parallel with the horizon, it is certain, that, at the proper distance,
we shall see, not only the inward splitting, but also some part of the hindermost
half, as in pillar A. Now observe (as the pillar to the left shews ) that the part
which is seen beyond the half on the light side, rounds off so much the further,
and consequently becomes darker than where the main light rounds off; on
the contrary, viewing the light side of the right-hand pillar, you see as much less
of the foremost diameter, or half, as more of that on the shaded side; wherefore
the out-line cannot round off so far on its light side, nor the extremity be so
dark, as on the other pillar, where more than the half is visible.
CH AP. VII. Of Beauty; and the Proportions of the Members in
au human Body.
BEAUTY being the most valuable part of painting, it must therefore be
 the first and chief object of our work; but my design is not to mention all
that can be said of its power and influence, since daily occurrences furnish us
with sufficient examples.
The wisest of the ancients venerated it, as we see in Plato, who defines it to







be, an human brightness of a lovely nature, having power to attract the mind, by the help
of the eyes. Nay, Cato valued it so highly, that he publicly said, it were as great a
sin io hurt it, as to rob aTemple.
Nevertheless it must be confest, that it lies most in an Idea conceived in our senses
and judgment ; whence it is impossible to think, that it should center in any one
single object: the most we can say then is this, that there are as many beauties as
different objects: the proverb says well,— So many minds, so many beauties. Paris
imagined, according to Homer, that Helena, wife to Menelaus, was the handsomest
woman. Apollo boasted the same of his Daphne: Narcissus, on the contrary, thought
no-body handsomer than himself. Stratonica, amongst the Persians, was accounted
the greatest beauty, and her statue worshipped. The neck and breast of the
Athenian Theodota were so amiable in Socrates’s eyes, that he fell in love with her.
Many more instances might be given; but seeing its standard is no where fixed
in order to know it certainly, we can only observe, that each country, each lover,
thinks it has the greatest. The Grecians think the brown complexion the most
agreeable ; the Latins, the fair; Spaniards think black hair, and the Germans,
brown hair, the most pleasing: this loves tall and well-set people ; that esteems
slenderness; this, a modest carriage; that, a wanton one. From all which
premises it is plain, beauty depends most on Imagination.
Beauty is three-fold. 1. Common. 2. Uncommon. 3. Perfect.
The Common, depends much on the fafhiion, and satisfies common sense.
The Uncommon, is singled out by our judgments from amongst many others.
And,
The Perfect is that, as we have said, which subsists in the imagination.
But we must neverthelefs six on some standard, or model, for beauty; which
therefore we have drawn, to the best of our skill, out of the many patterns left
us by the Greeks.
The beauty of a nudity in either sex, consists herein.
1. The members must be well shaped.
2. They must have a fine, free, and easy motion.
3. A sound and fresh colour.
1. The members must be perfectiy joined, in a manner best befitting their natures
and qualities ; the head and face duely proportionate; and the eyes, nose, and
mouth to have their exact symmetry ; the hands, fingers, feet and toes, and other
parts of the body, to be of an agreeable length and thickness.
2. By easy motion we mean, that all the members, from the greatest to the least,
exert themselves most beautifully, and without pains, performing their action in a
graceful manner; as we shall illustrate by examples.
3. By colour, we understand, such an one as is visible in perfect healthy per-
sons, not subject to impairs, and not inclining too much to rednefs or palenefs;
as we shall shew in its place.
These are the three qualities requisite to a beautiful naked, and named by the
poets the three Graces ; affirming, that they were all to be found in Venus Urania.
Now, in order to instruct the artist fully in the beautiful division of the mem-
bers, I shall here subjoin the measure, as l took it from aman’s skeleton, when,






























































































































































































































































































































































for Profefsor Birloo, physician to the king of Great Britain, I, according to his
instructions, drew the figures for his famous book of anatomy-
For ease in this measure, I have placed by it in Plates II. III. IV. V. a perpen¬
dicular line, marked with Sol and Luna, which is the length of the figure ; and is
divided into four equal parts, called rough Parts, marked A BCD, for the quar-
terly division of the figures from the head to the arm-pits, privities, knees, and
soles of the feet. This line is divided again into seven equal parts and an half,
called Head-parts, and numbered, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, : The sirst of which
is for the head ; which is again subdivided into four other equal parts, marked
a b C d, for the forehead, eyes, nose and chin : And, by these last divisions, we
shall afcertain the several parts of the figure ; ascending from the mark Luna to
Sol. According to which the length will be










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































And now I question not, but he, who governs his figures by these proportions,
will find his advantage in it; especially if he observes the gracefulneis of the
statues.
For instruction in the second part of beauty, the graceful motion of the members,
let the Tyro consult the figures in Plate VI. wherein he will find the principal
disposition for beautiful action, consisting in raising and sinking the shoulders and
hips, and their contrasting motions ; as also those of the lesser members in the same
posture ; from whence arises not only the grace of beautiful figures, but also
advantageous shades ; which give the last hand to grace.
This instruction is of so universal importance, that it ought to be observed as
well in dead as living nature; in paffionate, as meek men; raging, as quiet; sor-
rowful, as joyful; those in pains or dying, as in a dead body: nay, itis impossible,
that any particular motion or posture of the body can be good, which is not na-
turally exprest, and conducted by the three following qualities. 1. A fine out-
line. 2. A free sway in the motion. Lastly, A beautiful colouring: for, to
colour a living figure as, a dead one, or the contrary, a raging one, pale ; a quiet
one, hot; or a mourning one, in a merry air, would be egregious, and against
the truth; and all lies being hateful, must be unworthy of painting.
If I seem unintelligible in saying, that sine action and colouriug ought to be observed
in a dead body, void of boih; it must be known, that 1 speak of a painted dead
body, not a natural one; because this letter has neither the power of motion,
nor disposition: however, when required, we must dispose the model for our dead
figure in such manner as looks most beautiful; the face in front; the breast
swaying fideways; one hip rising; one leg close, the other flung out; one arm
flung this way, the other that way, and so forth: this is called a fine action and
the whole, a beautiful figure.
As for the colouring, it must not be like wood or stone, but flessy, as we see
in nature
it
If any object, that, because there are three principal stages of life; vouth, middle
dge, and old age each having its particular action, colouring and proportions it is difficult
to chuse perfect beauty out of any of them; l answer, that all three ought to be
représented alike beautisul, according to their natures; the young, tender, gay and frefh;
the midale-aged, sedate and fleshy ; and the aged, slow-motioned and decayed : for not-
withstanding age, each of the three has his commendable qualities-that is an
handsome youth--there is a comely man--mind the gravity of that old man
a
-and so forth. But I pray consult Perrie’s statues, and carefully mind the youth
of Ganimedes ; let Antinous, or Apollo, represent the second stage of life; and the old
Faunus, the third; and you will thereby see, that each of those figures is, in his
character, perfectly beautiful ; to which add, their fine colouring, agreeable to
their years : all of which confirm my affertion, and the figure must be beau-
tiful.
Although now a beautiful figure consists in a good proportion and disposition of
its parts, with respect to action and passion, yet it cannot be said to be absolutely
perfect ’till further improved by beautiful lights; for we often see, that too faint lights
render objects disagreeable, and produce an effect contrary to our intention;
which






which makes us uneasy, because our first purposes are spoiled, and we know- not
the reason of it. But so itwill happen, when, without minding the effect of our.
objects, we chuse an improperlight; as a violent passion in a feeble light, which looses
at once its effect and motion: contrarily, a tender and pleasant object may, by
too strong and broad a light, and shades too sharp, be quite broken, and its grace
gone.
Hence it is of the last moment to consider thoroughly, before we begin our
work, the nature and effects of the subject we intend to handle : As, whether it be
the murther of Julius Caesar in full senate; or the death of Cato; or the nuptials,
of Strafonica with Antiochus; or the reception of the queen of Sheba, with her
retinue of ladies, by Solomon, &c. Because different passions are to be introduced
in those different subjects: In the former, we must suppose great hurry and conster-
nation, fright and confusion, nay, all is in motion : In the latter, nothing is seen
but tender beauty, easy carriage, graceful modesty and authority.
And now whio will not agree with me, that the two former subjects ought to
be handled with strong and siarp lights; and the two latter with soft and more tender
ones à This effect lies also in the very natures and qualities of lights themselves;
some producing strength and sharpness; others sweetness, softness and pleasure: But, a
former examples may be called a graceful confusion, and the two latter, a severe:
amour. Wherefore I conclude, that a figure well proportioned and disposed,
having a graceful motion and sway, and a light agreeable to its out-line and
motion, may be called u perfect figure.
CHAP, VIII.: Of the Motion of the Members.
ET us proceed now to the second of the parts wherein beauty consists,
Lnamely, ihe motion of the members.
This depends chiesty on a contrasting or opposition of all the members of the body,
and on their lights and shades; which give a figure, motion and life: And this is
chiefly obtained by a winding or sway ; as when the face is fronting, the body
must turn a little sideways, and the legs again fronting. See fig. A.
plate VII.
A second observation is, a contrast in the inclining poise of tke body, from head to.
foot: For instance, if one shoulder rises, the other must sink; the hips, knecs
and feet, the same, as in the same fig. A. Wherein 1. the right shoulder riscs.
2. The right hip falls. 3. The right knce or foot rising again: and the con-
trary on the opposite ’side of. tlie body.
A third observation is, that when the right arm and left leg advance, the left
arm and right leg. fall back. 5
But this morion doubles, when the right shoulder is seen fronting; for then the
head and under part of the body must, be the same, as the same figure shews.
When the breast rises, the head ought to sink, and the contrary. See sig. B.



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































The head must always incline to- the upper shoulder, as in fig. A. In an erect
posture, the feet must make a rectangle, to wit, the heel of the one with the in¬
ward ancle of the other, as in fig. C.
Hands must always have a contrasting motion; if one be seen inwardly, the other
ought to be outward; if one hangs down, the other should be raised up. The
under part of the arm being foreshortened, the upper part should be seen direct. If
The motion of the legs is almost like that of the arms, comparing the upper part
of the arm with the thigh, and the under part with the leg : if the upper part
of the arm sink, the thigh must rise and contrast it. When the right arm is raised,
and the left depressed, then the knees or feet must be contrary. If the hip swell,
the upper part of the body sinks into the under part. If the shoulders heave, the
neck sinks into them.
Here take especial care, that the hand and arm be not on a line, but that
each contrast the other in an oppesing turn, as we see in the good and bad examples,
E.
fig.
The crofs line of the face is never parallel with that of the body, either front-
ing or profile-wise: Nor-the upper part of the body with the lower.
In these motions consist, in my opmion, the beauty of the body, with respect
ferm.
As for other motions, these three are. the principal :
I. That of the head. 2. That of the hands and feet. Lastly, That of
the body.
Those of the head are fourfold; forward, backward, and on each side. Those of
the hands and feet are the same.
The arms and legs have but one motion; to wit, one on the elbow, the other
the knee; the arm bending, and the leg drawing back.
on
The motions of the body are threefold; foreright, and on both sides.
Besides these, there are yet four other forts of motions proceeding from the same
members; to wit, the simple, the active, the passive, and the violent.
1. The simple is, when the members move naturally; as in walking, one foot is
set before the other; in drinking or eating, the hands are lifted up to the mouth;
the head turns, and the other members are made subservient to the present action;
and to which children, as well as aged persons, naturally incline.
2. The active consists in carrying, pulling, thrusting, pushing, climbing, and
the like; which is done by knowledge and judgment. This is only in part proper
to children. See plate VIII.
3. The passive arises from disquiets of the mind, or what the soul shews by the
body in the paffions; as love, hatred, anger, sorrow, joy, spite, scorn, and
such like.
The effect of these, though mostly inward, yet is seen from without the body;
chiefsy in the small members, as the eyes, nose, mouth, fingers and toes. See
plate IX.
4. The violent proceeding from fright, fear, despair, rage, &c. or any thing
that is unusual and sudden, and perturbates nature either by hearing or seeing ;
such






such as a sudden thunder, spectre, or frightful sight: These cause a shrinking,
stretching and winding of the members; to both which, young and old are sub-
ject. See plate X.
But all these paffions together cannot produce. a perfect figure, without the
assistance of the members; because we can go up stairs with hands in poekets; or
lift a weight with both hands, and, yet the legs may be close: a person can
be affrighted by something standing or lying before him, without shewing it
in the face ; we can also be in love, and it shall not appear in our motion. But
my principal intention is, to express these passions by the motion of the members: and to
stiew how each member contributes towards them: as when the body turns or winds, the
members stir, one advancing, another falling back ; one raised, others sinking.
But since it is very rare to see all these motions and paffions, as happening very
seldom and unawares : and since no model can be so set as to give them, I did,
for certainty, stand for them all; expressing every one, even to the lesser members,
eyes, mouth, nose, fingers and toes; and these were nimbly and dextroussy, as
you see, designed by my son.
CHAP. IX. Of passionate and violent Motions-
7E ought to observe in the first place, that the greatest part of these motions
V
V
are but in part to be apprehended, and mostly by representing the cause
of their motion by the relation which they have to each other, whether in their
beginnings or conclusions : for the end of one oftentimes begins another, as anger
is a step to madnefs ; sorrow to faint-heartedness, and this produces despair or
folly. This is the effect of most of the violent troubles of the mind, and pains
of the body; for this sinart stirs the members violently, the muscles swell, the
sinews, nerves, &c. stretch out of measure, nay sometimes beyond their power ;
as for instance, in burning, wounding, and the like: which pains, though they
produce particular contractions in the face and other members, yet they would
not be plainly known, or distinguished, if something of their causes did not at
the same time appear; as Pyramus stabbed with a sword ; Eurydice and Hisperia bit
by a snake ; Procris killed with a javelin; and the centaur Nessus shot with an ar-
row ; Hippolytus wounded by the overturning of his chariot; and more such. By
whom we must needs, as before hinted, represent something of the cause; as by
Pyramus, either the veil of Thisbe, or the naked sword; and by Eurydice, the
snake, living or dead ; by Procris, the weapon gored with blood : and thus of
any others. Moreover, we ought to shew the wound, and haw it happened; two cir-
cumstances equally necessary. The same is also to be observed in Nessus, who is
shot from behind; Eurydice and Hisperia bit in the heel ; Achilles wounded in the
same part : all which circumstances a skilful master ought to dispose properly.
But, lest these hints be not plain enough, I shall make them so, in the follow-
ing description representing,































































































































































































































































The Death of HISPERiA.
Hisperia, daughter of the river Sebrenus, being pursued by Asacus son of Pria-
mus, is bit in the heel by a snake; of which wound she died.
This young and beautiful maid is in the middle, lying on the Grafs, and sur-
rounded by some nymphs, who mourn her misfortune. Her father, stand-
ing dispirited against a piece of stone-work, and weeping for her death, is at-
tended by some other river-gods, who endeavour to comfort him, but in vain.
Her garment is. airy and thin, and her breast open ;. her gold-coloured head-
drefs coming loose over her shoulders; her gown turned up, which discovers her
thigh stained with blood. A boy, lying-near, points at the poisoned wound,
and at the same time pushes away a nymph, coming by with a short stick in her
hand, shews to the former the fore-ground where the snake lies killed by some
boys with sticks and stones. Thése boys, in lively action, beat the snake with
sticks and thorn-bushies; one of them tramples on its neck, which makes it gape;
another affrighted by it, seems to run away; at which a third falls a laughing.
A wood is on the right side of the piece. In the middle, on the third ground,
are seen some rising willows and other trees of the watry kind ; behind which
runs à river crofs tne piece, slowing on the left side forwards, wherein float reeds
and other watry productions. On the banks of this river are some vessels and
urns, some fallen down, others lying partly in the water, and one stands upright
by the stump of a willow.
Some veils, reeds and lris-leaves, bundled together, are scattered up and down.
Several Satyrs, Dryades, and other wood and field-gods appear out of the wood;
some with pine-apples, others with torches of the same tree; some shrieking out-
rageoussy, others viewing the snake, others the dead body : Most of them are
ornamented with wild plants or oak-leaves about their heads; some of them are
arrayed with goat-skins, others with deer.
On the left side of the piece, in the offskip, an high impending rock is seen,
and level with it, in the middle of the piece, Thetis driving her sea-chariot to-
wards the rock, in order to save Asacus, who has thrown himself from its top :
Here we see him flounce into the sea, and, full of sorrow, beating the waves
with his wings, and heaving his breast towards heaven, with his head sunk in his
neck, seems to complain to the Gods of his hard fate.
Some who are curious, run in haste to the rock, with loud cries and stretched-
out arms; at which, the foremost figures look back, pointing at the sea, to give
them to understand that it is already over with him.
I do not question, but he who is somewhat acquainted with fables and history,
and sees such a picture, will presently apprehend the whole drift of the story ; nay,
Idare flatter myself that a person, not conversant with them, will observe the paf-
sions in it, and the catastrophe, though he cannot tell who the persons are.
But to return to the mottons ; it is certain that all upright figures, whether of
men or women, must, for grace-sake, poise but on ons leg, never on both : By which
means, one hip will always rise. The legs ought not to be further apart than
the length of a foot








Walking, the hip can rise little or nothing; the breast ought to bear perpendi-
cularly over the leg, which supports the body : lf the right leg advance, the
left must draw back ; by which means, the body is pushed forward; the right
arm or elbow falling back, the left arm or hand, as also the face, must appear
foreright.
The weight of the body of one rumning, is intirely supported by the leg which
advances ; the breast projects; the head sinks into the neck ; and the other foot
is off the ground.
A person climbing, finks his head into his neck, and the neck is erect; if the
left arm rise, the right ought to incline: Contrarily, the right leg is climbing,
and the left hangs down ; the body bending over the climbing leg, without any
visible swell of hips.
Those who pusti and pull, have a different action from each other; and are
shewn here sufficiently with those who carry ; wherefore we shall say little of
them; though this must be observed, that no body can carry any great weight
in his hands, otherwise than on the side where the hip rises ; nor, on the contra-
ry, pull down any great weight, otherwise than with the hand of the side where
the hip sinks; the head ought to bend over the rising shoulder.
There are still remaining two sorts of motionof noless importance than the others,
namely, beseeching and steeping ; yet this last is not confined to the bed at night,
but occasioned by accidents in the day; in old men, thro’ heaviness; others, by
exercise of mind and-body ; women, by domestick labour; and youth, by their
play. And though we cannot properly call these motions, but rather a cessation of
motion, yet l thought proper to exhibit them in plate XI. Wherein, No. 1. shews
a slumbering young man, with his arms and legs wantonly spread. 2. Is a
sleepy woman, with her head somewhat inelining to her side; but her arms and
legs more modestly disposed than those of the young man. 3. Shews an old
sleeping man with his head on his breast, his arms close to his body, his legs
drawn in, and body sinking.
Among the besecching, No. 4. we see a figure praying eagerly and incessantly.
No. 5. Is praying in the utmost distress. And No. 6. Is humbly imploring the
Gods for help.
I think these examples sufficient for finding infinite others flowing from the
paffions, according to occafion, and as the matter requires more or less force,
zeal and pleafure. But think not thefe here offered, to be drawn in their greatest
force, or the most expressive : no, 1 am not so presumptuous, but rather like
wrestlers, who challenge the best masters, not to overcome them, but, to stand
the chance, who shall be the victor. I aspire at the prize; but not with arrogant
thoughts, that all must give way to me. It were foolisn to think, that what I
have learnt by practice and observation, another should not learn, nay improvey
by his industry. One light springs from another, and, from a little one, be-
comes greater; this daily experience shews. How many things do we know,
which were hid from our ancestors; whence we may believe, that our successors
will be more knowing than we. As arts and sciences are much improved in lat-
ter ages, so we may hope for the furtherance in the present polisned age. If
Hercules




























































































































































































































Hercules carried his valour to the fixed columns (Herculis Columae) Theseus, his suc-
cessor, went far beyond them, and yet followed the same path.
This I hope also to shew to the artist, wifhing, that by my labours, or his own
industry, he may find a shorter or more sure way to attain the highest perfection
in the noble art of painting.
CHAP. X. Of the different Colouring of the Naked, in a Child, Man,
and Woman; in Health, Sickness, and after Death.
AVING carefully studied this point, I find that one chapter is too
little to comprehend it; nevertheless I shall here lay down the prin-
cipal parts of it, hoping to handle the rest in this work, as it comes in the
way.
Having already treated of two of the fixed beauties of an human figure, we
shall (keeping nature still in our eye) proceed to the last of them.
The different colours of the naked are as manifold as the objects themselves ; nay,
almost innumerable : But we shall confine ourselves to the three conditiens of an
healthy and sick person, and a dead body; applied to a child, man and woman.
The child, being in health, is of a rosy colour; the man of a warm and
glowing colour; and the woman of a fair colour.
But in sickness, the child inclines to yellowish pale ; the man to dark pale, or
fallow; and the woman to a milkish or yellowisn white colour.
Being dead, the child is violet ; the man more grey, yet somewhat yellowish ;
and the woman like the child, but more beautiful, as having the whiter skin :
The reason of which is, that the child, having a thin skin, and being full of
blood, must appear ruddy; the man, being more yellow, and his skin thicker,
must appear more grey, since the blood can shine less through it; and the woman,
having a white and smooth skin, must therefore shew herself somewhat ruddy.
Hence it is, that a child, in its tender parts, is more violet, a man more grey,
and a woman blue, yet more upon the green than the violet. All this is de-
monstrable by the colours themselves ; for mixing blue and red it becomes violet
for children ; blue, red and yellow make a grey for a man; and yellowisn white
mixed with very little red and blue gives a greenefs for a woman.
Now, in order to strike the right colour for each, take these; for the
child, white and vermilion, it being pretty ruddy; for the man the same,
with the addition of some yellow oker, which makes it more warm, and also
more fiery ; for the woman, take white, a little vermilion and some yellow
oker. And to know perfectly the proper tint of the tenderness of each of these
three persons, you must, in finishing, take some smalt or ultramarine alone, and
with a soft fitch, scumble your blue over the most tender parts of your figure, so
that it lie soft and transparent : And you will perceive, that this tenderness pro-
duces in each figure, a particular and natural colour. So much for healthy na-
ture ; that of the sick and dead shall be spoken of afterwards.
Here methinks l can scarce understand (though nothing more common) the per¬
verse opinions of painters about colouring; they seck after art, but do not understand








nature : make large enquiries to little purpose; and as it were, traverse the earth,
without moving a step. They talk for ever of this or that master’s colouring;
of one they say, Ay, that is beautiful and fressiof another,— That is like
a
flessi and blood--— Another says,-
That is very fresh and glowing.— Others, after
having prattled a long time, and stupified themselves with enquiries, give up the
cause, saying,
Such a colour is not in the world; l can neither find nor imagine it;
it cannot be imitated And more such talk. But what sine thoughts are these ?
lf our senses cannot apprehend a painted nudity, what must nature herself be )
Is not the original better than the copy ; Had Titian and Georgione a beautiful co-
louring) Let us follow their manner: They chose nature for their pattern, with-
out imitating other masters, because in whatever other respects nature may be
deficient in relation to the art, she is certain in colouring; therefore the life must
be the best model; and what is not intirely like her, though never so flattering,
is false and of no worth.
As I have described some weaknesses in painters, so the following are no less
evils ; they pretend to correct nature, though she be, in colouring at least, not to be
corrected; incredibly difficult are their fruitless attempts, and as difficult their
meanings, through the neglect of essential methods for doing things rightly and
truly.
Another mischief proceeds from Tyros themselves; these, falling upon the life
at first setting out, can hardly endure to be debarr’d by their masters: But I desire
such may know, that, by this hindrance, ’till they can copy well, their masters act
prudently ; after this, let them proceed to the life, since it is certain, that they must
first get a thorough knowledge of the mixtures of the colours; without which, they
will make but poor work of the life; besides, it is far more easy to imitate an object
painted, than one neither designed nor coloured.
The better-meaning artists must therefore not pretend to arrive at fine colouring,
without consulting nature ; for the greatest grace lies in its variety, viz. in rosinels,
yellowness and blueness, as well in old as young, principally when each colour is
rightly applied and naturally represented : But this variety cannot be seen in the
academy-figure by night, but in the day-figure at the drawing schools.
Now, for the docible artist’s sake, I shall, in the next chapter, treat of such
colours as l have made use of in the dead colouring, second colouring and finish-
ing; not with design to confine him to those, but to open a door to further enqui-
ries ; for oné country uses these, another other colours, and yet both good, if
they at last answer the same purpose: Some again may have been taugnt other
colouring. But I submit all to practice, and their own judgments.
CHAP. XI. Of the Colours, and their Uses, with respect to bath the
Sexes.
FAIR and tender woman is dead-coloured with white and brown red;
in the second colouring, with white and a little vermilion.
For a young man the same; except that we also mix a little light oker with it-






In a soldier, brown red, and a little white in the dead colour ; second colour
as the others.
For a fallow or sun-burnt peasant, white, brown red and umber for the dead
colour; light oker and white for the second.
For a sick person, white, a little vermilion, or brown red in the dead colour;
light oker and white for the second, yet but little ruddy.
The figures being brought thus far, retouch or finisn them in this manner;
brush thinly over your figure some vernish mixed with a little light oker; then
clap on your main lights, scumbling them softly and gently into this wet ground,
as far as is necessary. For a child mix, under the vernisn, a little vermilion ;
some light oker for a man; and somewhat less light oker for a woman.
But chiesly observe, that the bluissi tenderness must not be mixed or laid on in the
two first colourings; but, on finishing, is scumbled in with the main lights, and
melted into the wet ground of vernisn, not with grey or blue mixed with white,
but with pure and thick-tempered smalt or ultramarine only, touched with a fitch-
pencil, as I have already intimated.
Thus also the reflexions are to be managed, whether they be strong, or appa¬
rent, or of what colour soever they be ; of which, more in its place.
The tints of the naked are but three ;. namely, the light, the mezzo, or second
tint, and the broad shade; but l except the ruddiness, which is also divided into
three degrees or parts.
The three former tints ought to be made and proceed out of one colour, in
shades as well as lights, but 1 reckon not among them either the greatest shades,
or main lights used in retouching.
The colour of a dead body, could, by this interposition, have no place after
those others ; in such a figure use brown oker, and white in the dead-colouring ;
which being thinly glazed with lake, more or less according to the age and condi¬
tion of the person it represents, thereon paint with light oker and white for the se-
cond colouring; in which, have a due regard to fingers, toes and other sinall
parts both of body and face, which ought to be grey and violet, as in living na-
ture those parts appear rosy and blushing.
If any afk, why I expresly asfign light oker, vermilion, or brown red to this
or that body; and be not content with recommending red and white, or yellow
and white ; he must know, that there is a vast difference between red and red ;
for instance, take vermilion and white, and brown red and white,, and observe
how much the two mixtures differ in force and beauty; thus it is also with the
yellow; which makes a great difference in the colouring of the three nakeds
aforesaid, and also in their tints.
But l do not absolutely confine myself to those colours ; l name them only as
my opinion touching them, and that I may be the better understood in what I
say about them.
Has the artist a mind, in the second colouring, to put in the tender tints à

Let him do it; but they will, on viewing the painting at some distance, appear

like spots : He will also find more work and trouble, because the colours lie too

thick ; whereby he is convinced, and obliged to work it over again another tine.







Before I end this chapter, I must propose one familiar question, frequently
started : Why many disciples give into a worse manner, than that of their ma-
sters ; which I resolve thus : Their bad manner is the joint fault both of master
and disciple ; the master’s chiefly, in being sometimes negligent in his instruc-
tion ; for though he understands the grounds, he does not teach them his pupils :
the greatest care he takes, is, to put them on copying all sorts of pieces, as well
of old as later masters, each handled in a particular manner, sometimes quite
different from his own. The disciples on the other side, being content with a
superficial likeness, viz. this part as red, that as yellow, blue or green, as the
original, (which they themselves must find out by tempering and re-tempering)
thence it follows, that in one part or other they generally fall into extravagancy,
after they have left their masters. Is their master’s an hard manner, Theirs will
be harder. Was he rough: They will be rougher. He, warm and glowing, They
fiery. Did he colour slaring' They will exceed him. Was his manner to paint
young and old women alike , They will paint both women and men, young and
old, after one manner; and make their wives or maid-servants their only models.
As for painting worse, this lies at the disciple’s door, through a propensity to some
particular parts, without regarding the whole : One affects draperies; another likes
nudities; another delights in bye-works. But such must not take it amiss, if I
compare them to thistles, which, where they fall, stick.
But a master, who seeks honour and esteem, must not only be acquainted with
what I have now delivered, but many more things, if he will be valued for hi-
story, the universal painting.
CH AP. XII. Of agreeable and beautiful Colouring.
INCE a piece cleanly and beautifully coloured must needs be very pleasing,
D as well to the ignorant as the knowing; and the contrary ones be displeasing;
we shall treat of it as a matter of great importance : But many miss the mark
herein; some knowingly, others against their wills ; I say, knowingh, in taking a
fancy to this or that manner, whether good or bad; and, against their wills, when
they are past recovery, and custom is become habitual. Sometimes it also hap-
pens through carelessnefs and fear of doing worse : These it is true, give good
ear, but neglect right methods.
As a pure light causes objects to appear clean and beautiful, so it must needs
be, that the more it is broken, and sullied by darkness, the objects will also be-
come darker and less beautiful : Many great masters have, in this very particular,
been much mistaken ; as among the Flemisn, Rubens; and in Holland, Rembrandt,
Lievens, and many others of their followers; the one in endeavouring to paint
too beautiful, is fallen into a flaring manner; and the other, to obtain softnefs,
got into a rotten-ripe manner; two extreams, which, like two dangerous rocks,
ought to be avoided. But prudence observes a mean in every thing; and a skillful







master will make a judicious use of the colouring in general, whether in nudities,
draperies, landscape, stone-work, or what else.
I have often wondered, how some bave tormented themselves in the different
colouring of a man and a woman; painting him warm and fiery ; her, tender
and fair; without reflecting whether such colouring was proper to their con-
dition, or not : nay without making any distinction between deities and men; the
nobleman and elown ; which l think very filly. Now, whether they intention-
ally do it, to shew how masterly they can match such a colour, or whether they
are fond of such extravagancies, or bid defiance to those who colour the nakeds
of men, women and children with littie or no difference, I will not determine : but
must at least observe, that though good colouring in general is very commendable,
yet what we most shew our judgment in, is, the giving every object its proper
colour, according to its nature and quality ; for the difference among objects on the
fore ground onght to be-much greater than those of the second or third grounds,-
because the distance or medium of air between, unites every thing less or more,
as well colours as objects.
The End of the FIRST BOOK.







The art of painting
BOOK I
Of ORDONNANCE, or COMPOSITION.
CHAP. I. Of the Qualities necessary to the first Idea, or Sketch.

In order to give the curious artist a previous notion of every thing, I





 think necessary to the main matter, to the end he may duly weigh
his qualifications for it, 1 say, that he ought in the first place to



ave a good memory, to consider well what he is to represent, and to



retain it in his thoughts ; and next, a free and nimble hand to execute
instantly on paper, what he does conceive, lest it slip out of memory again.
Buf these qualities will be of little service, unless he observes order in his pro-
ceedings ; the more important the composition, the lefs delay ; because a bright
thought sometimes comes unawares, and is as suddenly lost; and though perhaps
it may be retrieved, yet with meaner circumstances than at first. In fine, as we
take more or less pains about the matter, so the loss will be the greater, especially
to those of weak memories, to whom we may apply this emblem. A man em¬
bracing the smoke of a burning pile of wood, with both arms, with this in-
scription,—He who embraces too much, retains nothing.
How often do we find, that when we betake ourselves to thought, we are, by
some outward cause, interrupted, and our project spoilt by the confusion of our
senses ; to obviate which, it is best to be alone; and then, having paper, pen and
ink, or a crayon, and settled the scheme of yope ordonnance as to height and
length, you must mark out the plan or ground, and fix the point of sight,
whether the design be landscape, or for a chamber, palace, grotto, or what else :
After this, weigh well your whole design; then, what sort of persons must enter
it, and who ought to have the first and most visible place ; which mark instantly, and
their bigness, not in figures, but strokes; here on the first ground, there, on the
second, according to their characters and merits ; beginning with the king or
prince, and next, his retinue, or other proper persons; if there be still another
party to be introduced of less moment than these, and yet as essential to the or-
donnance, mark it with points in its proper place, without more ado.
Having brought your design thus far, you may, some time afterwards, reas-
sume the thoughts of it, beginning with the principal figures; and now consider








by what passions your figures are moved; how they ought to stand, sit or lie; what
they are doing, whether they sly or run, and whether before or against the light; how
they contrast, and how they shall be set off against each other. Sketch all this on
another piece of paper, and though in so doing some circumstance may have been
omitted, yet the consequence cannot be great, since the lesser, like à river, flows
from the greater, without burthen to the memory.
Go to your sketch again at some other time with fresn thoughts, and then con-
nider what characters must be naked, what cloathed, what heautiful, what common; to-
gether with the proper colouring, and it is agreement and order. Thus the design is
brought to bear, and this, in my opinion, is the surest way to help and eale the
memory.
Thus much of ordonnance in general, proceed we to treat of each part in
particular.
CHAP. II. Of Ordonnance.
WONDER at nothing more, considering how many histories can be col-
lected from facred writ, that we see so few of them handled, and those so lit-
de different in design. For in qoo lately published, most of them are on sub-
jects which have been represented before, without any attempts on such as have
been left undesigned, as if no ordonnance could be made of them. It is the same
with Ovid, Homer, Virgil, and many others, though from them might be gathered
matter for above three times as many compositions. The cause of all this, I find,
after much pains and inquiry, to be ignorance and carelessness, those two impotent
sisters, who check the senses and obstruct inquiries; an evil to be cured only by
diligent exercise.
We need not doubt, but that the ancient painters have picked out the best hi-
stories ; but it is folly to think they therefore despised all the rest. It vyere un-
happy, if the secrets still remaining, had before all discovered, for then we
might bid adieu to all future endeavours. But supposing, that the best subjects
are chosen, it falls out nevertheless that those which are slighted are oftentimes
the most painter-like, and have the strongest passions, and at the same time the most ele-
gant by-woorks; so that we need not despair of sufficient matter to handle.
But we see in cattle that they will follow one leader; and so it is with some
painters, who think they have done enough, when between their compositions,
and the old ones on the same subject, the difference lies in figures sitting instead of
standing; the action in the open air instead of being within-doors; or by some al-
teration in the ornaments and by-works : But nobler souls soar higher; they do
not sit down contented with what others have thought, but strive to excel in things
better, and new, or at least as good as the others.
What praise-worthy pieces must those be, which are built on other men’s
thoughtsP The original designers taxed with ignorance and little sense, because
their works are seen thus corrected in actions, draperies, colours and ornaments :








Bat let such artists continue to torment themselves as long as they please, men of
sense will always think meanly of them, and give the praise to the first inventors.
Great souls are always ambitious-to share equal honours with happier masters ;
for who of the poets would not be equal to HomerP Of the philosophers to
Aristotle; Of the painters, to Raphael? Of the statuaries, to Michael Angelo 9
Those great men have done as great things to acquire a name: A desire of glory
has fed the fire of their labours ; and this has secured them both honours and
riches. They did not vouchsafe, when the day was shut in, to spend theix
time in company, but ardently fired their lamps for night improvements; and
thus they attained the greatest happiness.
These things 1 judged preliminary to what follows ; and therefore we shall
proceed to management.
CHAP. II. Of the Ordonnance of Histories.
VHE management of history will serve for univerfal conduct throughout
this whole work ; for no one can be said to be a good master, without a
perfect knowledge of it : ft is so general, that it affects every branch of the art;
as the grouping of figures ; placing of colours ; choice of light and shade; lay-
ing grounds ; nay, even the disposition of each fingle figure: But I shall never-
theless be brief, and so proceed.
When now you have chosen your subject, whether in history, fiction or em-
blem, make a rough sketch of it, and so imperfectly, as only to understand your
own marks and strokes : Then read with attention the best and exactest writers of
the story, in order to conceive it well, and fix it in your memory; marking immediately
what you have read.
On your next return to this sketch, you must principally consider, in whaf
country, in zohat season, and what time of the day, the action happened ; and whe-
ther within or without doors, whether in stately places, or common. ones; and lastly, the
quality and dignity of the persons concerned; thus much for circumstances. Now
mind exactly the essence of the story, and then the aceidents proper to it. The
event of the story must always fill up the chief place in the composition; and the
beginning of it to be disposed in the Offffip; as a cannon-ball, shot from a distance,
batters a near bulwark, and scatters whatever opposes it ; by this means the drift
of the matter will appear at first view. Note all these things in your poeket-
book, that you may remember them; and be sure to consult them often for that
purpose.
Some day afterwards, early in the morning, when your head is easy and clear,
re-consider the whole matter: Imagine yourself to be the figure, which (one after ano-
ther) you are to exhibit; and so proceed to the most inferior.
Next, extend your thoughts to the places where the action happened : This will
bring you to apprehend the nature of it ; and you will quickly perceive all your
figures in order, and the qualities of each, their diftances and proper places: Mark
this in general with strokes only. Put each principal person’s name to his figure, that
you






you commit no mistake in them, or the disposition ssip out of your memory.
After this you must mind every other particular figure; and lastly consider by
what pasfions they are all moved.
By this method it is certain, that we are far advanced in general, but little in
particulars; the design is as yet no more than as if a person, standing on an emi¬
nence, or the top of a steeple, were viewing in an open country, the preparations
of a great army. He sees all neatly divided into troops and regiments, here the
horse, there the foot, and there again the general, and further off the officers;
yonder again, the carriages for provision and ammunition, and so forth. Now,
such an one only knows the objects to be there, and the place where ; but having
a good order, and following it, he can the more easily represent the rest.
But he must still go further, in considering from what side, and, in what place,
all is to be seen, and whether the horizon must be low or high; place your principal
object as much as possible in the midale, on a rising ground; fix your point of sight;
determine your light, whether it must proceed from the left, or the right, from
behind or before; and whether the story require sun-shine or a common light; next,
dispose the rest of the figures in groups, some of tæo or three, others of four or five,
more or less, as you think proper. But of this, we shall say more in a parti-
cular chapter.
In the mean time; to help those who may not presently apprehend this, we
shall give an example from off the fore ground; I say then, that you must place
your principal figures conspicuous and elevated upon the fore ground ; give them
the main light, and greatest force of colouring, in one mafs, or group; the less objects must
be somewhat lower, and their force of light and colour more spread. The second
ground ought to be in shade, or silled with sady objects; and behind them, on the third
ground (which must be light again) dispose the objects of smallest consequence ;
observing always, that large objects are placed behind small ones, and small
objects behind large ones ; as also strong lights against dark shades; if vou can-
not find it by the snade, endeavour to affect it by dark colours, as we shall shew
more amply in another chapter.
Having got thus far, make your sketch anew on another paper, wherein design
all the medities after the life, and the draperies from the layman, figure after figure, as
finished as possible; disposing every thing so to the light, that neither more or
less shade appear, than the zhole requires. Forget not to place your figure and
layman agreeable to the point of sight in your sketch.
Now consider the motions and passions ; which, to represent naturally, 1 shall
here shew a proper method; standing before a looking-glass, make, with vour
oton body, such actions and motions as your figures require ; the passions you must
conceive from the history ; for instance, for a figure in a fright, observe how you
stand, what you are doing with the right hand, and where the left is; how you
turn your head ; what the left leg is doing, and what the right; how you bend
your body, and so forth: sketch all this with their circumstances, without heeding
proportion, but the motion of the members only: then set your layman to that sketch,
disposing it so. as you shall need it in your ordonnance, chusing the moft beauriful
side, best light, arid moft advantageous shades for the purpose. If the figure must be
clothed,








clothed, cast your draperies as fine as possible, according to its character. Then
design it curioussy on blue or drawing-paper; but finisn the naked from the life
onsy. Take the same method in other paffions and figures, as we shall shew
further in the sixth chapter.
In the mean time, begin your general design on the cloth, from your last
sketch, and compleat it after your finished drawings, or models. As for by-woorks,
and other proper decorations, we shall treat of them in another chapter.
CHAP. IV. Of the Uses of fine Prints, Academy Figures and Models.
In few parts of the art are greater abuses committed than in the use of fine
prints, and composures of greater masters; for many accustom theinselves so
I
much to them, as seldom to do any thing which is not borrowed from prints, or
other men’s drawings. Are they to compose an history, emblem or fable, they
bring it together piece-meal, and by scraps; and searching their whole store of
prints, drawings, and academy-figures, take an arm out of one, a leg out of ano-
ther ; here a face, there a drapery, and out of another a body, in order to make
of the whole an ordonnance : but to whom does the honour belong ; Has some-
body used an ordonnance of Poussin, is the design that person’s, or Poussin’s, This
is like duck-eggs hatched by an hen, and we are puzzled to know to whom the
praise is due; but it is certain, that if the true owners of such borrowed goods
were each to take his own from such painters, l fear their genuine offspring would
be but small; it would even fare with them as with Erasmus’s Cuman afs, who,
with the lion’s skin, looked terrible, but his ears discovering him, he was stript
of his borrowed clothes, and severely bantered by every one.
But another mischief attending this method of proceeding is, that it makes
them slight the life, nay, oftentimes forget it; whereby, and the neglect of rules,
they never become good designers.
The necessary use of prints consist herein, that next to what has been said in
the preceding chapter, and the sketch settled, we inform ourselves what great
masters have thought and done on the same subject ; how they chose their objects,
and with what by-works ornamented : this will improve our thoughts. The
next thing we are to observe, is, the grace of their action, faces, lights and
fhades; and if any thing be for our purpose, seck it in the life; or if draperies, take
them from the layman; thus we may call the work our own. But above all, we
must make use of academy-figures of our design, especially those done in private-
No figure must be painted twice in one ordonnance, without urgent necessity :
But the followirg ornaments, whether our own or others, we may lawfully use;
such as trees, stones, tombs, fountains, urns, statues, ruins, all sorts of architecture,
and other ornaments, as much as we please. He who goes further, bigots him-
self so much to prints, and other men’s thoughts, that he thinks himself under a
necessity to express every thing their way: But it is certain our aim, in viewing
prints






prints is twofold; first, to soothe and please the eye ; next, to enrich our thoughts
when we are about a composition of our own ; for then they prove of the greatest
advantage to a tyro, in giving him not only fine thoughts, but also a pleasant and
beautiful manner, agreeable postures, graceful actions, well-cast draperies, and,
what is above all, a quickness of thought and a warmer inclination; as is more amply
shewn in my drawing-book.
CHAP. V. Of Probability; and what is Painter-like in an Ordonnance
of few or many Figures.
DROBABILITY, as operating on the mind and imagination by the help of
sight, ought chiesly to be observed in the partition and representation of histories,
and is next in consideration to the three branches wherein beauty consists; of
which we have already spoken.
It ought to appear not only in general, but in each single object; and we must
take care to reject every thing repugnant to it.
In order to it, consider what characters the subject consists of, whether of people of
fafhiion, or ordinary people, or of both mixt; let this appear in their carriage,
shape, graceful motion and pleasant colouring, as being people of education.
If the figures be rustical, let rusticity be visible in them, not only in dress,
but in their behaviour, colour and motion; and if therein some agreeableness
appear, let it still savour of rusticity.
By this means, and what follows, your thoughts will appear natural and likely,
to wit, by giving more or less beauty to persons of condition, and more or less simplicity
to meaner persons ; one may be fhort, another may be tall; one squab and cor-
pulent, another thin and slender; one somewhat crooked, another of a brown or
pale complexion; one of a quick, another of a slow motion : nay, in three or
four figures there ought to be at least one quite unlike the rest; I might say,
that hardly any two ought to be alike; among six or eight one at least should be
hunch-backed; and though this may seem to contradict what we have before said
touching beauty, yet it gainsays it not in reference to condition, since an hunch-
back, wry shoulders, distorted hips, a bigger or less head, have as good an
agreement with the other members as the most handsome-made.
If it be afked, what would be wanting if the figures were all well-pro-
portioned, yet some inferior to others in beauty ; l answer, that these last
but in some measure partake of the agreeableness of the others, and one in a less
degree than another; and as it is a truth that great people are subject to defor-
mity of body as well as little ones, so their deformity is not so visible as in
meaner persons.
Hence, I think my opinion not ill grounded, that chiefly in resortual com-
positions, such as plays, divine services, courts of justice, and concourses of all
forts of people, all foris ofshapes are to be introduced ; as crooked, short, tall,
awry, fat and lean, and even some lame and crippled, as occasion requires ;
but






but then they must be so disposed, that, without offence to the eye, they do by
comparison infenfibly set off other figures near them ; which is a main proof of
the likelihood or probability of an history : but to make this point the plainer, I
shall shew the difference between one old person and another, aad one young per-
son and another, each in a less or greater degree of beauty; and confirm it by
examples.
As for the handling of fables and emblems, these, being not facts, but fictions,
consisting mostly of virtues and vices, require à quite different inanagement;
for in representing virtue no blemish must appear, and in vice no perfection.
As to Deities, who ought to be perfect in every respect, we shall, as occasion
offers, write more at largé, and treat of them thoroughly in a select chapter;
and in the mean time shew here some different handlings of the same thing in
persons of different conditions, as in Plate XII.
EXAMPLE I.
No. 1. Shews the different grace in taking hold of a glass, the one takes it with a
full fist.
No. 2. Takes it lower with some manners.
No. 3. Is a princess holding a cup with the tips of her three fingers, drawing
warily and agreeably the little singer from it.
No. 4. Is a lady’s woman, who, fearful of spiling, holds the glass handily, yet
less agreeably than the other.
No. 5. A prince holds it handily and cautiously below on the foot.
EXAMPLE II.
Here you see again the effects of education between people of condition and
more common persons, very worthy a painter’s notice.
No. 1. Shews a clownish peasant, and how greedy and disorderly he eats out
of his porringer; he sits, and leans with both elbows on the table, embracing
his disn with both aris, lest somebody should take it from him; he holds the
spoon with his thumb and fingers under the porringer; his mouth over the dish,
and his chin advances to meet the spoon; his head is sunk in his shoulders, and
he bends forwards with his upper parts.
No. 2. Sits upright, and, being better bred, holds the porrenger by one ear,
and the spoon with three fingers by the end of the shank ; he opens his mouth
but little. Again appears a difference in,
No. 3. Representing a gentlewoman holding the spoon with the tips of three
fingers, and the hand over the shank, in a very agreeable manner; and in
No. 4. You see à lady managing a spoon with lefs grace than the other.
This pleasing air is admirably observed by the great Raphael and Correggio, and
particularly by Barocci, as we may see in a fine print after one of his paintings,
where Mary is represented with a spoon in her hand, taking some spoon-meat out
of a dish, held by an angel; in order to give it to the Child Jesvs, who, half
swaddled,



























































































































































































































































swaddled, stands in her lap : This print is, in my judgment, so adnirable for
grace, and so natural, modest and great, that nothing could be better exprest.
Though the two preceding examples might be sufficient to shew all other
handlings, and the difference of action in particular conditions of persons, we
shall nevertheless add a third.
EXAMPLE III.
Shews how attentive the two peasants land listening; the one, with an high
back, advances his chin, and stares at the speaker as if he would look through him ;
he hugs himself, and rests on both legs, which, with the toes, are stradling ;
the knees somewhat bent, and the feet turned inwards : The other stands streight,
poising his body mostly on one leg; has one hand by his side, and, with the
other, takes hold of his garb on his breast; the other leg, a little turned, is
somewhat more forward, and his belly somewhat sticking out ; his whole car-
riage more agreeable than that of the other.
Here again we see a reputable gentlewoman of a modest gate, her carriage
lofty and agreeable, one hand rests under the breast towards the body; the inside
ing with attention, she, with the other hand, lifts up a part of her garment. She
stands streight ; her head turned sideways, a little forward ; her knees and feet
close, and one heel turned towards the inward ancle of the other foot ; Now, on
corn difference educarion makes in people’s actions ; both her hands rest on her
hips; she stands on both feet without any sway ; the upper part of her body
bends a little forwards ; her breast and chin advance ; her head somewhat tosfing;
her mouth a little gaping; but her hips fwell not.
In such observations as these, consist the very nature and grace of a composition,
be it of many or few figures, in reference to persons, and therefore I cannot too
much enforce the enquiry into so important a point : I speak here of grand, ma-
jestic and moft agreeable action ; for the contrary is naturally and daily to be found in
us; and though many would be better thought of yet they shew the contrary by
daily conversation with mean people, whereby they slip the opportunity of get-
ting better ideas of genteel carriage, contenting themselves with shooting at ran-
dom only. However, they excuse themselves, by saying, that they have no op-
portunity of getting into sine company; a weak shield to defend their slothl do
not the church, the playhouse, and the park give them handle enough to see fine
people, and to observe how they behave ; As for me, before l had the happiness
to which we may sometimes arrive by the smiles of friends, I missed no oppor-
tunity of making observations, and noting them in my pocket-book; which an
history painter ought always to have about him, wherever he goes; and with
good reason ; for thoughts are often so volatile and slippery as to be retained with :
difficulty, as I have before intimated in the first chapter about ordonnance. Nay.
when I saw an handsome gentlewoman walking in the street, Imade it my business
to enquire into the reason of her grace, and in what it consisted, and why she appeared







more agreeable than others; and on the contrary, why ofhers are less agreeable : by such
researches as these, we come to the knowledge of what is handsome and ugly;
as well by the one fort of people as the other; but best by studying what is most
sublime and grand. Let me then persuade the artist to this method, not as I
think it the only true one, or to dissuade him from any other, but as an inlet to
so useful a knowledge, and by which we obtain the finest things; which, as I
have said, when once lost, may perhaps never be retrieved.
Many mistake, who think that magnificent garb and rich ornaments, as jewels,
pearls, gold and silver stuffs, &c. are infallible marks of the greatness and power
of people : but can the most discerning certainly conclude them to be such by
these tokens, without enquiring whether their education be equal to their grandeur à
even then also they may be deceived, since some mean people have naturally, or
by imitation, such an air and carriage, that, were their dress answerable, they
would be taken for great ones: the reason of which is, that at firff sight there
appears little difference between false jewels and true, though on a nice enquiry may
be found ; as in the jewels, so in their actions and behaviour, such a difference
as points out their true character.
Again, if these different conditions depended only on rich cloaths, nothing
would be more easy to a painter than this difficult part of art ; since at that rate
there could be no fashion; or a broom-stick might become a lady’s hood. Never-
thelefs there have been, and still are, painters enough infected with this opinion,
and follow it as a law; thinking that David, Solomon and Ahasuerus would not be
known for kings, did not their crouns shew it; these forsooth they must always
have wherever they are, and as well in the bed-chamber, as on the throne; and
the sceptre as well at the table as at the head of an army. I say nothing yet
touching their royal robes.
He who duly weighs what I have been saying, must allow, that state and car-
riage are two such excellent qualifications, that a picture cannot be said to be good
without them; nay, I think them the very soul of a good picture : but as a noble
soul, in a well-shaped body, without the addition of ornaments, visibly shews it-
self, so of course; such are needless in expressing true greatness: Indeed, when
ornamenis are introduced with judgment and caution, tney add to the splendor of a
picture, but nothing to character, nor can cause any paffions ; as we see in Raphael,
Poussin, Dominichino and Barocci, who, far from approving it, have, by the very
simplicity of their figures, snewn the extraordinary greatness I have been speaking of.
If any object, that Raphael himself has not observed this conduct in his story
of Bathstieba; where he represents David in a window with a crown on his head ; or
where Abraham courts his Sarah in sun-shiny weather, which afar off is seen by
Abimelech leaning on a bullustrade. As for the first composition I must say, if I
may speak my mind, that 1 do not over-like it, or indeed apprehend it; but
rather believe it to have fared as some faulty things did with me, which being
done in my apprenticeship I am still under some concern for; but by the intro-
duction of the sun-shine, his thoughts may possibly be finer than they appear at
first view, because, had not the sun shone on that amorous couple, Abimelech could-
not, at his distance from them, have seen their courtship; and if he had re-
presented






presented them in any other cornef of the room, than that where they were, they
could not have been sitting. However, since great masters have their failingg,
it is probable, that Raphael’s bible-prints were sooner or later, either designed or
painted by his best disciples, viz. Julio Romano, Gio Francesco Penni, or Pierino del
Vaga, from his sketches, and afterwards retouched by himself, since it is im-
possible that one master could dispatch so much work in so short a time, though
he had a quick pencil ; besides, his custom was to keep his works long by him
for the sake of improvements, and to give the last hand, and the utmost per-
fection to them : but as for this bible, if it be observed with attention, there
will be found a great difference between one ordonnance and another, though in
some, the greatness and likelihood are well preserved.
But to conclude the matter of this chapter, I must say, that my precepts ought
not only to be observed in an ordonnance of many, but of few figures also, since
it is very difficult to bring them all into one story : but if the subject be coartly,
as of Solomon, Ahasueras, or such-like, it must be known, that the persons, to
whom majesty and grace are most proper, ought to exceed in it, viz. The king
among his oourtiers; the queen among her ladies ; a governour among citizens,
and thus the greater above the less, according to his quality, office or dignity;
this causes a propêr distinction of superiority, and exalts the prime person above
the rest.
Even peasants, who are à little conversant with the towns, and know somewhat
of good manners, are observed to surpass others worse-carriaged than they, in
their discourses, holiday-mirths, and church-ceremonies; but clownisnness must
appear in them, though with respect to the paffions, some may appear to excel
others ; except that if a burgomaster; or topping citizen be mingled amongst
them, he must appear superior to them all by his handsome carriage, and city-
behaviour.
CHAP VI. Of the difference between Youth and Age, in both Sexes.
THE artist ought not only to mind nicely the actions, but also the difference of
the persons who are to compose his ordonnance; and he must have great

regard both to iniversal and particular differences, as well in the sexes as their ages.
Chifdren alter commonly every three years, and ’till they are six years of age,
have always short necks and round fingers. The difference between boys and
girls is visible in their outward parts, without opening their legs, as Testa does.
In the small members the difference is not very visible, though girls are some-
what thinner, have smaller ears and longer heads; their arms are likewise more
round next and above the wrist, and their thighs thicker than those of boys; but
the upper part of boys arms is thinner and smaller.
Those of Francesco Quesnoy are incomparably fine to paint after; nay, nobody
has attained his perfection ; we see his often represented either without hair, or
but very little ; whether he thought it more beautiful, or it was his choice in
making models, I cannot determine; yet methinks boys may very well sometimes






be allowed hair, and that frequently curled : Girls may have theirs twisted and
wound on their heads, with slying locks, serving. not only for ornament, but
distinction of sexes.
Boys of five or six years old may have hair finely curled ; girls more thick and
displayed ; another difference in the sexes may be this, that girls hair is more
soft and long, boys more curled and short.
Children of five, six or more years old, ought seldom to be represented with
close mouths; their upper eye-lids are generally hid under their swelling brows ;
they have commonly a quick look.
Young damsels have a vigilant and lively look ; raised forehead ;. nose à little
hollowed ; a small but almast half open mouth; round lips and small chin, in
which, as in the cheeks, is à small dimple; they have no under chin.,
Virgins we see seldom open-mouthed ; their eyes are more sedate and composed
than the others.
Old women ought to have a more set and heavy look, and hollow eyes; their
upper eye-lids large and loose, yet a little open, the under lids visibly swelling;
nostrils somewhat contracted; mouth close, and fallen in: And when they are
very old and without teeth, their under lip comes over the upper; they also have
risings under the cheeks on each side of the mouth; a long but little crooked
nose suits them ; but in men a more crooked one is proper.
People in authority become a grave look, a forehead somewhat raised, and
large Heavy eye-lids, and those half open; their aspect settled. and calm; their
faces turned a little sideways; the nose alike with the forehead and eyes; mouth
shut, and a double chin.
It is necessary to take particular notice of the different make and form of persons,
so far as they are described in history, in order to express the better the nature of
the matter; as Alexander and Hephestion in the tent of Darius; wherein Hephestion
ought be taller than Alexander: In Saul and David, the former tall, and the latter
less and ruddy. And thus of any other circumstance of history.
We should here have brought in some examples of physiognomy ; but as there
is lately published, on that subject, a sine treatise written by Mr. le Brun, and
translated by F. de Kaarsgieter, we think it not necessary to say any thing about it,
but refer to the book, since it is of service not only to painters, statuaries and en-
gravers, but also to poets, historians and others.
In the observations about taking and holding any thing, I have taken notice that
infanis are very fickle and harmleis in it, and because their members are very
feeble, and commonly ply any way, they act as if half lame; their hands are al-
ways squab, and therefore most open.
Zoung girls are wanton in their taking and holding; as in the manner of Goltzius.
Virgins and stayed women are modest and mannerly in their taking, and holding;
as I have shewed before.
But aged people have stiff'and dry hands ; for which reason they are most times
shut, and they cannot extend their fingers.
Although different accidents cause an altération in 'the face and posture, those al-
terations are neverthelefs very unlike each gther, therefore each ought to be handled






in a distinct manner; chiesly when any particular passion moves us to tlris or that
action, whereby the features and lineaments of the face are doubled by the said
unlikeness.
Suppose, for instance, that all faces were cast in one mould, and each governed
by a particular passion, as forrow, gladness, hatred, envy, anger, madness, &c.
Hence it is certain, that they will be very unlike and different; as well the actions
of the body : And if now you give each a particular make, and lincament, this
will augment their difference.
This observation is of great use to face and history-painters, and the contrary
as useful when nature and circumstances induce us to make teoo or three to be like
each other in one composition; namely, a company of figures all of one family,
who therefore may well take after one person in likeness, as the sons of Jacob; the
Horatii and Curacii ; for thus we evince the truth of the story.
Again, in handling the fable, where the daughters of Cecrops open the basket,
in which was Erichtonius, here we are obliged to make their faces alike, to shew
that they are sisters; for otherwise who would know them to be so, though re-
presented alike beautiful ; And it would be afked how the affinity appears, see-
ing it is not enough to say they are sisters; or that Pallas is Jupiter’s daughter;
or the long-bearded Asculapius, the son of young -spollo. But if you give these
three sisters one and the same aspect, yet to each a distinct passion, they will then differ
very much; for instance, let the youngest, who opens the basket with surprize,
start back, as if she were saying---Good God, what is thisP The second, full of
fear, runs away, calling out-— Dear sister, save me from this monster And the
third, being elder and more Rlayed, stepping back, with amazement, says, —
What l this is à monster. Tiisrproceed three different motions from one aspect or like-
nefs; for though the resemblance is somewhat altered, yet the same proportions and
features still remain.
The case is the same between parents and. their children; for instance, if the
the father have a crooked nose, or that of a Casar, the child will, in some de-
gree, have a nose somewhat longisn and rising; has the mother a long and
streight nose, the daughter will have the same ; except that in tender youth it is
less or more bending, as in old age it is thicker and broader, but little different
in length, as experience shews.
We see in the twelve heads of the Roman emperors, their natures -and inclina-
tions well expressed, and agreeable to the histories of their lives ; yet l doubt,
whether they all agree with the true aspects of those emperors; or, whether the
cotemporary masters (who were well-skilled in physiognomy) have not thus al-
tered them according to their natures, rather to represent their innate faculties,
than their outward appearances.
It is adfnirable to consider how our senses are surprized, when all the particular
aspects are- well observed according to the passions wohich they represent; methinks we
thereby discover mens inmost secrets ; that this person sings a high tune-; that,a
low one ; that one bellows with pain; another inwardly laughing; the teeth of
one chatter with cold; another parched with heat and thirst; thus a small line
can let you into a whole countenance ; less or more fatness, also much alter a face.
But







But, for the artist’s benefit, I think proper to shew him a way of finding out
all sorts of aspects after a certain and easy manner.
Let him take a looking-glass, and draw himself by it in such a paffion as he
desires, as joyful, sorrowful, spiteful, &c. and imagining himself to be the figure he
wants to represent, draw this nicely with red of other chalk on drawing-paper; ob-
serving nicely the knitting of the brows, look of the eyes, swell of the cheeks,
contraction of the nostrils, closeness or openness of the mouth, jutt of the upper
or under jaw-bone, according to his position, whether streight or bending: then
let him take a plaister-face, and make a mould from it of lead, or other hard
matter, in order to make afterwards as many impreffions of clay as he pleases;
these let him alter to the before-mentioned drawing, either with his fingers, or
modelling sticks, as he thinks proper, taking away something here, and adding
something there; but still preserving the general likeness: Thus they will serve instead
of the life, chiefly when the face, on which the mould was made, comes to be
like the drawing, that, by the aforesaid alterations, the artist can also see how
much the features likewise alter.
Thus all sorts of pasfions may be moulded with little trouble, and the moulds
used in as many different manners as he pleases, whether they are to be viewed
from below or above, or in profile.
He, who is provided with store of such models, will find great help from
them, since we cannot be furnished with them froin life itself; nor from our
own persons, otherwise than in a single and fronting position in a looking-glafs.
As for knowing how to make them, a few days and a little instruction will teach
us as much as is necessary, if we can draw well. zalf to these the artist add a
mould for a child and a woman, the set will be thermôre compleat.
E’re we conclude this chapter, it is necessary to say something of the disposition
of both sexes in a fketch of a capital ordonnance; as in a concourse of all sorts of
people, at an offering, a play, &&c. where we see, that those of a sex get toge-
ther, and youth to youth, age to age, men to men, and women to women : But
young women, out of curiosity, are observed to crowd under the people, and
though notwithstanding they join themselves to their sex, yet they are afraid of
mishap, and therefore, for protection’s sake, often take children in their arms;
but a man of judgment will nevertheless distinguisn these maids from others by
their breasts, head-attire, or drefs, though attended with three or four children.
It is improper to let children of three or four years old run into crowds, without
mother, brother or elder fister to guard or hold them by their hands.
In places of publick pleadings, firm and high places should always be assigned to
women; as against stone-work, walls, and the like ; because their bashfulness
makes them timorous, and their reputations ought to make them covet rather old
mens than young mens company, to guard them from the insolence of the mob,
soldiers or others, who, on such occasioûs, intrude any where tolraimmage, rob
or play tricks.
The vulgar commonly press close to the pleading place, light women are mostly
found in the middle of the croud, and people of falnion stand behind.







CHAP. VII. Of the property and Choice in the Motion of the Members,
in order to express the Passions.
PREVIOUS to the matter of this chapter, Ishall insist on an observation,

which, in my judgment, is worth the artist’s notice, as being for his ad-
vantage, as well as his diversion ; it is, in asfigning the reason why many make
so little progress in their studies; now l imagine it to proceed from their incon-
stancy, and lukewarm affection, which tie up their hands, unless necessity drive
l was so lucky as to do it; or--—
. It fell out
them to work : They often say,
-as if the business depended on fate, not on mathema-
better than l expected,-—
ticks : But it is quite otherwise with those who pusn on with zeal and good-will,
and confider earnestly and sedately, not accidentally, what they are about; these
are not satisfied with having painted a picture well, and being as well paid for it,
but reflect how much they are furthered in the art by it, and consider, if they were
to do the same again, what alteration and improvement they could make in it,
since it is certain, that though we improve by practice, yet by shorter ways we
can attain a perfect knowledge, and in a less time too : our own faults make also
a deeper impression on us when discovered by ourselves, than if observedby others,
because we naturally hate reproof.
Nothing affected me more than when I found my errors, or more rejoiced me
than when I had corrected them ; which nevertheless did not fully satisfy me;
for l endeavoured still to make what was good better. About twenty-four years
ago I had a mind to paint in little the story of Stratonica’s paying Antiochus a visit;. I
took abundance of pains in it, and it was extremely liked. Some years after; an
opportunity offered of my doing the same thing again, but six times larger; Idid
not think it proper to govern myself by my former thoughts, though much ap-
proved, but diligently consulted the best writers on the subject, rejecting the
trivial ones, and then proceeded as carefully to finish my work ; which got me
more reputation than the former, because executed with more simplicity, and less
pompous circumstances ; it representing only king Seleuchus, Stratonica, Antiochus, and
the phyfician; whereas, in the other I had introdueed a train of courtiers about
them, and, in fine, every thing 1 could think of to make it look pompous and
gaudy. Thus out of a single flower we may by care and industry produce a doublé
one, as was the case of another picture of Scipio and the young bride, which is in
the appartment of the states of Holland at the Hague; this-picture was of my first
thoughts ; but handling the same subject a second time, this latter, as better
composed, got the preference though done but two years after the other; which
I submit to any one’s judgment who compares them; Now if any one afk the
reason of this great difference, and in so little a time too, 1 answer, that having
perceived my ignorance and errors in the first composition, l doubled my pains,
informed myself better, made nicer reflections, and spared no trouble in order to
exceed myself, if possible, in the second performance.
This circumstance also attended my first Alexander and Roxana; for that which I
painted afterwards, and is at the late major Witzen’s house in Amsterdam, is of a









Thus Ithink I have sufficiently shewn, by my own example, the great differ-
ence between sitting down contented with what we know and. do, seeking further
improvements. Nothing delights more than to find-what we seek, and to im-
prove daily; in order to which, Ishall give the artist the following examples.
EXAMPLE I. Plate XIII. Of mutual or reciprocal Love.
Two children are seen to exchange lighted torches, which each gives with the
left, and receives with the right hand, thereby signifving, that what is given
with a good-will, ought to be received and requited with thankfulness; the right
hand denoting mutual kindness, or help and tuition.
Decency teaches, that the giver should hold what he gives at the upper end,
and the receiver to take it underneath, or in the middle.
The giver offers it with an arm stretched out ; contrarily, the receiver takes it
bassifully, with his arm close to the body: both incline the upper parts of their
bodies; their heads lifted up, and inclining over the side of their gift in a friendly
manner, and mouths open, giving the torches cross-wise to each other; they are
in all circumstances alike, in beauty, shape, motion and aspect, except a differ-
ence in their mouths, with respect to the priority of intreaty.
The giver holds his torch with three fingers, the other accepts it with a full
hand ; now, after each has recived his gift, they may be supposed to exchange
right hands, and their shoulders to meet, their left ears crossing each other, that
is, their heads come cross-wise over their left shoulders; and, if you please, each
kisses the other’s left cheek; their right feet advancing come close to each other.
EXAMPLE II Of voluntary submission.
Here we see a coward surrendering his sword to another; he holds it by the
blade close to the hilt; the other receives and takes it close at the hilt : as these
actions are twofold, so are both the paffions, the one shews his pusilanimity, the
other his courage.
The giver stoops his head very low, with eyes cast down at the other’s feet ;
he stands on both legs alike bent, as if he were fainting away; the left hand open
he is putting forth, or pressing thie outside side of the hand against his breast, as if
he were saying, There’s all I have, my life is at your merey: the other contrarily
stands set and upright, his foot advancing, his left hand on his side and turning
hindwards ; has a stern look, his mouth shut, his under lip and chin standing
somewhat out, looks with scorn somewhat over his shoulder on the giver.
EXAMPLE III in Plate XIv. Of Liberality.
This reputable man, who, in passing by, is giving an handful of money to a
poor one, holds out his right hand sideways, inside downwards, beholding the
poor man with a calm and set look, he stands upright, and, with a swelling belly,
is stepping forward: the receiver, on the other hand, makes up to the giver,














































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































bowing his body, stretching out both arms as far as possible, with his two hands
hollowed like a bowl-dish, looks on the gist with joy, eyes staring, open mouth,
as if he were faying,-O hol
EXAMPLE IV. Of Benevolence.
He, who prefents an apple to any one, holds it from’ underneath. with
three fingers, as friendly intreating, pressing his left hand, inside upwards, close
to his breast, his breast and chin advaacing, his head bending somewhat over onc
shoulder. The other contrarily receives it with respect, taking it on the top with
four fingers; advancing the upper part of his body, and somewhat bowing his
head; he discovers a modest gladnefs, looking on the gift; in the mean time the
other is watching his eyes.
EXAMPLE V. Plate Xv.. Of the same.
He, who offers his friend a fine flower, holds it with three fingers, at the lower
end of the stalk; the other takes it with the thumb and fore finger, next the
flower, with-his head over it in order to smell. The giver, as having sinelt it,
draws back his head over one shoulder from it, his face lifted up, eyes somewhat
shut, but one-more than the other, his mouth half open ; his left hand, close to
his shoulder, he holds wide open, as in surprise; he rests on one leg, advancing
with the other: the receiver contrarily is standing on both legs closed, with his
left hand behind him: the giver stands firm; the receiver wavering.
EXAMPLEVI. Of- Fidelip, or Friendsfip.
The person who is presenting à ring. to a virgin, as a token of fidelity or friend-
ship, holes it upright, with his thumb within it, and the stone upwards; he
advances his body and face, and looks direct, clapping his left hand to his
breast: the virgin, on the-other hand, stands or sits strait up, her breast some-
what heaving close to the ring; her head somewhat bending and swaying to her
right shoulder; her left arm hangs down, the hand open, receiving the ring with
three fingers of her right hand. The giver looks not at her eyes but her mouth,
speaking with a look between hope and fear; she, with a modest and serene
countenance, looks down on the ring, rests on one leg, her feet close: the giver
advances with his left leg, his knee bent, and rests on his right toes.
These three last examples I exhibit but half-way, since the disposition of their
lower parts may be easily understood.
As the gifts in all the examples are different, so the sentiments are often very
various as well in giving as receiving.
Whether it be done in sincerity, out of hypocrisy, or for the sake of decency, the
motions in either case differ very little ; because in them all the parties endeavour to
act with as much dexterity as possiblé ; nay, sometimes so far, that thinking to
impose







impose on each other, both are frequently deceived: in such case we must take
appearance for truth, and the contrary.
But such representations would not answer right purpose, as having false mean-
ings; for instead of dissimulation or decency, we should take it for pure love,
since in all three, as 1 say, the motion is the same; therefore, to remove all
doubt and uncertainty, we must have recourse to emblematic figures, which will
clear the meaning, and point out hypocrisy, falshood, deceit, &c. by proper
images, beasts, or hieroglyphic figures; which by-works a prudent artist ought
so to dispose, that, though inactive or mysterious, they may yet answer their
purpose ; for they who are deceived or missed should not perceive the least tittle
of it.
Some may think that the deceived as well as deceiver ought to be set off with
such emblems; but this is superfluous; for as both: parties seem to profesa
sinceritv, nothing but hypoerisy must be shewn.
Ovid tells us, that Mercury, having ftolen some oxen, and perceiving that one
Batius saw it, and fearful of being betrayed, desired him to keep it secret ; which
Battas faithfully promised: However, in order to try him, Mercury disguised him-
self, and a little after came to him, in the shape of the owner of the cattle, and
afked him whether he could not give tidings of them. Batius pointed to the cave
wherein they were hid ; which incensed the godly thief so much, that, reassuming
his form, he beat the traitor, and turned him into a touchstone. Nowit is very
probable, that in the disguise Mercury hid his winged cap and feet, and caduceus,
that he might not be known.
The same we find related of Jupiter and Calisto, when he, in the shape of
Diana, deceived her: But here the matter would not be known, did not some
tokens make it evident, that it was Jupiter and not Diana, though he appeared
like her.
The case of such a picture is the same with a theatrical representation, where
every thing is exhibited as if it really happened; the characters deceive and belye
one another secretly, without knowing it; but the spectators perceive all; nay,
their very thoughts ought plainly to be seen and heard.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Ifue, or Result of Thoughts, touching Histories.
S there are grounds and principles in all arts and sciences, whereon we must
A build, and we cannot, without exactly keeping to themi, either execute or
gain true knowledge of things, so they ought chiesly to be observed in the art of
painting, and especially in the Ordonnance; and since the memory cannot furnisn
out a story, with all its cireumstances, in such due order as a regular sketch re-
quires, we must establisn certain rules in order to supply that defect, since, though
a person should be so happy as to have strong memory, and brisk conceptions, yet
the hands are not so quick at execution ; no, the thoughts exceed them : Some
things also must necessarily go befcre, others follow; which implies and requires time.







Could we but draw as faft as think, memory would be useless; whercas it is cer-
tain, we can design nothing but the ideas which memory first conveys to the

senses.
However, let no one imagine by what 1 say, that a master must first sketch
what he first thinks, and run through tlie design as things occur to his thoughts ;
for conceptions never observe order, and therefore by such irregularity, the per-
formance would be abortive, as in the following inftance : Suppose a. represen-
tation of Cain and Abel, and the fratricide; the first thing that offers, is, Cain fly-
ing from God’s wrath; next is Abel lying dead; next the burnt-offering on the
altar; and lastly, the weapon lying by it. Now the last being furthest in your
thoughts, it is first scratched down with your pen ; then the altar appears; after-
swards Abel; then Cain; and then the Almighty; and at last the landscape, which
s to determine the bigness of the composition. Judge now what such a con-
fused method of designing must produce ; it is therefore a matter of indifference
how you begin a design; for the principal figure must be first considered, and then the
iecidents : Asgold is separated frem the earth, and cleared by refining. We ought
then to proceed orderly in the designing, making first the plan, next the stone-
work, and then the figures or by-works. However, we handle this subject, in
the chapters of ordonnance of histories, hieroglyphic figures, &c. Where
we maintain, that the principal ought to be placed first; then the figures of less
consequence ; and lastly the by-works..
But what I intend now, is, to shew a fhort and certain method of commodi¬
oussy apprehending and retaining things, whether they be given in writing or
by word of mouth, prolix or brief, together with their circumstances, be they
many er few, that youmay sxetch them exactiy in all their particulars perfectly
agreeable to the relation as. well iin mation; colour, drefs and probility, as by-
works; of singular use to those of short memories, but who are nevertheless
skilled in the expressinn of action, the paffions and their effects, uses of colours
and draperies according to sex and age, laying of colours against proper grounds,
difference of countries, sun-shine and ordinary light, and more such.
Having considered well of the subject, and where the action happened, first
make a plan or ground-; next, determine where to place the principal figures or
objects, whether in’the middle or: on the right or left side; afterwards dispose
the circumstantial figures concerned in the matter, whether one, two, or more ?
what else occurs must fall in of course : After this, to each figure join its mark
of distinction, to shew what it is; as, whether a king, philosopher, Bacchus, or
river-god.
The king must have his ministers, courtiers and guards.
The philosopher must be attended by learned men, or his disciples.
Bacches must have Satyrs and Bacchanals about him.
The river-god has his nymphs and naiades.
The king excels by his royal robes, croumn and scepter.
The philosopher is be known by a long and grave vestment, cap on his head, books, rolis
of vellum, and other implements of study about him.








Bacchus is adorned with vine-sprigs; crowned with grapes, and armed with a
Thyrsis.
The water-gods are set off with urns, flags, reeds; and crowned with water-
flowers.
All which badges are naturally proper, though not described in the story ;
nay, if they were, you need not heed them, since their characters remind us of
them when we are handling them : As if we were reading about the goddess of
hunting, every one knows that she has à retinue, and is equipt with accoutrements
for sport: And that the charming Venus is attended with her Graces. This may suf-
fice for personal character.
As for motions,
Aking is commanding.
A philosopher contemplating.
Bacchus rambling. And
The river-god in his station.
When the king commands, all is in a hurry iand metion to execute his will; his re-
tinue are obsequious to his words and nods.
When the philosopher is exercising himself, he is either reasoning, writing, or
contemplating.
When Bacchus is on his ramble, the Menades, Bacchanals, and Satyrs madly attend
his chariot, shrieking and howling; and with tabors,
pipes, timbrels, cymbals, &c.
The river-god in his station, either rests on an urn or a pot shedding water; or is
sitting among his nymphs on the bank of à river.
Thus each character is occupied according to its nature; and so we deduce one
circumstance from another without seeking it, or being at à stand, having such a
fund of matter in our heads, that onthe bare imention: of a person we must con-
clude that such and fuch properties tare effential to him-
The next businefs is, the effects of the paffions :When the general moves, the
whole army is in motion ; when the king threatens, the accused is in fear, and
the ministers and others remain in suspence. When the philosopher discourses,
the audience is attentive, and each person moved in proportion to his apprehen-
fion, or attention; one has his finger on his mouth, or forehead ; another is
reckoning by his fingers; another scratches his head; another, leaning on his
elbow, covers his face with his hand, &c. When Bacchus speaks, the noise
ceases. When the water-gods are taking repose, every one is husn, fitting or ly-
ing promiscuousty at ease.
If these examples be not sufficient to establisn my purpose, I shall add one
or two more ; and the rather, because no one before me has handled this subject
so methodically; nay, I may say, hardly touched on it.
We read in scripture that queen Efther, over-awed by the frowns of king Ahasu-
erus, swooned away. That Belthazzar, peroeiving the hand-writing on the wall,
was, with his whole court, troubled in mind. Again, in Ovid’s metamorphofis,
Ariade, in despair on the fhore, was comforted and made easy by the acceptable
presence of Bacchus, who offered her his aid. From all which, and the like cir-
cumstances, we are enabled to conclude with certainty, that a single paffion,
handled















































































































































































































































































handled according to the manner before laid down, can alone furnish matter
enough to enrich a whole ordonnance, without the aid of other by-works, since
many things and circumstances do proceed from that one passion onsy: For let
us suppose two persons passing by each other, as in zlate XVI. and one seen in
front the other in rear; he who walks on the left side, and is going off, has a
bundle on his right shoulder, from which, something drops behind him--he has
a boy and a dog with him. The other coming forwards, and perceiving what
falls, calls to tell him of it; whereupon he looks back, and the boy runs to take
it up. Now I refer to any one’s judgment, whether my thoughts, by fo simple
a relation, be not presently conceived, since it is all the story ; I fancy they are,
but yet still better, if keeping within the bounds of the relation, I were to make
a fketch of it ; for though the bare description of the thing easily makes an
impreffion on the senses ; yet he who is not conversant with the fine motions and
beauties of action, (which consist mostly in the contrasting of the members) can
never hit the writer’s meaning.
I place then, the man calling out foreright; and the other man past by him,
looking back and hearkening to what he says : In these postures both look over
the left shoulder. Now if any one afk whether he, who is paffing on, could
not as well turn to the right as the left in looking back, and the other do the
same ; I say, No; unless we will run counter to nature ; for I suppose, that he
who is approaching has a stick in his right hand, and with his left points to
the cloth which is dropt; and the other having the bundle on his right shoul-
der, his left hand rests on his side, by which also the child holds him ; Now;
because each other’s left side meets, and onc sees the cloth dropt at his left, his
kindnefs compels him speedily to call over thé same fhoulder to the other man ;
who plainly hearing, turns to the side of him who calls; whereupon they behold
each other; the boy, being nimble, runs quickly to the cloth, and the dog out-
strips him in getting to it first : From all which premifes is implied a natural mo-
tion, and turning of the members, without our saying,the upper part of the body
fronting;. the left or right leg thus or thus—lf we know the place of standing;
towards whom, and what they have to say, the rest must follow of course.
Such reveries as these give us a right judgment of a picture, make us retain it,
and help to remove difficulties; and if ’to this be added. some certain strokes to
point out either the place or actions of figures, it would be more easy and helpful
to the memory.
I know a painter who made each letter, or mark, have its particular significa-
tion : For instance, anL was a figure sitting on the ground; a T Christ cruci-
fied, and so forth: Moreover, he had another secret, whereby he expressed cer-
tain figures. he made use of; as a decumbent figure of Caracci, a running one of
Raphael, a flying one of Berettini da Cortona, a child of Quesnoy, light and shade of
la Fage, and many others.
If now the preceding example, of the two men- passing each- other, should
seem insufficient, I will subjoin one other of the same nature, but fact ; Imean,
the story of Judah and Tamar, (see plate XVII.) when coming from his country-
dwelling, he is in the way accosted by her in the habit of an harlot; I put the
case







case thus : Judah comes forward, and the road lying on the left side of his house,
along which some of his servants are going off in order to sheer sheep; Tamar
sits on the right side of the road, on the grass, airily and wantonly attired, and
with a veil over her head ; Now it is probable, that having a lewd design, she
first accosted Judah, who, like a man of repute, past her; but when she lifted
up her veil and beckoned to him, he stopt to hear what she had to say; there-
upon, I suppose, he stood still, resting on one foot, and advancing the other to
make an halt, to see who calls him ; he turns to the left, opening his left hand
like one in surprize, and then claps it to his breast, to shew that he is struck
there ; and lastly takes hold of his beard, as pondering what he is going to do :
In the mean time she rises and lays hold of his garment. The servants are seen
either in profile, or backwards, as the road turns and winds to the house, having
scissars or sheers with them. The house may lie as the road shews it, though,
according to ordonnance, the middle suits it better than a side; This is sufficient
for understanding the meaning of this story, and the right method for handling a
great work by a fhort introduction.
If any one suppose, that if the road were to lie crofs the piece, and the whole
disposition altered so as to make the man go from right to left, and not place the
woman on either side, it would be all the same, since then she would still be on
his left side ; I say, No; for she calling him, we should then, of both theirbo-
dies, see but one of their faces; and what were such a paffionless statue good
for; Again, we could not shew his principal motions, which are very essential to
the fact; wherefore the other way is best.
But let no one deceive himself by my manner of relating this history ; for,
consulting the scriptures, he will find, that I have inverted the sense to a subject
shewing how to give two persons distinct passions, and thereby to embellisn a picture;
for by the scriptures it will appear; that Judah is going to the place whence I
make him come, in order to send Tamar a lamb or goat to redeem his pledge.
I leave it to any one’s judgment, whether it cannot be plainly inferred what
motions these two figures must have, to make thereout three distinct and pro-
bable reprefentations, which I thus deduce.
First, In the man’s person, an unexpected rencounter.
Secondly, An enquiry who she is, and what she wants.
Lastly, A criminal paffion.
First, He is grave, afking and understanding what the matter is, or at least
imagining it, he wisnes it may be true; then begins to make love ; at last, being
fully persuaded, he gives loose to his paffion, grows bold and venturesome-
These three periods produce peculiar paffions in both, different from each other;
the first, grave and modest; the sccond, kind and loving; and the third wanton
and bold.
The woman contrarily is moved by three paffions.
First, She is friendly and lovely.
Secondly, Wanton, with a dissembling stand off.
Lastly, They both agree.
First, She accosts him with an enticing air, overcoming his gravity.
Secondly,






































































































































































































































































































































































































































Secondly, he approaching, addresses her in a friendly manner; but altering
her speech, she answers him roughly, and will not be touched.
Lastly, he, being transported with passion (at which sne secretly laughs) sne
pushies him coyly from her on one side, and lays hold of him on the other. From
all which premises we may find three positions springing only from the words
which we suppose must naturally pass between them.
Perhaps some may say,—I know nothing of such effects, since they never hap-

-But it is certain, there are very few who never felt them; and
even they can sometimes account for them better than others who have known
them. Many know the virtues of medicines and poisons, without tasting them ;
arguing with judgment improves the performance, otherwise art would be im-
practicable, or at least attainable by few, if it consisted in inquiry only ; for who
run mad, and could afterwards tell how the frenzy seized himp the truth is, we
can only guess at it. But this last story is proposed by me for no other reason than
to make it plain and evident how the members are moved by the impulse of the
senses, and the intercourse of talk, and how by such motions we express our inward
thoughts.
There are many such occurrences in authors, chiefly in Ovid ; as Jupiter and
Calisto, Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, Phabus and Leucothae, Mercurius and Aglaura,
Jupiter and Semele, Vertumnus and Pomona, Venus and Adonis, Apollo and Daphne, &c.
Befides some others in history, as Appelles and Campaspe, Alexander and Roxana,
Scipio and the young Bride, Tarquinius and Lucretia, Antiochus and Stratonica; and in
scripture, David and Abigail, Hagar with the Angel; Christ and Magdalen in the
garden; Christ and the Samaritan Woman at the Well; Marys Annunciation; the Visit ef
Mary and Elizabeth, and many others; all which ought to be treated in the same
manner, according to the nature of what they are doing; as at each word exchanged,
cvhat motions throughout the body muft follow, and what lineaments of the face, how the car-
natiens must change either to red or pate, more or less fierce, and so forth. By means we
may design any thing, and come to perfection the shortest and surest way.
CHAP. IX. Remarks on some Mistakes in Historical Compositions.
T will not be amiss, as a caution to others, to censure some mistakes of masters
in historical compositions, in order to shew of what great consequence it is to
represent plainly the true nature and state of things, that we may improve, and not
meet with rebuke instead of glory. A man of good sense may freely exercise his
thoughts as he sees good, but many think they merit much by following the letter of
a ftory, though at the same time they overlook above half its probability ; which fre-
quently happens, when they are got into esteem, and have a name. : But, alas I.
what rich man would not be thought such; what valiant man do a cowardly
action; or wise man commit folly; only through wilful carelessness; truly it
seems unnatural, and I think, that nobody of but moderate sense would strive to
excel in this or that art, without being tickled with the desire of fame either in
his life-time, or after death : and although some instances may contradict this,
vet






yet you must observe that I am speaking here of pare virtue; for he who built the
remple of Diana, and he who fired it, though instigated by one defire, to leave a
lasting name behind him, have been as different in praise as action; from whence I
infer, that no artist can be void of inclination for praise and honour, which other-
wise he must not expect; and if so, would blast his credit by an imprudent act :
Raphael in his Adam and Eve, has represented him receiving the apple of her,
and resting on a withered stump, and that smoothly fevered as with an ax or saw;
which is a double mistake, and if done wilfully, not to. be excused ; for how is
it likely, that a tree, which has hardly received life, and placed so near the tree
of life should so soon be withered; this must be an oversight like that of Cain,
who kills his brother Abel with a sharp pick-ax; and in another piece Eve has a
distaff; what improbability and impertinence is this; for when Eve has spun her
flax, whence must the weaver come, and who make the scissars to cut it) but
perhaps these were not Raphael’s riper thoughts, but rather those of his youth,
wherein the greatest wits sometimes mistake.
Charles Vermander, thotgh a writer, poet and good philosopher, has mistook as
much in his confusion of Babel; for the tower and scaffolding are represented un-
finifhed in the middle of the piece, divine wrath with slames wavering over it;
moreover are seen the children of lsrael marched off in tribes, and here and there
distinguished by troops; they with their peculiar standards, sit or lie all about,
not like people confounded by a diverfity of speech and a straying confusion, but
as met together from all quarters only to form a congrefs; for there we see
Egyptians, Persians, Arabians, Moors, Asiatics, Americans, Europeans, Turks, nay
Scoissers, all in their modern habits : Surely we need not afk them whither they are
going, because the love for our own country prevails above all things; and there-
fore every man is returning to the region whence he took his character, manners
and habit. What this painter’s meaning was, I know not, but in my opinion,
it is a true confusion.
I cannot omit another piece of Rowland Savry, representing paradise; wherein
elephants, rhinoceroses, crocodiles, bears, wolves, unicorns, ostriches, eagles, &c.
which must intirely lay it waste; Now 1 appeal to any man, whether such
stance of eating an apple, which might as well have been done by an ape, squirrel,
or other small creature ; which makes it look rather like a deer-park than a
garden of pleafure. Had more people been created than Adam and Eve, the
cherubim need not have guarded the entrance to keep the savage creatures out,
fince they were already entered, but rather to keep them in, in order to save the
rest of the earth from incommodity. I have seen more such compositions, but
to avoid tediousness shall not mention them here ; it is sufficient, by few examples
of great masters, to know how easy it is to commit mistakes, through ignorance
or want of heed.
In the first of the aforesaid examples, l would shew how it fares with those
who amuse themselves more with a small part than the whole of a story; and with
an arm or leg which no ways concerns the matter, without being in any pain







for forcing nature, or turning the sense. Of the second example I shall fay nothing
here; since it may be guessed what I mean by the iron of the pick-axe. Of the
third, that some men seck five legs on a sheep, as we say, whereby, instead of
clearing, they make the matter more obscure and intricate. As for the fourth,
some make no difference between an stalian floor and a green field, if they can
but have an opportunity of shewing their wit, introducing every thing whether
congruous or not.
As to Savry’s piece, my thoughts are, that all beasts are created by God, but
not in the same manner with man; and that each clime produced its proper
species of animals, which came from thence to Adam to give them a name ac-
cording to their natures; which was no sooner done, but they returned to the
countries they came from; some to the east, others to the south, according to
their natural inclination to this or that climate; so that the garden, wherein the
spirit of God dwelt, was only for Adam and his consort; in it they lived happily,
and besides them no irrational creatures, except such as could delight their eyes
and ears : moreover it is my opinion, that this garden could not harbour any un-
cleanness, putrefaction or noxious creatures ; wherefore my composition is this.
These two naked persons I place as principals in the middle of the piece, on a
small rising, close to a fine tufted apple-tree of larger size than ordinary, and of a
sound-body ; Adam ’sits with Eve in his arms, who half in his lap directs the apple
to his mouth; he, with his face towards her, with a staring eye, and raised brow,
looks surprized, and seems to put the offer away with his hand ; to the acceptance
of which, she, with a lovely and enticing air, seeks to persuade him; at the same
time, with her other hand behind him, she is receiving another apple, which the
serpent, hanging on a bough, réaches out toher. Behind her is a peacock with
its tail spread, and a cat pawing her ; besides, a fine hound, who looking back is
going away. I introduce also cocks and hens, and other tame creatures proper to
the region for embellisning the landscape. I plant there all sorts of trees, except
the cypress, to gratify the sight and palate. Small birds are slying about to please
garden. On the right side of the piece l shew the entrance into the place, and on
the sides, two square pillars of green leaves, beset with melons, pumpkins and
the like ; besides a long and high green wall, running up to the horizon, and
uniting with the offskip. The horizon is level ; along the green wall are seen
orange and lemon-trees, intermixed with date-trees. The whole piece is en-
lightened with an agreeable sunshine.
To this composition I shall add another
Of the Flight of Adam and Eve.
I was formerly of opinion, that when this pair received their doom and were
driven out of paradise, and both subjected to the same fate, the beasts must fly
with them, having learnt to know their own natures; wherefore I intended to
make my ordonnance accordingly, to wit, the two naked and afhamed persons
dying from the fiery sword which threatens them; and for embellishment, a
great






great confusion of beasts each attacking the enemy of its kind ; as the eruel wolf
setting on the innocent sheep; the sharp-sighted eagle on the timorous hare ; and
so forth. But as by this violence the main action would intirely lose its force, and
fall into a perverted sense, l desisted ’till I had better informed myself of the
matter, especially seeing no beast stayed in the garden, but each returned to his
country. I thought again, how can this be like the slight of Adam out of Eden 2.
it looks more naturally like two condemned malefactors driven into a forest to be
devoured of wild beasts ; which their fear and friglitful looks make more pro-
ble; and therefore l afterwards contrived it thus :
In Adam’s dlight the labouring ox accompanies him to help him in tilling the

ground; the scaly serpent moves before, turning and winding on her belly ; by
the ox are the long-bearded he, and wanton she-goat ; the woolly sheep; the
crested cocks and hens, and other such like creatures for sustenance. As also the
faithful dog and pawing cat, and such other tame animals as are proper in an
hieroglyphio sense ; after these follow noxious creatures, as rats, mice; &&c. No
sunshine appears, but all is gloomy, and the wind blows hard, whereby the trees
shake, and their leaves drop; all is waste and wild as if winter were at hand ; the
rugged and dry ground, parted by the heat, makes here and there ups and
down;. the water in the fens being dried up, the frogs gape for breath; the sun
being quite hid, the moon or north-star appears : Such were my thoughts of this
story.
I will end this chapter by sketching a third composition of my own, for the
studious cattle painter s benefit, being the
Story of ORPHEUS’; Death.
I lay the scene in a desolate place, yet filled with men, beasts, trees, hills,
rocks, water-falls, and brooks full of fish, and what can be more proper to the
matter, all being in disorder ; Ovid relates, that this ingenious poet and singer,
son of Apollo and of the Muse Calliape, did, with the charms of his harp, bewitch
this crowd, but it lasted not long; for the mad Bacchanals, enraged because he
despised them, stew him, casting his head and harp into the river Hebrus, called
by the Grecks, Marjsias, as the poet says. Now we see the unhappy body of this
excellent musician, thrown from a small hill at the foot of a tree, which moved
by so sad a catastrophe bends it boughs with sorrow, endeavouring to cover the
body with its shade : Next we behold the insulting, mad and intoxicated women
girt with skins, mocking, run away, after having flupg the head into the river run-
6.
ning on one side : Ayoung girl, who flings in his harp, is likewise driven by the
same phrensy : Behold now a guzzler who (though so much in liquor as to want
support, yet) must vent her spleen by kicking the body, and flinging a drinking-
pot at it, which makes her seem to tumble backwards : Here lie broken thyrses,
potshreds, bruised grapes and vine-branches scattered round the body in great
disorder : The long-lived stag makes to the cover; the dreadful lion and spotted
tyger grimly pafs each other ; each creature seeks and attacks its enenay; the
hurtful mouse, till now sitting quietly by the party-coloured cat, hangs in her
mouth;






mouth; the greedy wolf seizes the sheep by its throat; the faithful hen escapes
the thievisst fox, who near a fallen fir-tree catches the lascivious dove ; the hills
and rocks retire clashing against each other, whereby they tumble; here we
see an huge stone; there a flying tree; nay, the water itself seems to flow back-
wards ; the frogs and other marshy creatures, afraid of being devoured by the
vulture and other birds of prey, dive under water, but yet the white stork flies
with one of them in his bill; the cautious hare, running from the swift dog, stops
short, whereby the dog goes over him, and the hare, to make her escape, takes a
side course; the black raven and solitary owl, chatter in the tree at one another,
beholding the murthered body, which they desire to eat; and by it lies the faithful
dog howling, regardless of any thing else. The piece has no agreeable sun-shine,
but the air is stormy, and full of driving clouds foreboding a tempest; the prin-
cipal of the composition is shady, and slung off by a light lointain, which is almost
in the middle.
Thus I enquire into the genuine state and nature of things, like an huntsman,
who tracing the course of a deer finds at last his cover; not that l do it for curi-
ofity’s sake as a philosopher, but because these, and no other means, can help
me; and as long as I keep this path, hope never to. err or commit the before-
mentioned faults, especially seeing nothing argues stupidity more than untimely
fimplicity; whereas critical inquiry is the key of nature’s treafure, and of her
deepest secrets ; being not unlike what the wittv Greeks have feigned of Minerva,
whom they exhibit with abox and key, and-dispensing the sciences to men ac-
cording to their abilities.
I ufed formerly to imitate the unthinking, in not lessening or augmenting the
sacred stories, but adhering to the letter of the scriptures without more ado, and
without making any distinction between heavenly and earthly things; between.
soul and body; or, in short, between something and nothing; lknow, that as
to our eternal happiness nothing is wanting to compleat it;, but many things;
with respect to art; must I therefore remain in ignorance or dull simplicity ; In
the scriptures they say, all is written that is to the purpose, but then how came
the beasts into the garden of Eden ; Where gets Cain an iron pick axe, and Eve
a distaff, or the Babylonians their particular dresses ; Since no mention is made of
such circumstances. But when you read, that the king went to visit such and
such persons, that doés not imply that he went alone; as when vou find that
Haman was carried to the gallows, somebody must attend him besides the execui-
tioner; Josaua, in slaying many thousands, didit not alone, without the help of
his army. As for me, my opinion is, that in true histories, either sacred or pro-
fane, no improbable or impossible things ought to enter into the composition, nor any
thing left dubious, but that every thing tend to the clearing up and better understanding
tiem in their full sense and force.










CHAP. X. Of Richness and Probability in History.
S by the courage and curiosity of sea-faring men, many remote countries,
A nay a new world, have been discovered, so in painting, when artists spare
neither trouble nor pains, they will likewise, but with less danger, discover a
new world in the art, full of variety to please the eye.
We want not a new Homer, Virgil or Ovid, and their inventions, the present
have left us materials enough to work on for a thousand years, and that not suf-
ficient for the execution of a tenth part of their thoughts; and if we do not
mend our pace, ten thousand years will be too little ; the reason is, that we con-
tent ourselves with patching up old houses with new materials, and vet they are
old houses; if some parts decay, the worst are repaired, and the rest rather left
unfinished than the whole improved. But leaving similes we will use other means,
though uncustomary, to forward us in the art; curiosity is repesented with wings,
to shew its eagerness to attain things unkrown to her; let us not then stop in
barely inquiring into old things, but enrich them with new thoughts.
As an example, let us open Ovid, and seehis fable of Deucalion, set down in his
first book of Metamorphosis. Deucalion was king of Thessaly, who, with his confort
Pyrrha were the only persons remaining alive of the human race after the flood :
These were enjoined by the oracle of the god : Themis to cast the stones of the
earth over their shoulders, whereby human race was propagated, and the world
re-peopled.
A well-grounded thought leads the way to many others; even so it happens
here in this poet’s fable, laid down as a truth; nay so agreeable to the truth of
the flood, and Noah’s preservation, that there is little difference between the
truth and the fable; for what is in the one is also contained in the other; and
the circumstances of the flood are the same in both; the matter lies now in a
probable expresfion of the damage which the earth suffered by so total an inunda-
tion, and to execute it sketch-wise as l conceive it.
Ordonnanee of DEUCcAlion and. PYrrhA, after the Flood.
I suppose these two aged persons walking on level ground, the man’s head co-
vered with a corner of his garment, and the woman’s with a veil knotted behind :
With his left hand he holds his garment full of stones; her lap is empty; Cupid
conducts them by the flaps of their garments, with one hand, having also a
lighted torch in it, and holds them fast, that in turning or winding they may
not hurt or go before one another; the stones which they have flung behind
them all the way as they walked, represent human forms perfected in proportion
as they are first flung, and furthest from them; the man walks upright, with his
right
* She is rightly so called, as proceeding, according to Hesiod, from Calum the Heaven, and
Vesta the Earth, who appointed her to preside over Righteousnesi : And by Jupiter she was stiled the
Mother of Civil Sciences.






right arm lifted up, and hand open, as having just flung a stone, which is seen
skimming a little above the ground ; the woman I represent somewhat stooping in
her walk, receiving the stones from Cipid, which each time sne casts away, and
he, walking along, takes up before her ; Deucalion’s garment is à sullied purple ;
her drefs old and dark, and her gown violet ; Cupid is adorned with a red dia-
dem ; the grafs, full of mud and sand, lies flat. A little from these figures is
Themis’s temple, built on an eminence, and supported by columns, or a close
wall quite over-grown and full of mofs; this temple is surrounded with sine and
blooming trees, and near behind it is seen the two-headed mount, paffing by
the point of sight, and encompafsed with water.
On the left side, in the offfkip, I represent the ocean fufl of Tritons and Nereides
fwimming about the mount. To this hill I fasten an anchor, the rope whereof
is tied to the boat, which, being left by the water, remains hanging keel-
upwards.
These are the principal of my conceptions ; as for the lesser circumstanées, I
fhall not limit them here ; fuch as the dispersing of the rainy clouds by the east
wind ; re-appearance of the covered hills and rocks, discovery of buiidings da-
maged by the water, pieces of wrecks, statues, sea-monsters, bones of men and
beasts, ornaments and other remains appearing here and there out of the mud,
plashies, and infinite other things removed by the force of the waves from one
part of the earth to another, and washied from east to west; all which I leave to-
the artist’s discretion.
But now it may be afked why I introduce Cupid, who, in Naso’s description, is
not mentioned; and I give this reason, that he being the eldest of the gods, and,
according to Heftod, brought forth of chaos and the earth, by him consequently all
things are produced, according to the poets ; therefore it is probable, that in
this second creation he can be spared no less than in the first: Love was also the
principal, nay the only paffion, which' these people preserved to each other after
their great misfortue, and which they cheriffied by their simplicity and up-
rightness.
Again, though they were aged, and near their ends, yet they were studying
means to escape death, and to render their race immortal; and who, of the
gods, can contribute more to it than Cupid; Must not Japiter himself own his
sovereignty : Therefore, though the poet inakes mention but of two persons, yet
reason permits, nay, would have us bring this god into their company ; especi-
ally fince painters have the liberty to add new niatter; and more figures for orna-
ment-sake, when they are not repugnant to nature and likelihood; for which
Horace gives them full commission in his lyrie song on poetry.
 
-Pictoribus atque poëtis



Quidlibet qudendi semper fuit æqua potestas.

Thus paraphrased by Mr. Dryden.

Poets and painters free fron servilé gide.


May trear their subjects, and their obyects drate.





























Add then freely, when the writcr is silent, one or more figures to your work,
not to gain mastery, or to excel, but-to make the matter more plain and evident ;
which in fables is very necessary, though in histories it must be done emblematically
only.
After having entertained you with my conceptions of this story, give me leave
to exhibit a representation of the same subject handled by another painter, not to
shew the oddness, but the superfluity, impropriety, and ill-bestowed time, and
the ignorance of presuming pedants, especially since contrary arguments frequently
produce truth, and thereby shew the validity of a rule, which is levelled at ab-
surdities. This painter’s friends paying him a visit, he put his piece on the
easel, and thus entertained them.

Behold, Gentlemenl here is a proof of my judgment and art ; I call nei-
c
ther the leaened, nor the virtuosi to unfold its meaning;, no, an ignorant pea¬
sant can tell it you at once. There is the world after the deluge, as natural as
if it were alive ; but no wonder; for the ark is plainly discovered on the top
of mount Parnassus. Here you see the wonders of the heavens shut up, and the
fountains of the earth stopped with a cork: There the sea runs high in a valley
and full of all sorts of wood-work, as tables, chairs, benches, paper-mills, and
what not; besides some dcad bodies, as well of women as men, one of them
has a leather-apron, another a crown on his. head, and another a night-cap:.
This, Gentlemen, concerns only what is carried away by the water: But there
on the land lies a camel, next him a silver salver, and by it a dead nightingale
in a cage: Here again you see the grave of Mabomet, and about it some scattered
rolls of Virginia tobacco: And before, an that hillock, some cards and egg.
shells; but L, had almost forgot the cardinal’s cap, which lies there, and,
assure you, was painted, with carmine; as alsp aefcorpion, as natural as if
it.
were alive : There;. on the :third ground, is ’à gallows, and under it three
thieves, with, the halters still about their necks; Yonder is a child in his go¬
cart, half buried in the; sand : And there a sea-calf entangled in the boughs of.
a thicket ; besides some pickled herrings; Moreover you see there a Imush-
pot, with some pencils and crayons ; as also, a mass-priest in his surplice; nay
even the great Turkiss horse tail : Behold. all the toys blown out of a Nuremberg
toy-shop, scattered here and there : There, by. the old lantern, lies a drum,
with its head turned to jelly by the water : Isay nothing yet of that iron chest.
in which are kept the records of the imperial chamber of judicature at spire ; nor of
an hundred other things, besides houses and monasteries; nay, the Vatican it-
self; for all is turned into ruins and rubbisn; no living creature is to be seen
but Deucalion and Pyrrha, and their three sons and their wives, all done to the
life. Now who will not take this to be a flood, and believe that all happened
in this manner: Look there, I myself am sitting on thé fore ground, on an
hillock, and-modelling every thing after the life; and there is my name and
the date.
Having said this, he stood much surprised to see they did not extol his fancy,
and approve it, since he thought it so well executed. For my part, I think that
no one before him ever represented such out-of-the-way thoughts; many indeed
have





have now and then erred, but being made sensible of it, they have rectified their
mistakes; whereas this whole composition was but one mistake ; scripture
jumbled with fable; Moses with Ovid; antiquity with novelty ; a cardinal’s cap,
vatican, cards, things found out a thousand years after, with antiquity ; what is
all this but a chaos of folly; Methinks such an artist is like common chymists,
who, to extract gold, fling any thing into the crucible that will melt, drudging
night and day, and wasting their substance to find at last, in the bottom of the
devouring crucible, nothing but a little scum of l cannot tell what, an unknown
nothing, without colour or weight; when a good chymist will get the true knowledge
of metals, and their natures, &c. in order to obtain the precious gold by art and
labour : Even so ought a painter also to obtain the knowledge of objects, and
their natures, times, properties and uses, or else the substance of his art will
evaporate.
I have often observed, that superstuity, instead of rendering a thing more forcible
and conspicuous, has lessened and obscured it; and that too large a ground, thinly
filled, has no better effect; we must therefore avoid this Scylla and Charibdis as two
dangerous rocks : l cannot compare such proceedings better than to excessive
and melancholy. temper, or the other from a lively and too fertile an-one, or that.
some men are superstitious imitators of other men’s works; as we see daily, in one
the greatnefs of Carracci; in another, the fine colouring of Titian; in this, the
graceful simplicity of Raphael; and in that, the natural expression of Guido. This
method is indeed what some men are prone to, but let us consider the difference
between modelling in clay, and cutting in marble.
To return to our subject about the floods, let us make a comparison between
them and Raphael’s, in order to form a judgment; Raphael makes Noah and his
family the principal characters in his composition; we do the same by Deucalion
and his zoife; and the other contrarily exhibits them very dubioussy, and too
much out of sight in the offskip; in Raphael’s nothing is seen of what is laid
waste by the water, or dead bodies, beasts, &c. in ours so much is visible,
that the cause and the effects plainly appear; and in the other, so great a super-
fluity abounds, as if the whole world were contained in the single picture; in
Raphael’s is seen Noah’s going forth of the ark; in ours Deucalion and Pyrrha are
of the waters is scarce perceived; wherefore
In medio securo.
that is,
Secure we tread when neither foot is seen,
Too high or low, but in the golden mean.
Let us therefore ponder and weigh thoroughly what we are about in such an
important composition, and then proceed. to work as quick as possible.







CHAP. XI. Of the Ordonnance of hierogylphic Figures.
HAVING before said cursorily, that an excest of fuch figures often obscures
their meaning, nay, renders them unintelligible, I think it proper to treat
of this subject here, since they are of such frequent ufe and service, not only in
handling fables, histories, and emblems, but in carving statues and bas-reliefs for
great men and their palaces.
Caesar Ripa’s treatise of lconology is questionless an excellent and useful book for
all persons whose art has any relation to painting; but although it treat copiously
of hieroglyphics, manners, paffions, zeal, virtues, vices, &c. yet something is
still required to the right use of that book, according to the occaston, and dif-
ference of the subject, which by that great writer is not laid down ; since it is
without dispute, that each figure must express no other passion than its ocen; but
when they are used for by-works or ornament, to illustrate some principal real
character they must then subserve the ends for which they are introduced; for in-
stance, in a fight, victory should attend the conqueror; honour or fame, an
excellent man ; love, or Cupid, an amorous man; the vindictive, revenge; the
hypocrite, falshood; the cancrous man, envy ; the innocent, innocence; and
such like. l omit others, as anger, madness, sorrow, modesty, boldness, autho-
rity, charity, temperance, cruelty, pain, &c. because these have no share in
some acts, nor come into play except they are used alone, and without the com-
pany of living persons, as the elements against each other, virtues against vices,
and so forth. It is therefore of the greatest consequence for a painter, statuary,
poet, or orator, to know these things thoroughly, and keep them in memory,
which practice will make easy.
I remember, that when 1 was under my father’s instructions, and studying de-
sign, my gusto was for emblems, which I collected from his and other masters
works, and then made intire compositions of them; which, though trifling be-
cause of my youth and inexperience, yet surprised many, who advised my father
to let me pursue that kind of study ; but whether he thought me too young, or
that 1 rather inclined to history, he diverted me from it as much as possible ;
especially since it drew other masters disciples to see my odd productions ; which
he much disliked. But when my eldest brother brought me out of ltaly, Caesar
Ripa’s book aforesaid, (which hitherto we were strangers to, or else was locked
up as a secret) then my flame for emblematic learning. broke out again. By the
help of this book I produced many and strange designs, which for their fingu-
larity, were accounted as prodigies’or dreams, by some out of spite against me,
others through ignorance ; however my proficiency was such, that it yielded me
an annual profit, because the Jesuits scholars yearly bespoke of me the embel-
lishing of above 150 of their positions or thefei, with emblems, histories or fables
in water-colours. Judge now, whether these my studies tended not to my advan-
tage and improvement, and what honour was shewed me in preferring me to the
employ, before my cotemporaries and fellow-disciples, and what little sxill they
must






must have in hieroglyphical learning, though l doubtless then made many
mistakes.
But leaving digreffions, let us return to our subject, and illustrate it in the story
of Dido’s death; which we fhall handle two different ways.
I. Natural. 2. Emblematical.
In the first manner we reprefent the queen in despair, and past hopes, on a pilè
of wood, and, after sacrifice, stabbing herself; when lris cuts off the fatal hair;
her sister attends the solemnity in tears and lamentation; all is in confusion,
and every one affected with sorrow in a greater or less degree--Thus far Virgil.
In the second manner we shew how despair, accompanied by rage, is dragging
love to the grave, with this inscription,-Dido’s death. And so l designed it for
the frontispiece of Monfieur Pel’s tragedy on that subject.
Now it is easy to see why, in the former manner, neither rage, nor despair,
nor love attend the princess; and in the latter, why neither princess, by-standers,
altar, nor pile of wood, are introduced ; since in the first manner no aid is wanting,
because each figure fufficiently acts its own part, and shews every thing which
its paffion naturally leads it to ; wherefore it would be redundant, nav obscure
the story, to double all the several motions, with the same passions and senses, by
these figures ; whence it is that they can have no place.
But where the subject is purely emblematic, and emblematic figures the principal
characters, as in the sccond manner, they must come into play ; because each
figure then expresses its. natural quality, in order to clear and illustrate the sense
of the story, without the addition of any body else.
In this manner Apelles contrived his piece, on his being accused by Antiphilus;
wherein he reprefents innocence pursued by rage, vice, lies, and slander, and
dragged by them before an ignorant judge; thus many things are couched under
a single allegory : But when any particular person, man or woman, and their cha-
racters, shapes, countenances, &c. are burlesqued in this manner, then such a
design may be called a pasquil.
It is without dispute, that every man has but one predominant passion at a time,
which moves and governs him ; wherefore a prudent, generous and valiant
man, when he is doing a prudent act, may be accompanied by generosity and
valour, but not with prudence, because that quality appears in his act: Again, if
in an attack he perform a valorous action, such must appear in his person, and
pradence and generosity only must accompany him; if he shew his generosity, as in re-
storing captives without ransom, prudence and valour are sufficient to attend him, with-
out the addition of generofify. The case of a famous master is the same; for he
being possessed of several good qualities, as judgment, assiduity, quick concep-
tions, &c. if he be represented employed at his easel, those characters may all illus-
trate him, except affiduity, which shews itself by his motion and posture : If a
philosopher do a foolisn thing, all other good qualiries should ornament him, except
folsy, because he is committing it.
Such observations as these, are worthy of notice, and without them an emblem
cannor be good. This part of the art is very liable to censure, but yet few understand
it, because the facts being always couched under uncommon appearances, are se-
crets






crets to the vulgar, without explanation; nevertheless they should be so handled
that people of judgment at least may know their meanings, and the artist not be
reproved.
I remember to have seen a picture of Bacchus and Ariadne, wherein l observed a
mistake, in placing sorrow and despair about the princess; the latter was seen flying
from her; which, in my opinion, was right and proper in the master; but our dis-
pute was, whether the figure of sorrow had any business there. He justified it
by very plausible reasons, saying, that although, by the presence of the compas-
fionate god, her sorrow was at an end, yet it abated not suddenly ; because she
was to give him a relation of her disaster, and then to wait for a favourable an-
swer; and so long forrow must be with her. I have, says he, represented her
with a sorrowful look, and tears in her eyes, pointing towards the sea at the per-
fidious Theseus, the occasion of her forrow ; Bacchus is attentive, whose upper gar-
ment is opened by Cupid; and because Ariadne knew not whom she had with her,
man or god, love discovered his godhead, and made her sensible of his power.
This picce was, in my judgment, fine; yet I think sorroze should have been
left out of the composition, because, according to our position, no paffion can act
in t6o places at once ; for though the princeis’s countenance sufficiently shew-
ed it ; yet, as being overcome, it is taking its flight. I have seen more such
mistakes, but it is no wonder; for we are not born wise.
In the use of hieroglyphic figures for expressing the passions, consider, in an es-
pecial manner, whether those paffions work internally or externally; I mean, whe-
ther the action or motion of the body also shiew sufficiently it's predominant paffion; fora
good-natured, sedate man needs no auxiliary action to shew he is such ; because
his countenance does it effectually. But when we desire to make known
love and sorrow, which are internal affections of the soul, these must be expressed
by means of hieroglyphic figures, and yet if the body be disturbed and moved by
those paffions, the acting passion may be clearly perceived without hieroglyphics.
Notwithstanding the necessity of this knowledge in all who have any relation
to painting, yet many young statuaries imagine, that being generally con-
cerned in carving single figures only, it does not affect them. But they mis-
take ; for suppose they should be required to set off a figure with emblems,
whether on a pedestal, or in a niche, in bafs or whole relief, in order to bla-
zon the qualities and virtues of the person it represents, they would be at a
stand; and the rather, as we see painters exhibit most of their emblematic figures
in stone-work, in order to make an history clear. Now the statuary, not able to
trust in his own strength, relies on the painter’s aid to design him such and such
thoughts; which he sets his model, and so proceeds to work.










AFTER having fufficiently spoken how a figure ought, by its form, to ex-
A prefs the paffions, we are led to say somewhat touching the order or succession
of ils action; for though in a story, the one oftentimes proceed from the others,
and revert and fall back again, yet especial care must be taken, that they be not
expressed and shewn all at the same instant of time; but that each wait for its proper turn
and season. As if a gentleman should order his servant to- beat any one; three
motions arise from hence, which cannot be performed at once, because the order
must precede the hearing, and performance be the consequence. Again, it is pre-
posterous, that a prince should stand in a commanding posture, at the same time
time as his fervants are executing his commands. It would be as unnatural to
frame the story of the uoman catched in adultery, in this manner; Christ is writing in
the dust, while the people are sneaking away discontented and afhamed; and
(which is still worse) some provided with bafkets of stones, either waiting on the
second ground for the issue, or departing out of the temple ; though our saviour
parable Poussin possessed this conduct in a high degree ; as may be seen in his
picture of this story. When a general is spiriting his army, each soldier observes
filence and attention while the harangue is making.
In my juvenile years I painted the story of Progne, where, in revenge of her
desloured sister Philomela, sne is shewing and casting at Tereus the head of his son,
whose body is almost eaten up by him : At which pursuing her in a rage, she
was metamorphosed into a bird. I represented those outrageous women shewing
him the severed head : At which the king, transported with fury, rises from his
seat, with a drawn sword ; the table is overturned, and the drinking vessels,
dishes and other table-furniture lie broken to pieces about the floor, and the
wine spilt at their feet; and yet I made the women keep their standing, holding
the bead. To re-consider this story, it is natural to think, that in the beginning
the tyrant fat quietly at the table, ignorant of what was doing ; afterwards the
women entered the room, shewing him the child’s head cut off, attended with
speeches proper to the occasion ; which put him first out of countenance, and
then piercing his heart, he furiously arose froin table and overturned it; and
drawing his sword in order to pursue them, he pushed down every thing in his
way: Notwithstanding all which rage and disturbance, the women remain in the
same posture and station as when they came in. You may easily perceive my
oversight, and improper handling this story. It is true indeed, that all the diffe-
rent motions were sudden and quickly successive, yet she kept the head too long
in her hand, to throw it on the table after it was overturned. In all likelihoods.
at the end of her speech, she must have thrown down the head, and taken to
flight as soon as Tereus made the least offer for rising; and then must follow her
nietamorphosis, and she be off the ground. Iiconceive therefore, that the table
ought



 





ought to have been still standing; and sne, after the head was thrown up into
to be flying; and, to snew her inhumanity, with a sword or chopping-knife in
one hand, and menacing with the other. But I pafs on to shew my cooler
thoughts in another example, being the fable of Apollo, and the dragon Python.
This ordonnance exhibits a wild prospect; on the right side, on the second
ground, in a low morass, is seen the frightful monster Python (said to be engen-
dered of the vapours and exhalations of the earth) lying half in and half out of
the plasn, laden with arrows ; some people standing on a near hill, are viewing
him, stopping their noses because of the stench. On the left side, where the
ground rises higher, a round temple appears, and the statue of Apollo, with vari-
ous conditions of men worshipping, sacrificing, rejoicing, skipping and dancing.
About the morass or plashi stand some withered trees, pieces of ruins, and scat-
tered bones of devoured men and beasts. Behind the aforesaid rising, in the off-
skip, are seen cottages, the near ones ruined, those more distant from the monster
less damaged. On the fore ground the insulting archer is seen leaning on his
bow, and with his quiver at his back empty; he stands daring and haughtily
on his left leg, tossing his head backwards towards his right side and the
light, and, with his left hand extended, and a scornful smile, he is putting by
Capid, who, with his scarf flying behind, soars aloft from him, and, with
anger in his looks, nods his head, shewing him an arrow with the point upwards,
as if he were saying, -—
.Tou shall soon feel this point. Behind Phabus, or Apollo,
stands a large palm-tree, and by it an oak, against the trunk of which he sets his
back ; his head is adorned with oak and other leaves. Forwards l ought to re-
prefent a brook, wherein he is partly seen by the reflexion of the water; his
dress is a golden coat of armour, and a purple garment hanging down behind
him.
A second Ordonnance, touching APoLlo and DAPEne.
No sooner had Apollo cast his eyes on Daphne, but he fell in love with- her ; his
eager passion made him pursue her, in order to make her sensible of it; here-
upon Cupid, after having touched Daphne’s heart with a cool arrow, pierced
Apollo’s with an hot one; Daphne, insensible of what is doing, is talking with
some water-nymphs, who lie, with their pots on the bank of a clear stream.
She stands. in the sun in a fronting pofition, with her quiver hanging at her naked
back ; she beholds the nymphs, with a down and lovely look, over her left side ;
her left hip rises; her left hand is airily under her breast, with the palm out-
wards ; in her right hand she holds her bow above the middle, which somewhat
supports her, opening her elbow from her, whereby the hollow of her body on
that side is filled up ; her garment is girt short under, her breast, being fastened
with a ribbon on her left shoulder, and with a button at knee; the side slappets
are tucked under a girdie coming over her hip, the ends hanging down ; from
her head-ornament, buttoned up, her light treffes hang down on both sides with
a lovely flow over the shoulders. Behind her along the water-fide (which, after
partly running towards the point of sight, alters its course) is standing a white
marblé






marble oblong stone, three or four feet high, adorned with bas-reliefs, against
which stone her ground-shade falls : On it lies a water-nymph on her left side,
fore-shortened ; she is resting on her elbow, and, with the left hand under her
cheeks, is looking at Daphne; the nymph’s lower parts are covered with a blue
scart, which sets off the naked upper parts of Daphne. Daphne’s garment is apple¬
bloffom colour, little darker than the naked, with violet reflexions ; along the
water-side stand willows for repose of the nymphs. On the brink of the river,
to the left, is a rocky mountain full of risings from bottom to top, between
which the foamy water runs and descends. On the right side Apollo is seen (be-
tween the point of sight and where the ground rises high with rude steps) coming
full of amazement sideways from it ; he stoops forward, his left hand resting on
a crook or ftaff; his right foot lowly put forth, just touching the ground with
his toes ; his breast almost meets his left knee ; hij right elbow is drawn back ;
his open hand is up at his ear; his face in profile, and his eyes staring at
Daphne ; a fiery arrow enters his breast ; his garment is of coarse, light-grey stuff,
two ends of which button under his chin, and the others, from under his arms,
tuckt in his girdle before, where also sticks a shepherd’s flute; on his head a blue
cap, turned up before, and wrinkled on top ; his breast somewhat inclines to the
light, and, his right thigh is seen in full length. The light proceeds from the
right; the hill on that side is upright like a wall; the steps parallel or fronting;
on the left the hill makes a rugged slope, and, every-where over-run with va-
riety of wild shrubs and herbs, it sfills up almost the right side of the picture, run-
ning up high by the point of sight; projecting over the way, which is very
low, it gives a ground-shade there, which takes half the way to the stone be¬
hind Daphne; and beyond it is another ground-shade, running between some high
trees behind the hill. The offfkip, on the left side, discovers a fine fabric, be-
ing the palace of king Admetus; near which, some cattle are grazing in the field.
Cupid is slying towards the hill, looking back at Apollo.
If it be afked, how we shall know this to be Apollo; l answer; by his beauti-
ful air and golden locks, his lovely aspect, and the devoir with which he is
viewing the nymph, and by the arrow with which the flying Cupid has pierced
him. Besides, l do not know, that Ovid’s Metamorphoses affords any such re-
presentation of a shepherd thus enamoured with a nymph; for it must be observed
that Apollo was at that time expelled heaven, and bereft of his godlv ornaments,
the purple garment, sun-rays, management of the chariot of the sun, the lyre,
and the like; and got his living by feeding cattle for king -Admetus.
I represent Daphne’s conversation among the Naiades (I think) not improperly,
since the river-god Peneus was her father, whom I leave out of the story, because
his paternal authority would not suffer her to entertain such kind looks ; for he
disliked her manner of living, and would have her marry ; which sne disap-
proved ; wherefore, to shew her aversion for men, I have introduced none but
virgins. I have also not given to Apello a crown of oak-leaves, because improper
to a shepherd, but a blue woollen cap ; a dress better suiting that condition, since
now he is no more Phabus, but Apollo.
This story is rarely handled, generally overlooked by painters.








Third Ordonnance relating to ApoLlo and DAPhne.
Here Apollo is pursuing the object of his love, running and at the same time
intreating her ; her countenance discovers fear; and seeing him so near her, she
endeavours to shun him stopping short and taking another way ; she fears neither
thorn-bushes nor rugged ways, but runs swiftly over all. He pursues, but not
with iutention to seize her, because he has one hand on his breast, and with
the other he casts away his staff, skimming over the ground behind him; his blue
cap is blown off his head, towards the way whence he came; his head is flung
back and sidling, to demonstrate that he is intreating her; and she is looking
back at him; his aspect fiery, his eyes flaming, but to no purpose ; for she con-
trarily, though tired and sweaty, is pale and wan, her face dry, eye-brows- knit,
mouth raised in the middle with the corners downwards like an half-moon, to shew
her pain; fhe lifts her extended arms towards heaven, quite exceeding the poize
of her body; the quiver at her back is flying back, and the arrows scattered
along the way ; she holds her unbent bow in her chilled left hand. Apollo, in the
pursuit, has catched a flap of her garment as her feet take root ; her body is to-
wards him, buut her face towards heaven, struggling with approaching death.
Her eager lover (as yet insensible of this) thinking she is now in his power, hopes
for victory.
But here I mean not to shew her standing still, but to run further
by striving to disengage her rooted feet and toes, which she imagines are only
retarded by Apollo; wherefore she flings her head back, discovering her fears by
loud shrieks ; at which moment her metamorphosis begins. It is not improper
to shew a long and winding way by which they come; and, in the offskip, the
nymphs, by the white marble-stone, looking after her; one of them shades her
eyes from the sun with her hand; others are wondering ; others mutually em-
bracing. Behind them are seen the mounts- Gtheren and Helicon rearing their
heads to the clouds; and behind Daphne, between some trees, is a terme of Mer-
cury, if then in being, otherwise that of Diana her mistress. Her dress is as be-
foie. Apollo and Danhne’s course is against the sun; sne is seen backwards, her
right leg forward, and the left, lifted high, seems.- to turn to the right to take
that way ; he, contrarily somewhat stooping with his left leg forward, and his
right behind, just off the ground, is turning to the left, tracing her steps like
an hound coursing an hare, which, stopping short, takes a. new way.
Sequel of. Apollo and Daphne’s, Story.
Daphne, unable to run further, at last remains fixed to the earth, often striving
to unroot her feet, but in vain ; a rough bark now covers her legs and half her
thighs, and a deadly chill congeals her blood; her fluttering soul seems to be
leaving her, sighing for the last time ; she stands on the left fide of the point of
fight, on the fore ground; the upper part of her body, arms and head are still
intire ; her quiver in disorder, recedes a little from the point of sight to the left ;
the under part of her body fronts the light; her right hip rises; her legs twining







unite below, just under the knees, into a single stem; her breast standing out is
fronting; her head turned to the left droops over her left breast; her eyes are half
closed ; her mouth almost shut, discovering still some faint signs of pain, her
cheeks are pale, but her lips violet ; her head is full of branches, and so filled
with leaves sprouting out on all sides, that they shade the face, and half her
bosom. Before her, a little to the left, a large oak rises, which she embraces
with her left arm, against which her head is leaning. Her dress is as before.
Apollo, now at the end of his hopes, bursts into lamentations moaning her hard
fate, but chiefly his own hot inclinations, the cause of both; he stands on her
right side, with his right leg on the second ground, his foot hid by the hollow of
the way, and his left leg on the first ground, with the foot close to the stem; his
head a little backward, leaning to the right side, and his face towards heaven; he
extends his right arm, with the palm of the hand outwards, as far as he can
reach, feeling under her left breast to see whether her heart still beat or not-; his
right hand is off from him quite open; the slap of his garment, loose on the
left side, hangs. down behind. On the right side, from behind the ground, a
water-god comes running with wonder; above whom appears Atropos, or Fate,
with her distaff and scissars; she is seen from behind and fore-shortened, soaring
high towards the right side of the picture. The sky abounds with driving clouds.
The mount Parnasus appears off on the right side, as also the river running be-
hind it towards the point of sight; on the bank of which river some beasts are
drinking. Halfway up the mount is seen a small round temple of the goddess
Themis ; before the frontispiece of which, stand an oak and a lmden-tree; and in
the lointain, almost on the horizon, the town and royal castle of Admems; the
rest is field, in the middle of which a shepherd is sitting on the grafs, and another
standing by him, who points at the castle, at which the other is looking with
wonder; Cupid talking with Atropos, is flying along with her. Behind the oak
should be seen a part of the before-mentioned term.
The Conchesion ef Apollo and Daphne’s Stery.
When Apollo had finished his prophecy, Daphne, gave a nod as a token of her
assent to it; but while he is gazing at her mouth, he fees her no more; the troe
alone (on which her bow and quiver hang) must now be his comfort ; he sighing
and lamenting went to lean against the oak, which was half withered, old and
rent, his elbow in one hand, and his face supported by the other; his legs aerofs ;
in this posture he remains a while musing and filent. The water-nymphs are sit-
eing round about, one on her urn reversed; another on the ground near him ;
another is embracing Daphne’s unhappy body, looking up at the leaves, and
seeming to address her, who now is no-more. Another, standing by, is raising
her shoulders, dropping her folded hands, and head hanging. An old shepherd
is pulling Apollo by the slap of his coat, but he does not regard it. In fine, no-
thing is seen but universal disorder, sorrow and wonder; the gods and people are,
flocking from all parts to view this new fort of creature, to wit, Dryades,
Satyrs and Hunting-nymphs, some with respect, others with amazement, others
with







with joy ; the universal mother Earth herself stands in surprize.To conclude
this fable, I must add this remark, as not foreign to Apollo's prophecy, That
the laurel in times to come should serve for a token of victory, and adorn the
brows of conquerors instead of oak-leaves, and that, in memory of Daphne,
those should be sacred to him above all others.
Here, Valour, or Hercules, appears with his lion’s skin and club; to whom Vic-
tory, resting against a laurel-tree, is offering a garland with one hand, and pulling
off a branch with the other; in her arms is her trophy.
Memory sits by the aforesaid tree, on an eminence, recording, in a book the
actions of the hero; Saturn shews her Hercules. On the second ground, by 2
morass, lies the body of Hydra, with some heads struck off, and others burnt
black.
CHAP. XIII. Of Use and Abuse in Painting.
HIS noble art having been the esteem of all ages, as writers testify, it
is
 certain, that nothing so pleasingly flatters the eye, as a picture viewed
its full lustre; but in all things there is an Use and Abuse, and so it happens
in
painting.
The Use lies in handling of noble and edifying subjects ; as fine histories, and
emblems moral and spiritual, in a virtuous and decent manner ; so as at once to
delight and instruct. Thus the art gains its lustre.
The Abuse appears in treating obscene and vicious subjects; which disquiet the
mind and put modesty to the blush : He, who follows this method, can never
expect the reward of virtue (which, Horace says, is an immortal name) but rather
eternal infamy. We shall consider the matter in both respects.
When historians treat an history, they seldom pafs over any circumstance,
though ever so indecent; nay, though it be intirely evil; poets do the same in
their fictions, but in a worse degree ; because a flattering tale easily ruffles, often
misseads the mind of a reader. In fine, it were to be wishied, that, when such
liberties are taken, (which should never be, without absolute necessity) naked
truth were either veiled, or cast into shade, in order to prevent unlawful desires.
But if a discourse can thus captivate the heart, how much more must the eye
be attracted by a painting) Since the sight affects the senses in a greater degree,
painting the good man Noah, wallowing obscenely in liquor; And would it be
a less crime than Cham’s mocking him ; He did it only to his brothers; who,
turning away their faces, covered their father with their garments, in order to
hide his nakedness ; whereas the painter exposes him to all the world. It is as
indecent to shew Poriphar’s wife, naked on the bed, in an unseemly posture, inti-
cing Joseph, though it was a private fact, and not attended with the worst cir-
cumstances. Nor is Michael Angelo Buonaroti more to be commended, in exhibit-
ing his Leda stark naked, with the swan between her legs; a circumstance cer-
tainly






tainly. that he might have omitted.: Is it not to be lamented, that since there
is such a fund of matter forfine designs, virtues as well as vices, whence we may
them so barefaced and circumstantially, that they want nothing but smell; As
Horace intimates,
Nam frustrâ Vitium vitaveris illud,
Si te alio pravum detorseris.
But, leaving this unlawful subject, as unworthy of an artist, let us proceed to
shew the tokens of a good picture.
Writing printed is more intelligible, than the scrawl of an indifferent pen-
man; and so it is with a picture ; if the story be well exprest, and each object anseer
its character, with respect to the story, time and occafion, leaving naked or cloathing the
figures, which ought to be so, such an ordonnance may justly be called a speaking
picture : But it is otherwise with paintings governed by whim, and void of like-
lihood; the former picture explains itself at first view, and the latter is a dark
riddle, in need of unfolding.
Is it not sufficient to fhew Diana with a moon on her head, Venus with her star,
and Flora with her chaplet of flowers; for we should also shew their distinguisn-
ing qualities and characters, still regarding their head-ornaments, and when they
must be decked, and when not. Doubtless in every country, except among sa-
vages, are to be found good laws and manners, and three principal times for
dressing, especially among the women, whose attire morning and night is plain
and loose, but at noon set out.
It is no wonder, that among the crowd of excellent masters, few make true de-
corum a maxim in their works, since their opinions are so various, and governed
either by their degree of sxill, or inclination; one thinks, it lies in the harmo-
ny or conjunction of lights and shades; another in the composition of colours,
and those altogether broken; a third, in chusing the colours as beautiful as possi-
But, let them.
ble ; another, in great force ; another, in airy reflections, &c.
fancy what they please, none of these parts will alone constitute a becoming
picture, how fimple soever; much less a compleat ordonnance of figures, land¬
scape, architecture, flowers, cattle, &c. For instance, of what worth is a com-
pofition of figures, where all the postures and airs are alike; of a landscape,
where, in the boscage, we see no difference or variety in the bodies of trees,
leafing or colouring; in architecture the same; but how decorous must a cattlc-
piece be, when we seë the qualities of the animals well expressed : some smooth;
others rough, hairy or woolly. True decorum then proceeds from a conjunction
of all the particulars above-mentioned, and a great force of light, snade and re-
flexion, and an harmony of colours as well beautiful as broken, and the whole
managed according to rule, and agreeing with nature.
If we will weigh these things, we shall soon perceive that the fault is often our
own, and that it is in our power, to arrive at perfection if-we want not ambition
to excel, and do not undertake things above our capacities. Ultra vires nihil ag¬
Many







Many excellent masters have mistaken the mark ; Ars longa, Vita brevis, say
many; but it is a poor pretence for an artist. If it be true, that you endeavour
to gain this decorum, alter your particular inclination as soon as possible : be as careful
in the least as the greatest circumstances, of your picture ; reason diligently with
yourself at vacant times; for though scarce any one is to be found alike skilful in
all the branches, yet it is not impossible to be so; in short, if it is not in your
power to bestow extraordinary time to advantage, be at least so prudent as not to
bring any thing into your compositions which you cannot justify.

CHAP. XIV. Of particular Inclination for one Branch, whether Figures,
Landscapes, Buildings, Seas, Flowers, &c.
ILIGENCE and a proper talent, in conjunction with prudence, may gain
Priches; sudden wealth is not so stable as that got by degrees ; the former
is the effect of desire and luck, the latter, of prudence.
I think that master resolves best, who considers in the course of his study of
any branch,
I. Whether his fortune and well-being depend on one particular person, or on
the body of the people.
2. Whether it be not more advisable to accommodate himself to the occafions
and tempers of the people, than to confine himselfto his particular inclination.
Lastly, how his studies may be sometimes enriched with variety of new
matter.
He is, I say, a prudent artist who, weighing these premises betimes, as quickly
puts them in execution; especially since the world is best pleased with variety and
novelty, which spur them to love, inclination and desire: What can subsist
without variety, ls a cook, who can dress but one disn, and one way, to be
compared with him who can do several ?
We have many sad instances of. excellent masters, who, through obstinacy,
have drudged in poverty and sat down in want, rather than go against their
custar; if the master painted figures, he confined himself to he and she-faints ; if
landscape, nothing but wildernesses and deserts; if flowers,, nothing but flower-
pots ; if seas, nothing but storms and tempests; if architecture, nothing but
grottos and auins: It is true, that it is more commendable to excel in one branch
than to be indifferent in many; but as true, that variety of food causes new
gusto : In short, making a virtue of necessity, we are obliged to alter our notions,
and submit them to seasons and occafions.
We shall now proceed to enquire and observe, what ready and constant materials
each artist, in his practice, has occasion for; and whether those be copious
enough; and lastly, what are proper to each branch-
The general fund. consists,
First, In the variety of paffions and designs.
Secondly,






Secondly, In pleasing new matter, moving to love ; as the proverb says, Nen

sufficit unus ; wherefore variety and novelty are necessary; but I mean not, that
it should appear in every piece we do; but now and then, occasionally, in order
to please and retain the curious.
Lastly, It must be considered, whether there can be found such a constant flow
of novelty, as the particular study of the artist calls for, and wherein it consists;
some principal instances of which, from whence may be deduced an infinity,

shall here subjoin; as for the figure-painter, there are not only he and she-saints,
but also philosophers, prophets, and prophetesses or sybils, eminent men and
women as well in policy as warfare, monarchs, lawgivers, statesmen, and eccle-
siastics; the four parts of the world; the five senses ; and innumberable other
remarkable persons and objects: Judge then, whether there be not matter enough
for. those who would go greater lengths than to spend years, nay, their whole livés,
in fingle figures. In landscape what a field is there for variety, besides wildernesses
and deserts ; As delightful lawns, beautiful inclosures, rivers and cascades, rocks
and caves, pyramids, burying-places and tombs, and places of publick exercise;
plantations of trees, country-houses, sports of shepherds ; sacrifices and baccha-
nalia; and all these varied by being made fronting, in profile or in rear, some-
times with an high, at others a low horizon; sometimes in sunshine, at others
in moon light; to which add, beasts, birds, &c. For sea-painters, remarkable
accidents, as well ancient as modern, sacred and prophane stories, fables and
daily occurrences : Some of them may be these; Christ walking on the sea, and
Peter, fishing in a boat, is calling out to him; Christ asleep in a fhip in a ftorm,
and awaked by the people ; a sea-coast with ships riding at anchor, and others,
both men of war and merchant-men, under sail; an engagement between mer-
chant-men and pyrates,Turkissi and Algerine rovers; seaports, with trading merchants;
releasment of slaves ; sea-triumphs, the Venetian ceremony of marrying the sea in
the Bucentaur; a sea-shore with Helen ravished by Paris; Coronis pursued on the
strand by Neptune; Polyphemus and Galathea; king Ceyx and Alcyone; Ulysses tied to
the mast of his ship on account of the Sirens song; Aneas flying with his father
Anchises; piracy; unloading of ships; morning and evening sun-shine, and moon-
light; calms, impending storms, &c. But none of the branches afford greater
variety than architecture; as well inward as outward ; besides ruins and innume-
rable by-works for ornament, what an abundance of beautiful temples, palaces,
frontispieces, galleries, triumphal arches, colonades, pleasure-houses of elegant
taste and colour, spring from the five ordersà Also termes, niches with figures,
ballustrades adorned with lions and lionesses, sphinxes and other ornaments of
porphyry, free-stone, copper gilt, and other ornamental stone; to which add, the
great diversity arising from the ornaments of gold, silver and marble, bass-reliefs,
paintings, hangings, alcoves, pavillions, cabinets ; in fine, nothing can be ima¬
gined, that the painter of architecture cannot make his own : And the proper
defigns in painting may be, Solomon praying for wisdom; the queen of Sheba with
Solomon; the nuptials of Joseph and Mary; Christ among the Pharisees; Mark Anthony
and Cleopatra; the murther of Julius Casar; Solon with Cræsus; the goddess Vesta
appearing before the entrance of the Pantheon, to curb the insolent attempt of the
people







people to violate her; Herse and other virgins going to the temple of Flora, and
Mercury, in love, hovering follows her; Mercury and Herse in her Bedchamber,
&c. Other inward and outward decorations may be sacrifices in temples; court-
stories, and occurrences in palaces, halls and apartments (some of which we have
elsewhere shewn) besides consults, grand entertainments, plays, visits, withcraft,
ghosts, delightful appearances, &c. As to the flower-painter, what can be more
pleasant and agreeable than flowers in their great variety, beautiful air and
colour ; A sight which never tires, though but in painting : l confine them not to a
single slower-pot ; for they may be variously disposed ; wreathed as garlands; or
made into festoons and groups; or loose in baskets ; sometimes intermixed with
grapes, apricots, peaches, cherries, grains of paradise, &c. according to the
fealons ; which may be exprest by busts of copper and all sorts of marble, and
by bass-reliefs ; besides the five senses : Add, for variety, notable leafing, as
laurel, cypress, oak ; and sometimes to the fruit, corn, turnips, carrots, pum-
kins, melons, walnuts, figs, &c. Proper designs for this branch may be these ;
for the spring, Venus and Aabnis in courtship, set off with children and flowers;
for the summer, Pomona and Flora, with flowers and fruit ; for autumn, Pomona
and Vertumnus, in a summer-house.
I think it needless to descend lower, since there is no subject, how mean soever,
which cannot be sufficiently enriched with something new.
But perhaps a landscape painter may say, I understand nothing but my own
branch: Birds or beasts I never studied : Another may say, still-life is my practice,
landscape, figures, or cattle l never touched. A poor excuse l Since for many
infirmities help may be found; as for short sight, spectacles ; for lameness,
crutches; for deafnefs, an ear-pipe, and so forth; borrowing from fine paintings,
and from prints and drawings (these latter are always to be had) is in such case
no reproach; moreover we may, without hurt to our honour, employ a seilful hand,
if he conforms to the subject and sense we are handling.
It is remarkable that pieces painted by two masters, seldom or never answer the
intention of the composer, the distinction appearing either in force, handling or
colour ; but this is no wonder, when each of them follows his own gusto and
manner, without any regard to the other, as if the afssistant’s share in the work
were as great as that of his employer. When a general finds himself too weak for
an enterprize, he calls- in some body to assist him, but not to command ; so we
painters, when we need an assistant, intend not to shew what he can do for his
own credit, but that he should work in conformity to the composer’s direction
and purpose.
But we shall confider an affistant’s qualifications, and how he ought to accom-
modate himself: He should be skilful in perspective, colouring and penciling; by
Der spective, to give more or lefs force, with regard to the composer’s manner: by
colouring, that his-be more or lefs beautiful; and that in penciling, his be agreeable
with the other’s. If the piece be tenderly and naturally handled, the by-works
must also be kept tender and well finished.: if the piece have a light and bold
manner, the by-works must have the same; so that the whole work, getting
thereby a general decorum, seems to be all of one hand. This is so necessary a
conduct









conduct in an affistant, that his service cannot otherwise be said to be of any use
to us ; nay, granting him to be a greater master in fame than his employer, he
ought to take care that his work do not predominate, a fault which would disserve
them both; and when this fault is heightened by ignorance or malice, the ma¬
jesty and elegance of a fine composition is lost, and the work subjected to the
scoff of. the curious, as l have divers times experimented.
CHAP. XV. Of the four Sorts of Tables, or Ordonnances ; what
they are.
HAVE been long in suspence whether I might, without being taxed with
presumption, offer to publick view my reveries about the general tables or
ordonnances which spring from refined judgment, and are of important use to
curious artists and poets, as well to exercise their pens as pencils : but at last pre-
suming, that the product of my weak abilities would not give offence, I pursued
my intentions, imperfect as they are, I shall be at least pleased, if my endeavours
gave a handle for better inquiries.
It is agreed, that a fable or ordonnance is a representation of some fact, either
with the pen or pencil. A poem is a fhort and plain account of the most material
circumstances ; shewing the true cause from whence the fact proceeds.
Three qualities are necessary to a good poet. 1. An exact acquaintance with
history, and the best authors. 2. Good knowledge in antiquities. Lastly, an
easy and delicate poesy ; to which add, an agreeable stile, by which, after having
weighed what materials and pasfions are proper, he disposes every thing in a con-
secutive order, and the most perspicuous manner.
Grace is as necessary in poesy as harmony of colours in a painting; but though
all the aforesaid beautiful qualities be well observed, yet they cannot produce a
perfect ordonnance without the aid of the rules of painting: For a sine history of
great personages, accompanied with elegant by-ornaments, in a delightful country,
unartfully disposed, is so far from perfection, that it cannot have the utmost
grace, though it were the life itself. Much may be said for a subject well treated;
but more for an ordonnance of a fkiful master, painted according to the laws of
art, which make even crookedness seem strait.
Ishiall now treat of the nature, force and quality of tables or ordonnances (as
necessarv for landscape as history-painters) and therein consider.
I. Their kinds. 2: Their names. 3. Which of them have double uses, and
which have single.
I suppose four kinds, viz. historical, poetic, moral and hieroghyphic; the first is a
simple and true fact. The second, a double fiction, exhibiting fabulous stories,
or a mixture of deities and mortals : The third has a threefold moral ; teaching
our duty to God, our neighbour and ourselves : And the last is fourfold. as
couching, under a short and mysterious sense, the three before going; handling
virtue and vice for the benefit of soul and body, and shewing the happiness and
immortality of the one, and the corruption of the other.








In history, the poet or painter, ought intirely to confine himself to truth, with-
out addition or abatement; his ornaments, though borrowed from poesy, must
be so restrained, that nothing, serving for illustration, create improbability ; for
instance, not to represent day-break by the poetic figure of Aurora; or the
night, by Diana; or the sea, by Neptune; which is needless, and an error, be-
cause those things can be naturally expressed by colours ; as day-break, by its
appearance, of yellow, red and blue, or by the sun-rays appearing on the
horizon; the night, by its darkness, and by the moon and stars; the sea by its
waves and billows, rocks, monsters and shells on the shore; also the Nile, by its
crocodiles, &&c. or any thing proper to the sea or rivers.
The poetic tables differ from the historical in this; that, instead of true story,
they consider fictions only, intermixing deities with mortals, as we have said; and
thereby signifying nothing else, but the course of the world through the four
elements, as air, earth, fire and water; and though historically handled, yet
each is a simple figure, having a mystic meaning, either in name or shape, and
often in both; as Soylla, Atlas, Leda, Cyclops, and many others : And thus the
fable, being both philosophic and moral, in one and the same manner prescribes
virtue and decries vice; as we gather from Ovid, Virgil, and others. It is
necessary therefore, in designing such an ordonnance, to keep intirely to the fable;
as before is said, without any addition of hieroglyphic figures, as temperance,
prudence, anger, jealousy, &c. which are so improper here, as hereafter shall be
shewn, that they destroy the very intent of it; for there are others, which (though
in a different manner) will express the same paffions ; as Cupid, instead of lovs ;
Pallas, instead of wisdom, and many others ; as we collect from the poets.
The moral ordonnances are true facts, or histories, proposed only for edification or
instruction ; exhibiting either the gallant acts, or crimes, of human nature; and
these explained by some additional emblematic figures, which express the paffions.
by which they were moved, or misled ; for instance, with Alexander we may place
ambition; next Marcus Aurelius, humanity; next Augustus, piety; next Scipio
Afr icanus, his moderation, in restoring the young captive bride to her spouse, and
many others, as Horace in his emblems artfully exhibits. In this sort of ordon-
nances we are no ways confined to time, the sun’s place, or the quality of the
country ; for we may intermix summer with winter, even all the elements may
appear; the subject may be in the front of the picture in Africa; and in the off-
skip, at Rome, or elsewhere ; even in hell itself another scene may be acting;. so
great a latitude has a moralist: But he must take care to avoid supersluity, and
things improper to the main action, which, as in plays, spoil the beauty of the
representation.
The bieroghphic ordonnances are quite different from the three former in their
nature and quality, having no other affinity with them than an intention to exale
virtue, and debase vice, by the rewards of the one and the punishment of the other :
They are as well christian as heathen; the christian affect the soul, and the heathen
the body : The former demonstrate the immortality of the foul, and the latter
shew the vicissitude and vanity of the world. These tables consist in assembling
several emblematic figures of different paffions, which all together are to express






a single meaning; as piety, peace, war, love, &c. And such tables are called
emblems, by their application and emblematic use, and by being made up of
compounded objects which have their proper meaning and relation, or else deri-
vatives from them ; as the palm-tree, laurel, myrtle, cypress, or the sun, moon,
and stare, or an hour-glass, a dart, slame, &c. which signify any power, virtue
or extraordinary effect. These tables, like the preceding, admit not of the
least superfluity to obscure their significations ; because having neither history nor
fable to build on, they consist only of a single paffion, proceeding from the sub-
ject (which may be at our own choice) explained and made intelligible by the
other emblematic figures, which must not be improperly introduced, lest the
sense of the whole scene be altered : But here we must observe to make a dis-
tinction between Heathen and Christian representations ; the Heathen admit of Venus,
Cupid or Anteros, for love ; the christian shews charity, or a woman with children
about her, and a flame on her head; the former has Hercules, for fortitude, and
the latter St. Michael; the one takes Jupiter with his thunder, and the other,
Justice ; the former expresses piety by a woman with an oblation-bowl in her
hand, and near her an altar with a crane, and the latter chuses a cross instead of
the bowl: But all this is uncertain, and not confined to time or climate.
Being well apprized of these things, we obtain the best and surest method for
defigning any kinds of tables, or ordonnances, how abstruse soever; nay, be
your design ever so single, it will always afford plentiful matter to furnish out and
enrich a large and capital compofition; as I shall shew in the following table,
though but in part, as leaving out the city of Athens in the offfkip, a river with
swans, Fate in the air, or Mercury flying along with Atropos, &c. We read of
the Greek philosopher Aschylus, that, as he sat meditating in the field, he was
killed by a tortoise dropped by an eagle on his bald pate ; which mournful acci¬
dent I handle thus. A little to the left from the point of sight, I place the un-
fortunate old man, on a small eminence, with a pen in his hand, and a book in
his lap ; he is fallen on his right thigh (which is foreshortened) with his legs a¬
cross, and one of them extended to the left, his upper parts bending, and in-
clining somewhat to the right; his head is in profile and downwards ; he flings
his right hand sideways from him, the pen almost touching the ground, and his
left is open over his head ; the tortoise falls, somewhat sloping, head-foremost
along by his left ear; his hook is tumbling out of his lap to the left; over his
head, a little more to the left (where his garment is under him) hovers the
eagle, looking downwards ; at the corner of a stone, (six inches high, and co-
vered with a part of the aforesaid garment) running towands the point of sight,
is an inkhorn, and some rolled papers, and his cap. This is the substance of
the composition : In the offfkip, where the ground to the right lies low, I shew
a pyramid, and near it a shepherdess sitting by a young shepherd, who is stand-
ing, and offers her a bowl of water, or milk; up and down are cattle grazing,
and nearer (behind the fore ground) it would not be amiss to shew another man,
who passing by, and hearing the philosopher’s cry, does, in surprize, look back
at him, swaying the upper part of his body (which is almost naked to the waste)
to the left. The philosopher is plainly drest in a long vestment, and a flappet of
his






his upper garment, whercon he sat, comes under his right thigh; the vestment
is dark violet, and the garment light fillemot; the stone, whereon the garment
lies, is bluish; the ground grafs-green ; the passenger, behind the fore ground,
is in shade, except his head, and part of his shoulders; and is drest in a reddisn
kkin, a cap on his head, and a stick over his fhoulder, whereon hang a pair of
ssippers; the shepherd and fhepherdess, in the snade of the pyramid, receive
very light reflexions, the whole prospect being exhibited in sun-shine. The
landskip and offskip I leave to the choice of those who like the composition. It
is said, that this philosopher was so fearful of his bald pate, that he thought
himself secure no where but in the field, in the open air; wherefore l do not in¬
troduce near him either house, tree or any thing else that could hurt him. But
thus it happens, in the midst of his security, he meets his death : Mors inevita
bile faium !
Some perhaps may afk, why I have chosen but a single figure for the subject
of this ordonnance; my reason is, to shew those who are skilled in landskip a
method of giving their by-ornaments greater lustre, and excellence ; those, I
mean, who are so rich in invention of inanimate objects, that are content with
one figure, and at most two, and those perhaps of little significancy ; though
it must be granted, that the name of an excellent, wise and celebrated person,
represented in an artful landscape, gives the work a lustre, and the master reputa¬
tion ; for a fkilful landscape-painter certainly deserves honour, but double when he
shews that he also understands history and poetry.
Many landscape-painters (not excepting some famous ltalians) chuse commonly
low, mean and poor subjects, and by-ornaments ; for my part, I generally lessen
my landscape, to give room for embellishment. In fine, if we cannot be alike
perfect in all things, we may at least, through perseverance, go great fengths;
for
Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi sed Jade cadendo.
That is,
By constant drops the stone is holloz’d thro
Which greater single force could never do.
The aforesaid ordonnance is very fine for a landfkip; and the rather as it
handies an uncommon story, attended with few circumstances ; for the whole is
but a fingle figure, though the scene, as being a beautiful open field, would
easily admit of three or four. Consider then, excellent professors of this branch,
what I have laid down; the trouble will be but small, and it is in your power to
make it easy to you: Qui eupit, capit emnia-







CHAP. XVI. Of the Uses of Ovip’s Metamorphasis; and what is
further necessary to the sketching and executing a Table or Ordonnance.
EXPERIENCE tells us, that truth loses by repetition, and that he who
 eafily believes, is as eafily deceived ; but the master, who makes it his bu-
finess to build on the most certain infallible means, in order to obtain his end,
bids fairest for excellence. What poor work is it, after having seen a well-ordered
defign of another mast, adorned with elegant by-works, and fine colonring, to be
a slavish imitator of it, by introducing neither more nor less figures, nor other
draperies and colours , What reputation is got by it, were it ever so well execu-
ted ; nay, if differently disposed and incomparably painted : It is certain, that
something more is neceffarv before we undertake a subject. A prudent general will
not rely on the report of one spy ; nor spare either men, money or pains to get
right intelligence of the enemy’s defigns ; a good painter should do the same, in
order to excel; which to do, the following observations are highly necessary.
1. We must know how the story, we pitch on, is described by the author; and
consider, whether we agree in every eircumstance with his opinion.
2. We must consult the comments of the best writers on that subject, in order
to get the true meaning of the story.
3. We must weigh the suiting and application of the draperies, and their pro-
per colours and by-ornaments.
4. How the four elements, the four complexions, and the four hours of the
dav with their form, ornaments, and colours ought to be represented.
Thus we may obtain truth, and the master will make it appear whether he has
gone to the bottom of things¬
Few painters excel in history, especially fables, for want of inclination to en-
quire thoroughly into their subject ; reading they think, is troubiesome and need-
less, since Ovid’s fables are now in every body’s hands, copiously handled, with
three or four lines of explanation under them, by which they know, whether it
is Venus and Adonis, Vertumnus and Pomona, Zephyrns and Flora, &c. Is not that suf-
ficient, say they 1 And do not l see, that the one is naked and the other drest; this a man,
that a woman; this has a dog, that, a bafket of fruit; and the dther, a flower-pot ; xohy
then should not these be my patterns, since they come from such great masters à 1 readily
grant, that books of prints are of great us to painters ; but to use them in this
manner is a willing slavery, unlefs we cannot read.
In my youth I was so conversant with the least of Ovid’s fables, that on hear-
ing but the name of one of them, I could repeat the whole circumstances of the
story ; but their meanings and uses (which fhall be our present enquiry) my fa-
ther had never told me; ’till long after led by curiosity, 1 re-considered them ;
and with the asfistance of my brother James (who was master of the Greek) was
led into some of the mysterious meanings which they contained.
Many have a superficial knowledge of Ovid’s fables, but few understand the
drifts of them ; what they gather is mostly from prints, nothing from the text ;
wherefore






wherefore we shall now explain ourselves in two examples of the sun and moon; at-
tended with all the necessaries and circumstances and observations which we have
before insisted on; and first, in
The Fable of APoLlo and HYAcintRUS.
Ovid relates that Apollo was in love with this youth for his extraordinary shape
and beauty ; and that as they were playing at coits together, the youth was un-
happily struck with one of them, which occasioned his immediate death.
The comment says, that this youth being also beloved by Zephyrus, he offered
to make him the chief ruler of the most agreeable spring-flowers; but he reject-
ing the offer, kept close to the conversation of Latona’s son; in return for which,
Apollo promised to teach him all the virtuous exercifes, which became his condi¬
tion and liking, such as shooting with a bow ; the gift of prophecy ; touching
the lyre and finging, but principally wrestling; with a privilege that, sitting on
a swan, he might behold all the places wherein Apollo was most beloved and wor-
shipped. The west wind having made fruitless efforts to gain the youth’s esteem,
at length, through rage, gave into despair, and plotted means to be revenged of
his rival ; wherefore, taking his opportunity, as Apollo and the youth were at
coits, he secretly blew a coit so violently at Hyacinthus’s head, that he died on the
spot : Apollo being extremely grieved thereat, the earth, in compassion, turned the
young prince’s blood into a flower, in order at least to make his name, if not his
person, immortal.
The Table, or Ordonnance.
Hyacinthus, in his bloom, is on the fore ground to the left, and falling back-
wards, his back most visible, his belly raised, and his right leg flung up, and some-
what bent, the left leg stretched off from the ground; contrarily lifting up his
right arm, with the hand open; and fingers spread; his left elbow drawn back,
and the outside of the hand against his right cheek; his face, trickling with
blood, is in profile, and his head flung back ; his hair is bright, short and curled;
a chaplet of flowers falls from his head by his right shouider, which, with half
his back, is bare; and lower, his vestment is girt about his body. Apollo ap-
pears twenty or thirty paces behind him, to the right of the point of sight, step-
ping back, in great concern ; he is seen in front, stooping, his breast sways from
the light, his under parts contrasting it, and his shoulders shrunk; his mouth is
open, his left hand from him, and close shut; his right arm acrofs his body,
and the hand up at his left ear ; his left leg stisly flung out ; his right leg quite
bent, the foot hindward, supporting his body ; he is naked, and his hair light,
yellowissi, and long, flying above his shoulders ; he is crowned with laurel. Ze-
phyrus, (or the west-wind) whose rage was the cause of the sorrowful accident, we
represent winged, and flying from the youth towards the wood on the left side
of the picture ; his right foot is upwards, and his upper parts sway to the left :
part of his head and back are covered with shoots and leaves of trees : on the left
side






side of the piece forward is seen Enzy, in shade, peeping out of the boughs, and
laughing : behind Apollo, we introduce a piece of stone-work, extended almoft
from the point of sight, to the extremity of the picture, and therein, two large,
circular openinings, overgrown with mofs and wild shrubs; near him is a large
tree, and by it a laurel, whereon hangs his garment, and below, on the ground
against the body, his lyre. The ground of the picture opens a large plain,
bounded to the left with a wood running up to the point of sight, just by the
aforesaid large tree, where the river Eurotas is gliding from left to right. On the
right side of the piece forwards, we place a large sphinx on a broad pedestal,
whereon lies Hyacinthus’s garment, and against it a javelin, and on the ground a
bow and arrows, an hasel-wand, musical instruments, and musical and other books.
The coit flung at the youth is seen rebounding 6 inches from the ground to the
right. Behind the sphinx stand an olive and cypress-trce : The aforesaid stone-
work is brownissi grey, inelining to violet. Apollo’s garment on the tree is purple,
embroidered with gold: the lyre ivory : the sphinx (whose fore parts only are
seen) is in profile, and of white marble : the youth’s vestment is white, striped
with gold, and his garment on the sphinx’s back, a beautiful dark violet. The
whole ordonnance shews a bright and clear sky; the light comes from the right;
and the point of sight is in the middle.
Explanation of the Fable.
Hyacinthus, who, according to the poets, was metamorphosed by Apollo into a
flower of that name, is a true emblem of wisdom ; for Apollo presiding over the
muses and learning, Hacinthas is represented to us as a youth beloved by him for
his beauty, having his natural faculties as yet uncorrupted, as being a child with-
out judgment or discretion, yet beauriful ; exalting his mind, in order to contem-
plate himself. Whence we learn, that when the senses forsake the follies of youth,
they bring forth the flowers of wisdom, adorned with virtue, whose immortality
is, by writers, sacred. to all ages.
Further Notes.
(The use of the bow. ) Latona had two children by Jupiter, Apollo and Diana, both
expert archers.
Apollo was esteemed the God of prophecy and oracles, on
IThe gift of prophecy.
account of the Delphic oracle. to which, people from all parts resorted, in order
to know things past, present, and to come.
The are of singing. ) Apollo is, from highest antiquity accounted the chief musi-
cian, in finging as well as on stringed instruments.
Principalby ze restling. ) This word has divers allusions; but in general implies
any bodily exercise anciently practised in the Grecian games, as, playing at coits,
leaping, dancing, fighting with the fists, wrestling, &c.
Siiting on a swan he should behold, &c. ) The ancients have, not without reason,
consecrated the swan to Apollo. 1. Because he (being the sun) gives all things life,








according to the saying of the philosopher,—The sun and the moon bring forth the
man.— 2. By the swans and their easy deaths are chiefly denoted virtuous men,
who part with their lives chearfully in order to meet immortality.
Animadversion on the foregoing Picture, with respect to the Painter’s Ordonnance.
That the agreeable youth is of noble extraction, his fine mien and purple gar-
ment sheW.
His wisdom and knowledge appear by the sphinx, with the instruments lying
by it.
The chaplet of flowers shews his amiable qualities.
The garment, he wears on this occasion, points out his virtue and modesty.
The cypress, near the olive-tree, gives us to understand, that all sulunary and
sensual pleasures, how pompous soever end in misery.
Having done with the sun, we shall proceed to handle the moon in the same
manner.
The poets differ in their relation of this fable of Diana and Endymion, but mostly
agree in the explanation of it, as I fhall now shew. They say, that the moon,
(Diana) falling in love with the shepherd Endynion, flung him into an everlasting
sleep, on a mount in Caria, named Latonia, that she mignt kiss him at pleafure;
but others report otherwise. Pausanias intimâtes, that they went further than
kissing, and that Endymion begot 5o daughters on the moon. Others affirm, that
she yielded to his pleafure, on condition he made her a present of some white
sheep : Though all be fabulous, yet it carries some probability ; for Pausanias
concludes, that Endymion was the first who observed the phases and course of the
moon. Pliny also testifies, that Endymion first observed the motions of the moon,
and learned her nature and qualities ; which gave rise to the fable, that she fell
in love with him. Alexander Aphrodisius likewise writes, in his emblems, that En-
dymion had great skill in astronomy, and, because he slept by day, to fit himself
for night observations, it was feigned, that he had carnal knowledge of her, and
also a wonderful dream, by which, being a philosopher, he got that knowledge :
others say, that he was a poor shepherd, (as Seneca, in his tragedy of Hyppolitus)
though a king’s son, and that he dwelt on mountains and in solitary places, the
better to observe the moon’s motions. The learned F. Gautruche thus has it,—
The Fable, says he, testifies, that Diana fell in love with the shepherd Endymion,
who, for too great familiarity with Juno, was by Jupiter condemned to eternal
sleep ; but we hid him in a mount, in order to soreen him from her conforts wrath-
The truth is, that Endymion observed nicely the moon’s motions ; and therefore
used to pafs whole nights in solitary places in the contemplation of her ; which
circumstance gave rise to the fable. Let this suffice for the story, the parts and
ordonnances whereof follow.
Table, or Ordonnance, of DIANA and ENDYMION.
Endymion, son of Estius, king of Elis, a beautiful and well-shaped youth, is
lying






lying asleep on his upper garment, on a near mount, on the right side of the
picture ; under his arm is a Jacob’s staff, a crook near him, and at his feet a
large celeftial sphere, and some books and papers, whereon appear characters and
diagrams. He is profile, his upper parts somewhat raised, and'he leaus, with his
left ear a little forward, on his left hand ; his right leg is extended, and the left
thigh, and receives strong reflexions from the moon. Diana, a little off, (not
in her hunting habit, or sitting by him and kissing him, with the half moon on
her head, as usually represented) naked descends from the clouds, with a full
moon behind her as big as herself, and surrounded with stars, with the attend-
ance of love, (or Cupid) she is in a fronting position, bending a little forward,
with her left knee on a low cloud ; her arms wide open, as if about to embrace
the youth; and in her left hand is a æ Sistrum; her aspect is beautiful and gay,
and full of desire, being lighted by a sun-set as well as Cupid, who is descending
with her on her right side, with his face towards her, and holding, in his right
hand behind him, his bow downwards, and in his left, (which comes forwards)
an arrow, with which he points at the sleeping youth; he flies somewhat oblique-
ly, with his upper parts from her, with his legs seen hindward through the cloud.
A boy, standing on Endymion’s right side, looks to the left at the goddess; his left
the left side, is pulling of her garment, a flap whereof twines about her right
thigh, which is somewhat foreshortened. Below this child, on the left side,
where the mount declines, sit two children joining and blowing their torches;
and behind them appears the offskip, being a valley with a low horizon. The
sphere, books and papers lying to the left at Endymion’s feet, are (with a small
which a part covers his privities) is purple; that of the goddess, sky-colour.
The sun is low, proceeding from the right.
Explanation ef the Fable.
By Endymion we may understand a virtuous mind, which the heavenly spirits
endeavour to caress and kiss through violence of affection.
The high mount implies, that when the soul ascends. to heaven, the body is
seized with heavy slcep or death; for since the body hinders a perfect union with
God, it follows, that as soon as the soul has disengaged itself, it goes casily and
quietly to heaven.
Diana, by her increase and decrease, represents the changeableness of things;
for the Greek poets asserted; that Jupiter, seeing Diana go naked and indecently
for a virgin, charged Mercury to make her a garment, and that, though he made
her several, yet none would fit, because her shape was always changing; where-
fore

« Sistram is a mufical instrument, generally represented in the hand of lsis; as we see in medals
and other antiquities.






fore her figure is a natural emblem of increase and decrease, and of the mutabi-
lity of worldly things. This figure has also other necessary uses, with respect to
human life ; as St. Ambrose intimates, who, from the example of the moou,
(whose light is variable, always increasing or decreasing) teaches, that nothing
in the world is stable, but all things subject to decay.
The Sistrum in Diana’s hand (the use of which lies in the motion) also denotes
the vissitude of worldly things, and their continual destruction and renovation.
Others think, that the Sistrum signifies, the sound, which the moon causes in the
course of the heavens.
In such a manner as this, should all histories, fables and fictions be examined,
if the artist aim at reputation. I think, I have given the curious satisfaction
enough in two examples; for should I go further, the subject would not only be
tiresome, but swell as big as the whole work ; wherefore for variety, we shall
pass to.
CHAP. XVII. Of Rules for the Management of small Figures in a
large Compass; and the contrary.
TDHERE’S a great difference between the ingenuity of a good painter,
and that of a mere designer, with respect to ordonnance; the former pro-
I
ceeds by the established rules of art, the latter only aims at what is designer-like;
the one is master of principles and rules, the other is ignorant of both; the de-
signer considers only what relates to relief (being a stranger to the natures and
effects of stuffs, colours and tints) and therefore he must find all things by means
of lights and shades only: but a painter has more liberty and advantage; because
he can, besides the shades, effect every thing by his colours and tints. But the
difference is further visible from the sets of prints daily published, whether in
landscape, perspective-views, architecture, &c. ancient or modern story; in
all which, the designer generally travels the old road of compositions, and the
etcher or engraver as closely follows him; but when a good painter handles them,
all the parts will be improved and become more excellent, as well the invention,
disposition and harmony, as even the motions ; by which means, a person of small
abilities cannot but be better pleased, and often, for the sake of one or two fine
prints, buy a whole set ; as in Oudaen’s book of the Roman might, in which,
one plate, engraved by Abraham Bloteling, does, by its neatnefs and elegance,
eclipse all the rest; and this is the more remarkable, because in his medals the
figures are shaded not with hatching, but with a thick stroke and touch on the
shady side.
Now, agreeable to the title of the chapter, we shall pafs to the necessary
management of an ordannance with large figures in a small compass. It muft
be granted, that an ordonnance in a large extent, requires more circumstances,
than a smaller, although in higher, the chief matter lie but in three or four
sigures; for what in the former comes close and silling, must in the latter, be
spread,






















































































































































































































spread, in order to fill up a large space ; and to do this artfully, we are obliged to
introduce other by-works, and those (though insignificant, yet probable, and not
repugnant to the subject) tending to explain the story ; for instance, in a land¬
scape, to introduce some buildings, fountains, pyramids or statues; or in an hall
or other large apartment, hangings, alcoves, bafs-reliefs, and such like, either
for ornament, or to make larger grouping; in short, any thing that will entertain
the eye, since small figures, in a large compass, are not of themselves capable of doing it :
wherefore, with respect to such, the by-ornaments onght to be large, in order to
creare broad lights; yet these ornaments must not be so monstrous as some have
them, who, in order to swell the composition, make pillars bigger than three of
the figures can fathom, with castle-like capitals, and frizal figures almost in full
proportion ; nor so out-of-the-way as those, where, in a landscape, are seen trees
three or four hundred feet high; terms, mere colossuses, and pyramids higher
than any:in the world ; to which add, houses in the offscape, where, before people
can possibly approach them, they must be lost by distance. But this is egregious
conduct ; for we should always bring together such parts or objects as neither
lessen the figures, or cause any obstructions in the composition; I mean, that a large com-
pafs must either look large, or else be filled and adorned in a moderate manner,
as we shall shew in two sketches of the. mourning Venus, plate XVIII. each repre-
sented in a different manner, to demonstrate, that in a large compass a great mafs of
light is absolutely necessary. The story is, Venus inconsoleable for the death of her
dear Adonis ; even the the aid of Cpid fails, whose bow, arrows and extinguished
torch, nay her beloved garland of roses, she tramples under foot; Mars; though
secretly pleased at the adventure, however prétends to sympathize with her in her
forrow, but in vain; for she slights his offers, iand pushes him from her; she rests
on the tomb of her slover, wherein either-his body is depofited, or (according to:
the custom of the country) his afhes are kept-in the urn; the other by-work is a
grove of cypress and myrtles; from the urn. might proceed’a sprig of the flower
which is ascribed to him, since it owes its origin to his blood.
On a due comparison of the plates, we may discover the disference between the
two compositions ; in the uppermost the mafs of light is neither so large, or
spread as in the undermost; which proves, that in. a greât and close ordonnance
in a small compass (as the upper) such a great maïs of light is not necessary,
much lefs by-works, in ordersto encrease it; because the figures there principally
govern, and being large, have on that occasion, the greatest force, as well in the
execution, as beauty and colouring; the by-works serving to shew the placc and
occafion, but not to draw the eye : Whence, ic-is easy to see, ’that what creates
decorum and elegance in the one, appears infignificant and disagrecable in, the
other ; I speak of the light onl, which requires alilistinct management in both;
wherefore,- since in a large compass, the, By-ornafients make the greatest part;
they must consequently cause greater masses, of light there-;: and icontrarily, in a
small compass, where the by-works are least, the main light ought to take the
figures only. And to confirm this, F’must-say, that what in the undermost re-
presentation pleases the eye; and sets off the scomposition (even were it as large
again) is only caused. by the light, because, the by-works, being the most, abate







the light of the figures; which having in the upper, with. the dark tomb, more
force, must create such a confufion as. to weaken the strength of the principal
figures. In a word, the larger- the figures, the more-stiade ought to-be about them; aud-
of consequence, the smaller the figures, the more light.
CH AP. XVIII. Of the Ordonnance of Histories, Portraits, Still-
Life, &c. in a small Compass.
ERE we end this book, or leave this subject, it is proper to confider fur-
Ether, whether it be not more artful to represent a story natural and close in
a small compass than a larger; which I think to prove from the examples of
Raphael, Caracci, Dominichino, Poussin, Le Brun, and other excellent mafters.
Moreover daily experience confirms it. It is certainly troublesome to be confined
to a small compass, especially to those who affect to load their compositions, be-
cause largenefs is very entertaining to the thoughts : The difference between
both managements is the same as painting as big as the life, and in little, where
we see that in the former lies the most art, since we can more easily go from the
large to the small, than contrary, though both be done from the life. The case
of these two artists is like that of a fkilful steersman, who, capable of wrest-
ling with storms and dangers, sails unconcernedly in smooth rivers ; when a meer
ferry-man would be put to his shifts to steer on the ocean : He then is happieft,
who has been always used to large things, since the small spring from them like
an inland river, which loses its strength the further it goes from its spring; of
which the old masters were not insenfible, who, though much employed in small
painting, yet lay in for large work, being conscious, that what required the most
trouble and sxill, got them greater name and profit.
The force of a large painting beyond a small one, and its advantages are these :
I. The natural representation has a better effect; for viewing it near, it raises
love, pity, anger or any other passion, as if we sympathized with the story.
2. It raises the master’s fame.
Lastly, The work is much esteemed-
It were needlefs. to mention other arlvantages; wherefore I shall confirm my
opinion by examples. We read of a picture of Stratonica, that the sailors in a
storm took it for a deity, and accordingly worshipped it. And that in Juno’s
temple, her standing figure was soi artfully painted, that her eyes seemed to look
every way, and at any Ueholder wherever he placed himself, appeared severe to
the criminal, and geatle to the innocent. The reason of which effects is, that
the two pictures were so highly finisnied, and had so natural an human shape,
that they seemed to be. rather flesn and blood, and to have motion, than to be
paintings.
This shews what influence large representations have on the senses ;. let us now
soe what paffions curigsity raises, as in this example; I suppofe a murthered corps
lying somewhere ; neax it a person weeping; a littie further,, the seizure. of the
murtherer ;






muretherer ; ’and the geople running fome towards him, others towards the body.
Now it may be afked, whether all these circumstances do not sufficiently shew the
fact, without other persons, or greater paffions : To whioh, I answer negatively;
for we ought to see whether the wounded person be dead, or not, and in what
part wounded ; next, whether l’know the affaffin; whether the woman lament-
ing him be of quality, or ordinary, and whether she be rélated to the wounded
perfon ; accordingly coming nearer, I think I know him; I am affrighted; I
behold the wound, which appears ghastly to me, and am the more affected
by tke tears of the troubled woman, who ftands at his head; I look for the
murtherer with concern and revenge, and see him dragg’d in irons between two-
officers ; he looks pale, and his heart forebodes the worst; in fine, every one is
variously affected, some concerned, others indifferent with refpect to the fate of
the wouaded, or murtherer. Now, if such a variety of objects occur in a fimple
accident, waat force muft the life have, when feen near in such a representation,
especially if naturally exprestp but we need not wonder, that so few tread in that
old path; since they faek case, and want the ambition to excel by an exact in-
quiry into nature.
I once thought l igot reputation by painting in littie, but was afterwards con-
vinced that large work, orthe : life feen near, was the sureft way to excellence ;
but envy and strife stopped my career:: what the painters in large in these countries
merit, may be eafily determined, since lfew of them ido it masterly, through ig-
norance of-the true antique or beautiful life ; by true autique I understand, perfect
antiquity without mixture of modern mode; not Venus with stays, Mars in a fuit
of armour, Pallas in a straw-hat, &c. which is a choice that can never get repu-
tation-; because such a mafter has no thorough knowiedge of tlre life, nor brings
work-enough ints his ordonnances. If he-get a bold and light pencil, that is
thought sufficient; his drawings -are commonly so flight, that thuy disgover little
more light than what is neeessary for the most relieved parts, without regard to
half tints, tender parts and soft muscling; and from-these drawings he paints as
big as the life; whersby he is obliged to supply, as hecan, all the other requisites
which in the life he slighted’; thus the composition comes out lame, and what
makes it worse, his aversion to draperies, and-beautiful folds, which are so grace-
ful in a picture, and so easily to be had from the life. But drapèries, says he,
are trifles ; as they fall out, let ’em pafs; if it is not linnen, it may seive for
woollen; and if for neither, it is at least drapery.
But when, on the-contrary, I view the old masters works, what a vast differ-
ence do I not discoverl what pains have they spared to handle their subjects pro-
perly t ’tis true, they admitted not of many circumstances in their compositions,
but, what they did, were perfectly artful, elegant and natural. View but Caracci’s
woman by the well; Raphael’s Simon Magus; Dominichinos Judith, Ziba, Esther and
David ; Pouffin’s Esther and. Ahasuerus; or Le Brun’s beautiful death of St. Stephen; how
wonderful, expressive, noble, natural and close they are ordered, and that with
large figures. All which plainly proves, that painting as big as the life is much
preferable to that in little, and that he, who has made the former his practice,
can easily perform the latter, though he in littlé cannot so eafily give into the
large.






large. To have a finé and natural expreffion in littie is certainly commendable ;
but it is more easy to mark out a camp, and draw up an army for battle in a large
plain than in a narrow compass; :a spread army is weak, but closenefs of troops
makes it-strong ; wherefore in narrow and ill-situated places, a general must shew
his utmost conduct. We ’usually say, that the best writers and poets are short
and concise; in musick the same, perfect harmony lying in four parts, whether
vocal or instrumental ; it is. likewise more, artful, to conipose a piece in few than
many divisions.
Charles du Gardin was exceeding fine in little, and yet he had a great inclination
to intimate the large manner;- but he did not succeed. Mieris, the famous painter:
in little, lost all his credit with his patron the duke of Tuscany, by his portraits
in full proportion; and so it has happened to others,. Those who practice in lit-
tle, use small puppets for their layman, but not puppet-dresses ;, their academy-
figures are drawn on white paper, uncertainly snaded, with mezzo-tint or tender-
ness, and no higher finished than serves their turn : others, who fancy they know
better, -and, as if they had a notion of broad management, sharpen the extremi-
ties of their figures and darken a little against the light, having no need of a
second tint ; becairse their’sigures shall not round. Once, as l was drawing at
the academy, Tmet with. a person who managed in that manner, and I desired he
might be afked (because then I understood not the language of the country) why
he did not finisn the figures better, since he had time enough for it; whose answer
was, he had no occasion for more finishing, as painting small things, one, two or
three foot high at furthest. I. then caused him to be afked, that supposing he
were to do something larger, whether he would not be at a loss ; he answered ;
that he hoped he should not, as long as he kept to his text : which indeed was
truth, as appeared in the consequence; for having an opportunity afterwards to
paint some figures in full proportion, there was no more in them than his draw¬
ings, which were, his models. More instances of this kind were superfluous,
since it-it is hoped the better advised will conduct their studies rightly in a due
examination of the life, in order to qualify themselves for larger things.
This observation touching small and large compass, is not only useful in
history, but also in landscape, portraiture, flowers, fruit, shipping, architecture;
in fine, in all parts of painting.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Division of History.
N all things we should observe order; which some proceed in, according to
their fancies, and others act counter to rules, not knowing, that things are

established thus and thus, by an universal consent; and why : he, who thinks
himfelf to do as he pleases, may indeed paint Jupiter with a fool’s cap, and a yel-
low or green garment; and Momus in a purple drapery, and so forth; because
there is no other punishment for him but his ignorance: but a well-advised artist
make better inquiries, that he may justify his work, or that the work may speak
for






for itself. Let us love virtue, says Horace, for the sake of virtue, and shun vice,
not only for fear of punishment, but also for the odium it carries. Although no
one need fear corporal punishment for disorderly management of history, yet he is
not free from the reproach of ignorance and blunder, a punishment great enough
to a generous mind ; wherefore we should submit to established order, as the con-
ductor of our studies, the surest way being best, and the beaten road nearest. If
a good historiographer, in compiling a story, make an orderly division of his
materials, ’ere he begin to write; disposing first the general heads, and then the
particular ones ; afterwards, the incidents, and which of them are principal, and
how many; and which of them happened without, and which within-doors;
moreover considering, whether the story throughout is to be handled in all its cir-
cumstances in a certain number of parts, or in some principal ones only ; as
whether he will contract Homer’s twenty-four books into twelve, Virgil’'s twelve
into six, or Ovid’s fifteen into seven or eight, at pleafure; so a judicious painter,
in handling a magnificent history, should make himself master of the true con-
tents and meaning of it; as whether the parts be few or many; if many, whether
he cannot bring them into a small compass; and if few, whether he cannot add
to them : moreover he is to consider, which are the principal parts, and what can
be left out, in order to reduce them. to such a proper number as will answer his
purpose ; always remembring, in case he should fall short, that he may use
any licence that is not against nature and reason, even to make two incidents out
of one, when occasion requires.
We are therefore to establish it for a general method, in handling a thorough
history, divided into three, four or five ordonnances, more or less, that the first
picture must always shew the drift, state and place of action; and the last, the
conclusion of the whole story.
Large histories, such as of Joseph, Alexander, Hercules, and others, which best
become palaces, saloons, apartments and galleries, cannot be handled in a single
piece, because of the variety of accidents they contain, which must be continued
in several pictures, whether in tapestry or painting. Again, if the gods come
in play (which frequently happens) the cieling is proper for them; taking care,
that either the beginning or conclusion of the story be over the chimney, as I
shall more largely shew in the book of cieling-painting.
There are many such long stories in Homer, Virgil, Apuleius, Tasso, even in scrip-
ture itself : now if we would chuse two incidents out of any of them, or make
two compositions, and those to be, hanged together, we ought in the first to re-
present the most remarkable part, whether it be the ist, ad, 3d, ath or gth ac-
cident, according as it happens, so that its fellow may be the last; as the end of
Adenis, or his death; the fall of Phaeton, or his grave ; Sardanapalus burning him-
self; Aneas’s deification: Reincud’s disinchantment; and, in facred story, Solomon’s
offering to the idol.
Here it is necessary to be observed, that all histories have two contrary be-
ginnings and conclusions ; some, a sorrowful beginning and a joyful exit; others,
contrary ; to which add a third, which are neither joyful nor sorrowful. The
story being divided into three accidents, the first should serve as an introduction to








what we intend to treat of; in the second should appear the main action; and the
third should turn in the happy or miserable event : for instance ; we may repre-
sent Julius Caesar entering on the government; next, his condition, or further pro-
motion ; lastly, his death. We can also divide a story into four parts or stages,
as the birth, rise, life and death of a vulgar or noble person.
But five divisions are the most perfect; more are superfluous ; because any history
may be sufficiently represented in five parts; thus, the person’s beginning in the
first; his rise in the second; his condition in the third; his fall in the fourth;
and his end in the fifth; as we shall further illustrate in the chapter of fellowing
or matching of pieces.
In representing an history the artist is not always confined to the laws of written
story ; a good historiographer is obliged to go through with all the particular
facts from the beginning to the end, in a successive order; a painter, contrarily,
has a greater liberty of choice, since it is indifferent to him, whether he falls upon
the beginning, middle or end of a story; and therefore sometimes begins where
he plcases ; picking out of the story what best suits his intention, either what went
before, now is in action, or must be in consequence ; being obliged to exhibit no
more out of the whole, than can be seen together at one view.
Horace divides the drama into five acts: The first containing the sense and in-
troduction of the story ; in the seeond is the sequal or consequence, arising from
the first: in the third, the contention or dispute; in the fourth is seen at a distance
the issue of the story ; and in the fifth, the catastrophe or conclufion either in
forrow or joy. But the drama differs from a painting in this; that the one con-
tains in each act a particular time, place or action; and the other exhibits only a
momentary action.
The division of the drama into five acts is not without reason, from the ex-
ample of the sun’s course ; which begins with day-break ; secondly, ascends all
the morning; thirdly, has a meridian-altitude ; fourthly, declines in the after-
noon ; lastly, sets in the evening.
He who would act sure and orderly should use the following means ; which,
besides the truth of the story, will furnish him with plenty of thoughts.
I. The time. 2. The place of action. 3. The conditions of the persons con-
By the time we understand either the past, present, or to come; and therein, a
divifion into night, morning, noon, and evening; also into spring, summer, au-
tumn and winter; and into months, weeks, days, &c.
As for the place, we must consider, whether it be in Europe, Afia, Africa, or
America; whether in town or country, within or without doors ; in stately or vul-
gar buildings, or a mixture of both.
In the conditions of persons we meet with great and illustrious ones, as emperors,
kings, princes, senators, generals, &c. as also deities and high-priests, male and
female ; in the second tire, nobility, merchants, and citizens, lastly, the com-
mon people, countrymen, beggers, &c. In these orders of men, we distinguish
between great kings and less, and the same in the other conditions; and divide
them again into old, middle-aged and young. Among people in general we find







tall, middle-sized, short, thick, flender, well and mis-shapen, healthy and sickly,
sensible and foolisn; all differing as well in their natures and humours, as in their
countenances and shapes.
We may add, in the fourth place, the manners of each, and the particular
customs of nations, whether of Romans, Greeks, Perfians, Armenians, Germans, &c.
together with their dresses, confisting of various stuffs, as silk, linen, course or
sine woollen-cloth, long or short.
Lastly, the knowledge of phyfiognomy, perspective, geometry, architecture,
anatomy, proportion, colours, harmony, reflexions, and every thing that occurs
in the chapters treating of those particulars ; which we shall not here repeat.
It now remains only to be observed; first, that there are two sorts of pictures,
natural and unnatural. Secondly, what good histories are, in order to shew their
continuance in one painting. The natural pictures are those, in which we ex-
hibit the nature of a story or accident by a single paffion, i. e. by a single repre-
sentation of the person on whom the stress lies. The unnatural are those, wherein
the same person is represented more than once, and thereby two accidents mixed
together which happened at different times, as the one by day, and the other by
night; which is contrary to nature, and wherein is often used more than one
point of sight. Secondly, the most pertinent and intelligible histories are such as
that of Heliodorus, described in the Maccabees, when he was punished by the angel;
to which add, the high-priest prostrate before the altar, intreating the almighty ;
and further, the widows and orphans, lamentifig and crying; all this shews the
continuance of the history, and may be brought into one piece. Another may
be that of Pompey, where he is burning all the letters and papers of Perpenna in
his sight, and then ordered him to be carried to his punishment: and many
others.
CHAP. XX. Of the Observables in a Frontispiece-plate.
OINCE we have treated of many particulars and their requisites, it will be
proper here to subjoin,the disposition of objects in a frontispiece-plate, and
S
their observables, as being of a different nature from other ordonnances, and tend-
ing in all respects to embellisn the book only ; like a fine garden-walk, where the
objects, whether vases, statues, trees, &c. are placed to answer their purposes.
The figure which denotes the subject of the book, ought by all means, as the
principal, to appear in the middle of the plate, set off by other by-ornaments :
over head or beneath must be a large table or flat face, with the book’s title there-
on, either in thick black letters, or else double-lined ones, and the other figures,
which serve for illustration, placed of equal height on each side, either standing
or sitting: Thus much for the fore ground. The offscape, having little concern
in the matter, we may dispose where we think proper with low or rising grounds,
in order thereby to give the uniformity of the subject greater lustre, and a painter-
like decorum : The principal visto ought to be in the middle; but, if two are
necessary







necessary sor the sake of shewing fomething in the offscape, they must be on each
side, and equally large and extensive.
But we must take especial care, that the title be encompassed with architecture,
or rockage, or trees ; or at least remain within the fore ground, which we ought
to consider as a theatrical stage opened on one or both sides with a curtain, some-
times setting it off with a colonaded frontispiece, or else inclosing it in a moulding
or compartment; in which case there should always be a sounding fame, either
before or behind, let the subject of the book be what it will : even the fame
alone with the title of the book will look more proper, than the figure of the
book without the fame.
It looks well to inscribe the title in the pendant of the trumpet, when it is in
the middle of the plate, and in double-stroked letters; but if it happen to be on
a side of the plate, it is improper. The capital black letter suits the middle and
bottom of the plate; however, when the title must be placed high, the open let-
ter is best, because the other would take the eye too much, and weaken the rest
of the work. Thus much in general.
With respect to particulars we must observe, that the figure representing the
book, should always possess the chief place in the middle of the plate, and that
to be elevated ; the figures of less consequence somewhat lower and further in;
and thus with the others ; each going off according to its rank, action and quality,
to the offscape; and if other additional ornaments are necessary, they must be con-
trived here and there in bass-relief.
But to explain myself, I shall give a plate-example, and take for the subject a
book, entitled ARs MiLITARIA, or; ATreatise of Military Exercise: Bellona, as the
subject of the work, sits exalted on an high and large pedestal, in the middle of
the plate, set off with all kinds of warlike instruments, as usual ; beneath her,
on one side, stands a person in an offensive posture ; and on the other, a defensive
person; these three figures make the whole story; the latter is represented as a
brave citizen with a table in his left hand, whereon is drawn the plan of a fortifi-
cation, and under his right arm a sheaf of wheât; the former appears as a
vigorous young man, with a spike-headed staff in one hand, and a spade in’the
other, and at his feet a crow, or wall-breaker; on one side in the offscape, is a
town-wall, and on the other some armed men setting houses on fire; behind the
former stands vigilancy, and behind the the latter subtilty.
Now we may observe, that the aforesaid uniformity in the figures, accompany-
ing Bellona, and which help to explain the sense, is unavoidable ; for if one of the
hieroglyphic figures next her were sitting, and the other standing, it would cause
an absurdity in the ordonnance ; because those two figures ought to shew an acti-
vity, or at least to be in a readiness to undertake some enterprize: Wherefore
they, as well as those behind them, must be standing; the latter being placed
there, not as capital figures, but to aid and subserve the two others; and there-
fore, being rather ornamental than necessary, they may be left out ; as also may
the offscape, since the subject sufficiently appears without it: nevertheless it may be
retained when it does not obscure the main design; but I should rather chuse to -
contrive it in bass-relief in stone-work.






All frontispiece-plates should have the three following qualities.
1. To delight the eye.
2. To tend to the praise and honour of the author and designer.
3. To be advantageous to the seller.
These observations, though little heeded, yet are very necessary, since all
things have a reference and tendency to something; and though, by a proper
application, we must shew their qualities, as in the three instances aforesaid, yct
we have a liberty to make further additions, if not foreign to the main design of
the composition: l say then, that if the capital figure be set off by an area, palace,
or other building, that ornament must come on the right side of the plate, next
to the binding of the book, and run off to the left as scantily as the design will
permit. It would be improper to represent a table, pedestal and vase, or such
like, half in the piece, unless the print have a border broad enough to be supposed
to hide the other half, or it were on a third or further ground. We also remark,
that the light falling on the objects must be supposed to come from without the
book ; that is, it proceeds from the left side or opening of the book, and shoots
to the inside of it, in order thereby to create between them (I mean the print and
the book) a perfect union and sympathy; like that of the soul and body; sup-
posing the book to be the body, and the print the soul which moves it; to which
add, in confirmation of my position, that the back of the book gives rise to the
print and leaves.
The reason why I dispose the objects thus, whether light or heavy, is, because
I think the contrary very improper and ill-grounded; as the decorum of it may
be seen in the frontispiece-plate of my drawing book, designed in that manner;
which I shall explain, and give a proof of, in the two following examples.
EXAMPLE I
I place, on the right side of the design, a fine frontispiece or porch of a court
or temple, with wings coming from it on each side; and on them, some people
leaning over a ballustrade; all running to the point of sight, which is in the
middle of the piece : At the entrance stands a prince, princess or vestal virgin;
and before him or her, on the steps, a man or woman kneeling, and receiving a
staff, or a roll of paper: Fame on high sounds towards the left; and on the second
ground also on the left side, (but half without the piece) some affrighted people
taking their flight. On the same side, the offscape should appear visto-wise, like
a gallery, up to the point of sight. Now, the design being lighted from the
left, and only slightly sketched with black chalk, or a pencil, and rubbed off on
another paper, the former will face the book, and the reverse the contrary.
EXAMPLE II In a Landscape.
On the right side is a massy tomb, supported by sphinxes, and set off with
other stone-work as pedestals and vases; the foremost whereof are more than half
without the piece; and all running to the point of sight, as in the foregoing.
Behind





Behind it is a close ground of cypress and other trees up to the point of fight;
and beyond it is the offscape. From the left side, on the second ground, may be
seen in part only, some people coming forwards; as a priest, boy with sacrificing
utensils, the ax-bearer, and beasts for facrifice. Before the tomb, on the plinth,
should stand a small altar; forwards, two or three Harpies taking their flight;
and from the tomb, Cupid flying after them, with an arrow in his bow, as driving
them from thence. Now reverse this drawing also, and then observe the de-
corum it produces.
Although this method of proceeding be founded on reason and good grounds,
yet, I fear, many will take it for a chimera; on a supposition that we pretend to
amend something, and lay down a positive law for what has been several hundred
years left free and unlimitted ; since books may, without the aforesaid observa-
tions, be good, sell well, and bear a price : Again, if a book be good and have
but a title-page, without a frontispiece-plate, that’s enough; even a plate ever so
poorly handled will pass, if it but shew what the author treats of. But. let me
afk, whether it is not more acceptable to give a print great decorum, and make
it better with little trouble, than to beat the old road ; especially when we can
support it by certain rules, which will dicover the error of former management,
Some perhaps may say, Why have not others mentioned this, since the position
is so positive) But 1 answer, that though many things have been found out,
something still remains to be discovered by the studies of curious and inquisitive
men. We grant, that if a book be bad, the frontispiece-plate will not mend it;
however, if the proverb may take place, a thing well set off is half sold; and there-
fore elegance is very necessary in all things.
Of the Representations of Dreams, Apparitions, unusual Thoughts and Fictions, at leisure
Times,
Who can blame a studious artist for amusing himself sometimes with sketching
odd conceptions, or for painting them; I think it very commendable, and
3
true token of greatness of mind, and the best method for excelling in design; it
is certain that they who make their art their diversion, have a double advantage
in it, because they exercise their judgments with usury in the most abstruse de-
signs which the senses can comprehend. Let us only consider, with respect to
the people, how acceptable such an artist must be, since most men have an itch
for novelties ; as in plays which draw the greatest concourse of people, the more
uncommon they are. If any think lought rather to maintain that such artists ought
not to be regarded, and that they should find their pleasure in better things,
let me afk in what: Whether in hearing idle talk, reading useless books, walk-
ing the streets, &c. all which is rather wasting time than improvement. It is not
unknown that Raphaele, Michael Angelo, and many other famous masters, did some-
times exercise their judgments with out-of-the-way thoughts ; whence I infer,
that they thought it no shame. But contrarily, what good can come of excessive
drinking, and dipping into other things, as if painting no longer concerned us ?
It is certain we cannot serve two masters at once; and as certain, that he who
studies







studies a difficult point, and intends to master and practise it, must not at the
same time, for pleasure, give into another which is more difficult, and of a
different nature, lest he destroy his first point: We ought therefore to accustom
ourselves to things which neither over-charge the senses, nor too much burthen
the memory in our pastimes. A young artist who at his leisure endeavours to
qualify himself for fine compositions, must especially shun excessive drinking,
hearkening to old women’s tales, enquiring after news, reading trifling books of
stories and romances, principally, accounts of murthers and sad accidents, in-
tidings too much affect the mind, and a series of troubles puts us beside our-
selves ; reading of murthers, &c. seizes the heart, and makes us unfit for study ;
curiosity, instead of being satisfied, is so craving, that when we design something
sedate, it can hardly find a place in our thoughts; and the study of musick, or
To explain what l say, touching the designing of uncommon thoughts at leisure,
I shall give three or four examples, each of a different nature: but must first in-
quire, why painters will not give themselves the trouble to design unusual or bar-
barous histories, such as the Indian, Japan or Chinese; and find, that it is, because
no authors have written any thing about them worth sketching, those nations af-
fording no other scene than cruelties, murthers, tyrannies, and such like disagree-
able objects, which would rather offend than delight : Moreover, that the odd-
ness of their dresses, manners and customs do not at all quadrate with the grace
and beauty of the antique. It is certain, that the principal business of an history-
painter is, to express the story with proper and lively paffions, that his intention
may appear plain and satisfactory to the curious; and yet, this would be no more
than the reading it in the author, if the grace of the figures were not also to ac-
company it. What disgusts in a fine play more than ordinary action, bad dresses,
and a contemptible stage; if a fine voice be agreeable to the ear, how charming
must it be, when the eye sees it comé from a beautiful woman : Beauty causes
love, but deformity, aversion. It is therefore no wonder, that we have no relisn
for such odd subjects, fince Europeans are too conversant with real beauty, to be
pleased with such shadows and ghosts: yet, notwithstanding what is said of the
figures and histories, I think it not unworthy of a landscape-painter -sometimes to
exhibit such uncommon landscapes, because the oddness of the grounds, trees and
buildings found in them is pleasing to most people, especially those who are con¬
versant with their history; and indeed this novelty of prospect is no ways so re-
pugnant to art or nature, as the people and their manners, in spoiling the shape
which God and nature gave them.
If it be said, that such landscapes are improper without figures of the same
country, it must be granted ; nevertheless, as the by-ornaments of a landscape
are usually the least regarded, I think it not disagreeable, to exhibit here and
there some of those creatures, in order to shew the nature of the country : a judi-
cious artist may dispose them as he thinks best for the good of the whole picture,
and the pleasure of the eye; and because those countries are well known to
Europeans, he can introduce them there, and intermix with them travellers from








other countries, as Persians, Romans, Greeks, &c. who may add to its improve-
ment : as we introduce whites into the blacks, country, and blacks into Greece.
But perhaps another difficulty. may be started against such landscapes, namely,
that they cannot be handled so natural and true, as where we can have the life
before us ; which indeed is probable; however it must be granted, that the
authors, treating of those parts, are so many and so particular, that a man of judg-
ment may gather sufficient instruction from them; the temperature of the air, fruit-
fulnefs of the soil, shape of the trees and other greens, and their natures and
colours are plainly set down; and if the green happen to be a little lighter or
darker, or the ground more yellow or russet, who will go about to disprove it, if
artfully managed ; for my part, I should make no scruple to paint such a piece,
fince a painter ought to ssip no opportunity of getting praise, and wish to have
done it, according to my present idea of it : lf we omit doing many things for
want of a proper knowledge of them, what cannot the pencil of a judicious
master do, if he will but set about it; yet some men will not go out of their old
road, as was the case of a fellow-pupil with me under my father; who on my
afking him, why he painted not other subject as well as bible stories; answered,
that he had no occasion to scek after others, since the bible yielded more than he
could do in his whole life: which indeed was no wonder; fince he painted one
story ten times, if it pleased him. But we shall now come to the representations
we promised.
Remorse of Conscience occasioned by an Apparitien. See Plate XIX.
After Sextus Tarquinius had ravishied Lucretia, the unhappy lady (who had stabbed
herself in revenge of her violated chastity) appeared to him, as he was lying in
bed, shewing her breast gored with blood; at which, he was so terrified, that he
knew not where to hide.
The figure which accompanies her holding a dagger, with cypress-leaves about
its head and waste, represents despair, as the broken pair of compasses, sticking in
its girdle plainly shews. Now perhaps it may be afked, because Lucretia is open-
ing her wonnd, whether the dagger should not become her ; which I grant; as
having committed the fact through the other’s instigation. It is certain, that
there is no need of by-help, as we shall prove in its place, in the bass-relief of
Aseleagar, when the mischief is done by our hands; but here the case is very dif-
ferent ; for Meleager was there dying, and the revenge not yet executed ; whereas
here the revenge is already had, because she is producing her wound, and there-
fore the greatest effect of despair is over, and she shews him the bloody dagger by
means of despair; which figure would indeed be superfluous, where she not sup-
posed to be saying,This steel did it. For if sne were in a desperate posture with
the dagger in her hand, the figure of despair would be unintelligible, and therefore
superfluous. Again, it would be absurd, to make her stab herself at his bed-fide,
since. no spectre of any person can appear before a separatiou from the body

wherefore she shews herself to the debauchee, as the cause of her untimely death,

















































































































































































in order to bring him to remorse, and for that reason Despair is represented in a
— Haec invicta manet.
triumphing manner, as if saying,
Megara by the bed-side, with her head beset with serpents, scourging him with
a smoaky pitchy torch, intimates not only remorse, or reproof, but all other in-
ward troubles, grief, rage, horror, disquiet, &c.
The lamp on the table, and in a princely apartment, may perhaps seem odd;
nevertheless I think, it has a fine effect on the foremost figure, and also helps to
make the table-furniture conspicuous, without hindering the other light; doing
still more good, as being a lamp, and having burnt a long time without snuffing,
and therefore casting a gloomy russet light, when that of the spectre is bitumi-
nous, burning white and blueish.
As for the small compass of the ordonnance, some would have filled a room
three times as large with those figures; and even represented an hall adorned with
pictures, bass-reliefs, tables, stands for candlesticks, &c. and a within-door visto;
an ltalian comparted floor, and many other things.
Representation of Vanity, according to the Saying, Man’s Life is a Dream.
Alexander, reposing on a bed, the following spectres appeared to pafs by him :
First, Time with his hour-glass; next, Ambition, holding a torch; next, Valour,
followed by Asia, Africa, and America in irons; then follow Riches and Pleafures,
and then Honour and Glory; the former with a pyramid, and, the latter with a coe-
lestial sphere ; a naked man brings up the rear, having a dejected look, and hug-
—O Alexander l
ging himself, who, in passing the bed, accosted the prince thus,-
behold me; reflect on what l was, and what l now am; the whole world was at my dis-
posal; my valour purchased me the highest honour and glory ; riches and pleasure were at my
command; but nos, in nakednefs, I pajs by as à shiade :—Sic transit gloria mundi.
This cavalcade l exhibit in an hall richly furnished, representing the figures in
a waving motion, and skimming over the floor, a foot high, on a thin cloud,
cross the picture to a descent of two or three steps on the left side; and thence,
on the same side, up to a back door on the left side of the point of sight, where
they disappear. The bed, a little raised, stands backward in the middle of the
piece ; the aforesaid shades are vapourisn, but not sharp : forwards, on the left side,
I place, on a pedestal, the figure of a sitting Aezander, with thunder in his hands,
a globe in his lap, and an eagle by his side; and behind the pedestal stand two
centinals in earnest discourse, insensible of what is doing.
Let it not be thought, because I make the three parts of the world fettered,
that Alezander, by his valour, subdued them ; for, according to the testimony of
some writers, he did not conquer all Asia; nevertheless, that his ambition made
him hope to do it, is not improbable ; since he caused himself to be worshipped
as a second Jupiter Ammon ; as he himself has given us to understand by these
words :-
-Alterius Jovis altera tela.

I question not, but that, if such a shady, ghost-like manner be well executed,
it will appear very uncommon, though l do not lay it down as a fact happening
to Alexander, but give it as my own invention.
I have







I have said, that the shades or appearances walked as on a cloud ; by which I
mean a thin vapour, serving them for a ground, and giving a faint shade to the
hall-floor ; yet the vapour and ground-shade are of no other use, than to express
things in a supernatural way, and to make a distinction between real and imagi-
nary people.
I have seen such a thought painted by Jordaan’s ; where a man is dreaming in
his bed; and before him stood a naked woman, appearing as a real one, who (one
would think) was going to bed to him, had not the artist painted there some
clouds, as if she were standing in a door of clouds : whence I was led to think,
she might be a spectre ; but then not having a ghastly appearance, l thought she
had too great a communication with the rest of the picture ; she was seen from
behind, and very beautifully coloured : I and others therefore concluded, that
this woman was only a model ; to which the other particulars were added, in or-
der to patch up a picture, and sill the cloth---But to return to our ordon-
nance.
My thoughts are, that Alexander must not be represented naked on the bed, but
in princely attire ; for otherwise the door must not stand open; and l am not con-
fined to the chamber-light, because of the shades or spectres ; wherefore, in re-
ference to that, I have two points in view ; first, to keep the light beautiful as
sun-shine; or secondly (which is better and more ghastly) to keep it somewhat
gloomy, in order to express naturally the vapouriness; and by it the vanity of
human condition.
An odd Fable.
The fable-wrights tell us, that in the beginning of time, a difference arose be-
tween Apollo and Diana, both in their youth, who should produce the finest ani-
mals, wherewith to furnisn the world ; Jupiter, as chief ruler in heaven, for pas-
time allowed it, and gave them power to do it : after many challenges and dis-
putes, it was finally agreed, that Apollo, in the presence of all the gods, should
make the first essay; and accordingly, to general admiration, he produced a large
lion : Diana sensible of it, and seeing the gods taken up with the sight of so strange
a creature, and fearful that she should not produce the like, brought forth a cat,
a creature not unlike the lion, but as much inferior in strength and shape, as the
moon is to the sun. Whilst the gods were- laughing at this, Apollo was so nettled
at the presumption of Diana, in thinking herself his match, that he instantly
brought forth a mouse; to shew, in a scornful way, that the cat was not compa-
rable with the lion : whereupon Diana summoned all her wit and power to bring
out a monkey ; which creature, like the former, being found to be very ridicu-
lous, and her endeavours judged fruitless by the gods, sne was so provoked, as to
create an eternal enmity between the lion and the monkey, and the cat and the
mouse.














Apollo, as a youth of about fourteen years of age, stands à little to the left of
the point of sight, holding in his right hand a scepter, which rests against his hip;
hie stands in a daring posture on one leg, has a fierce look, and on his right side,
a little from him, sits a large lion. Over-against Apollo, a. little forward; stands
the young Diana, holding up a dart in her right hand, and seeming to call up a
monkey from the earth, who, half out of the ground, looks grinning behind him
at a mouse, which, because of the cat standing by Diana, seems to creep away un-
der the legs of Apollo.
The deities view those strange things with pleasure; Jupiter and Juno sit by
themselves on a low cloud in the middle : near Apollo and Diana are seen Mercury
and Aurora; and on the right side forwards, Mars and Bacchus, the former lying
on a stone : Venus, attended by Cupid, lies on the grafs ; and next them, a little
further, Ceres, sitting in the lap of Rhea, points and laughs at the monkey : be-
tween these two and the cloud, whereon sits Jupiter and Juno, appears Saturn: On
the left side forwards sits Pallas with Asculapius, between lris and Ganimedes : Be-
hind Apollo advances Momus, stooping forwards with his bawble upright in his
ieft hand, whereon he leans, and looking to the right, makes a scornful sneer ;
his other hand is wide open, with the thumb on the tip of his nofe. The whole
assembly of the gods, except Apollo, looks merry and gay.
Emblematic Ordonnance of Folly.
Here we exhibit a naked young man, stripped of all his substance, (which he
lavishily consumed) appearing before the frightful Idol, lashed by Despair: the
stern old man standing next it, drest in a black garment, has his hair and beard
plaited, and somewhat like a conjurer, is shewing the young man a cushion lying
on the ground before the altar; from under which sprout out thorns; on which
nevertheless he is forcing him to-kneel : Nature on onc side, on the second ground,
lies feeble on a dunghill, looking with tears at Ceres and Bacchus, who, despitefully
going from her, deny any succour : Necessity alone sits squat down by her, having
nothing about her but a broken cup and some creeping insects. The building
seems to be a ruinous palace ; the visto behind the idol is frightful enough; and
yet how fine the house on the third ground appears, partly in the sun, and partly
in the shade of the pleafant trees ; methinks it has two sphinxes of white marble
on two hand-rails at the sides of the door; and on the steps is seen Luxury, scat-
tering handfuls of money out of the horn of Amalthea : Wantonness is playing on
a timbrel to some dancing satyrs and lewd women : a little further under the trees,
some of the same company lay, eating and carousing like brutes, by a fountain :
The aforesaid idol is like a chimera, composed of many improper parts; the head
of a frog; the upper parts like a woman’s ; arms like wings; hands as lion’s
paws, with one of which it holds up a purse of money, and the other rests on an







harpy ; its legs and feet like those of a satyr; and on its head is a crown of
holm-leaves. The prodigal is treading on a broken stone, whereon appears a small
carved altar, or some remains of it : Fortune, deserting him, is slying forward ;
at the same time Envy behind the idol, is laughing in her sleeve. Nefariun vita
& fortuna dispendium.
CHAP. XXI. Necessary Observations in continuing an History in seve-
ral Pieces, for Halls, Galleries, &c.
WE have several times asserted, that strict probability ought to be one of the

principal cares of a judicious master in his compofitions, without devia-
tion on any pretence whatever, be the choice, figures, landscape, architecture,
&c. or any thing else ; becaufe, as the proverb says, Truth, though obscured for a
season, must appear at last.
Now, to obtain this likelihood or probability, besides the requisites which we
have in their places already laid down, it will not be amiss to observe, that the
principal personages retain their own forms, characters and colours, from the beginning to
the end of the work.
By the forms we are to understand the proportions of their bodies.
By the characters, the features which alter from time to time with their years ;
from youth to maturity ; from thence to middle age; and thence to old age.
By the colours we mean, the fair, rosy, pale or brown ; bestdes long or short,
dark, russet, light or black hair, long or frizled beards : In fine, such an one must
must be knouyn to be the fame person, through all the compositions, without any Alteration.
The same conduct must be observed, with respect to the attendants or retinue;
especially a black man and woman, who, if they have any part in the stately at-
tendance in the first composition, must maintain that post to the last; because, be-
ing slaves, they are seldom exchanged; and by their presence their masters are
better known, especially when they have been observed to attend them several
times,
It is not improper to make mention of blacks, both men and women, since they
are seen in the retinues of most people of power in all nations, the one more, the
other less, and drest in a particular garb, by way of distinction, like great mens-
liveries, &c.
It is necessary, avoiding mistakes, to know how many Olympiads the whole work
takes in, and exactly to enquire into the different years in which the first, second,
third and fourth story ended, in order to assign each character its certain age, a-
bating for accidents, which indeed so alter people, that they get out of know-
ledge ; as in the thin and slender, becoming thick and fat; and in the brifk and
sprightly becoming dull and heavy : and the contrary; and yet those accidents
leave the features, whence likeness proceeds, in their perfection.
But here perhaps it may be afked, if we follow this observation punctually,
whether the likness would not be so lessened as to be quite lost in old age To
which














which I agree, so far as respects the colour and fleshiness, the one in a greater,
the other in less degree ; yet the character, with all its known features, is, what
maintains likeness, be a man ever so old ; wherefore it is necessary to make that ap-
pear in the persons from time to time. Alexander was very young, when he wa-
ged war with the Perfians; and, at the end of his conquests, died in the flower of
nis age. Of Darius and Casar we ought to observe the same, though differing in
years from Alexander. Christ, at the age of twelve, taught the Scribes and Pharisees
in the temple ; when full grown, he did his miracles; and was, finally accused,
condemned and put to death at about thirty.
Lastly, we ought to observe, that the life and atchievements sometimes follow
in a long feries of years, and successively ; as in the stories of Romulus, Julius Cae-
sar, Scipio, Alexander, and many others; and in scripture, Christ, John, &c. of
some of which, we have largely treated in our book of tables and emblems, which
we shall publish in due season.
We leave it now to any one’s judgment to consider, how necessary the aforesaid
observations are in the continuance of an history ; wherein we must also take care, that
the horizon through the whole work be of one height, and level with the eye of the be¬
holder; as we have several times said in its place.
The same conduct as we have recommended for figures, respects also all immove-
able objects belonging to the story ; for instance, if the general subject require,
that a palace or house must come in more than once, it is necessary that it always
keep it first form and station, only altering the point of sight, as we would have
it seen either in front or rear, or in flank, either near or distant.
The orders and ornaments of architecture likewise come under the same regulation ;
for the frontispiece, balcony, porch, steps, rails, ballustrades, statues, windows,
&c. must remain the same in each composition; and not only so, but of the same
marble and same zoood, abating for the decays of time.
With the inward ornaments the case is the same; for the rooms must not be
adorned in ta o different manners, but with tapestries or pictures of such or such a
choice. The inner court may be set off with fountains, statues, &c.
No greater overfight can therefore, in my opinion, can be committed on such
an occasion, than to employ different hands in so capital a work, because they com-
monly differ in manner, handling and knowledge, as much as night and day ;
whence it happens, that the chain of a story is so broken and dubious, that with-
out an explanation, it is difficult to know whom or what it represents; one fol-
lowing the antique gusto; another the modern; one giving his personages a cer-
tain likeness, and another giving the same person a character quite different from
that of the former, as it hits their fancies and choice; so that Virgil’s saying is
I remember to have seen two pieces, being the continuance of one fact; in
both which were represented one and the same general ; in the former, he was in
armour and bareheaded, more or less antique-like; and in the latter, he was
triumphantly carried on à shield, clothed in buff, and with shoes and stockings,
hat and feather, and with a naked sword in his hand : As for his carriage, it was
as little, like that of the former, as his dress. Now how ridiculous this must

look, let any one determine.






I could give more instances of this kind of blunders, but thinking this a suffi-
cient caution to those who may be concerned in fuch works, I shall pursue our
main defign, and come to likeness; which, in a word, lies in the features, how
much soever a person may advance in years.
To hit the likeness well, and prevent the afbresaid mistakes, the following is
thé best method: Chusc a fine plaister-face, ci hér of man or woman, which has
such an air as the subject. requires, whether modesz, austere dr amorous; this face we
must make use of from the beginning to thé end of the work, where those obser-
vations are necessary, either in front or profile, eud with such a light as is proper to
the whole design, whether right or left, sorward or backward, candle or torch; all
this to be done without any variation, except somewhat in the liveliness and
fleshiness, which, through years, is continually abating in both sexes, as we have
before faid.
As to the motion of the passions, caused by particular accidents, we have, in
a former chapter, shewed a method, how to manage in such cases, without the
life.
Having said thus much touching the ordonnance, I think it not improper to
subjoin two observations, which are as necessary to what has been said as to what
shall hereafter be treated of, namely, a description of the conditions of men in the
summer and winter seasons; and conclude this book with an emblem.
A Man in Summer
Is vastly affected by the heat, which, thinning the blood, makes it flow with
ease to the extremities of the body; whereby the motions, are freed from restraint-
The head is raised; the shoulders sink; the arms and legs spread; the hands and
fingers opened, whereby each part of the body seems to refresn itself, affording
every where free passage for the cold; the mouth is generally open; the eye-lids
feem to be brisker, because warmth enlivens all things ; caufing also the vapours,
which ascend to the brain and fall on the eyes; the hair stuck behind the ears
hangs down the back, so that all seems to be uncovered.
A Man in the Winter Season.
To exprefs this figure well, it is necessary to explain cold itself, as being the
cause of the subsequent motions. The blood, wherein lies the warmth of the
body, is (by means of cold, which is its opposite, and enters from without,
through the pores) forced inwardly; so that it passes chiefly from the small
members, to wit, fingers and toes, to its center : wherefore we see that, to keep
off outward cold, people sink their heads into their breasts; raise their shoulders;
hug themselves very close with their hands under their arm-pits, which the cold
cannot easily affect; the knees joined, legs somewhat bent, and the whole body
stooping; the eyes almost shut, or kept open with difficulty; the mouth closed ;
the upper lip hidden by the under one, which covers it up to the nose, to pre-
vent the cold entering the body; the hair hangs carelessly both before and behind.










EMBLEM,
The best method, a person of weak memory can take, is, to exercise his judg-
ment on things at the instant they present themselves to him; that is, to set down
what he has a mind to keep, that he may at any time have recourse to it for his
future information and remembrance ; and this to be repeated ’till he has gained
what he wants : but this- cannot well be done, unless he, at such times, suspend
the use of three of his senses, hearing, taste and smell, and retain only sight and feeling,
according to our sketch, thus :
A young man, in his prime, is sitting at a small table, with a pen or crayon in his
hand ; Memory is sitting over against him, holding upright an open book, where-
in Truth is represented, to him on the table ; Time, standing by him on one side
points at the figure of -Truth; and Prudence, on his other side, is guiding his
hand ; Sight and Feeling stand by him at the table; the three other-senses are, at
the command of Judgment, conducted by Temperance to another apartment; be-
hind Memory, Judgment is seen driving away some Children, who are observed here
as vices and untimely hindrances, prejudicial to Memory; those unseasonable im¬
pediments, always hovering about us, and courting our smiles, have each their
particular tokens in their hands; the first, a Timbrel; the second, a Racker :-the
third, a Plate of Grapes, the fourth, a Pye ; the fifth, a Patridge; the sixth, a
Fool’s Cap.
Thus we may easily see, how weak and imperfect we are, when Judgment does
not affist us, and we are missed by the bent of a corrupt inclination.






TH E
Ar P of IAENNG.
BOOK III
Of Things ANtIQUE and Modern.
CHAP. I. The Difference between what is Antique and Modern.

are now obliged to put in execution our purpose of making a


proper distinction between things antique and modern; since the



difference between them is so great, that they cannot unite, without


causing excessive deformity ; for things antique are always the fame, bat





the mode continually changing; its very name implies its mutability ;

fince nothing is more inconstant than what depends on fafhion; which alters not
only annually, but even daily in those who mimick the court. These contrarieties,
which are so confounding, and cause such a variance between what is antique and
modern, we see chiefly in the composition of histories, fables, emblems, and such
like; in which both (yet the modern most) are blended together.
Congruity and suitableness in the composition of histories are true tokens of a
judicious master. What is more glorious, than while we are ravifhing the eye,
to pierce the heart ; while the sight is recreated with the beauties of the art, to
transport the mind with the decorum and energy of the composition: He there-
fore is esteemed a prudent master, who not only gives every thing its proper colours,
but also its due expression, pure and uncorrupted. Thus we see that great masters, who
are got to that perfection, do not blend things promiscuously, and without dis-
tinction, as east, west, south and north in a chaos-manner; because, with the little
masters, we should then act against nature; it is therefore necessary, that we nicely
consider what it is we intend to represent, to the end that we may not fail in giv¬
ing the true meaning of it. How can the truth of a thing be known, unless it be
represented as clear as a literal explanation , Let us then, curious artistsl sedately
weigh, what gives the art such an effect and lustre: have ye a mind to borrew
any thing for your ordonnance, examine first the story ye design to handle, whether









it be Perfian, Greek, Roman, &c. Will ye represent à Darius, chuse all your ma-
terials from ’the Perfians, for his attirement. Will ye bring F Demosthenes on the
stage, learn the proper circumstances of the Athenians, and make him appear a
great heroe. Will ye exhibit the valiant  Scipio, give him a Roman dress, and
other neceffaries from that people suitable to it. By this means each perfonage will
have his true property, and you will shew your skill in history, and also, by observ-
ing the time when, and place te here, represent the subject accordingly. Would ye
exhibit High or Loue-Dutch, Englisn 'or French stories, fetch no materials from Per-
sia, Greece or staly : each country can furnisn fufficient matter proper for its cli-
mate, to wit, plants, manner of living, pastimes, house-ornaments, stuffs, dresses,
publick worships, times and manners of eating and repose : all which particulars
must be attentively considered, in order to gain our point, and for which purpose
reading and books are necessary : for as a professor in law must draw his knowledge
from the marrow of the Roman, German and other writers of jurisprudence ; a
divine from scripture and the commentators thereon; and a philosopher the same
so a painter ought to be skilled in the representations which he makes his prin-
cipal study, whether the same be ancient or modern. Hence we judge, what a
fund of knowledge is requisite : if a painter would be universal, he should almost
know every thing; nay, more than many other artists in their particular callings;
for he ought to have a tolerable knowledge of mathematics, philosophy, geogra-
phy, history, &c.
Do not meddle then either with things which you are not conversant with, or
follow the advice of others; for it is more commendable to sketch a dog or cat
zoell, than an elephant, camel or crocodile poorsy. Are you disposed to handle an
ancient story, borroz nolhing for it that is nez, and of modern invention; since what is dis-
guised with falsehood can never be truth ;like a traveller, who darkens truth by his
own additions, whose whims make him describe things he never saw, and that, to
a person who, on due consideration, soon discovers the fallacy. The artist’s Judg-
ment itself must therefore alzays go before; and all that he undertakes be governed
by reason and nature : An Italian should not be in an Indian dress; or a Persian in a
slashied doublet, since the person we desire to know, does thereby become unknozon.
Each country and people are known, not only by their habits, but by all the other
circumstances before-mentioned ; give then to each its own requisities, and every
thing that is proper to it. How excellent must a picture appear, and with what
admiration viewed, when every thing has its due qualities, and the whole, a
prudent management l what will not the artist merit, if he perform nothing be-
yond his strength and knowledge l for, since we cannot know all things in per-
fection, we must keep within the bounds of our understanding. He who would
be every where, is seldom found any where ; and by confounding. things does, in-
stead of real judgment, discover his little sxill. Represent then no more than
your capacity will admit; and principally take care, not to iniermix modern and

ancient
« He and his army were defeated at Marathon ; and afterwards by Miltiades, general of the
Athenians.
5 He conquered Sicily, after he had laid waste the Country of Epidaurus,
. Pl. o  
ll By whom Carthage was destroyed.







ancient dresses, and furniture in the same composition : thus we shew à generous spirit
for eminence, and with the excellent former and latter Italian, French, Femiss, and
other masters, an emulation to excel in what is noble, great and artful.
I think I can’t better describe the difference between what is antique and modern,
than by a windball and an egg, thus; the ball, by being tossed to and fro, and
at last bursting, represents short duratien, affording nothing but wind; but the egg
hatched and opened, produces a living creature ; not only a something, but some-
thing good; the former, a mere nothing; or, if it have a name, it is vanity, and
therefore rather bad than good.
Painting was, by the ancient Romans, so highly esteemed, that none but noble-
men durst learn it : As we may also gather from the painters, several of whom
have been of noble extraction: and the reason of it is very evident, since it is
not only probable, but reasonable, that such ingenious spirits should have a dis-
tinguishing inclination for arts, suitable to their quality, above the vulgar. Their
meditations, actions, and perceptions were fixed on great and sublime things :
they enquired into, and consulted many excellent authors of history, fables and
emblems, as well sacred as profane, and the accounts of ancient medals ; from
whence they have drawn plentiful and ingenious matter for their studious : what
excellent paintings have they not obliged the world with l how many temples,
palaces, and other rare structures have they enriched with elegant devices inciting
to virtue; whereby they have bequathed a lasting name to posterity l How did
architecture (never enough to be praised) flourisn in their times. But whatt alter-
ations do we see now ' How are the beauties and profitable uses of painting either
funk, obscured or slighted, since the k Bombocciades are multiplied in these countries ;
at prefent we can fcarce see one virtue appear, but ten, nay an hundred vices will
rise counter to it; thus. has sprung up à second Hydra like that of Lerna; so that
we want avaliant Hercules to lop off those dragons heads which are always sprout-
ing. Thus architecture itself, how excellent soever, is, with the right practice
of painting, brought into disgrace, and slighted by other nations ; since we scarce
see a beautiful hall or sine apartment of any cost, that is not set out with pictures
of beggars, obscenities, a Geneva-stall, tobacco-smoakers, fidlers, nasty children
easing nature, and other things more filthy. Who can entertain his friend or a
person of repute in an appartment lying thus in litter, or where a child is baw-
ling, or wiping clean , We grant, that these things are only represented in
picture ; but is not the the art of painting an imitation of the life; which can either
please or loathp if then we make such things like the life, they must needs raise an
aversion. They are therefore too low and unbecoming subjects for ornament,
especially for people of fafhion, whose conceptions ought to surpafs the vulgar.
We admit indeed that all this is art, or at least called so, when the life is thereby
naturally expressed ; but hau much the beautiful life, sxilfully handled, differs
from the defective life of mottern painters, let the curious determine. It is-cer-
tain that men, (and beasts too) have each a particular and different inclination to
particular things; whereby they love what is agreeable to their natures, the one
good
x The followers of Bamboccio, a celebrated painter of mean subjects.










good, the other bad; becanse (as some pretend) they are governed and insluenced
bycertain constellations happening at their births: This at least we know, that
one man inclines to hunting, and a country-life; another to war, strife, and con-
tention ; another to merchandise and deceit ; this, to politics and great things;
that, to pleafures, &c. So that in each we discover what his nature and pafsion
is prone to.
But let uà reffect on two arts, noblé and ignoble or antique and modern, and see
how much they differ both in objects and execution. The antique is unlimited, that
is, it can handie history, sacred as well as profane, fables and emblems both moral
and spiritual; under which three heads it comprehends, all that ever was, is, and
shall be; the past, present, and to come; and that, after an excellent manner, which never
alters, but remains always. the same : The modern, contrarily, is so far from being free,
that it is limited within certain narrow bounds; and is of small power; for it may or can
represent no more than what is present, and that too in a manner wohich is always changing :
What is past and to come is without its power; as also histories, fables and emblems, as well
poetical and philosophic as moral. Hence we may judge what the modern art of paint-
ing is, and why it cannot be called noble; much less of any harmony with the
antique. I could assign more causes for this disunion, but shall at present omit
them for two reasons : first, because men’s judgments are so various; and each
argues according to his paffions and inclinations, in proportion as he likes or
dislikes a thing: Secondly, (which is the principal) that I may not be thought
to raise any suspicions of partiality or prepossession. But why should I restrain
my thoughts , Let me speak plain in spite of others; l say then, that although
modern things seem to have some prettiness, yet they are only to be esteemed as
diverfions of the art. I moréover maintain, that such painters as never produce
more than one choice of subjects, may truely be ranked among tradesmen; since
such reprefentations cannot be called an exercise of the mind, but an handicraft
trade.
But such remarks as these, we may sufficiently perceive, that from apprehension,
knorvledge, and judgment, spring the lustre and elevation of the antique art of paint-
ing; and contrarily that ignorance, negligence, and self-ieill, debase and subject the
modern: So that the ancients have not improperly placed Minerza by the one, and
Midas by the other; intimating by the former, still in the art, practice, carefulness
and an heavenly talent; and by the latter, imprudence, blind zeal, wordly defects and
hindrances.
But if any one would perhaps examine, whether there be not a means to make
the modern noble, as well as the antique, that they might both march together, they
would find it to be labour in vain; since defects once got footing are not easily
remedied: But further, we often hear with wonder, that painters persuade one
another that, in handling a subject, it is enough to follow nature, though sne be
defective ; as crooked, lame, squint-eyed, or blind; and that when she is imi-
tated with a delicate peneil, that is sufficient; and such is their zeal and extra-
ordinary pains, that one paints for that end the air of his wife, though ever so
ugly, with all her freckles and pimples very exactly; whereby the agreeableness
of a beautiful woman’s face is quite loft: Another chuses his clownish unmannerly-
maid¬







maid-servant for his model, and makes her a lady in a saloon : Another will put
a lord’s dress on a school-boy, or his own son, though continually stroaking his
hair behind his ears, scratching his head, or having a down-look; thinking it
sufficient to have followed nature, without regard to grace, which ought to be
represented; or having recourse to fine plaister-faces, which are to be had in
abundance.
The beautiful and well-composed airs in a picture of many or few figures,
have a great effect on the minds of the knowing; of which the ancients were
thoroughly sensible; for in the most perfect bodies they made the face chiesly to
excel in beauty and agreeableness. No one of judgment will deny, that a beau-
tiful and well-carriaged woman has such an ascendant as most effectually to move
her beholders in two different manners, as by two contrary pasfions; under mis-
fortune or in raging pain, she will pierce a man’s heart, and move him to com-
passion; and when she entertains us on any joyful occasion, with singing or
laughing, she will at once delight us : a clownish woman contrarily, will not
produce any such effects; for her beholders, through her unmannerliness and
simple behaviour, despise her mirth, and mock her ridiculous sorrow.
What great defect do we not still find in modern painters, when they use, or rather
abuse, the life; not doing like those, who being accustomed to a nobler manner,
view the life with knowledge and judgment, that is, not as it ordinarily appears, but
as it ought to be, in its greatest perfection: Whereas the others, blinded by custom,
have no such nicety ; because they imitate the life just as they fee it, without any
difference : We even see them make it more deformed than nature ever produces;
for the more mis-shapen faces Bamboccio, Oftade, Brouvver, Moller, and many others
made, the more they were esteemed by ignorants: By which lozp choices we can
easily judge, that they were strangers to beauty, and admirers of deformity :
However it is an infallible rule, that daily custom and converse with people like
ourselves contribute much to it. Thus deformity and vice are preferred to vir-
tue, and what should be shunned sought ; whereas he who is sensible of virtue
will always endeavour to escape error.
CHAP. II. Method for representing what is City-like, or elegant Modern.
yHE continual changes in worldly things afford us plentiful- matter for modern
manner, without recourse to-history, fables, or emblems ; even so much as
te be endless; as may be gathered from the affemblies for public worship,
pleadings in courts, plays, family occurrences, and the like: All which we
perceive to be either majestic, amorous, sorrowful, or otherwise. Those things,
how different soever, can be represented in the antique manner as well as in the modern,
provided each keep its quality ; as I have already intimated, and shall further insist in
the subsequent examples; which can be handled in both manners alike natural and
proper, without either’s borrowing any thing from the other, but the subject. This 1 think.
worthy






worthy of remark; and the rather, since, to my knowledge, no author, treating
of things antique and modern, has said any thing touching it.
Francis Mieris has not only curiously followed his master Gerrard Dou, in the
elegant modern manner, but is, in some things, his superior; and the rare Poussin,
and Raphael. prince of the Italian painters, excelled in the antique: Let us then
follow their examples in what is most agreeable to our gusto’s ; and though the
latter far exceed the former in nobleness, it is however more commendable, to be
like a good Mieris in the modern manner, than a bad Raphael in the antique. Though
I remember to have séen a picture of old Mieris, which, as often as I think of it,
furprises me; it was an half-length figure, about the bigness of the palm of the
hand, representing the art of painting, holding a vizor in her hand ; its air, head-
attire, dress and furniture so very beautiful and truly antique, that I never saw the
like done by any other modern master, how skilful soever. Whence it appears,
how rare it is for a modern master to give into the antique.
Let us now represent the case of parents permitting their children to take seme
diversions in bathing: A design which can be as well executed in the antique as the
modern manner. The bagnio comes forward in the piece, having a descent into it
of two steps: The boys from twelve to fifteen years old, about the water and in
it, are naked : A daughter, of twenty years of age, is seen with, a fine white
linnen cloth over her body, in order to cover what modesty conceals, and as is
customary on such occafions; nevertheless her arms and part of her legs are bare ;
she is coming up the steps on the left side : One of the aforesaid boys holds her
fast by a flappet of the wet cloth, in order to prevent her going up : further be-
hind, near a bed, the eldest daughter, about twenty-five years old, appears almost
unshifted; and near her, a maid-servant to put the cloth about her: The father
we represent, drest either in his cloaths, or a japan night-gown, standing on the
brink of the bagnio, and laughing at the boys who are in it, and playing their
tricks : One of them is standing with his left leg on the steps, and with the other
foot just touches the water; the youngest boy lies on his belly extended on the
lowermost step, plafhiing with his hands in the water; the cloth of the daughter,
who is stepping out of the bagnio, dropping wet, sticks so close to- her body,
that the nakedness of the members appear so transparently through it: The
mother all this while is busy in serving some sweet-meats on a table covered with
a napkin, near which, a child, of two or three years of age, is sitting in a chair
in his shirt; to whom she offers a macaroon. Somewhat further are seen silk gowns,
petticoats, velvet fcarves, hoods, &c. hanging on pins : On a table are lying
pearl necklaces, bracelets and other trinkets: In fine, the whole disposition is
most orderly, natural and beautiful. As for the boys cloaths, to wit, coats, hats,
breeches, stockings, shoes, &c. they lie on the brink of the bagnio.
Now I refer it to the judicious reader, whether the daughter, who, on the left
side, is stepping out of the bagnio, ought not, notwithstanding her being covered
with the cloth, to be represented beautiful and shapeable in her arms, legs,
hands and feet, nay, even her body also, so far as the nakedness appears through
the wet cloth; her modesty appears evidently by her bafhful look : What a car-
riage shew the feet and whole body, while she endeavours to cover the parts which
modesty






modesty conceals l And how modestly does she step-up, instead of expofing those
parts by a wanton gatel 1 afk further, whether the boy, who is stopping her
by the flappet of the cloth, ought to be less beautiful and well-made than the
father in the flowered japan gown; The boy the same, who lies extended on his
belly ; in whomn must appear innocence and childifhiness : The eldest daughter in
her bloom, well. descended and virtuously educated. To whom shall we liken
her ; whence must we fetch her beauty ; and whom must we use for a model ?
a vulgar person, or one of a better appearance: even this latter would be a in-
fufficient for the purpose, if not well educated and fine-carriaged ; hecause beauty
without grace looks mishapen and stiff: This virgin then, who is, except in her
feet, quite naked, ought principally to be painted as beautiful and agreeable as a
Grecian Venus ; I mean not, a wanton one, but an « heavenly one, i. e. a virtuous
one ; for as much as the soul differs from the body, and the body from the drefs,
does nobility from commonalty, virtue from defect. If any one afk, where he
shall find those béauties ; 1 refer him in the first place, to the books which treat
of perfect proportion ; wherein true grace consists: Whilst he is studious in those,
he ought to have the best plaister-figures before him, in order to exercise his un-
derstanding, and thereby acquire a solid judgment. If it be again objected,
that the plaister is not equal to living nature, l own it ; for l mean not, that the
artist should paint flesh-colour after them, but get a perfect idea of their J.
beauty, grace and agreeablenefs, both general and particular ; whence perfection
springs; for the colouring is evident, and easy enongh to be found in the life, as
I could prove in several instances of some ordinary painters who coloured well;
who, before they had made much progrefs in the art, were cried up for great
men, and yet, having any thing extraordinary toodo, were not able to fketch well
an head, hand or foot.
The modern painting can theréfore not be accounted art, when nature is simply
followed; which is a meer imperfect imitation or defective aping her. Even,
where a thing represented ever so natural, well-designed and properly ordered ;
the condition, manners and custom of the country well observed, and the colour-
ing most exact, yet the knowing will not think it artful : but when nature is
corrected and improved by a judicious master, and the aforesaid qualities joined to
it, the painting must then be noble and perfect.
I say therefore, with respect to the naked, whether of man, woman or child,
that when it is not exhibited most beautifully, or in its due proportion, the modern
painting cannot deserve the name of art; and. with good reason, since this is the
only method whereby to make those two unlike sisters accord.
Van Dyk, never enough to be commended, gained excellence in the antique as
well as the modern manner, by strictly following the aforesaid three graces in
both; and he thereby acquired the epithet of Matchless: let us therefore follow
his noble example in what made him so famous ; since he is the first who carried
the modern manner so high as to gain it the name of art. Whence we may easily
conclude, what great difference there must be, between a painter who makes
the
« Venus Urania.
T The Three Graces.






the modern or defective life, his study and excellence, and one who follows the
antique, or makes a thorough enquiry into every thing that is beautiful and perfect:
The difference is even so great in every respect, that I cannot but wonder at it;
especially, when 1 consider how much greater the number of the former fort is,
and how they daily increase. l wonder, I say, that now-a-days virtue is so little
heeded ; virtue, which took its rise from Heaven, is now, as formerly the god-
ly Astrea did, flown thither again; and vice, contrarily, which sprung forth of

Erebus and black earth, keeps its station. But it cannot be otherwise, since
blind love alone rules, and an I Anteros is no more. The reason of so great à dif-
ference can be attributed to nothing else, but the different inclinations of painters,
to objects agreeing with their tempers.
They, who content themselves with following defective life, will never produce
any thing perfect, or deserve the name of artful masters; because not knoeeing, or
not caring to knole, what is dest, they cannot so much as strive at it: to which add,
another mischief ; they more easily judge of what is bad than good; as 1 shall explain
myself in the following example.
A young man as a painter with pallet and pencils, attended by Zeal, is led by
a blind Cupid, to the figure of Nature, whose face is covered by Vulcan with a veil,
The sun behind the young man enlightens the aforesaid whole figure. Mercury, on
a cloud, with his Caduceus in one hand, holds a star over the artist’s head in the
other. The meaning is this.
Nature is the painter’s object; the Jun represents knowledge; Vulcan the gross part
of the air, or earthiness; and Mercury, inevitable fate. The rest explains itseif. Thus
much touching a modern painter.
Another emblem may have this difference, that instead of Vulcan’s covering the
upper part of Nature with a veil, Pallas is taking it off; and Anteros introduced
instead of Cupid : The meaning is, that Judgment by Pallas (which signifies Wis-
dom) governs the upper and most perfect part ; and discovers to the soul all it
needs to know; when Aiteros signifying Love to Virtue, is leading the painter, at-
tended by Zeal, to it.
But to speak still plainer, we shall subjoin a third ordonnance.
We represent t to young men of equal age ; the one standing on the ground be-
fore the figure of Nature; and the other, on one side, or behind him, somewhat
raised on a stone or step : by the former is placed Vulcan, and by the latter, Pallas;
the one fignifying defect or earthy parts, and the other, the soul or perfection. Let
the
Astrea, or uprightness; sincerity, love, and all heavenly virtues are understood by her. She
was the daughter of one of the Titans and Themis, according to Hefiod : but Ovid calls her, the
daughter of Jupiier and Themis. She came from Heaven in the golden age, and when vice and cor-
-ruption got footing, stew thither-again.
By him is understood Hell and the Night. Some name him the god of Hell, and, say he wa
married to the Night. Also an Hellist river, of which Vijgil fings thus, in his Eneids.

Venimus & magnos Erebi tranavimus Mmneis
From Erebus and the Night are brought forth lies, envy, stubbornness, poverty, fickness, &c.
Porpkiry
I Couxrer-love, son of Veaus, and younger brother to Cupid. See Suidas, Paufanias,
&c.






the figure of Nature be enlightened by the sun, and cause triangular rays to pro-
ceed from those young men’s eyes upon it; the rays of the former extend from
the feet up to the middle; and those of the latter take the zohole figure. Let us noW
judge, when the sun represents knowledge, which of the two young men can see
and comprehend the most, and is most perfect, he who views the figure but half-
way, or he who examines it up to the upper parts. Whence we may learn,
that the mind and judgment are beyond the hand and practice, which, without theory
are of no worth. Tis art to produce something which we have not in sight; but mere
copying and aping to intimate what we have before us.
applied to the case of the lovers of the antique and modern manner.
We suppose then tzo lovers instead of two painters, and take the art of painting;
instead of nature, for the object; which they, like the others, view, the one en-
tirely, the other but half-way : thus he, who comprehends the figure through-
out, knows most, and has the best knowledge, and is consequently a greater lover;
when the other is observed as a lover of loco things, and ignorant of the more
noble: of this latter fort we find the greatest number in our countries.
It is a certain position, that some men, though hindered in their youth by an
ordinary education, from attaining sublime thoughts and great things, can alter
in time by art and exercise ; even conquer their innate dispositions, and fit. them-
selves for noble and excellent things ; so that we need not wonder, that Domesthenes
was not more eloquent than Demades, who, though he seemed as if nature had
not bestowed on him either tongue or speech, yet became so eloquent, that his
singular example shews, there is nothing impossible to art; nay, few defects,
which, like Demades, diligence and labour cannot overcome. Do we need not
read of Heraclides, that he became a philosopher in spite of nature and edu-
cation ; why does Socrates, not prone to virtue, become virtuous ; wherefore we
need not wonder, that many great men have obtained great endowments, though
naturally unfit for them : And from hence we may infer, that art and exercise
are of more worth than the productions of nature.
I have not yet made mention of several men of mean extraction, who, though
they spent many years with pleasure and affiduity, in loco employments, yet after-
wards arrived, to general surprize, at the top of their art ; as is said of Polydoro
da Caravaggio, who, in Raphael’s time, having been an hod-man tohis eighteenth
year, became afterwards a great master : The same was the case of Quintin Matsys,
who having been, to his twentieth year, a smith, gave into painting, and much
surpassed his cotemporaries. Martin Hemstirk, a countryman’s son, Andrea
Mantegna, a cow-herd, and many others of mean birth also went great lengths in
the art.
Was not, among the ancient philosophers, Protagoras, a countryman’s son; Py-
thagoras, an engraver’s ; Jphicrates, general of the Athenians, a taylor’s ; the orator
Demades, aforelaid, a failor’s, and the Mantuan Maro, prince of the Latin poets,
the son of a potter ; even the muses themselves were poor; their nobility sprung
not from their birth but their science.
We could give many more instances of this kind;. but, not to seem tedious,
shall proceed to.










CHAP. III. The Nature of City-like Subjects; which daily afford plentiful
Matter for a modern Painter.
AS the genius of artists differs, one leading to the sublime manner, another
 to the common, even to the meanest, so we find ourselves obliged to treat

of all parts of-the art, in order to be alike useful to every one.
We have already observed, that there are three sorts of people, the courtly or
high; the citizen or commonalty; and the mean or poor state; the first is spoken
of in the foregoing book of ordonnance; and the second shall now follow.
We suppose, that every artist endeavours to excel in his choice of a subject;
that some seek fame and money; others, money and fame; others, money only:
at the same time we think it no less artful to represent a jest than a serious matter;
a countryman, than a courtier; or an afs, than an horse, since either requires
good skill to express it properly.
Although there is a great difference between citizens and courtiers, yet the one
as well’the other may excel alike in beauty and goodness; it is grandeur alone
that makes the distinction between the city and court ; for luxury and pride are
peculiar to the latter, but modesty and temperance to the former.
Having premised this, ’it will be easy to exhibit plainly, the further circum-
stances, as occasion shall call for them; first observing, that as the city-life is
peculiar to us, with its daily occurrences of asfemblies, pastimes, family-affairs,
and other particulars, mentioned in the preceding chapter; so it is the more easy
for a painter to make such subjects his practice ; especially one who finds himself
insufficient for the grand taste, for whose sake we give the following schemes.
And first an
Example of Intreating and Refusing.
Two virgins are seen at a table, drinking tea; the youngest is in her within-
ddoor dress, and the other, a friend paying her a visit; each has her cup and
saucer; that of the youngest stands filled before her, and she has the tea-pot in
her hand, in order to fill the cup of the other, who, having turned it down, sets
it on the table ; she is friendly intreated by the other to drink another dishi; as if
she said,— Pray, dear Isabel l one dishi more; but a fervant entering the room to call
her away, she refuses it, with her hand on the tea-pot, to hinder silling, seeming
to say,l thank you heartily; fill no more. These two paffions cause two contrary
motions in the whole body, hands, feet and face. The mother, who is letting in
the servant with his hat under his arm, holds the door half open, and is shewing
him his mistress; the opening of the door discovers a sledge, (the usual carriage
of Holland) with which he is come to fetch her.
Now, in order to express more plainly this rising from the tea-table, we may
place another virgin at it, near Jsabel; who, looking towards the door, seems to
rise and set down her cup: The man we may make approaching his mistress, with
à letter







a letter in his hand; and the mother, standing at the door, and looking : a little
boy may also properly stand at the table, who, stealing a bit of sugar out of the
box, is watching his sister, to see whether she observes it. Thus the matter may
stand with respect to these two viigins.
Have we a mind to represent the same occurrence by gentlemen, we ought
only to change the tea into wine; the teapot into a bottle; the-cups into glasses;
the tea-equipage of kettle, chafing-disni, &c. into a cistern, according to the
season; and the mother into a menial servant; the apartment, if in the summer-
season, to be in a garden-house; and, in the winter, a chamber, with an enter-
tainment, or collation.
Such subjects as these are very commendable, and may be nobly disposed, to
the credit of an artist : But he must avoid handling cottages, brandy-shops, ale-houses,
batdy-houses, corps-de-gard, and the like.
We shall exhibit another example of daily occurrence; whereby appear more
passions; in order to shew, that they must not be wanting in such representations.
EXAMPLE II. Of an accident which happened at a Painters House.
The artist had one morning a fine plaister-figure and two busts brought home ;
and setting them out of the way on a chest of drawers, and then paying the
figure-maker, let him depart : A boy of seven or eight years of age fitting near
the drawers, eating a piece of bread and butter, saw this; who, after he, had
eaten, and his father left the room, took a chair, in order to view them near;
and thinking them play-things, must needs take them down : But either through
their weight, or the tottering of the chair, whereon he stood, he dropped the
figure. On this noife the father, apprehensive of what had happened, came
down into the room, and beheld the misfortune with sorrow. The boy affright-
ed, fooked about for a corner to hide in; and at last run to his mother, hanging
about her neck, and begging her to save him. She, though concerned for the
damage, yet desired the father to consider the child’s innocence; upon which,
and the intreaty of his daughter, who had rushed into the room, on hearing the
outcry, he was pacified; ordering the maid-servant to gather up the broken
parts, and’-to fling them away : after which, he took the two busts in his, arms,
and returned to his room-
Although this accident be in itself of no great moment, yet it will furnish
matter enough for a mode-painter, as well as the contrary, to fill three cloths with;
being full of efficacious paffions, elegance, and variety; and as rich in subject as
if it were a fiction.
It cannot be denied, that this subject, though no history, is of an historicat
nature; and requires as much pains as handling some fictions out of Homer or
Virgil. We grant indeed, that the nature of it gives us liberty of adding what
ornaments, or taking away what heavy by-works we please, fince we are masters
of our own inventions, and can manage our thoughts as we think fit, ’till we have
brought them to our liking; which is a licence not allowable in other kinds of
history ; nevertheless when we have a mind to exhibit an accident like the pre-
ceding,






ceding, we mnust confine ourselves to all the- particulars of it, though no history ; be-
cause by abating or leaving out any of them, it would make no impression on us.
This example then, though only an introduction to such sort of compositions,
yet requires a punctual imitation; and we get in time richer in those inventions,
by daily occurrenees. They must be even pleasant to painters in the grand man-
ner, since they recreate the mind, require no reading, and may in great nnmbers
be met with at leisure times. Princes often disguise in mean habits for their
diverfion; and citizens and commonalty in rich ones for the same reason-; because
any fort of varietytickles; and each seeks his pleasure foreign to his usual way
of living.
But it is more easy for a citizen to play a citizen’s than any other part; and for
a painter to keep to the management of what he daily meets with, than any thing
else ; since the mind is like a glass ball hung up in the middle of a room, which
receives all the objects present, and retains the impression of them. Thus Rubens
and Van Dyk, by daily conversing with the great at court, were fixing their
thoughts on what is sublime and lofty in the art; Jordaans and Rembrandt again,
on what is city-like, and Bamboccio and Brouwer, on what is most vulgar and
mean. Thus each in his way, according to his conversation with people like
himself.
The following accident is as remarkable as the former:
21 12
Ordonnance.
This composition exhibits a mother, holding a looking-glafs before her child.
This woman sits upright, with her back mostly against the light, close to a
window, which runs to the point of sight, and is but half seen; through which
window she receives her light a little fronting; her dress is a long dark blue upper
garment, and her under one, having long sleeves, is light gold colour-with purple
reflexions ; with her left hand she holds the looking-glafs upright in her lap;
looks at the child with a smile, yet her mouth somewhat open; her head, in
profile, inclines a little to the left shoulder; her right hand behind her rests on
a small round table, whereon lies an open book, a frame with, needlework, and
some bobbins of silk. The child standing before the glass, with a fool’s cap on
his head, holds an apple against his left breast- in his right hand; and has his
left arm with a double fist up to his ear, and whimpering threatens to beat the
glass; he turns to the left, looking angrily at it, and draws back with his right
leg : His coat, which is white, is loopt on the right shoulder; and his left breast
bare ; he is girt with a rose-colour girdle. A maid-servant standing behind him,
is seen fronting, with her backside standing somewhat out to the left; her gar-
ment is greyish violet, with a white cloth about her body; in her left hand she
holds a key against her breast, and under her arm she has a dusting brushi; her
right hand rests on her mistress’s arm, and with her head flung back towards her
left side, laughs so heartily as to discover her teeth ; her hair is tied under a cap,
except a black twisted lock coming over her bosom on the left side; her smock
sleeves are turned up to her elbows. Close behind the mistress hangs a light grey
curtain,







curtain, mostly shaded by aepier of the walling between the windows; on which,
the maid gives- a large ground-shade, which flings off the child. On the left side.
of the composition a door is seen half open. Forward appears a cushion on a-
cricket, whereon lies-a tabby cat; and by it, some little flowers or a. withered.
chaplet, and a timbrel.
Now, with respect. to this representation,, consider the following.
Observations.
Here is something more to be remarked than the innocence of the child; he
grows angry at seeing himself in- the glass, imagining, that another child (be-
cause his own dress is unknown to him) is come to fright him, and get his apple.
The chief design of the ordonnance is,, to express exactly the proper paffions of
pear by the postures, but also by the dresses assigned. them, and their colours ; to.
wit, in the child, innocence; in the maid, folly ;. in the mother, moderation.
Although this- composition be no more a fact than the former, yet it affects our.
pafsions as a truth;. and because the dresses do not quite chime in with-the mode,.
it may, if well painted and executed, hang better near an antique history or fable,
than one of a company of gentlemen and ladies, whose rich: dresses- snine with
ture will maintain a decorum, which, will not abate in a thousand years, if the
circumstances of the by-works be well observed. By introducing a timbrel instead
of marbles, nickers, or cockals, and giving the maid a dusting-brush instead of
a broom or mop,. and placing by the mistress an open book or a frame of needle-
work, instead of a spinning-wheel or pudding-pan, we shall perceive the childish.
simplicity of the first, the servitude of the second, and the tutelage or command.
of the third. The very cat-lying by the dead flowers on the cricket, intimates.
childisn play, and a fondness to scatter all things-about the room.
If the artist find no taste in representing things in the antique way and yet think
the modern too mean, such an one may very commendably employ himself in.
handling such subjects. as the following.
Picture of Virtue.
She appears sitting composedly before a large looking-glass, the frame whereof
is carved and gilt, and adorned with monsters ; she views herself init, holding a
rounded serpent twined with laurel ; her aspect is sedate, her sway majestic; and
she’s attired like a ROMA; Near her stand some children attentively viewing the
the frame, and, with a general laugh, pointing at the monsters. One of these
children wears a fool’s cap; anotner has a nest of birds ;. a third has a jingling
iron; a fourth, a shell of water, out of which he blows bubbles with a reed ;
and a fifth is playing with a puppet;. these children are partly boys and partly
girls.







































































































































































































































































































































































The sense of this table is easy : but if the curious want further scope, let them
consider only, for instance, in what a good and bad family consists, and’ they will
find, that there are four sorts of people : namely, in a good family, a prudent
and respected father ; a careful and good-natured mother ; obedient children, and
humble and honest servants : the father gives law ; the mother enforces it to the
children; and both they and the servants obey : again, the father punishies ; the
mother reconciles, and the children love and fear : a good father is also liberal in
the support of his family ; the careful mother manages with frugality, yet with
honour : all is in peace and order and virtue their aim.
In a bad family, we contrarily see the father careless; the mother lavisn; the
boys wanton; the girls pert; and the servants idling and dishionest : the father in-
dolent ; the mother unreasonably indulgent to the children ; the girls saucy and
proud ; the boys rampant and gamesome; and the servants catching at what they
can lay hold of, thinking it best to fisn in troubled waters, and feast daily at their
masters expence. Again, there are otfier objects in a divided family ; when the
man is pious and’the wife a worldling, we see frequently wicked children : con-
trarily, a worldly-minded man and a religious woman often have virtuous chil-
dren ; the reason is plain.
If such things as these be well observed, they furnish abundance of matter, and
produce an extraordinary effect in any family-occurrences, in what condition and
on what. occasion soever we confider them ; whether in prosperity or adversity ;
great and noble, common or in the mean state; and as well in their’manners and
carriage as their dress: and if these things be well executed, whether in the antique
a the modern taste, they are each way commendable subjects for an artist.
CHAP. IV. Continuation of the same.
S a connexion to what precedès touching the tzoo afbresaid manners, I shall
give some further thoughts, though short of what can be said of those two

unlike sisters, since the field is so large, that l’could write a whole treatise on that
fubject only.
Representation of Vanity. Plate XX.
This ordonnance exhibits an hall, which receives its light through a large win-
low on the right side : behind against the wall stands a table, on which is a large
ocelestial globe : At the foot of this globe lies an open book : on the left side of
s’the point of sight is seen, through a door-way going down with steps, a visto,
with part of a fountain; and on the side whicht runs to the point of sight several
vases and busts of famous heroes : on the left side of the apartment is a closet af-
steened to by two steps, between two hand-rails : in the middle of the piece for-
ard, we place a round table, decked with all sorts of women’s furniture, as a
looking-glass, boxes, &c. At the window are seen two children, a boy and girl ;
the






the boy, with a shell in his hand, is leaning on the frame of the window, and
blowing bubbles through a reed or pipe; the girl, who is got on a foot-stool,
supports herself on her right hand, and, laughing, poinrs with the other at a fly-
ing bubble : upon which, the boy looks back, holding the reed or pipe with his
right hand in the shell: On the right side of the hinmost table stands a philoso-
pher in study, with; a finger at his forehead, and holding a pair of compasses on
the globe in his left hand : by the closet, which is half open, stands an old wo-
man looking forwards, with her head sidling, and rubbing her hands : by the
further hand-rail of the steps, a maid-servant is kneeling, and whiping the said
rail with a cloth; having by her a box of sand, a pot with water, and a stiff
rubbing-brush: the closet is full of plate : at the round table forwards sits a
young lady, dressing at the glass; her bosom is open, and she is loosely drest in
sine linnen and silk ; with her left hand she is bringing a right-side hair-lock over
her bosom, viewing herself side ways, and, with her right hand taking a pearl
necklace out a of box: the apartment is of light Pisan marble. The philosopher’s
garment is of dark violet; that of the boy at the window white; and of the girl,
blue: the lady is in white, and light red changeable with blue, and she has a
beautiful dark blue girdle about her waist; the old woman’s garment is greenisn
blue, somewhat faded, and the sleeves faced with light yellow; the maid-servant
is in light grey, and has a pearl necklace about her neck : by the steps lie a pair
of sandals : the round table is covered with a dark green carpet : the floor is of
stone and divided into squares ; it may also be of wood.
I shall now, for certain reasons, give the reader my thoughts of the disposition
of the objects in this ordonnance. But first, he will much oblige me, if he will
please to examine what I have hitherto said, and shall say on this head; because
he will then be enabled to judge, whether it is impoffible for me as some mali¬
ciouay report, to make the disposition of an ordonnance, with the due actions of
the figures, and in their proper places and colours, according to rule, because of
my want of sight; for would these men themselves but open their eyes, they
would quickly perceive, that disposition depends on positive and certain reasons.
First, 1 dispose the apartment with the immoveable objects; after these, the fi-
veable objects at the same time as l assert the proper place of the window, tables,
and closet.
Now l do not say, on which side of the table either right or left the lady is sit-
ting; because it is needlefs, and she cannot be disposed otherwise than she is ;
since the looking-glass must be placed against the light; consequently she ought
to front the light, that she may see herself in the glafs; for how could she shew
her breast fronting, when the face is to be in profile; And were she to bring the
lock of hair over her bosom with her right hand, and to put the left on the table,
she would be without sway, or good posture, and from head to foot in profile.
Let us next consider whether the philosopher could be otherwise disposed than
where he is ; on the left it can no ways be, for two reafons. 1. Because the
globe






globe is on that side very much in shade, and therefore unfit for his conclusions.
2. Because he would then be partly in the light, and shew almost the fame posture
as the lady, where yet ought to be an opposition. Again, were he standing
before the table, or globe, than we should neither see his motion, nor his con-
templation ; wherefore no place suits him better, or is more proper than where
he stands : by which, this advantage also accrues, that because he now receives
more shadethan light, the lady thereby gets more beauty and decorum: He can
also more commodiously view the globe, and make his remarks by turning his
body ; because one side is just fronting the light, and the other contrary to it.
It may be the same with the old woman next the closet; since it is impossible, that
she and the rest of the figures can be otherwise disposed with so much advantage
and decorum.
This defign could also be well managed in portraiture ; especially in a family-
piece of man, wife, children and a servant ; for we find daily occurrences enough
agreeing with such a representation.
But to discourse clearly on this composition, and to shew, that it is founded on
good reason, we shall make some further remarks upon it : l say then, that it
will bear divers interpretations, though, as will appear below, they may be
brought into one : The lady at the table and the old woman at the closet both
signify vanity; and yet it may posfibly be said, that the former may as well be
taken for pride, and the latter, as standing before, the plate, and, with a smiling
countenance, rubbing her hands, naturally express coverousness. The old man,
seen here as a philosopher, may consequently signify philosophy. But I say, that
this only seems to be so ; hecause, if the explanation take that turn, it cannot
be a compendious emblem, but a confnsed medley of divers things, from which
no inference can be drawn.
Wherefore it is proper to. explain our thoughts of this composition thoroughly,
even to the smallest objects, gradually coming forward fromn the greatest distance.
The busto’s and fountain in the offscape, as also the servant cleaning the hand¬
rail, tend altogether to vanity; as the old man with the globe represents vain con-
templation ; for who can penetrate the secrets of God and nature, The sense of
the young lady and old woman we have explained before : Wherefore the true
meaning of this subject is only to shew, that all is vanity; which yet could not
be absolutely concluded from it, were not the children there ; since, the other
figures and objects might be diversly applied, to wit, to pride, covetousness,
philosophy, &c. and therefore the children, who employ themselves in blowing
bubbles, are now the soul of the work : and without them, there-would be neither
a connexion nor conclusion : Even each figure would have a distinct signification,
and each call for a distinct apartment : and though we were minded to exhibit
different paffions into the same picture, yet something must be appropriated to
each of-ghem, in order to shew its meaning: For a picture is not in the same
case with a frontispiece-plate, wherein is a general representation of the whole
subject of the book, viz. the seven wonders, the twelve months, &c.
The aforesaid design is also not much unlike a true history; and might like-
wise serve for a moral or emblem ; For each figure has its particular and proper
character;






character;, men incline to study; women to gather riches and goods ; daughters
grow up in luxury, and mis-spend their time; young and innocent children busy
themselves in trifles; so that on the whole, the conclusion must be, that each
person, in what he inclines to, loves vanity.
If any one here object, that astronomy, mathematicks and philosophy are not vanities,
as being ascribed to wise men, he must know, that wise men themselvs are, by «
some, accounted fools ; wherefore y Pythagoras, though an heathen, would not be
stiled wise; but à friend and lover of good discourses and Sciences. Knowledge often
makes wise men presumptuous, and prevents their considering, with the philo-
losopher, that sciences are vanity. Thus we see daily, that the rich are haughty
and disdainful ; the handsome, proud and voluptuous; though beauty and
pleafures, like a morning-flower, decay with the evening, and we may well say
with the poet, that volutuousness is a shadow, and a momentary delight; and therefore
Poor creatures
They are, who covet Jhadows aud transient happiness.
All which things occur almost daily ; even in one and the same family; as we
have more largely intimated in the preceding chapter.
Some perhaps may censure me for introducing into the aforesaid example such
a trifle as a pair of sandals, which seem to belong to the old woman: But I say,
they are not trifles, but proper for such women as make idols of their houses,
and chuse rather to go barefoot over their floors than bedaub them, though they
have their maids always at their elbows with woollen cloths to clean after them.
But since this sacrifice to neatnefs of houses is here, in Holland, too obvious, we
shall urge no further, but, for peace sake, silently reflect, oh/ the vanity of a too
spruce Dutch zvoman: Even the maid, as dependant on the mistress, humours her
vain defires ; however, since those serviceable creatures in their conditions have
likewise something, which shews vanity, I give the servant, in the example before
us, her corals or pearls about her neck, although she were as ugly faced as a
vizard, or like the peasants in Latona’s time, when turned into frogs ; for how
ordinary soever those womon are, they think themselves handsome, if they have
but a coral necklace and curied hair; wherefore it is plain, that such circum-
stances are needful, and have, in their places, a good effect.
As for the ordonnance of dresses in this example, mode-painters may dispose
them as they please, agreeable to their choice : I have only sketched them here,
to shew, that we may represent a Vanitas as well in the antique manner as in the
common way of mode-painters.

a The Sophists termed wisdom foolish, scandalous and vile.
F Pythagoras of Samos. He rejected the name of wise, which was given hin.








Of Things Antique and Modern.
CHAP. V. Of Dresses.
WE need not doubt, whether the art of painting were, or will be, other-

wise, than it is at this time, with respect to its different choices ; be-
cause from the beginning, there were mode-painters; and as each climate has its
particular customs in dressing, so each nation follows its own fafhiion; whence it
appears, that anciently, as well as noz, men were of opinion, that their own was
the best, without giving any reason for it. The Eastern nations have their par-
ticular dress; and the Northern, theirs : these last prefer cloth, wooll and furs be-
fore the finest and thinest silks of the East; and thus it fares with all other dresses.
Each nation, 1 say, whether Italians, Spaniards, French, &c. cherishes its own
mode ; wherefore it is no wonder, that painters follow those, which best suit their
choice : nevertheless the case of art is, in this particular, like that of religion;
there is but one true ; the rest are sects ; so that the dress which is the moft constant,
and remains alzays the same, is also the beft: Nevertheless we leave each nation to its
own choice.
That the modern paintings vary from time to time in goodnefs, and are con-
tinually decreasing in that respect, is not to be doubted ; since we have daily in-
stances of it in many, which are full of mistakes: But let me afk, whether the
Tuscan order, which is the most simple and strong, do not require a good archi-
tect as well as the Corinthiaz, or best.
The mode-paintings agree in all parts with the antique subjects, in relation to
art, to wit, in design, disposition, colouring, light and shade, and by-orna-
ments, &c.
An ingenious mode-painter ought to take care, not to meddle with the antique,
or to mingle the one with the other ; for that weufd be an unpardonable mistake;
since he may be sufficiently furnished with modern matter for his study. It is not
great folly to introduce foreign words into a tongue, which is of itself copious
enough ; Why are the learned Hooft and Huigens so famous ; is it not because of
the force and purity of their stile ; especially that of Voudel, who therefore is
justly called the Dutch Virgil.
We see daily, how imperfect and defective the falhion is ; each day creates an
alteration, and each made we think best, if it get but general approbation; as may
be proved, if we confider, how ridiculous our fore-fathers habits seem in our
eyes, and consequently how much he would be mocked, who should appear in
one of his great grandfather’s; and would he not be thought a madman, The
case is the same, with respect to the old representation of dresses, with their stiff
double ruffs, close-waisted and pinked doublets, &&c. Does any thing seem more
odd. to us ) and are not such old paintings, though well handled, much slighted 2
and what reason have we to think, that the present mode will better please our
successors, when we ourselves even dislike that of the year past.
Thofe who take to such a choice are not qualified to handle any history of an-
tiquity : How ridiculous would it be, to dreis queen Esther in a stiff-bodied gown,
bedecked






bedecked with ribbons, a ruff about her neck, a wide and quilted petticoat,
laced ruffles. setting close at the hands, and a point-of-Spain head-dress, instead
of a diadem, and every thing else. answerable, and with'her, king Ahasuerus sit-
ting in a Spanissi leather èhair, with a narrow crowned hat on his head, a ruff
about his neck, a fhort doublet with long sleeves, and over it, a fhort cloak lined
with fur, wide breeches with knee-knots, cannioned stockings, roses in his shoes,
Spaniss dagger by his side, gloves in his-hand, &c. and in the offscape, Hamman in
a red waistcoat with silver buttons, and a linen pair of drawers, standing on the-
ladder with the hangman, and a Franciscan friar at the foot of it, holding up a
crucifix to him; would not this be a fine ordonnancet and. yet such things
happen.
Now if it be afked, whether. the mode-painters, who paint markets, kitchens, and:
thé like, are not to be reckoned in the number of figure-painters; I say, they
are ; so far as they keep to such subjects; nay, were they to handle fictitious stories,.
or even parables, ethich. are tied to no time ; as, of Lazarus and the rich man; of
the publican; prodigal son, and the like; or any daily occurrence; fince such re-
presentations are the more affecting, as they fhew foreign dresses; and foreign
modes being a rarity, are not so soon disliked as our own. But fuch painters must
not meddle with scriptural facts, or the stories of Ovid, Virgil, and others, which-
aré tied to time, as l have before intimated.
Yet such. is the unaccountable rafhiness of some, that they dare represent a
Sophenisba entirely in the present mode ; velvet gown. white sattin petticoat trimed
with gold laces, laced rufffes, an attire of false hair on her head, white stippers,
and in an apartment hung with gilt leather, with a fire in it; and the floor of
wood, wherein the grain-and knots are nicely obferved; the room furnished with
plush chairs, fringed and brass-nailed ; over the chimney, large china dishies; and
against the hangings, shelves with tea-furniture; a parrot in a copper cage, &s.
Besides a black seen coming, to present her à modern gold cup, or a cut cristal-
drinking-glass on a silver salver ;. he is in-a livery, trimmed with guimp-laces and-
a shoulder-knot : Her costly bed, even the pewter or silver chamber-pot and
floor-matting are not forgot.
Lucreria and Dido they treat in the same manner; against the wall of the apart-
ment of the latter, hangs a plan of the additions to Amsterdam, printed for Allara
on the Dam.
These artists would feemingly impress the histories of Plutarch, Livy, Tacitus-
and such authors, on the minds of the people, and yet do it as ridiculously as-
the poet, who, in order to make his verses known to the world, laid them
on a river running up to a town, imagining that on the paper’s fwimming thi¬
ther, it would be taken up and read, and his reputation thereby spread ; but grow-
ing wet, it sunk, and happened to be taken up by a mud-man, and flung
with the mud, into his barge. Thus the poet was disappointed.
Ye artists then, who are willing to improve, weigh well what vou are about ;
keep to the edges of the water, that if ye cannot swim, ye may not drown ;
since he who is fearlefs of danger, often perishes in it. The goodnefs of a knife
lies not in a filver handle ; or that of wine, in a gold cup : Be informed-in truth;
since






fince your work, though ever so neatly handled, will not plead your cause to ad-
vantage without it.
Two painters meeting on a time, happened to have words about Precedence ;
Astiquo, who thought himself the wisest, would take the upper hand of Modo, with-
out more ceremony; but Modo, who insisted not less on his honor and reputation
would not yield to him ; and, being somewhat younger, and sturdy, punched him
so violently in the breast, that they both fell. After they had lain a while, and
recollected themselves, Modo began chiding; but Antiquo said--What; ze ill you
not give me the precedence ; Not l, says Moao, l am as good as you; and what signify
zbords ; draw your seord, or else Iuill run this knife into your guts. This treatment was
too gross for the proud Antiquo ; wherefore, full of rage, he clapped his hand to
hiis sword, and the battle ensued; which was very fierce and doubtful. All wlto
saw it stood amazed, calling out gentlemen, hold in, hold in I but to no purposeà for
each continued pufhing, though without hurt to the other. One Justus happened to
approach in the midst of the fray, and perceiving they were both his friends, in-
terposed his good offices, and parted them. When they were somewhat pacified,
Justus afked, what induced them to fight with such unequal zi eapons; and
so rassily to endanger their lives. How, says, Antiquo, are you the only man
zho do not know, that Modo has forced and transported abundance of honest people à Has
he not brought the chaste Lucretia and virtuous Sophonisba, under false appearances from
their owm countries to Amsterdam, in order to make a jest of them ; Do not you knore hoio
he has subjected the innocent and pious Esther, with the whole court of Ahafuerus, to the
tyrany of the Spaniards; Moreover he robs me daily, and will not give place; nox,
what think you, have not l just cause of complaint ' Hereupon Justus afked, whcther the
quarrel arose from any thing but precedence; but Modo, unwilling to hear an answer,
faid in anger-—sll that my lord lays to my charge, I retort on him; how many things
hias he stolen from me à helmets, gaunilets, stays, &c. Ahil have you forgot that knavissi.
trick, which has made so much noise in the world, wlen he conjured « Heliodorus, the
church-robber, out of Judea, into St. Peter’s church at Rome, with intentien to steal the
facred treasure in spite of the Pope ; but to cover his design, and not to raise suspicion, in
case of miscarriage, he disecvered the plot to Pope Urban VIII. who instanily being carried
thither in a chair, afked the robber, whether he were not mistaken; and whether he did not
know, that Jerusalem was meant, not Rome à Do you think then, that the holy tather,
had he looked back, and seen the high-priest of Jerusalem in the holy of holies, would have
let that offender go unpunissied : What is your judgment of this sample, should I give
place 10 Antiquo; Pray, said Justus, let reason then take place. Yet Antiquo bawled
out-
— Let me have my buskins and Roman coat of armour, wolich he robbed nie of, and
I will acquit him of the rest. To which Modo said,-—-First restore me my greet
grandfather’s helmet and coat of mail, which yau made a present of to Eneas, when he
-Foer
was flying from Dardania; you may keep the gaunilets: but Antiquo replied,
great grandfather’s armour I presented to Dominichino, and the gauntlets, to Reubens,
who has bestoived them on one of the life-guards of Thalestris, queen of. the Amazons-
The conclusion of the matter was this; Justus advised, since neither could restore
any thing, that they should drink the question, and take care, for the future, not
to steal from each other.








I question not, but. the reader will, by this story, sufficiently understand my
meaning.
We have formerly asferted, that those who daily converse with mean and bad
people, commonly become like them ; as those contrarily who keep company
with the well-bred and virtuous, become good. Custom, says Horace, is a second
nature; and the proverb intimates, keep honest company, and honest thou shalt be: He
then is happy, who, having a true sense of good and bad, chuses the best and
most profitable, and governs all he does by that standard. He, who has ac-
customed himself to a bad manner, cannot easily get rid of it; perhaps will re-
tain it all his life : He, contrarily, who gives in to what is good, will reject evil,
because it is against his inclination.
Reasoning thus, it is easy to apprehend, how benefical it is for a Tyro, to
inure himself to any such fine things as are proper for his study, and to reiect the
imperfect and unnecessary. Too many goods, the famous Bartholet used to say, are no
goods.
Here, pray observe an emblematic ordonnance of a painter debauched by ex-
cessive reading of all sorts of unprofitable books, in order to shew, that none
must be used but such as are proper for his study; which Seneca affirms, saying,
that we ought to study few but good books. The cause of the aforesaid painter’s dis-
order be also attributed to the vast quantity of useless prints, drawings, &c. he
consulted; which are as great enemies to the best thoughts as an excess in books.
Here is seen an anrigue table, laid with boards, in a painting room, and, in
the middle of it, a dissi with a cake in the shape of a pyramid, and by it a cup-
Four vcomen are fitting at the table, viz. Painting, Statuary, Architecture, and the Art
of Engraving, each having her proper marks of distinction. Judgment, leading
Beauty and followed by Virtue, is entering the room, and approaching the table,
where they are welcomed. At which instant Prudence is driving thence Vice, re-
presented as an hunch-backed dwarf, as also a chimera. The room is hung with-
nistories, landscapes, architecture, and prints. Antiquity is sitting in a niche, holding
some medals in her hand, representing ancient lustre. The aforesaid door, where
judgment, &c. enter, is behind to the left; and Vice, &c. on the right side, are
driven forwards out of the room. The chimera has eagle’s claws, dragon’s wings,
a serpent’s tail, long neck, a woman’s head, beset with serpents, and the belly full.
of hanging teats.
Eet us then seriously chusé, out of our collection,
the materials which will best
serve our purpose, whether they be plaister-figures,
prints, drawings, academy-
figures or other models; rejecting every thing that is
foreign to our study.
Since we have hitherto spoken of what is modern, it will not be amiss to make
some short observations on the antique.
He, who would nicely follow the antique, ought to know, that it consists in
these two qualities, viz. beauty and goodness : Beauty again lies in a perfect proportion
of the members;. as we have snewed in the seventh chapter of the first book;. and
goodness in the grace arising from-the moiion of the members;, which motion ought
to be free, and without exaggeration. Thus much as to the nudities.
The






 




The draperies which are well cast, and fo adjusted as not to hinder the graceful
motions of the members, are certainly the best; as we evidently see in the works of
Raphael, Poussin, and some others, who practised the antique.
The ordonnance light, and what else is requisite in a perfect piece, ought all to be
most beautifully chosen.
In this manner we must also confider, landscape, architecture, and other embel-
lishments : all ought to be either pure antique, or entire modern.
We shall here subjoin one other ordonnance for the conclusion of this book.
Ordonnance representing a driving azay of the Mode, or what is Modern, fram the
Antique.
Instead of Beauty and Virtue, which in the former are led by Judgment, we may
introduce here a beautiful and modest young virgin, attired in thin linen, which dis-
covers the naked; on her hand sits a phoenix, and on her head is a chaplet of
flowers. Judgment may be set off with a gold fillet or diadem on its head, and a
scepter in its hand. Instead of deformed Vice, and the chimera, we may exhibit a
slying young damsel in a stiffened gown and high, laced head-dress; with a sable tip-
pet about her neck ; her arm-sleeves full of lace ; moreover she has shoes, stockings
and gloves; and under her arm is a bafket of china-ware, and mushirooms ; which,
by her rude motion, she is dropping. Prudence is beating her with a looking-glass;
holding in her other hand an arrow twined with a serpent: The aforesaid young
virgin’s chaplet ought to be composed of small and everlasting flowers, vig.
Ptarmica Austriaca and Gnaphalium.
The muelhrooms fignify, short duration, or sudden rise and decay.
The scepter of judgment is a long thin rod, with. a knob on the top.
THE END. OF THE THIRD BOOK.




T H E
art of painting
BOOK IV
Of COLOURIng.
CHAP. I. Of the Colours, and the ordering them.





It is remarkable, that, though the management of the colours in a

 painting, whether of figures, landscape, slowers, architecture, &c.



Yields a’great pleasure to the eve, yet hitherto no one has laid down

 solid rules for doing it with safety and certainty. Contrast in mo-



 tion is founded on reasons, which by practice, we can in a fhort


time, retain, and inculcate to others ; as is also the division or proportion of the
members ; since according to Albert Durer, it may be mathematically demonstra-
ted. The same may be said of lights and shades, by means of perspective. All
this may be thoroughly learnt in our juvenal years ; but the disposing of colours
by and over each other, in order to fetch put a good union and harmony is not,
to this day, fixed on certain principles. Meer chance is herein our only com-
fort.
An engraved, or etched print, beautifully designed and disposed, and agreeably
lighted and shaded, is very commendable; but a picture, which, besides those
qualities, requires an artful diversity. of colouring, merits the highest praise.
Nevertheless masters have, in their colouring, their particular manners ; one
has a faint manner; another a dark one; another, a grey manner; some have a flaring
manner ; others, a muddy one, &c. occasioned by their not knowing, that colours
require an orderly disposition ; like an ingenious gardener, who, in the production
of choice, beautiful, and large flowers, considers what ground is proper, and which
needs dryness, and which, moisture, and what sorts thrive best in each; which re-
quire sun, and which call for shade ; which want improvement from pidgeon’s dung,
and which from dog’s dung; in order thereby to make a greater advantage than
other

















other people do : In like manner, a paimter, if he makes thorough enquiries into
che natures and effects of colours, and against vohat grouuds they are best set off, aud will
hest anszeer their purpeses, shall be convinced that he gains a point above others. By
seeking much is found, and, notwithstanding any rubs in the way, we must re-
aew our- attempts. How many attacks have I made on flis fecret 'ere I could
make a breach in it à had I not intimated Alexander, and cut the gordian knot,
I should have been still to seek. I shall now gladly impart to the artists ali my
discoveries and improvements, and refer it to his judgment, whether they be of
any moment.
The number of the colours is six ; and these are divided into tzoo forts.
The former sort contains the yelloz, red and blue, which are called capital colours.
The latter is a mixed fort, consisting of green, purple and violet ; these have the
aame of Sroken colours.
Waite and black are not reckoned among the colours, but rather potentials or
efficients ; because the others cannot have their effects without the help of them-
These colours have also their emblematic fignifications, and particular properties.
The zehite is taken in general for light; and black for darkness.
The yellow, for lustre and glory.
The red, for power or love.
The blue, for the deity.
The purple, for authority and jurisdiction.
The violet, for fubjection.
The green, for servitude.
The colours confidered in themselves are certain faculties, imperceptible with-
out the interposition of and laying on a body; like the moon, which could not
receive her light from the sun, much less-communicate it ta us, gtherwise than
by means of a body. White is also that from wbich the coburs cone forth, and the
body whereby they become perceptible to ues.
the cofours give life to all things ; without
In reference to the Art of Paenting,
those it would be imposlible to distinguisn between life and death, wood and stone,
air and water, gold and silver, nay, light and darkness : They have a particular
great power, uniting by their agreement, separating by their force and crudity : they cause
some things to disappear in thin air, and force others to appar out of the back-grounds.
Their variety produces the utmost-charms and harmony, as wel in nature as
in a picture ; especially, when in the latter they are disposed by a judicious hand;
for what is more beautiful in a landscape than an azure fky, green fields
decked with a thousand varioussy-coloured flowers, differently-coloured grounds;
this russet, or yellow, that, green or grey, as each requires ; also the ornament of
the brown cypress-tree, the grey willow, the fair olive, the white poplar the
green alder, the red fir, and joyful linden, éach according to its nature : add
to this the diversity of stone-work ; how agreeable seems the porphiry of tombs,
the serpentine-stone obelfks, the white marble vafes and termes; even archi-
tecture receives a vast addition by the different colours of stones ; as when the dark
grey stone, free-stone, white. marble, and. such like, are finely matched and put
together ; and the building within is adorned with red-sperkled-greenish jasper,
porphiry






ornaments of gold, silver, copper and alabaster; and the floors inlaid with all
forts of costly stones ; as lapis lazuli, porphiry and variegated marble, in order
to please the eye.
But all depends on an orderly disposition. It is impofible to effect any thing
charming, with such costlinefs, if those colours be not duly matched, and artfully
placed : It is therefore highly necessary, that the artist know perfectly their
natures and particular effects, in order to proceed with certainty ; as a good
writer, acquainted with letters, bestows his thoughts on words only.
As forthe disposition, it must be observed, that as in an ordonnance of many
figures, divided into groups, one of these figures is always the principal, and to
which all the rest must be subordinate, according to their ranks, so it is the same
in the colours, that they may altogether produce a good general harmony: nay,
were it recessary to place the three capital colours together, the yellow must be
forward, the red next, and the blue behind; which will produce a fine harmony-
The three other colours may be disposed in the same manner; when the pur-
ple is placed forward, the violet may be behind it and the green last, as being
the weakest. These latter colours are called weak and broken ; because they
possess very much the qualities of the former; the purple, for instance, being
produced by a mixture of red with blue; the violet the same, and the green,
of blue with yellow.
But though each of the colours have it’s different force and effect, yet they do not
observe any particular rank, or order; because a strong colour sometimeshappens to come
before a weak one; and the contrary, as occasion requires ; for were they always
te keep order, and the yellow to be principal, so that the others must diminisn
gradually, there wouldthen be no difference, butthe effect always one and the same;
whercas it is here as with an actor, who sometimes play a king, at others a god;
Vet if the principal part in a picture, whether through choice or neceffity, con-
sist of white, light or weak colours, the parts about it, how beautiful soever, will
be no obstruction, if they be but varioussy and well ordered.
Again, if the said principal part consist of yellow, red, blue, or green, and be
thereby set off, all the other parts ought to be intermixed here and there with-
small portions of this strong and predominant part, as if they were enamelled with
it; yet in such manner, that they seem to owe their origin to the said ruling part,
and, though separated, yet have but one effect, and uitethe whole ; like the great body
of the moon, surrounded with glittering stars.
This suffices for the ordering the colours in general; and yet they cannot have
their full effects, or due decorum, without chusing proper back-grounds for setting
them off agreeably ; avoiding those which create confusion, or are too harsh and
discordant. Of the former fort are such as follows.
White suits on all sorts of dark-grounds, except warm yellow.
Light yellow suits on purple, violet, blue and green.
Light blue, or green, violet and yellow not warm or fiery.
Light green has a good effect on purple, violet and blue.
Light









Light violet has the same on green and blue.
On white suits black, violet,
green, and purple; but not yellow or blue.
On light yellow fuits violet, purple and green,
On pale red fuits green and blue.
On pale green fuits purple, blue, yellow, and violet.
On pale blue, suits dark yellow, red, and green.
But were we to lay dark blue, on light yellow, or the contrary, it would appear
very harsh and disagreeable.
There are other colours wbich are neither harsh nor disagreeable in themselves,
and yet appear unpleasant and without force : as if one or the other were quite
dirty and muddled ; such are, purple on red; beautiful red on yellow; or beau-
tiful green on yellow; purple on blue or violet, and the contrary; also white
on warin yellow, and the contrary ; or red upon red, or blue upon blue, as ex-
perience teaches.
Touching the colours which are used in reflecting on changeable silk, I shall
say this: that with musk-colour suits best masticot, with light purple or violet in
the reflexions ; with affi-colour blue suits yellowisn white, reflected with rose-
colour; with orpiment agrees dark purple with bluc reflexions; on beautifui
green suits rose-colour, with light blue reflexions; and with purple or violet
agrees Naples-yellow, with -sea-green reflexions.
But we must especially observe, that all reflecting or changeable stuffs kecep their
own colour in the shade, to wit, that of the main light; for we must not commit the
same mistake as the old masters, who painted all changeable draperies with two
colours only ; as a yellow changeable stuff, with a blue reflexion; they made
the main light yellow, and the shade blue; and thus they managed all others.
Truly a great mistake, and quite contrary to naturé.
Since we have thus far engaged in the by-colours, and their effects and har-
mony, we shall also treat of thole which tend in particular to embellisn a land¬
scape, history or other painting.
On grafs, pale red is exceeding well set off, and appears pleasant to the eye ; as
also dark violet, dark blue; light yellow changeable silk, with red and white;
and light blue, with purple or violet reflexions.
On russet earth grounds agrees à dark violet, blue and dark green.
On dark grey stone (commonly called blue-stone) agrees light red, green, yel-
low and yellowish white.
On free-stone suit all dark colours, viz. purple, violet, blue and green.
But we must not use a colour of pure lake and white; nor single light and red
orpiment, without urgent necessity, and then very sparingly. The green and red
of one tint, either in light or shade, also disagree, on account of their harshness;
wherefore they must not come together.
In a piece of many or few figures, which is to hang against a dark ground, or in
a shady place; also in a landscape, against dark and close boscage, white has a fine
effect; especially Naples-yellow, red and light orpiment, vermilion and fine light
red.








Again, in a light apartment of white marble, orlight free-stone, or in a land-
scape painted light, clear and full of sky, blue, purple, violet, green and black
have good effects; whereas the colours before-named are, in this case, not only
disagreeing, but they also look weak, and without strength; except white, which can-
not be used too much, since it is no colour, and therefore suits any where, ex-
cept against fkies.
Nevertheleis l do not here asfert, that the embellishments, in the aforesaid
pictures, must consist only of light and warm colours; but that they be intermixed
with some dark and zeak ones; and that in the latter pictures, where we use dark
and weak colours for the by-ornaments, we must dispose some light and zoarm ones
among them.
Now some may possibly think, because we place blue by the other colburs,
that such would obstruct the offskip; or that the lointains, which, by reason of
distance, are commonly represented blue, would be damaged by so beautiful'a spot:
But this doubt may be soon cleared up, by considering, that I do not chuse here
all dark colours; but that the offskip will thereby in some measure appear more
distant, faint and uniting. It is also true, that blue in a landscape is often harsh,
and makes the painting look flaring; but by the darkness it becomes, in this
case, soft, natural and tender.
Besides blue, I mention also violet, green, &c. but my meaning thereby is
not, that it is indifferent zhere those colours are placed; as blue against the blue
of the sky ; green against greën trees ; violet against a violet-stone, or ground;
or light against light, and darknefs against darknefs; for that would be improper;
because, as there is light and darkness in a landscape, so we have always means
to give dark and light colours their places.
With a candle-light, either within or without-doors, or other lights proceeding
from fire, suit violet, purple, blue, green, white, black, red, without excep-
tion ; these being pieces, in which those colours have an advantageous effect,
and wherein they predominate on their proper grounds ; for yellow and red are almost
the same as a burning candle, which has a great effect by night, as it has none
in the day-time, because the sun-shine makes it hardly perceptible.
Now as the two former pictures consist of strong colours, viz. white, yellow,
and red; and the two latter of purple, violet, blue, and green, yet those of the
one fort may be joined to those of the other, in order to create an agreeable mixture
and harmony, by placing with the strong some that are weaker; and on the con-
trary, letting each in its place have the mastery on its proper ground.
But I have particularly observed, that out of the three aforesaid predominant
colours, others may be tempered of less force, brown oker with Naples yelloW,
pink with white, and such like; and placing them by the others, as middle colours,
we may, in conjunction with those others, setch out a great mafs ; since white has tts
degrees as well as red; always observing, that the principal mnst predominaie, both in
force and beauty; and that those colours, which are drawn from it, be dispersed
here and there through the whole piece; as being best set off against the general
ground.







Having now plainly shewed the qualities and uses of the colours, and their
differences, we may easily think, that the pictures, wherein they are considered,
must needs be very affecting.
We shall not here say, uhat, where, and how one colour mixed with another is
to appear ; because it is impossible and unconceivable: The principal method
for obtaining this secret is, to observe, to what piich we work up our first and strongest
colour, and to let this colour predominaie ; for which reason it is a maxim with some,
that we must not introduce into a picture more than one capital colour, or a colour
which represents it: but I have already shewn, that several may in that manner
be brougnt together in the same piece; wherefore the eye and judgment must deter-
mine this point : for if we find it proper to introduce a beautiful colour where
we have a mind to place such an one, why should it be bad; This only makes it
so ; it being accompanied by by-colours, not well ordered ; as warm colours
against warm, and grey near blue; whereby those colours have no effect; or
else, by placing too strong and too many capital colours by one another, which
overcome the aforesaid beautiful colour, and make the painting look slaring.
But, that we may not mistake in this point, let us chuse any colour; and in
order to find an affociate for it, take one which is discordant ; as if we pitch upon
red, take a grey one; if dark, a light one, &c. Thus they are, as proceeding
from each other, joined together; and by such means we can never be at a lois
in finding different colours for different draperies; yet with this proviso, that in
all those colours the force or distance of the figures must be observed.
For the ready obtaining these things, I have found out a very easy method,
which always shewed me the particularity and harmony of the colours; it even
often helped me, with certainty, over the difficulty about the difference of the
colouis in draperies ; especially such as were changeable : First I tempered on my
pallet, out of my general mixtures, fhree particular colours, viz. one for the main
light, one for the half-hade, and one for the shade: Then I took cards, and
severally painted them with one of the aforesaid tempered colours ; when they
were dry, I placed and replaced and shifted them so long till I had satisfied my
judgment : sometimes, when this would not answer. my purpose, I shuffled
them; and then took a parcel from them at random, which, if they happened
to please, were my directors. This method helped me most in reflecting draperies,
which I thereby often produced very advantageous, and ef a sine colour; it was
especially useful when I had any doubt whether such or such a colour would suit
well with such or such an onc, or not; for the cards certainly shewed me the
thing as well as if I had the stuffs themselves, and saved me the trouble of uncer-
tain inquiries.
It will not be amiss, to say something further, touching back-grounds : It often
happens that a person sees a colour in a picture, which seems to him very agree-
able; and yet, on imitating it, he finds his colour has not the same force and
effect, through his not observing against what ground that colour was painted; a
point worthy of the utmost attention, if we would avoid mistakes in colouring;
wherefore we must always observe the grounds and places of the colours, if we would
have our colour predominate; ordering the most disagreeing against it; for










instance, to make the yellow predominate, place blue against it, or else the darks
of other colours ; would you abare the force of yellow, place green near it; and,
to bring it lower, put a colour which proceeds from yellow, whether it be free-stone
or any thing else of a yellow tint.
In the same manner you may handle all the rest of the colours, observing,
that, as the objects diminisn by distance, so the colours must proportionably be
fainter, and gradually more grey; nature shews it: and yet I have found, that
we may place even a capital colour in the offskip, and it shall be prevented
from approaching, by accompanying it with cclours like it, and drawn originally
from it, as we have before shewed.
CHAP. II. Of the Property, Nature, and Colours of Dresses.
TE have before said, that the art of painting is an imitation of nature in
V
her visible parts; nothing is impracticable to it; and yet observes due
order in all things; and as we have before shewed the general order of the colours,
so we shall now handle it in particular, with respect to draperies, wherein it chiesly
lies.
Draperies consist of four kinds of things, viz. linen, silks, stuffs, and cloth; and
these have each their particular natures and manners of folds: their properties
are also different; and to shew them by an example, I shall divide the kinds into
the four times of the day.
Linen draperies are for people in the morning of their lives; silks, for those
in their zenith; stuffs, for those in the afternoon, and cloih, for those in the
evening of their lives. But to speak more intelligibly, there are four particular
conditions of men, viz. infancy, youth, manhood, and old age; and each provides a
dress according to his years; children should be dressed in linen; young people, in
silks; full-grown men and women, in stuffs; and old people, in cloth.
The colours for the several stages of life are these; for childhood, white; for
youth, green; for manhood, red; for old age, dark violet; and for death, black.
In the first chapter we have shewed, that white and black are not accounted
among the colours ; since the one is but the parent of colours, and the other, the
depriver of them ; wherefore we introduce white, as light, without which no
calour is visible.
Dark sillemot or tazny shall serve to represent the earth, or greenness; zohite, to
snew the water; blue, the air; red, thefire; and black, the darkness abcve the element of
fire ; for there is not any matter or æther beyond it, which can contain or be
penetrated by the’ sun’s rays.
We also know, that there are four seasons, viz. the joyful spring; golden summer;
fruitsul autumn; and melancholy winter: In the spring, we begin to leave off cloth, or
heavy winter raiment, and to wear thin stuffs; summer and autumn permit us to
dress, according to their heat, either in linen or silk; wherefore a certain author
says, that we ought to suit our dresses, as well as our words, to the season.










The seasons may be also expressed by colours; as the spring, by green; summer,
by yellow ; autumn, by red; and winter, by black.
Yet, among the deities, there are some who have always one proper dress and
colour ; as Jupiter, a purple mantle; Juno, a blue veil ; Diana, a white and blue
garment; Neptune, a sea-green one, &c. These we cannot alter without committing
mistake : but the figures must nevertheless be ordered, if possible, zohere they suit
best. All brave personages, of either sex, should likewise be clothed in red or
warm yellow.
It therefore behoves a prudent artist to have a perfect knowledge of the nature
and qualities of the aforenamed stuffs; even, were the figures ever so small, he
must notwithstanding shew in his work, of zehat sort of stuffs the dresses consist;
and although reftexions cannot be well observed in small figures, yet we ought to.
see, by the course of the folds, whether the draperies. be silk, cloth, or other
stuffs,
A neat painter in little ought also, not only to distinguisn the thickness and
thinness of his draperies by their folds and colour; but in the particular nature
and colour of each drapery, their diminutions and variations; as between thin
and thick silk opposed to sattin, and more such; for if the eye, at first sight, can
perceive and distinguisn them, we ought also to make them appear what they
are ; chiessy in small and highly-finished pictures; as Mieris and others have art-
fully done to such a degree, as plainly to distinguisn between silver, pewter, tin
and polisned iron.
As becomingness subsists not only, in the stuffs, but also, in their colours ; so,
knowing that, we shall not easily mistake in the choice of colours and draperies.
But I must here give some painters an hint about the nature of stuffs, especially
coloured ones; they believe, they can paint sattin after white silk, and change-
able silk after coloured silk : But this is lame work ; for what in plain silk is
shining in the light, will often be found quite dark in satiin; wherefore in this,
nature must be consulted.
For these reasons the eye is pleased, when in a painting of a concourse of people
or publick shew, it can easily distinguisn all sorts of people, and the conditions
and ages of both sexes; and at the same time their motions according to their
natures and qualities, and the dresses and colours which become them ; as, an old
man, heavy and weak, standing on both legs, and sometimes by the help of a
stick, becomes a long dark-coloured cloth garment, viz. of umber, dark violet,
fillemot, or black, fastened with strings or buckles, and setting on him somewhat
negligently. A young man should appear in a quite contrary motion, as being
frolicksome, fickle, airy, and standing often on one leg; he must be painted. in
a most beautiful purple, green, red or yellow drapery, of light stuff, or thick
silk, fastened on the shoulder, and not too long, that it may not hinder his con-
tinual motion ; because a man, if full of fire, loves to have his legs free. Women.
and young virgins, as being tender, sedate and modest, are chiesly distinguished
by their white garments of thin linnen, and all sorts of airy and womanisn-
coloured silks, viz. light blue, apple-blossom, pearl-colour or light lemon, cast
loossy on each- other, and in such.- manner that the beauty of the naked. may easily
appear






appear through them; their posture is modest and set; their legs close; their
bodies upright; their necks basnfully bent ; their arms close to their bodies; their
mode gay; and taking hold of their garments, which hang down to the feet.
Children, are seen mostly in white linnen, or lemon, blue or violet-coloured silk ;
they are often in white vests, without any hanging drapery ; but when they have
such loose drapery, a small one, about a yard in length, is sufficient, and this
fastened on the shoulder for security, while they are running, bustling and rolling
on the ground.
This conduct is, in my opinion, of great consequence, though few have ob-
served it ; nay, even some good painters oftentimes fail in it, making no differ-
ence between manly and womanisn colours ; giving an old man a feminine colour,
and a manly onc to a woman; intermixing them as if there were no certain rules
for either : but it must be granted, that the silk-colours, which befit a young,
sturdy, capricious man, are very disagreeable to a virgin, who is tender, weak,
more sedate and less voluptuous ; he requires strong, she more soft and beautiful
colours, yielding a pleasure to the eye. It would also be very improper to paint
a child in black ; a young man in dark brown colours ; a grown man in party
colours; and an old man in beautiful ones.
I once saw a picture, of an unknown master, in which, all the particulars I
have recommended were plainly and nicely expressed, it had such an elegance,
and gave me so great satisfaction, that I stood in surprize. On a mature con-
sideration of this painting I perceived, that it was purely designed to answer this
very purpose; for l saw here and there some aged people, mostly in dark and
cloth-colours; there, agam, a group of young and gamesome people in variety
of beautiful-coloured stuffs; also fome women in light-coloured changeable
filk, &c. near them were some old women in dark dresses ; here and there ap-
peared children, running about and playing in the sand, all drest in linen-habits
and soft colours. This ordonnance vastly pleafed me, and put me to consider
what it could be likened to; and I find it to be the same as the four times of the
day ; for let us take the children, whether boys or girls, for day-break; the young
men and women for noon, when the sun is at highest; and the old people for
night; between mid-day and night is Vesper or the evening, which may be re-
presented by joining something of both conditions; also between Aurora and mid-
day, the same; so as3to make, in the whole, a proper differenee between the
conditions and ages of men. Here let us not forget, that old people sometimes
affect white, to shew’their becoming children again; contrarily black is sometimes
worn by young people ; as a thin black veil to signify some sorraw, or else to
distinguish a married woman from a maiden.
CHAP. III. Of tle Colours of Dresses, and their fuiting with each
other.
AS we are treating of Mresses, it will be proper to say something of the suiting
 their colours; I mean what lining or furniture each coloured, garment re-
quires ;






quires , a matter of great moment, though as little observed in pictures as the
life : Wherefore let it be noted, first of the weak colours.
When the apper garment is white, the lining or undercoat may be rose-colour,
fillemot, purple, violet, or beautiful sea-green.
With a light blue garment suits a furniture of yellowish white, violet, dark
fillemot, or dark reddish blue.
A light or pale yellow garment ought to be furnished with violet, sea-green,
beautiful green, dark fillemot and purple.
A pale green garment must be set off with yellowish white, sky-colour, violet
and dark red.
Now follow the strong colours, and their proper mixtures.
A lemon-colour garment may be furnished with sea-green, violet, and dark
fillemot.
A garment of red orpiment-colour suits a furniture of violet, sky and greenish
blue, musk and umber-colours.
A sky-colour blue garment may be adorned with rose-colour, yellowish white,
pale yellow and light beautiful green.
A fillemot-coloured garment may be furnished with pale yellow, rose-colour,
light afhi-colour, violet, dark purple, and dark green.
All these colours reversed have the same effects.
Here let it be observed what I mean by the word lJurnitureJ; it is an adorn-
ment, or setting off; as when a large drapery of a plain colour is adorned with one or
more small ones, whether a veil, girdle or sleeve-facing, under garment, or breast-
cloth; this furniture is either of changeable silk, or of party-coloured stuffs,
when it is to set off a large and plain coloured drapery ; and the contrary the
same; as when the large drapery is changeable, the small furniture ought to be
of a single colour.
For further satisfaction I shall subjoin an instruction of what coloured stuffs
may be best adorned with gold, whether slowered, leafed or striped.
On a green ground fuit flowers.
On a purple and violet, narrow sprigs or stripes.
On musk-colour, close and large flower or leaves.
On rose-colour, apple-blossom and white thin silk, suit stripes.
Purple, fillemot, musk-colour and white also look well with fringes, either
scanty or full, according to the substanee of the stuff.
It must be observed, that what I have hitherto said of the ordering of the
colours, is not to concern a single figure only, but to serve any occasion by a diffu-
side and agreeable intermixture ; nor do I mean, that, among several figures, there
must be but one with-a single-coloured garment; and the rest, of changeable or
broken colours ; for-when they are separate, and the draperies large, each in par-
ticular is to be set off in the manner I have before laid down; for instance, if
all the small draperies were separated from the large one, and we drest as many
figures in them, then each must be further adorned with other small draperies, of
colours suiting with-it, in such manner as the large one was before. In a word,
if we only confider, that a single colout ought to be intermixed with a change-








able one, and a changeable colour, with a single one, we shall perceive what order
this affair requires, in order to look decorous, and please the eye.
But, for further explanation, I shall give two examples of it. The first is, a
company of five or six aged people, either without or within-doors; Now if
these figures must be all drest, it requires no art, nor is it a sign of knowledge,
to give each a single-coloured and equally large drapery, although we might
find as many different colours, in order to join them agreeably ; and this, for
two reasons; first, because, that cannot happen in the life without premeditation. And
secondly, because the figures may not seem to be emblematic; for though to the
twelve apostles are appropriated, their particular colours, yet we must not infer from
thence, that, if they were all asfembled together, we ought to give them a single
colour from top to toe ; because, though we break the colurs, they yet remain the same;
as blue, with green reflexion, remains blue ; yellow, with purple, remains yel-
low; and so of others:. Our second example is, a wanton meeting of young
men and girls, modishly drest according to their years; these are skipping about,
and playing in a field or room ; Now it would not be at all proper to join all their
dresses of broken colours together, though they were coupled in such order as
they require ; and for the former reason; namely, that it can never happen but
through premeditation and necessity: and though it would appear elegant and
pleasing, yet not at all artful without an intermixture of some single-coloured draperies.
Nevertheless we find. many do it; either, because they take no delight in change-
able draperies; or else because they cannot paint them, and therefore make shift
with broken colours. Again, there are others who have no value for single
colours, and therefore, on all occasions, introduce changeable or broken ones.
We have also met with a third sort, who do not know how to make a difference
between a changeable stuff and a broken colour; though it is certain, that a re-
flecting or changeable drapery is an intermixture of two or more colours, and a
broken-coloured drapery, but of two; as violet, with. red and blue ; green, with
yellow and blue, &c. whence they are called broken or miwed colours.
In the first chapter, treating of this management, we have spoken of reflecting
or changeable draperies; and as we are now again embarked in the same subject,
it will not be amiis to explain the matter further.
Many fancy, they make a good reflecting drapery, when it is well folded, and
different in colour in the main lights, greatest shades and reflections ; even
Raphael and other great masters have been mistaken in so doing ; whereas a good
changeable drapery ought to dracv its reflections from the colour of which the main light
consists; the shade likewise proceeds from the ruling colour, yet has some tincture
of the changeableness : And although the drapery be changeable, yet it has a
constant ground-colour of the main woor of the silk : Thus it is an usual ex-
prefsionA green and yellow changeable: This then is the true quality of a re-
fecting silk, that all that is seen fronting on the relief keeps its main colour, but the sides
of the folds going off, cause the changeableness; which we may easily perceive on lay-
ung a changeable stuff smooth on a table or floor; for viewing it perpendicularly
from above, it will then appear red or vellow; but if seen parallel along the stuff,
often appear blue:: When it follows, as we affirm, that only the folus which go eff







become changeabee, and alter in colour; when thet others, in the main light and
shade keep their own colours : Again, what in one stuff changes red will in another
appear green or yellow, according to the woof or warp.
By reason of such accidents, we are obliged to have pieces of particular stuffs,
in order to shew the difference; which cannot be learnt by heart, because of the
nicety of the matter.
We have said, in the foregoing chapter, that in an ordonnance of many figures,
we ought to observe the sexes, ages and conditions of people, and that each must
have his proper stuff; the golden suits deities, and those who are deified; purple
becomes princes ; thus each, down to'the slave ; Now, to those of weak memories,
I shall shew a good method for their becoming masters of this point in a fhort
time.
Set down in your pocket-book; the following heads or titles; old men and
mairons : married men and women; young men aud maidens; boys, girls and young
children.: place these titles under one another; and write against them the proper
dress, stuff and colour of each sex and condition: These notes you must often consult,
and especially when you are about an ordonnance of fewor many figures.
You may also make a. column. for the colours of draperies; setting them down
under one another : as white, yellow, blue, green, red, &c. and against them
write their linings andi ornaments, asThave before mentioned.
It will not be improper here to. observe, some particutars on different occasions,
in an ordonnance of many or few figures, with respect to colours ; noé as if they
were unknown or not observed by: ingenious artists, but because they are often-
times neglected and slighted, either through carelessness;, prepoffession or an
opinion that they need not- be so -strictly confined; or else, because beautiful
colours are most pleasing to people, and therefore they must especially satisfy the
eye ; without reflecting, that they thereby injure the art and their own reputa-
tations : Such painters are like great talkers, who say little to the purpose.
Truly, the colours have great efficacy, when-well orderedi and suired ;; bug they
raise an aversion when unskilfully and confusedly disposed.
An ingenious person will undoubtedly agreë with me, that there are particulur
characters which distinguisn one man from another;, a pringeefrom, anpfficer; aan
officer, from a vulgar person;; a rich man, froin a pgor one: by whaf means
then is this difference, perceivedp is it not by his authoritative countenance.
grandeur and stately carriage, and by his garb-songer ansf of miore costly stuff
and beauty than the others; if 'so; it will be éasy to appiehend, that; though luch
a person were not endowed with all the aforesaid qualities, but with the- contrary,
he ought nevertheless to be made known, by something ior other; as we, have
shewed in treating of ordonnante. Whefore is it needless ten say any thing further
in this matter, to bring us to. the present point. touiching the colours; namely, to
shew on what occafions they olght to be used beautifully, and op what; not; for
which purpose l shall éxhibit three: principal accuriences, as. exaiples, whence we
may deduce and order all others.

The first may be à coüneil, or a lriumph, or such:liké i wherein all the- dressés
ought to appear intirely of the tuost magnificent, rich and beautiful stuffs.







In the second, confisting of Bacchanals, country-merry-makings and herdfinen’s
sports, the colours ought to be half beautiful and half broken, each agreeable to
the condition of the parties. And
In the third, being publick Sights, viz. pleadings, mountebanks, jugglers, merry-
andrews, and such like, made up of common and mean people, coarse stuffs
and dirty colours ought to be be most visible.
Now here it still is to be remarked, that in the one fort of colours as well as the
other, the most beautiful excels; and as those three occurrences are not common,
Imust say, that among the meanest as well as the best, there are some which have
the preference ; among the beautiful are some more beautiful; and among the
mean, meaner ones. Thus much as to colaurs, in order to know a good master.
But ere we finisn this chapter, iet us observe, in what parts thé coloured
stuffs appear most beautiful; since stuffs are very different in this respect, and have
their divers proper beauties.
We say then, that black stuffs are most beautiful in their strongest saades; zuhite,
yellozp, and red in their main and greateft light; and blue, green and purple in the
half tints. But all stuffs, not having a glofs, ought to be much more beautiful
in their lights, than their shades ; because light gives life, and makes the quality
of the colours appear, when contrarily snades obscure and extinguish their beauty;
consequently all objects will shew their natural colours better, when their surfaces
are lefs fmooth and even; as we see in cloths, linen, leaves and herbs, which are
rough or. hairy; in which no gloss or shining can appear, because they cannot
receive the reffexions of neigbouring objects, but fhew only their true and natural
colour unmixed nor tinged with that of any other object, except the rednefs of
sthe sun, when, by his tetting, he makes the clouds and horizon partake of his
colour.
CHAP. I. Of the Disposition of sbady Objects, either distant or near
against a light Ground.
IGHT against light, and fhade against shade naturally unite. Against a
Llight ground suit well dark figures, and against a dark ground, light 'ones,
in order that they may be strongly set off; however, the setting off of objects
either much, little or less, on the sirst, second and third grounds certainly differs
very much.
Now it may be afked, when a parcel of figures, standing or sitting, have a
zobite back-ground, and appear, some far from, others rear, others against it,
whether dark colours would not be proper in allthe three groups ; I say, they would ;
but then they ought to be confidered in another manner; for, without intermixing
some of them with light colours, they could not subsist; wherefore it is neces-
sary, to give some more, others less force ; the figures close to the white ground
ought to. be mixed with light colours, in order to stick to the light, and to break
the less their force; and yet the dark colours will predominate, the light ones










































































































































































































































































































































Of Colouring.
131
Chap. 4.
being only, as I say, to have communication with the white ground, thereby to
keep their distance, and to unite with the great light of the back ground. The
figures, on the second ground, which come more forward, ought again to have
less light colours; and the group, on the fore ground, the least; whereby they
have less communication with the white ground, and consequently more force
against it.
It is the same with light against darknefs; for we can easily perceive, that
white and black never approach each other without participation. The more
black is mixed with white, the more it inclines to white ; like a large and thick
festoon, mostly light, placed against a dark ground ; Now, if you would have
this festoon appear close to the wall (for it is not with nature as with a picture)
you must needs use it in some dark flowers and leaves, ordering them about the
extremity, the moft white or light to be in the parts moft relieved, darkening it
gradually towards the two extremities nearest the ground, whereby the one sticks
to the other and unites, remaining yet a light festoon, though intermixed vith darkness.
It is the same with a dark festoon against a light ground; the dark flowers being
in the middle, and gradually diminisn on each side. It is certain that it will not
shew such decorum and relief, though its shade be in proportion as strong as
that of the former; yet it is only to be used in case of necessity, when the matter
and condition of the place require it; wherefore we must accommodate ourselves
to all exigencies.
This effect is not only proper for slowers, but also for fruits, ornaments, &c.
Even all kinds of gold and silver ornaments may with elegance be joined together
by the colours, after the same manner.
Now follows an example, in plate XXI. disposed after the aforesaid manner.
Here, on the fore ground appear five figures of men and women against a white
back ground; the three middle ones, close together, are dark and strong, and the
two on either side, of a little lighter colour, whereby the group keeps an agree-
able relief and union on the extremity. On a more distant ground stand two
other figures, of which the foremost is dark, and the other, half behind the
former, light; yet both of less strength than the foremost group. The last four,
standing close against the ground, differ still much from the others, as being here
and there intermixed with more light; one having a white stomacher; another a
white cloth on her head; this having flowers; that with light hair; another
with a white pot, light drapery, nudity, &c. which littlenesses notwithstanding
have not so much force as to enlighten the whole group.
The doctrine of harmony teaches, that we must always place darkness against
light, and the contrary; but this is only a medium, shewing, agreeable to that
position, how and in what manner light and darkness may appear either close to-
gether or distant, like the aforesaid festoons; but it must not be considered other-
wise than as a part of a picture. If we would have a perfect ordonnance, we can
order, at pleasure, fuch dark figures as those, against light grounds, and the
contrary ; for instance, would you have on the right side of the piece adark bush,
in the mièdle a visto, and on the other side, houses or stone-work, neither light
nor-dark ; you may place against the buih, light figures or other objects, and in







the middle against the offscape, dark ones, and against the houses, others again

which suit best; execute each correctly, and in particular, according to the said
examples, and then nothing will be wanting that concerns the tints : the colour
joined toit make the work compleat.
I think I have fully explained this point of darkness against light, and the con-
tray ; yet several things serving my purpose still occuring to me, which were for-
got in the first chapter, I judge them proper to be mentioned here. I say then,
that all light colours, even were they broke, appear well ’against a dark
ground, but not with such a force as the strong ones; as we have formerly said,
that warm colours appear best on a faint ground, and the contrary, whether they
be light or dark. It is also a constant rule, that the strong colours, as light red
and light yellow, do not suit on a light or white ground, more than beautiful
blue on a dark one, though reckoned a capital colour.
But let us return to our examiple; we have hitherto only spoken of the tints, or
light and darkness, it will now be necessary to shew also the colours of the dresses,
according to their order, place and power.
No. 1. is sea-green.
2. 
Yellowisni grey.
Violet.
3.
Somewhat less beautiful green than No. 1.
Purple.
5.
Dark violet, not beautiful; but the girdle beautiful light yellow.
6.
Brown oker, and violet reflection.
7. .
8. —
Greenisn blue.
Red orpiment
9—
10. — Violet.
31.
11. Umber, with little red.
Observe now, from behind forwards, whether these figures, as they advance,
do not become gradually stronger, by the intermixture of strong colours. The off-group
has none; that in the middle has one; and the foremost, two; of which, one is
very strong.
lf it be afked, why I place here the strong one, namely, red orpiment, as hav¬
ing no force against a light ground; I say, it must be observed as the foremost fi-
gure, being encompassed with two dark ones.
Let it also not be thought, because I thus exhibit the colour of each figure,
that they ought therefore to be of the same colour from top to toe. Consult the
sketch, and remember their draperies (one large, another small, of broken and
faint colours) with which they are intermixed, and suit the ground ; as we have
already intimated, that (in order to form great masses of capital colours, viz.
yellow, red or blue, and. they to predominate in an ordonnance) we may enlarge
or break such a strong part with mixtnres of the fame;, as ted orpiment, with brown oker,
umber, or such like, zohich nevertheless remains yellow. After such a manner we
may handle all the colours, to wit, beautiful green, with other green ; red, with
purple ; violet with blue or grey ; yellowish white with grey, &c. In, à word, if
but one of the two be less beautiful.









































































































































































































CHAP. V. Of the Harmony of Colours.
THEY, who are conversant with books; are sensible that few-authors have
written of the harmony of colours; and what they have done is so obscure and
unintelligible, that I shall endeavour to make the point clear
It must be granted, that in every part of the art, nature is our patern, since she
disposes herself in the most perfect manner. If we at any time discover some-
thing fine and pleasing in her, (which we often do) and yet know not the réason
why it has such elegance and decorum, we ought to consult the rules of disposi-
tion and harnony, and examine with which of them the objects agree; by which
means we shall soon apprehend what decorum is, and on what reason founded.
Harmony proceeds from placing faint colours against strong ones, and the con-
trary ; wherein such an union appears, that the one seems naturally to floi from
the other, as in this instance : Let us suppose an ordonnance to be divided into
three grounds, or distances ; place the principle figures in the middle on the fore-
ground, and let some of them be strongly coloured, and the whole group as
strongly slung off by a shady hollow rock coming behind them ; place to the right
on the second ground, some figures beautifully coloured, yet a tint darker than
those on the fore-ground; and behind them, an airy, greyish-green bush; and
further on, a light offscape, filled here and there with small trees : let this bush be
a tint darker than the second ground-figures; on the left side of which ground,
place other figures, as of girls and young children, in faint-coloured draperies,
which, though coming against light buildings and the blue sky of the offscape,
will notwithstanding appear beautiful and harmonious : now in such a disposition,
we are enabled to perceive horv each of the three parts keeps its distance by the
nature of the ground behind it : The foremost, as the strongest, and consisting
mostly of light, approaches with force against the greatest snade; and those on:
each side, though almost as light, yet are limitted by their back grounds, which
differ but one tint from them ; whereby they appear neither further nor nearer
than they really are ;, from all which premises we may plainly perceive, that
granting those three parts, or groups had a like strengih and colour, yet they may, by
means of their back grounds, be brought down in such a manner, that, at pleafure,
only one of them shall predominate, and the other tzoo retire: Would you have the fore-
mest figures dark, reverse your former conduct, and your purpose is answered.
Thus you may easily join grounds and objects in order to fetch out harmony; and
by harmony, one of the perfections of a painting.
But the more clearly to evince the force of colours against proper grounds, with
respect to distance, I shall explain the matter in a second example ; see plate XXII.
Irepresent the boat, as thé nearest object, gilt with gold; and strongly glittering
against the shade of the trees, and rock ; to the foremost flying figure, on tke
same distance as the boat, I give a light red drapery against the shadiness of the
said rock, in force equal to that of the boat ; the second flying figure, somewhat







further in, has a green drapery, also light against the rock, where, being a broken
colour, it becomes fainter; and the third, which is further in shade, and has a
dark blue drapery, is flung off, and keeps its place at the furthest part of the hol-
low of the rock, which with the yellowisn blue sky next it, is lightish: the stand-
ing figure, in the stern, or off-part of the boat, is more strongly fet off, by a
dark and warm yellow drapery against the aforefaid hollow, than the blue garment
of the hindermost flying figure, and less than the boat’s head and timbers which
have the greatest force, as being the greatest part doubled by the reflexion in the
water : On the river-side, against the trees, are seen other figures, (partly naked
and in faint-coloured draperies, viz. apple-blossom, light changeable and white,
intermixed here and there with yellow) and their reflexions, and that of the
green of the trees in the water; Now those figures, though faint and light, are,
in their diminution of force, in the same degree with the middle flying figure, as
having the same distance, and being of the same nature, and composed of broken
colours ; so also the red of the foremost flying figure agrees with the yellow of the
boat, both being strong colours : The rowers are in dark blue.
Though this example sufficiently enables us to manage any ordonnance whatso-
ever, yet I mean not that there must be always forwards a yellow object ; behind
it, a blue one; and in the middle, a green, purple or violet ; for you may chuse
zohat colour you please ; as instead of this gilt boat, a red one; and give the fore fly-
ing figure, instead of a red, a yellow drapery, affigning to each a proper back ground:
although the yellow of the boat, and tne red garment of the figure are strong co-
lours, yet they are distinct in nature ; for as the yellow is in itself lighter than the
red, so the red requires a darker colour than the yellow, in order to be flung off :
Again, if instead of the figures by the river-side, which are clothed in apple-blos-
som, blue, &c. we would use other colours, as green or red, we may do so, pro-
vided, as before, we give them such a proper back ground as will fling them off,
with respect to their distance ; for it must be remarked, that, although they are
distant, yet there is no necessity for giving them faint or broken colours : li is a
maxim with me, that any colour, how strong soever, may be moderated and restramned ac-
cording to its distance ; the colours in this example are disposed accotding to their
ranks, (the strong ones forward, and the weaker, in degrees of distance, accord-
ing to their natures) only to shew the method of placing them; in a word, Whe-
ther they are to approach, because of their natural strength, or to retire by reason of their
natural weakness.
But it is scarce possible, that in ary subject all the colours sheuld, according to
their natures, happen to fall so advantageously, and therefore we may, on any
occasion, alter them ; for instance, if, instead of the gilt boat, we were to intro-
duce a piece of white marble, adorned with mouldings and bafs reliefs, and
strongly lighted ; the visto behind, turned into a close ground, and the trees be-
hind the stone-work, instead of greyisn, more sensible, warm and approaching;
this stone, I say, would have the same effect as the boat, and come forward with
force, though white, we all know, is not so strong a colour as yellow : for herein
it will happen as in a camp, where, in the general’s absence, the liestenant-gene-
ral commands ; and in a company, and in a company, the lieutenant for the cap-
tain,








































































































































































tain, and the ensign for him; even the serjeant is not without his power ; there-
fore when strong-natured colours are not in a picture, the weaker supply their
places, in a greater or less degree as the matter requires ; wherein lies the crisis of
the management : let me add to this instance of the white stone-work- that it
must be the strongest. and most catching object in the whole ordonnance, and that
no strong objects must come near it, to lessen it’s force, or to kill it, unless they
be weakened, and brought down either by mistiness, or by means of their back-
grounds ; whereby they may then have no more force than a broken colour.
CHAP. VI. Of the Dispofition of irregular Objects; and Light against
Darkness; and the contrary.
HHE placing and ordering of objects is of great moment ; for if, after we
have chosen them all most beautiful, we dispose them carelesly, they will
abate of their lustre ; again, a good dispofition will make an object, though un-
elegant in itself, look agreeable. To give fome examples of it, I fhall begin
with plate XXIII.
On the fore-ground, on the right fide, is lying an overset pot against a large
overset pot against a large ftone, and both of them strong and warm in the light,
against the darkness of same high trees which are on the second ground. On the
third ground, lowver and by the water-side, rifes a columned building, which is
light again. In the middle of the piece, the horizon appears very low, with some
hills; and on the fore-ground, ape three figures making the greatest group, and
mostly in warm and dark-coloured draperies, against the faintness and light of the
offscape. On the second ground is a young man, who, with the house, at the
door of which he stands, is beloz in the shade, occafioned by the ground-shade.
of the trees opposite to it; this house is of free-stone, and therefore light against
the blue fky. The foreground has no verdure, and is all light, chiefly about
the figures.
This iketch shews us the irregularity of objects in an ordonnance, and how we
ought to dispose them according to art: some high, ofhers low ; together with their
force, in order to create a deverfified decorum. By objects, Imean both the move-
able and immoveable, viz. men, cattle, birds, trees, hills, buildings, &c. as
well horizontal, as falling back behind each other.
As to force, it consists in light against darkness; and the contrary ; for (except
by the diverfity of colour) there is no other way than this, to set off objects against
one another.
We have faid, that the three fore-ground figures are strongly coloured, and
come againft the faint offacape ; whereby I shew, that in one piece there ought
pot to be two lights on the same ground, although they are both strongly set off,
hut that one part must consist of strong light, and the other of darkness. It is al-
so casy to conceive, that the three figures, because they come against the light off-
scape






scape and not into shade, must needs require dark colours: contrarily, the pot
and stone are set off against the dark trees, by a general rule, that when there are
some light objects on one side of the composition, those on the other should be
dark.
Let us now view a seeond example in plate XXIV. as being an observation de-
pending on the former, seeing neither can subsist without the other. This tends
to illustrate the management of lights, both above, on each side, and behind one ano-
ther; and that we ought always to order after such a manner; when the former
example shew us the irregularity of objects in their high and loze disposition.
The forward sitting figures are, with the first ground dark, as being shaded by
a driving cloud ; so also is the walking figure down to its middle. The building
on the second ground fronts the light, together with the two standing figures,
which are set off by the dark side of the house. The-three hinmost figures are
in the shade of the same building, against the sky ; which is their ground. The
column, also on the second ground, is almost to the top in shade against the hind-
most trees, which run to the point of sight. The man is half again in the light
against the dark column; and his under parts, (which with the first ground are
dark) are set off against the second ground, which is light.
But it is not sufficient to place here or there a ground-shade ; we. must also shew
the occasion of it, that it may not be afked, what caused it ; for all snades are
not alike ; some are more dark, others more clear; moreover, they differ also some-
times in colour ; wherefore it will not be amiss to say sometliing of it here, though
5F;.
we shall treat of it more at large in its place.
The ground shade of trees often appears lefss or more green, according to their
transparency or closeness. The ground-shade -caused by driving clouds is faint,
and has no other colour than that of the air between. The ground shade of a red,
green or blue stretched curtain is also of the same colour. Those of an house or
other heavy piece of stone-work are grey and dark, &c. But 'to return to our
subject.
It is plain, that what is demonstrated in these two examples, touching light
and darkness above, on each side, and behind one another, is the same when re-
versed; namely, if that which is now dark were light; and’ the light, dark. It is
also indubitable, that if one of the lights were taken away, the ordonnance and
agreeable harmony would be spoiled at once ; even so much, as not to be brought
right again withont a general alteration ; for instance, suppose the walking person
were dark above, how could he be set off by the column ; Since we have beforé
said, that darkness against darkness is improper; and were thé column to be
light, how should we manage the sky.P. and if the sky were dark behind the co-
lumn, that would be as bad again ; for the whole fore ground and all upon it are
dark; and the second ground is light again; wherefore every thing would be in
disorder and indecorum : From these premises we may plainly perceive, that this
is a constant method for management; and when a good difposition of the colours,
according to their qualities, is joined to it (for we knniv; that objects have various
colours, of which we can chuse the most proper) the decorum will still. he the
greater, and the eye more pleased : Trees, though they appear always green, are
yet


























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































yet diversified according to the season, and their natures: some are sea-green, others
deep green this russet, that grey-green, these again light green, others dark green:
grounds  likewise differ, as hilly, sandy, clayish and muddy : stones do the same: all
which, we have fully shewed in the first chapter of this book. As for men, none
excepted, what colours have they not; in fine, he who well understands the or-
dering of the colours, and the suiting them, will never be at a loss.
But let him especially observe, that in any ordonnance, whether of history,

landscape or any other branch, one side must be contrary to the other, not only in
light ands shade, but also in height and depth.
The designs of these two examples are not much unlike that in the foregoing
chapter; yet here is greater variety ; for the former was, of the force of objects,
either dark or light, against contrary grounds ; whereas these, though grounded
on the same observation, shew us how they are to be ordered above one another, when
it so falls out: for instance, we see a group of figures on the fore ground, against
another on the second ground, somewhat higher; and that, against another still higher;
and so on, to the cieilng or sky : we have shewed, in chap. 4, how we ought to
set off objects behind one another, and to unite them with the ground ; but these ex-
amples teach first, how light and dark objects above one another ought to be mamaged
so as to serve each other, and that each may keep its distance. Secondly, how, for
warn of shade, we must make shift with the affistance of colours. Lastly, how irregular
objects ought to be placed against each other; which is the soul and life of an or-
donpances especially where there are many people. But it is not confined to hu-
mas figures; for it respects all sorts of objects, whether grounds, hills, ballu-
strades, Ragtlements, windows, roofs, clouds, and sky ; in fine, every thing we
can see behind’any thing else, whereon people can appear. Speaking of clouds,
it must Réobserved, that we may reprefent figures flying in the air and sitting on
clouds the same manner as: on the earth; a matter of principal concern on
the occasion, where the major part of the objects consists of height, and many
are at a lost in the different lights, colours and tints. Wherefore, docible artists à
regards his as an infallible rule, and consider every thing which l have laid down
in the bresaid examples, to prevent your falling into the mistakes which are
gerein finally committed.
I shall now subjoin a third sketch, plate XXV. touching the crossing and going off
of sequel of the two preceding.
 example, a. boat going off against a crofs height, or earthern wall,
rivers people were leaning by one another; who, with the trees rising be-

 the regularity of the wall : The approaching figures appear again
offscape which runs acrofs.

is in a strong light against the shady wall, which ends in the middle


 where the foremoft approaching figures are set off with light both
 hindward dark figures, which have their effect again against the

light of the buildings in the offscape. The sky on the right side of the piece
abounds with heavy hanging clouds ; and on the other side are none, orlvery small
ones.
Here we perceive, first a greot motion in the disposition of the objccts; which
cross.







crofs each other up to the horizon on one side; and on the other, the contrary,
which causes an agrecable variety ; especially as there are some objects going off,
which shew the point of sight: The second obfervation is, the harmany of lignt and
shade, as in the former examples.
This example then shews, what methods we may take, in order to fetch out
such effects; and it is for that reason, that this point is exhibited severally, and
in different manners, which we may make use of as occasion offers, as much or as
little as we think proper; though never too much, since variety tires no one, but
is always pleasing: as here a visto, there boscage, houses, &c. here a. winding
road; there again a building hiding part of the offscape; here a level ground;
there a river beset with trees, partly running towards the point of sight, and then
bending either to the right or left-cross the piece round a rock, and at last to dis-
appear. Variety feeds a continual delightful desire; but we must know, that it
principally respects ordonnances in the open air or landscapes.
CHAP. VII. Of Agreebleness in irregular and contrasting Objects.
Twe have not knowledge in composition, all that we endeavour at is- extrava-
gancy ; even should we bring out a good disposition, it would be owing to
luck ; when a well-ordered piece though indifferentlv coloured, will always have
an harmony. The truth of this I find clearly evinced in irregular objects; which
give life and motion to an ordonnance; as we have several times shewed in treat-
ing of ordonnance, and also in the first,and last examples of the foregoing chapter.
This motion is happily fetched out, if the contrasting objects be considerately
joined ; for by this means they will meet each other so agreeably as perfectly to
please the eye ; not as placed thus by nature, but as the result of an artful com-
position.
By the irregularity of objects, I understand their forms; as when one is high,
another is oblong; this pointed, that square, round, oval, &&c. But ere I
proceed further, shall shew the easy method l took in order to get the know-
ledge of irregularity.
First, I drew all sorts of figures in different actions, as sitting, standing, stoop-
ing, lying, walking, &c. and cut them out with seifsors. Next, I made a sketch
of my ordonnance, and laid it down flat, and put my cut figures upon it, moving
them about till l was satisfied where to place a fitting, standing or lying one;
how many suited here ; how few there ; and thus, after much shifting, I brought
forth a good ordonnance ; which I then designed fair, making. such alteration in
the actions of the figures as l thought proper, yet retaining their postures in
general ; leaving large and standing one where they ought to be, and the small
ones lying or sitting in their places: and so forth.
By this means I have found, that a landscape, with many and small figures, ought
to consist of large by-works for setting them off, viz. large and close trees, heavy
stone-work, broad grounds, &c. And zoithin-doors, in a: palace or apartment,
cross

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































there ought to be, behind small figures, large and flat walls, with sew ornaments;
for were they to consist of many parts, all would seem alike large; and were we
to place by large figures some large parts, all would appear small; or to speak better,
equally large. A large object must make another small; an oblique one, another
together, that the one may shew the other.
It is the same with light; if a large part consist either of light or shade, let one
be the groundfor the other; for instance, if on the second ground, a large part be in
shade, let the third have some sharp and glittering light; this will help the broad
shades and wanton lights : but those two choices require a different management;
the principal ought always to precede, and the other to be subservient to it: in
landscape the immoveable objects predominate, and the moveable ones serve only for ornament;
contrarily, in an ordonnance the figures are first dispesed, and then the by-works; for
when we say, that an upright standing figure must be placed by a bending tree,
and a crooked stem, by a standing figure, we understand by the former the stem to
be the principal, and the figure the affistant, if in a landscape; but in an history, the
figure is principal: thus it is also in an apartment with architecture, statues, bass-
reliefs and other ornaments.
The irregularity of objects does therefore give a particular decorum and elegance ;
for what satisfaction would it be to the eye to see some beautiful grapes and
melons lye each in a separate disnp but if grapes, melons, or other gibbons,
round, oval and large fruits were grouped together, they would add a lustre to
each other.
We know that a small house visibly magnifies a temple or palace, and that a
long and low building makes a tower or mausoleum look high.
Such contrarietiès as these aré many; and to name them all, would be as
tedious as impossible, wherefore l shall content myself with naming some of the
chief.
Plate XXVI. The examplé No. 1. with an high horizon; shews the ordering
of objects according to perspective ; the steps A run up against a parapet; the
figure B sits on the ground, where the steps rise; and forward, where they sink,
stands the figure C. The point of light D is on the horizon.
No. 2. shews the contrary of the former, when the horizon is loze.
Flate XXVII. No. 4. shews that lying objects require standing figures.
No. 5. Is the contrary; by lying figures ought to be introduced high standing objects,
viz. columns, trees, and the like.
With a gyramid ending in a point, or an high and narrow square stone suit
stooving, sitting, and lying figures; also standing figures, but mosdly in profile.
Under, or with statues in niches or on pedestals agree no set standing figures, unless
one be sitting.
With thin bushies or cut coppicès suit best standing, leaning and stooping figures; but
not any lying or sitting.
Against an elegant stone, with bafs-reliefs, ought to be figures with slat and broad-
solded druperies. The contrarily is also good.








With a strait-coursed river, broken shores and banks.
With lying cattle, standing men; and the contrary.
With horses, asses, and coxs, agree boys, &c.
With sheep, goats and other small cattle, fuit full-grevon people.
With stat mufical instruments suit round ones, viz. the hautboy, lute, and the
like.
With a timbrel, a cymbal, or a triangular ringed iron, &c.
But when any thing is introduced into an ordonnance to create a contrast, the
principal piece which we would break by the by-work, must always predominate.
CHAP. VIII. of strong Objects against faint Grounds; and the
contrary, or, Darkness against Light, and Light against Darkness.
TAVING already spoken largely about the management of the colours, which
is one of the capital parts of painting, I have taken great pains in building
some rules thereupon, with a view, that when occasion required, I might give
Under my present misfortune this comfort is left,
good reasons for so doing.
that l now have nothing to hinder what I firmly purpose, and therefore can con-
sider it with more vigour than ever; Ieven imagine it in a degree equal to
nature herself, since l know perfectly the strength and nature of colours and their
effects.
Consider then the following example, plate XXVIII. whether it be of moment.
The man A in a warm fillemot drapery, is against the faint offscape : the woman
Bin a light blue drapery against the trees behind her: or, a beautiful sky-colour
blue, and B pale red : again, A dark beautiful red, and B rose-colour: or, A
purple, and B white; these are the principal and most suitable alterations, besides
changeable stuffs.
Some perhaps may afk, whether the blue drapery, which we place here against
the offscape, does not contradict what we have formerly said; namely, that blue
is reckoned among the weak colours ; and yet here we asfert warmth against
faintness, and the contrary : to which l answer negatively ; because we call warm
colours, those which are pure and unmixed, viz. beautiful sky-blue, beautiful
yellow, and beautiful red ; whereas, when those colours are mixed with white,
their warmth no longer subsists; because their darkness gives the glow. We see, on the
contrary, that light blue, light yellow and light red, even white itself, serve for
weak colours against the dark, as this example shews,
The reason why A ought now to be of a single or capital colour, is because
the offscape being made up of so many tender and faint colours, shall have no
communication with it; which makes the one the better retire, and the other ap-
praach. B does the same contrarily.
This small example is of such a nature, that any ordonnance of what kind
soever, as well within doors as in the open air, taken from it must be good.
































































































































































































If we introduce, instead of the offscape, a building with bafs-reliefs, figures
or other ornaments, of a weaker colour, or else of marble, it will answer the
same purpose; and if, instead of the trees, we exhibit a curtain, grotto, rock or
other building of warm stone, it will be the same again, with respect to colour :
But if A come against a flat ground, of one colour, whether grey or white, then
that figure may be of different colours, or changeable stuff. Likewise if we place
Bagainst an hanging, or a party-coloured ground, that figure must needs be of a
single colour or drapery ; wherefore we are enabled to judge how far this obser-
vation extends.
Yet as this example shews only light and darkness, we shall subjoin another in
plate XXVIII. aforesaid, with a third or middle tint ; which, with the former, will
suffice for giving a right notion of composing all forts of ordonnances, as well
within doors as in the open air, as before said; although the design were to consist
of 2, 3. 4, or more groups ; observing the grounds against which they come ; whether
faint, strong, distant, or near ; to the end those groups may, by the force of light
or weak colours, obtain their due beauty; I speak not in reference to any one in
particular, but all in general.
We find, that when dark colours are placed against a faint offscape, they are
vifibly set off, and make the one appear distant and the other near; and the more,
when we set some light and weak colours on the fore ground, whereby they still:
have a greater effect, as we may observe in figure A.
From which premises it is plain. that the same can be effected by the contrary
method; so that the argument of some, namely, that strong and warm colours
ought always to be placed forwards, in order to approach the more, and the
weak ones to be in proportion to their distance, the fainter the further, is en-
tirely overthrown for want of considering that the stress lies. mestly in the back ground.
The example now before us is like the former, the fore ground excepted, which
is added to it, the better to explain our meaning in the ordering the colours to
advantage ; by which method we can dispose our ordonnances with ease, and so as
to fetch out a beuatiful harmony. See plate XXVIII. aforesaid.
I place on the left side on the fore ground in the grafs, a sitting woman, with
her right leg fronting the light, having a white under garment, and over it a red
one. She rests her right hand on a dark greeaish-blue pot. A little further be-
hind her stands an half column of grey stone; which sets her off, and whereon
leans an old philosopher drest in. dark blue, having on his head a crown of green
leaves. On the right side, on the fore ground, which is sandy, and here and there
intermixed with russet, lies a large flat basket of a dark russet colour, and in it is
a large Italian pumpkin, on à beautiful dark blue cloth spreading half out of
the basket, on-the light ground, by it stands a girl, drest in rose-colour, holding
her lap open ; behind her appears an heavy white terme; and on the left side from
her stands a woman drest in light violet, who is putting a garland on the terme ::
the girl is in profile, and the woman fronting; the philosopher shews, to the wo-
man before him, the terme, which sne turns towards and looks at. The terme, girl
and woman are close together, making with the ground a great light; against








CHAP. IX. Of the Painting Objects dustily.
HERE is still one thing which many painters carelessly pafst over, though
very useful and elegant, if well and naturally observed : it relates to such
cbyects as are. dusty, as well in rooms as in a garden ; for though the former be some-
times swept, and the latter cleaned, yet pedestals, balluitrades, parapets, vafes
and statues always escape; galleries and public places for walking in, are like-
wise seldom cleaned : it is therefore, in my opinion, very improper in those,
who with great care represent the pavements of the said places with stones of
divers colours very distinctiy jointed, one dark, another light, without spot of unclean-
ness; which. makes it very difficult to get a good decorum, or cause those pavements
to look stat, without offence to the eye; causing moreover an excessive stiffnefs, be the
colours ever so well ordered; whereas usually in a large apartment, daily walked in,
we cannot, in the afpresaid distinct manner, perceive what the colours of the floor
are, except towards the extremities and next to the walls; wherefore the middle, where
is the most walking, must appear dull, uniting, and almost of one sint. Some painters ex-
press the compartments of such floors so distinctly, that you would even imagine they
xeere wet. I grant indeed, that sometimes in the life it is. so, by means of the dark
stone; yet if we break and make them a little lighter they will then not stare so much,
and yet be no less natural ; as if an apartment were surrounded with a marble surbase,
and the middle of the room were a gilt cistern, by which the floor may very well
appear strong, because of its agreement with the marble, and the glitter of the
cistern.
ine ni
For my part, J should rather chuse a plain floor than a comparted one; but if we
lie under a necessity to introduce the latter, the best method will be, to unite the
colouring in such a manner that the tints differ but litile from each other.
This observation does in an especial manner affect landscape; since it is certain,
that the parts which abound with trees, whether woods or sides of roads, are sub-
ject to rain and wind ; and by means of dust or sand, the greens, tombs, pyramids,
vases, and all other objects in such. places are so sullied and covered, that the true
colours of the said objects are hardly perceptible : for instance, in such a place as
we now speak of, stands a red tomb on a black plinth; now, if we make this tomb
or plinth too dark, or too strong, it will look as if it had been zoffied; whereas
contrarily it ought by means of the dust of the branches and leaves which some-
times fall on it, to be so covered over, that we shall scarce perceive, whether the
tomb be red, or the plinth black.,
Although some may think this obfervation too trifling and far-fetched, it is ne-
vertheless highly necessary, in order to find, besides by other methods, the likelihood
in a picture ; whether it be, for breaking thereby,
in some measure, and uniting
objects, which, through the nature of their colour, would have too. great a force,
or for any other cause; yet not without reason, that it may not appear too affected.
But here, methinks, I hear some object, that if we thus observeinievery thing
this dust and sully, long gowns and trained cloaths cannot be free from it; espe-
cially those of women, which are commonly of beautisul and light. colours, and-
must






must consequently be at the bottoms, as well as their white sandals, more or less
disty, tothe no smalf Ianighter and wonder of the people : to which I anfwer, that
I should more wonder, to see a person come dry out of the water, than clean out
of dust and dirt ; for though we do not see it observed by others, who have always
made the sandals beautiful and white, even those of a common soldier, as well as
of a general; and a trained gown the sams ; yet I say, that this observation does
not tend to countenance mistakes, but to make us mindful of the nature of things, and to
express them in our pictures with all likelihood, more or less as the matter requires,
not superfluoussy, but in moderation; a virtue which, taking place in other things,
should not be neglected in this point. A judicious master will observe an equilibrium,
in order to prevent aversion, since things roo beauriful are unnatural, and those which
are too dirty disagreeble to every one. This management would also not be justifi-
able, could we not, as I have said, perceive the reason of it; as in poor people, coun-
trymen, and such like, with old and tattered cloaths, which wear not without soiling
and gathering dust.
5
But this observation is of no use to- those, who, not apprèhending the causes of
things, will have every thing as beautiful as possible ; whereas likelihood should ap-
pear in all parts. Prudenter agendo.









TH E
Art of painting
BOOK IV
Of Lights and Shades.

CHAP. I. Of the different Lights of a Picture.

JUDGE this point to be one of the most important in the art of



painting; for without a thorough knowledge of it it is impossible to


to make a good picture ; wherefore I shall shew all, that by dis-



course I can bring forth, as the result of what I have learned by


many observations and long experience.


Of a common Light.
Objects, in a common light, have no broad sharp lights, and their shades are
uncertain : the second tint and shade keep their own colours much better in a clear
air without clouds ; because the objects, being lighted on all sides without vapour,
appear sensible, and more relieved than in sun-shine. This light l think best for
portraits, and such objects as we would have enlightened from without the pic-
ture ; as an open gallery or such like place; and though the objects thus lighted
have no great force, we nevertheleis find, that the main touches both in lignt and
snade are stronger than in ocher lights.







This light gets great elegance and advantage by lozo horizons; when it makes
greater fhades; as under the leasing of trees, mouldings and projectures of buiid-
ings, and such like.
Of the Light in a coudy Sky.
We need not wonder why the objects in a cloudy air appear more sensible
than in sun-shine or clear weather; because the air or vapours, being mostly
exhaled leave the objects below wilhout mistiness, and thus afford a much sharper
transparency for viewing every thing, without the least obstruction; for which
reason, things in a cloudy air, seem less to go off from us, and appear dark and
near, and of a more beautiful colour; especially the green of grass and trees.
Of a Sunsshiny Light.
Objects enlightened by the sun are more or less misty, as the sun shines strong
or weak ; for this reason, that the atoms or motes between us and the point of
sight seem more dense, by the strength of the sun than in a common or clear light;
and are more or less tinged; by which means the shades of objects become faint
at once, and go off more suddenly, than in another light; wherefore we may
easily conceive, that, though the shades are broader, and more sensibly limited,
than in another light, yet they appear not so sharp as some masters have, by mis-
take expressed them ; especially Berchem, in his objects less than the life; this
indeed would be well enough in covered places, as galleries, palaces, apartments,
where there is no air ; whereby the objects then appear more perfect, plain, and
less retiring.
Suppose, for instance, you walk through same shady trees, it is certain, that,
coming towards the end of them, you will see the objects in the open air plainer
and better than in the field; the prospective glafs evidently proves this, were the
day ever so clear. Observe then in general, that (as I have said) the objects
grow faint more suddenly and disappear in sun-shine; which herein principally
differs from common light.
Of the Light in Halls, Rooms, and ofher Apartments.
For pieces to be hung against walls of apartments, the common light is most
proper, if the disposition of the light of the place will permit, as being the most
moderate and agreeable when well and naturally expressed. This conduct
then is principally to be observed in it, that the figures and other objects be
lighted more or less strong and broad, according to their nearness to, or distance
from the light of the windows; and, though standing on the same ground, they
ought neverthelefs to be different in force of light and dullness of shades. So also
the groundeshades on walls, grounds, and other objects, should be, some shorter,
stronger, and more sensible than others. The figures close to the windows must
therefore certainly receive their light from on high, and have shorter ground-
shades than those which are further from them.








But as it may happen, that the objects distant from the aforesaid light, may
receive light from other windows, so their shades ought also to break more or less,
and to become faint, because they are encompassed by a larger light, besides re-
flexions from the walls. The shades of such objects are also warmer than in the
open air, where the blue of the sky and vapours very much weaken them, and
make them faint.
We must likewise observe in general, that in an apartment hung with red,
yellow, bluc or green, all the shades of the objects are thereby reslected, and
partake of the same colour; but the touches and shades of the faintest objects will
appear the stronger.
A Compendium of the Lighis.
In cloudy weather, the objects are less retiring, more warm, and more sensible.
In clear. weather without clouds, a little more retiring.
In sun-shiny zveather, still more retiring, and less sensible.
In suggy weather (as at the latter end of the year, or in winter) the most re-
tiring, and more suddenly disappearing.
The grosser the air, the more body it has; and the more body, the more visibly
lighted ; whereby the sight is shortned, and the objects appear more indistinct.
Thus much as to objects in the open air.
These four particular lights, naturally handled, are certain proofs of a fkilful
master; and it would, in my opinion, look very agreeable, to see such pieces
hang by one another, embellisned as follows :
In cloudy weather, the herdsmen, fearful of rain and storms, are packing up
their baggage; the sheep every where making towards them, listless and hanging
their heads; which they are driving in an hurry into the woods, looking conti-
nually at the sky ; in fine, the bustle is great, and every one in motion.
In clear weather the herdsmen walk hand in hand ; others sit here and there, by
a fountain, in discourse ; a third group divert themselves with singing and skip-
ping about, and some play on the hautboy, fife, reed, or straw-pipe, instruments
usual among country people; and in the mean time their flocks are grazing in
safety.
In sun-shiny te eather, the shepherds and shepherdesses sit at ease under their
spread clothes; some by a water fall wassiing themselves; others sleeping in the
shade of a fountain, or trees; their flocks are grazing up and down in groups ;
some chewing the cud for coolness, others drinking at a river, others lying in the
shade.
In foggy weather, the herdsien are driving their flocks homewards; walking
with concern, and shrugging their shoulders, and poking out their heads, care-
fully looking to see whether a sheep or goat have not been lost in the fog, and
closely guarding the flock on every side. The young women follow, with cloths
or veils on their heads; and some are stopping their noses with them, because of
the fog.







CHAP. II Of the Condition of the Air or Sky.
THE sky is a wide expansion, seeming lower or higher as it is more or lefs
replete with vapours; now the sky is certainly never without vapours,
since, were there none, it would be every where blue, as well on the horizon as
over our heads: but we see it appears lighter next the horizon than vertically,
because the vapours fog and diminisn the beautiful blue there. It is also plain,
that the nearer the air is to the earth, the more dense and gross it is; and in pro-
portion to its afcent, the more rarified and transparent. The vapours are likewise
more or less sensible in proportion to their density or raritv.
We must observe here, that when the sun rises in the east, it is then, in that
part, lighter on the holizon, than in the three others; and at noon it is lighter in
the south, and so round, because this large heavenly body communicates its in-
sluence toevery thing near and about it.
Ishall now demonstrate, by an example, the reason why the vapours, the further
they are from us, become the lighter: Take a thin gauze eight or ten yards long,
and strain it in the open air, on four poles; mark each yard with a cross-line,
numbered 1, 2, 3, to 10; then place yourself under No. I, and looking along
to the end of the straininig, you will perceive the blue of the sky less in the sccond
division; and the further, still lesser ; because the thin threads doubling before
your eyes, thereby thicken the gause more and more, and abate its thinness or
transparency ; insomuch that at last you perceive nothing but an entire white stuff.
Suppose now that the stars were up, and you were to make the same experiment,
you would find them to appear most distinct in the first division, and disappear in
proportion as they go off, which is a plain proof, that though the air be ever so
more light.
It is for this reason, that the stars are never seen very near the horizon; and if
we do perceive any thereabout, they are but small and weak.
Between the air and water there is no difference ; the one seems to be an impres-
sion of the other; to wit, both of them light towards the horizon, and the air
overhead and water forwards both dark.
As for the ground or plan, which receives its light from the heavens, l do not
find it necessary to assign other reasons for proving, that the case of this is quite
contrary to that of the air; since perspective shews, that every thing enlightened,
if it have but a solid body, darkens more and more the further it goes off from
us : suppose, for instance, an open gallery, Soo feet long, having an even floor ;
you will perceive the first foot to be lightest, and so on to the further end, less and
less light. The same may be observed in figures chathed in zohite, and how much
the first will differ from the last. I speak only of what is in the light; for the
case is quite different with what is dark, and in shade; as we may see when
figures are drest in black, that then they become lighter and lighter by the










The objects which appear in a level field, when the air is without elouds, and
the sun, hidden either behind a mountain or tree, will receive light from all sides,
and yet keep their relief by reason of their strong and dark touches. Their colours are not
broken, but retain their natural beauty : and though the sun, as before said, be
hidden by something, and cannot then shine on the objects, they will neve-thelefs
receive more or less light from the air on the side where the sun is hidden, without
altering the colours.
That the blue of 'the sky is no colour, we can plainly perceive by the objects
in an open sield, when the sun or light clouds shine not on them, which are not
in the least tinctured by it; as being nothing else than a vast remoteness or height,
from whence it comes forth, and therefore not able to impart this colour to the
objects, as they do theirs to ene another for want of body.
Since we are treating of the virtues of the air, it will not be amiss to say some-
thing of its reflexion; a matter worthy of observation; since in that point are often
committed great mistakes; and to explain it we shall exhibit the three following
examples.
N. B. The numbers signify the tints; as i is one tint; 2, one tint darker, and
3, a tint darker than the preceding.
The figure A, plate XXIX. is a tint darker in shade than B, for this reason,
that the trunk of the tree C has rough supersicies which can give no light; and
the white house D contrarily can give a great light or ressexion; now if the
house were not there, but a level field instead of it, B would rather be lighter
than darker; and if the trunk and bushies behind it were also taken away, those
two figures would have a like shade : whereas we see now two figures on one line
or ground, one darker and the other lighter, though the darkest shades in the
latter keep their own force ; which, did they appear otherwise, would be against
nature and the rules of art.
The second example has the same observation.
Now I am well assured from experience, that if we were to give to some (who
had never seen this sketch, or known the reason of it) an outline of the following
or such a design, disposed alike, and one figure as far from the trees as the other
is near ie, standing in a line parallel with the horizon, in order to shade them
according to their notions, they would represent them bolh alike in light and shade;
though by an infallible rule, he who stands furthest from the trees, have more light
round about him than he zoho is nearer; and therefore it cannot possiby be otherwise
than as we see here exhibited ; to wit, Bone tint in shade, and z in the ground-
shade; and A z tints in shade, and 3 in the ground-shade. Now behold the wo-
man on the fore-ground, who, like Bhas one tint in shade, by reason of the re-
flexion of the stone standing near her. The ground-shade upon that stone consists
of three tints; and if the stone, or any such hindrance were not there, the air would
cause the same effect, though not so strongly.
Some may possibly think, that the house is too far to cause such a reflexion;
and that then the figure A ought not to differ so much; but I say, that the trunk
C with the May-bunnes behind, so interpose, that the figure A cannot receive any
reflexion from the house, and therefore it must naturally be one tint darker in shade













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































than B. would you make à far-fetched opposition, and dress A in white; I say
then, that there would be no need either of the trees or houses; when vet its plain,
that the one as well as the other is thus ordered to serve for an example.
The third example, Plate XXX. confirms the two former; in which we plain-
ly see the reasons why objects are weakened more or less in their shades, not only
by the reflections of other objects, but also by the Air on the left side; and the
ground-shades the same, which are darkened more or less beyond the reach of the
said air or reflection ; as it appears on the three columns, in which it is evident,
that the ground-shades of 1 and 3 are a tint fainter than, that of 2; the pillar 1by
the light of z and the air, and 3 by the air alone, The pillar z is about half-
way from the bottom darker in its reflection than above, and its ground-shade
one tint darker than 1 and 3, by reason of its standing nearer to 3, and whereby
pillar z comes to cast its ground-shade on 3, which ground-shade covers the light
of 3 half-way ; whereby this last cannot reflect thus far against z, nor in its ground-
shade. These effects happen as well in sun-shine as common light, without the
lcast alteration.
We exhibit here another example in Plate XXX. aforesaid, which affords no
less consideration than the foregoing; and whereby I shew the force of light and the
cording as the horizon is high or low. A and B are the Instances, and C and D,
the proofs of it, that it cannot be otherwise. The case is the same, whether the
light be sun-fhine or common; or whether it be fronting or sideways. The hori-
zon is, as we see, between both heads, and the point of sight in the middle, or
somewhat more to the right side. The light proceeds also from the right.
Now consider, how the two heads A. and B, though having one and the same
light, differ in their main-light touches;. A having those touches on the forehead,
and all the projecting parts, as nose and chin, under lip, and so forth; and B
having them on the rise of the brows, corners of the eyes, beside the nose and
along the cheek tip of the nose and chin, &c. which alteration is only caused by
the point of sight, according to its position either high or loz. When the objects
(be they of what kind soever, if but smoorh and even, as marble, copper or the
life itself) stand under an high horizon, the aforesaid main-light touches go upwards,
and on the contrary descend, the more the objects are elevated above the horizon; as we
have said, and is here demonstrated; now observe C D of the same stuff as the
foremost heads, and lighted by the same light, where C has a strong heightening
on the rising part; which descends more or less as it rises above the horizon.
This example is of great moment, and produces uncommon things; in which
we should sometimes be at a loss, and which would not occur to us in many years :
I speak in reference to those who are too confident of quick conceptions, and do
not duely weigh things; for it must be allowed, that, without the knowledge of per-
spectiue, it is imposfibe ta trace truth from the secrets of nature, in order to bring
it to pass in our works. It is true, we can imitate the life, a gold or silver pot,
kettle, dish or other shining piece of houshold-stuff, as fine as the life; but may
be vastly mistaken in the uses of them in our ordonnances, if we do not regard
the motions ofthe glitterings; which are as various as incredible; and yet all those
things may be easily apprehended, if we understand, and sometimes practise, per-
s.ctive.









CHAP. III. Reflections in the Water.
THE representing reflections in the water is certainly not of the least moment,
and their agreeableness makes them worthy to be naturally expressed ; but
as there are not assigned, or will be found, any certain rules for them, without the
aid of perspective, so it is lost labour to seek any : for which reason, some landscape-
painters often pafs over the reflections in the watet, to avoid the trouble of per-
spective.
Nevertheless the incomparable Poussin has not forgot to make use of them, and
he has got great reputation thereby; I speak of Nicholas, who was as famous for
landscape as figures, and who never met with any difficulties which he did not
surmount.
Having earnestly applied to this point, I considered, whether there could not
be found other shorter means to effect it, than by planning lines, &c. that so agree-
able a part of art might not be neglected; and after long trial I discovered the fol-
lowing method.
Take an oblong board of what size you please, and place thereon some wax-
figures as close to the edge as you think proper, or according to their distance
from the water, which they ought to have in your picture. Bend these figures in-
to such actions as your sketch requires, and place them, by means of little bits of
wood or potters-earth, as high or low as you desire; then take a trough (made for
that purpose) of lead, wood or tin, painted within-side with such a ground as you
want, whether black, umber or terrevert, and fill it with water, and set it against
the board and figures, as high or low as your sketched ground directs. Next,
fix your point of sight; and, after having found your distance, place yourself
there, either standing or sitting, and thus design the figures with their reflections ;
slightly also marking the shades : then set your layman to each figure, and design
it very carefully ; fixing the layman each time in the place where each figure stood,
so as to see its reslection like that in your sketch.
Here especially take notice of the length and breadth of the reflexion; for it
always shortens more then its object; because it is so much lower under the hori-
zon. When you place the model or layman as much above the horizon as it re-
flects under it, and design it thus correctly, in order to paint after it, you hold
the drawing upside down : here you will possibly say, that the reflexion ought to
be reversed : which l do not disown; but then you can make an impression of
your sketch on another paper, and whereby perceive the good effect.
Having proceeded thus far, and painted after your sketch, you may be assured
every thing is right.
But here let it be observed, that the reflexions must always be perpendicular
with the objects above them, as if growing out of each other; as we may see in
Plate XXXI.















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































This method relates not only to the placing of figures, but all other objects of
what kind soever; as horses, dogs, pyramids, stones with bass-reliefs, vases, pots
and other things, and whether they be forwards, back-wards, or at the sides of
your painting.
You may, instead of a water-trough, use a looking-glass; but it is not so na-
tural as the water, which may be made to look deep or shallow, and as dark or
light as you please, by placing a little mud, grass or sand in the bottom of the
trough.
As for the colouring, experience teaches, that the more the water is enlighten-
ed by the sky, the more uncertain the reflections are; and when the shun shines di¬
rectly on the water, the objects will appear much more uncertain, as well with respect
to us, as those who view themselves therein; for the reflections then appear only
as descending rays, without any shape; as we sometimes see by a candle, the
moon or other thing, which gives only a reflection on the surface of the water,
whether in sun-shine or by night; because we cannot then perceive the transparency
of the water.
The reflections in the water, though it be quite dark and clear, are never so light
as their objects without, but always a tint or an half darker.
Now, to represent the ressections in running ceater you must first paint it with
light and shade, on a ground rubbed thinly over with a little tough oil; then take
a large soft pencil, and here and there cross-hatch it. But a better way, is, to
take a long-haired fitch; and make the strokes as close as the veins of the water run,
taking care, not to striké out too much of the out-line. But as glafs is a diapha-
nous body, and therefore has no constancy or fixedness, nor can effect any thing, but
by means of something else having more body, as by the earth, which is afirm body;
(this we see, when the glass is silvered or pitched) so with water the case is the
same; which will produce no effect, nor receive the form of any object, unless
there be a firm ground to fix its transparency; as we may see by a piece of ice.
will be necessary to observe somewhat about objects standing in the water; a point
well worth our noticé, on account of the uncommon occurrences which happen in
it, though as little heeded as if they were on the land, and no water thereabouts.
We must suppose the water to be like the air, and that the objects, between it
and the air, seen from top tobottom, appear the same as if- they were upside down
against the air; there being no other difference between the lights of either, than
that water is à little fainter than the air;, as may be apprehended by a looking-
glass, in which, the objects, though tlicy appear ever so plain, do not come up
to life itself.
These things being premised, it is easy to conceive, that objects standing in the
water are enlightened as well from belo-v as above. I speak not here of the the re-
flections of objects, but of the objects themselves, and their shades, as may be
seen in Plate XXXI. aforesaid. The man A who extends his right arm over the
water, receives strong reslections from below, of a violet colour, like that of the
air, above him, along his shaded side; and his left arm, across his breast, re-
ceives a double reflection; to wit, from the water, and from his body; whereby it is
of a more warm colour than the other. The young man B stooping over a stone,
vieWs







views himself in the water, in the shade of the tree : by him I shew that the re-
slexion of the water is like that of the air, but a little fainter, as I faid before.
The face on the stonc C exhibits the famc, but more sensibly, being also lighted
from below
Here we must further observe, that the further or higher objects are from the
water, the more reflerion they receive; as may be seen in the man D, who, withhis breast,
is close to the wvater, without any reflexion ; because the light over him cannot shine on
it, since he is stooping forward, and shides the water to the ground with his
body. Thus far I have cxperimented; and from whence, other circumstances
may be deduced by practice.
In the mean time we may observe, how much those objects differ from those on
the land; of which latter we must note, that the more they rise from the ground,
the less reflexion the shades receive ; because the light of the grounds being on the
superficics, they maintain their own constant colours.
Touching the reflexion in the water, besides the contraction and reflexion, I
have been long doubting about the irregularity between them and the objects them-
selves ; since I perceived by the rules of opticks or practical perspective, that there was
something more to be taken notice of. I apprehended also, that as there is
air and sun above and below, so those two lights must needs cause an uncommon
effect in the objects and their glitter or main heightenings. But vet l could not
firmly conclude how or in what manner; and the rather, because (which I am
much surprised at) I never heard that any person had certainly demonstrated it.
At last, finding the greatest difficulty in explaining my conceptions, I did, to
give a sketch of it, cause an enquiry to be made into the truth itself, as plate XXXI.
aforesaid shews ; wherein we plainly see how far things may sometimes go beyond
our guesses. Those who try nice experiments must be rejoiced, when they make
greater discoveries than others. We say, he zho seeks finds; but nothing is to be
obtained without labour and practice. Observe then, that the stress lies here in
the main-light-touches, as the aforesaid figures plainly shew; but they may be qua-
lified according to occasion and as you think fit both in the objects and their re-
flexions.
We take then, for example, the objects standing on the water; being under
the horizon equal to their height, and receiving their light from the right, they
stand on each side of the point of sight, and have their proper lights and shades,
according to perspective, as also the main-light-touches or gloss on the relief. The
same experiment may be made with all sorts of objects; in all which, we may
perceive, how much reffections in the water as well as the contractions will differ
from the objects themselves.
This is an uncommon observation; but study will make it familiar.


































































































































































































































































































CHAP. IV. Of Ground-shades according to the Difference of Lights.
NT will not be improper to make some observations about the ground-shades of
objects, and the course of those snades, according to the different lights, pro-
ceeding from the fide round to the fore part.
As perspective determines exactly the length, breadth, and depth of things, so
it is impoffible to represent any thing duly and well without it, though, as l may
say, we were to practise the art an hundred years, and the ordonnances to consist
of but two or three figures; T will not say of ten or more : It is no wonder that
we so early cause young artists to learn perspective before they take to composition ;
it is even commendable if they understand it but indifferently, and shun those who
not only reject its rules, but laugh at those who study them ; a conversation very
prejudicial to young and unexperienced tyros. But to return to our subject.
We find a great advantage in using a side light in our ordonnances, with respect
to the ground-shades ; because those shades, whether forwards or distant, always
run parallel with the horizon, without any fore-shortening; which we may easily
find without perspective ; as may be seen in plate XXXII. fig. I, because they
may be conveniently measured with a pair of compasses, on else guest at.
We may then well perceive, how much easier this uy Hian where the light is
more fronting, and the ground-shades consequentlyxufi somewhat oblique and
shorten, and therefore not mensurable by the compasses; much lefs to be guessed
at, through their great variety and diffimularity. If the objects change their places,
the ground-shades also alier; oné runsalmost parallel; another, more oblique and
shorter; and others still more, iKproportion as they go off from the fide whence
the light comes; as in fig. 3, whereby is shewed a method for finding such
ground-shades, without trouble or loss of time, in what manner soever the light
fall.
As to the front-light, as in fig. S Imust further premise, that as in such case the
ground-shades go off backwards, so we need nothing but the point of sight, in
order to find them; and their fore-shortenings can be only found by means of the
gradation-line, which though a small trouble, may be sooner made than read. My
method is this :
First, I fketch No. 3, for my ordonnance, fixing my horizon and point of fight
ground-shade at rardom, according as I suppose the light to be a little fronting-
Next l set my line B (whereon are marked the gradation-feet) on the right side.
Further, I draw a parallel-line C from the foot of fig. A to the aforesaid line;
which shews its distance. Now, in order two exhibit the coursé of its shade, I lay
my ruler to the foot of fig. A, tracing its ground-shade up to the horizon, where
Imake a little star D, from which star l fetch all my other ground-shades, both
fore and off-ones, from one side to the other, whether figures, stones, &c. Now,
to find the lengths of all thefe ground-shades, l draw again, from the end of the
ground-shade E a parallel-line F to the-gradation-line; then l count the degrading
feet,






feet, supposing the figure seven feet high, and its ground-shade six feet long, go-
ing six feet into the piece, as marked on the gradation-fine. Thus nyay allidther
objects be managed, by only counting their heights, in order to give the depths
of their three ground-shades accordingly.
It is now easy to judge, how difficult it would be to find the variation of sha-
dow without such a line, as aforesaid.
This method has a further advantage, in assisting those who will finisn all their
figures after the life; for, by the course of the said ground-shades, we can prer
sently know where to place the model or layman with respect to the light of the
piece ; as we have demonstrated in our drazoing-book.
V. Of Reflections in General.
CH AP.
7O nake this observation plain, I have thought proper to illustrate it by one
or two examples; bocguse it is one of those principal beauties of a picture,
whereby we-every where diseer the master.
It is not improper ffen wedried huntsmen, or nymphs, to rest in shades; as in
this example, plate XXxM. Here they sit forwards in the left corner of the
piece, on a greea bank, Wst a wall quite over-run and shaded by the trees ; on
the tops whereofsexere and therg, are seen some sijall strong lights. The standing
figure receives thE strongeff light almost doyn tò the knees; and the remaining
part, uniting with zhe grouneNas its distancé : The light of this figure has,
however not so much force as tognne wan, behind ghe sitting figures, any re-
flection; partly because those Jigures are between, and partly on account of the
roughnefs of it; as being fuill of breaks, holeg. and projecting branches and leaves,
which double the shade Nahd admjt little or nothing of the reflecting rays of the
figure. We see contrarily, chat the figures  over against the light object or
sigure; receive, without hindrance, strong reflsction, the one from before, the
other somewhat sideways, according to their sitting, either behind, forwards or in
the middle.
It is of great moment to shew plainly the true cause of the said reffections, as to
distance, colour and force. Of the colour I shall say this (for the distance I have al-
ready shewed) that, were the said light figure drest in beautiful light red, and
strongly lighted by the sun, and the four sitting ones drest in purple, yellow, blue
and white,they would certainly be adulterated by the red reflection, and partly lose their
own colours, in order to take that of the other, and be mixed with it: As for
instance, the purple will become red; the blue, violet; the yellow, russet, or
fillemot; and the white, apple-blossom, or flesh-colour : yet some more than others,
according as they receive faint or strong reffections, distant or near : moreover the
naked will become more warm, not all over, but in the parts which are tinged by
it; for the air round about is seen less or more, whether in the shade, or between
it and the part which receives the reflection.
The
























































































































































































The second example in plate XXXIII. aforesaid shews the breaking of the
shades, according to the place, as well in colour as force.
The Stone-wall is of a russet and warm colour; the standing figures dressed in
white or light colours ate, with the stones and ground about them, lightened hy a.
common light or sun-shine.
These objects shew us, that though the light, which comes upon them, be pure
and unmixed, their shades are nevertheless quite adulterated ; because they are
hidden from the air, and surrounded with a warm ground, and receiving no other
light than from the reflections of the said ground, the colour whereof the shades
take : we see the contrary in the undermost flying figure, to wit, that the more the
objects approach the air, the cleaner they become, and keep their own colour ; as
appears in the uppermoft figures, which ishalf in the air, and not the least altered
in its shade ; save that it becomes a little more purplish according to its distance ;
which may be visibly seen in its under parts, and in the lowest flying figure;
which is still in the dark, and cannot be touched by the blue of the air, being of
a quite different colour from thhe uppermost; to wit, more warm, as are also the
figures which stand below.
Formerly, few masters understood reflections, efpecally among the Italians. Among
the French we find som made use of them. However I freely own, that such of the Ita-
lians (were there but one) who observed thent, understood them in perfection; and the
French but indifferently; though Voutet got his reputation by them, having therein
done more than all the French and ltalians nyaghichenakes me believe that the reflections
have not been long in practice ; since we yetval
ebany old pieces wherein they are not
at all observed; l cannot but think, tha
hat time they were unknown to them.
But, what is still worse, some, as Lastmadet RorWanap-, &c. did not know, when
an object was in shade, on which side it ought :elight or dark:; wherefore they-
shaded it like others which were in thoelight, more or less, as if it were glazed so-
much darker : for instance, in a piece lighted from the right side, you will some-
times see a figure in the shade of a stone or other object; now the shade of this fil
gure, instead of being on the right side, occasioned. by the stone, they made on
tne left, like all the rest : a true sign that they knew nothing of reflections. Raphael
himself was not expert in it; for at that time they knew nothing ef plaring light against
light, and dark against darkness; on which occasion the reflections come most to pass; whereas tkey.
sought the chief effects and harmony in opposing light to shade, and the contrary,and
therefore needed no reflections: moreover they avoided all great shades- and broadness.
But now-a-days the management is quite different; we are for great shades : and
what makes an ordonnance look finer than great shades and lights, whether buid-
ings with figures and bass-reliefs, woody groves or any thing else, quite in shade,
agreeably lighted by the reflections of grounds, air or other light objects, It eer-
tainly gives the eye great satisfaction, with respect to variety; and at the same time
produces an agreeable union and tenderness, as well in the whole as the parts of a
picture. Nevertheless it fares with restections as with all other things, superfluity
causes à surfeit. There are also some, who so delight in reflections. that they shew
them at all adventures ;. and will often express almost imperceptible ones with the
greatest force, by vermilion, ultramarine, red orpiment, &c. we find such chiefly
among the Flemings, as Jordaan’s, Ruben’s, and many others.








We must take then particular care, not to represent any reflections without shew-
ing the reasons of them, and how far or near they are to their causes; that we
may rightly judge, what force or weakness they receive or give. In a word, that
we need not be obliged to afk, Whence tae reslection proceeds ; why it is red, yellow or
blue, so strong, so faints &c.
CHAP VI. That Sun-sbine has no more force than common Light, with
respect to Shades.
T is certain, that objects lighted by sun-shine have no darker or stronger shades
than those in a common light, though they seem to have stronger; for the blue
f the air is lighted more or less, according to the sun’s strength or weaknefs, and
therefore keeps alzopys the same tint, as I prove by the first example in Plate XXXIV.
The column, whether plain or ornamented with bass-reliefs like the Trajan or An-
tonine, is set up in the middle of the field, and at a distance from it, at the side of
the piece, an high tower or bulwark, the ground-shade whereof above half covers
the column; wherefore the sun shines powerfully on the upper part only, and yet
we shall find the shade from top to bottom of one and the same tint.
It is the same with the light of a candle in a darkish room; or in the evening;
which, though stronger and of more force than the other light, yet does not in the
least darken the shades of the parts on which it comes, but let them remain alike, as we see
in the second example.
The lanhtern in the boy’s hands lights the objects near it in part, when the refi-
due is lighted by the window; we see then, I say, that the parts illuminated by
che lanchern, do not become darker, in the shade, than if the said light iere not there.
And if the day happen to be shut in, and night approaching, it will not only be
darker about the said light, but all over.
But it is quite the reverse with trnasparent objects, such as stuffs, alabaster, horn,
&c. for want of the solidity of the preceeding objects; as we see in the third example.
Suppose that the column, either of paper or alabaster; receive its light, through
à small opening, either from the sun or a candle; you will find, the snade, about
the part so lighted, to be more or less light, according to the strenght of the light
in such manner that it may be plainly distinguished from the other shade where-
about is no light.
This observation especially prevails in nudities and transparent draperies.
In nudities lighted by the sun, we shall find, the small or thin parts to be always
more or less transparent ; as the eye-lids, nose, ears, fingers, &c. and therefore they
must not have firm shades : but it is contrary in a stone-face, for though the sun shine
ever ’so strong against the thinnest parts, yet they will not be transparent, but re-
main as dark as the thicker: and were this face to be painted with a beautiful
and natural colour, it cannot be like the life, but rather a dead person, I speak
with respect to transparency ; for we know by experience, that the blood, being
warm, is thin, and transparent, but when chilly or coagulated, it is. corporal or
solid;







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































solid; wherefore it is certain,
that, in this case, a dead person is more like a stone
than a natural figure. We can plainly perceive this in slaughtered oxen; when the en¬
trails are taken out, and a candle set within the carcafs, the breast and parts between
the ribs will be more transparent while the flesh is warm, than after it is cold and has
hung longer. It is the same with a dead body; for if a candle be set behind an
ear, or next to the nose, they will not be transparent.
The single folds of thin draperies appear more transparent in sun-shine than in
common light, and have therefore fainter shades than coarser and more thick vest-
ments ; but the shades of double hanging folds, especially when they are close toge-
ther, appear in sun-shine much stronger than in the single folds of thick stuffs.
Leaves of trees do the same.
The,difficulty being thus solved; namely, that the strength of sun-shine, or a
candle;-dp not make the shades darker than they are in common light, we shall,
to acccrgilish, our purpose, shew therein the sun’s strength consists; a matter easi-
ly to. be apprehended by those who have well weighed what has been before said.
We finct by experience, that objects lighted by the sun have much greater force
than thee in common light; which is not effected by strong shades, but by their
broadneRared sharpness; which common light does not give, either within doors or the
open act  Some imagine the strength to be greater in the sun than in common
light: which can only make objects approach in proportion to their magnitude,
distance, or nearness, as small life and large life ; yet I say, that common light has
this property as well as sun-shine. What difference then is there between either ?
No other, than in the one broad and sharp shades, and in the other, more round. and
melting ones. The former caufes plain and long ground-shades, and the latter, short and
uncertain ones. Hereby we properly distinguisn a sun-shine from common light.
That the one is more forcible than the other is no wonder; the proof appearing
in the two following examples; in Plaie XXXV. better than I can express it in
words: of these the sirst is lighted by the sun, and the second by a common light;
both alike in darkness of shades; the one sharp, with long, plain ground-shades,
and the other the contrary.
l once painted an emblem, or rather a Narcissus viewing himself in the water :.
l took the light more fronting, as it is commonly ordered in sun-shine, with an
intent only to shew, how l apprehended sun-shine with respect. to the melting, of
the sharpness, and also to avoid a ground-shade, which a child’s head near-him
would have caused on the cheek of Narcissus (the principal in the piece, and his-
left cheek already in shade) if the light had come sideways; which would have.
looked so very offensive, that his view could not have shewn the beauty where-
with he was so much enamoured; it was moreover indifferent to me, whether,
the light came from a side or was more or lefs fronting, because it respects the,
general design no more than if it were intirely fronting. It is true; that large.
ground-shades cause the greatest elegance in sun-shine, if they come not too close.
together (for then they look disagreeable, and cause a certain-mlancholy in a picture)
but appear more pleasant when intermixed with gleams: of small lights to break-
their too. great Breadth-







I call this piece an emblem, because the poet fayss. that’this-youth, seeing his
own likeness in the water, fell in love with-himself : now this fort of love disco-
vers a vain conceit or weak paffion in. a man, so far clouding his knowledge and
judgment, that he is insensible of what he is doing ; for the more natural expres-
sing which sense, I had placed, near Narcissus, aschild with a fool’s cap, fawning
on and embracing him, and decked his hair, virgin-like, with slowers; and, to
shew the delight he took in his folly, his motion and look- bespoke one affected
with the reflection which the child shewed him in the water.
This piece was richly filled with by-works ; as figures, architecture, bascage,
cattie, flowers and water, with design to represent all the particular objects light-
ed by the sun, each according to its quality and in the most suitable manner. It
was thoroughly finished: (by finishied,) I understand, when every thing is in it to
the most minute circumstance, not when only the principal parts are exprest, and
many small circumstances left out, or, when things are curiouslv softened ; as some
by the word, would make us believe. Be that as it will, I had not left every
thing unsoftened ; because the difference would then have been so great, that the
piece must have had too much nearness; since it is certain, that as objects go off
they become more uncertain. The small and subtle things, such as small folds
and features, disappear; yet the painting might well be said to be finished; since
every thing was in it that ought to be, with respectito its distance.
I had before painted the same design, for a model of that above ; it was laid on
flat and not in the least softened ; whereby the difference between them was very
visible : now l must own, that softening is very alluring, and has an apparent dis-
tance; however we may always perceive, that the one has as much force as the other.
We have before asferted, that objects lighted by the sun cause a greater force and
motion than in common light; which some imagine, proceed only from the sharp-
ness of the snades’: now, it is so, in some measure, with respect to their broadness,
but principally for the plainness of the ground-shades which the Gbjects cast on
each other; whereby things are often broke and divided in such a manner as if all
zere double ; even six sigures in a common light will not sometimes give so many
pieces as four in sun-shiine : whence we may plainly perceive, that saarpness gives a
nearness, softening more and more as the objects go off; so that no objects what-
ever can shew any sharpness unless they are near-; because of the air interpofing be-
tween us and them : if it seem strange and unintelligible, a due iinquiry will make
it evident ; wherefore l argue, that the nearerer the objects, the more plain and
sudden are their shades; foras less air interposes between us and the nearest, so it
must increase in proportion as they go off.
Here it will not be iunnecessary to relate a particular accident, as a confirma-
tion of my asfertion. I have formerly said, that in my youth Tmade my designs
in water-colours : now Thad one time, among others, painted one, which, by
reason of its starved and hard penciling, I so disliked,
that I purposed to try to
give it a better face, though I were to spoil it intirely.
First, I tried it with the
glare of an egg; which not succeeding, I sixed it on
pastboard, and made a
brim of wax round it; then I poured clear isingglass on it,
and let it dry : by which
means the painting became as neat and soft as possible;
and shewing it to one of







my intimates, he was fo surprized, that he could hardly believe it to be the same
piece, because the body of the isingglass had taken away the aforeraid hungriness
and hardnefs. But afterwards, on inquiring into the natures of things, this ex-
periment appeared not strange or wonderful to me.
By this occurrence l would. intimate, that mist or air takes away all sarpness;
making things grofs and rough seem light and smooth, like a varnisn or glue
glossing every thing in nature before our eyes.
Touching objects lighted by the sun, they cannot, by means of strong and
dark shades, and with yellozvissi only, look natural or sunny ; becaule there is no
difference between this, and other lights, with respect to force; I mean in objects
less than the life. The sharpness of broad shades, and the form of ground-shades,
with’the colour of the light, and their reflexions, how weak soever, can natural-
ly effect it : but objects as big as the life are beyond our power, if they were on-
ly to consist in force. Now, some may possibly say, that then it is the betier to be
represented in litile : to which I must answer, that then the painting would not go
off in proportion, but stick to the frame : of which we shall say more in another placo-
CHAP. VII. Of the Ground-sbades in Sun-shine.
Tis certain, that the ground-shades in sun-shine (which contribute much to
the decorum of a picture) consist not only of length, broadness and sharp-
I
ness, but in a conformity with. the objects which cause them, whether pillar, pyra-
mid, square, &c. The ground-shade of an upright standing figure, falling on the
ground or any thing else nst be perfectly seen; even so much, that though the said
object were not seen, or were hid behind something, yet we may judge, by its
ground-shade, what shape it has; which is one of the principal tokens of sun-
shine. Some think this no great matter; and that when they have struck, on the
ground, a long stripe of à certain breath, that sufficient, without shewing whether-
it be the shadow of a pillar or a man.
Speaking of this, I cannot omit mentioning a blunder of a certain great master:
He had represented a St. Francis in the Wilderness, on his knees at prayer, with.
extended arms béfore a crucifix, as he is generally exhibited. The piece in it-
self was very fine; but casting my eyes on the crucifix (which was composed of
small twigs of trees) I preceived, that it made a distinct shade of the whole on the
ground, though it was almosthalf in the shade of the faint. But what more surpris-
ed me, was, that his body with the arms in the same position as the crucifix, but:.
ten times bigger, did not cast a like siade on the ground, but the shade of a mass.
or black, wthout arms.
Now, we have said before, that though a figure or other object be hidden be--
hind something, yet we can judge, by the ground-shade, what saape or formit has;
as I shall shew in few words: for instance, place afperson in a palace or aparment,
behind a pillar, or the, like, and let him be lighted by the sun; his-shape will
planly be seen on the ground, by his shadow. Again, would you. introduce into
a landscape,,






a landscape, a pyramid, tower, or bulwark, zohich is not there, it may be done by
means of the ground-shade, when it falls into the piece from the fide of the light;
whereby the objects, and every thing belonging to them, will be plainly visible.
Ingenious painters of sun-shine have still an advantage above others, that they
need not make any high trees, hills or building, in order to create here or there
large ground-shades, for bringing forwards fore-objects, and flinging off hinder-
tones ; they order their shades where they think proper, and can always support
their so doing with reasons ; because we often see, in sun-shine, a small driving
cloud shadow a whole piece of ground, and another ground shall be light again;
and so several béhind one another : thus they can divide a field, at pleasure, into
lights and shades, in order to shew things agreeably.
I have, with great attention, observed the colour and shades of the sun’s light,
and found (especially in the month of September, about two or three in the after-
noon, when the sun is strongest) that the sky has a clear blue colour, intermixed
with small driving clouds. As for the objects, when the sun shines strong, they
appear, as if heightened with red orpiment and white, and the shades reddisn
grey ; as white, black and a little brown red mixt together; not uniting with the
blue as in common light, as some imagine, but becoming gradually a little more
violet, and growing fainter toward the horizon, where no blue is to be seen.
The trees on the fore and second grounds appear finely green : the blue of the
objects is greenish ; the red is orange-colour; the violet, russet; and thus all the
colours in proportion; deep water shone on becomes greenisn grey. This exact
observation agreed perfectly with what I had formerly experimented, in a bright
sun-fhine, by means of a small hole in the window of a darkened room; by which
I saw naturally on the white wall, as on paper, the reflection of every thing that
was moving without doors.
But let us proceed further to confider, whether mis-shapen shadows do not make
objects unintelligible. Beauty in general, subsisting either in figures, landscape
or other objects, exhibits all things plan and distinct in their shapes and forms,
z ithout Diminution or breaking them; for things contrary to each other cannot possibly
raise an agreeable beauty in our eyes, nor convey to the senses a true idea of their
forms, unless by a medium, consisting of a second or middle tint, which unites the
two contrary parts, namely light and shade, when they come too sharp on each
other; thereby to soften the Deformity on the objects, and to unite them :
I
un
speake of things which are, though broad; which makes round objects, instead of
looking, relieved, seem square or angular as if in sun-shine ; wherefore they appear
not beatiful but mis-shapen: and the reason is plain; people are not sensible of
any other decorum than what occurs to their eyes. for its certain that things alter
by the least accident, whether of unusual lights or shades, which makes them
strange and unknown. let some boast, that it is broad and the best manner;l main-
tain, that tho’ it were a sun-shine, it is all ène and the same: and if we are to speak
of what is ageeable and perfect, I say, that it ought to be known that a picture
with a common light is the most perfect; a light which shews us more exactly and plain
the preper forms of objects; what is round, remaining so, and the square altering not.
As for the misshapes of things exhibited in sun-shine, we have sufficiently
shewed






shewed them as alsg that the stiarpnefs of deformed shades spoils the true
property of the objects ; for instauce, suppose too. standing figures, talking to-
gether, are lighted by the sun; if now the one cast a shade on the other, so as
half to cover his face, we need not doubt, but he will become less known even
were he 2. parent.

In architecture or mouldings it happens as bad ; because the offensive suarpness of
the
 shader disfigures and confufes their form and neatness at once.
I think it therefore a sign of pusillanimity (not to say cowardice) in a landscape-
painter, zlways to make choice of sun-shine; which is certainly but a small part
of his art : as if an architect were to be continually employed about a chest or
box ; a flower-painter, about a flower-glass; a cattle-painter about a cow or sheep ;
a still-life-painter, about a skull or hour-glass ; sea-painter, about a sloop or boat;
or a statuary, about a crucifix. He is no history-painter, who always represents
an Herodias with. a St. John’s head in a charger; or a Lacretia stabbing herself; or
a Jael with an hammer, or a St. Joln with a lamb; all which are but particular
incidents, which scarce déserve a name : an artist therefore must not be afraid to
exhibit every thing that can be represented with every sort of light.
But the opinion of most paiters of sunshine, is as ridiculous as that of those
who always practise a common light; both proceeding from a mistake or ignorance,
whereby they cannot rightly judge of things differing from what they have been
always used to : now, their judgment is only a conclusion agreeing with their ap-
prehensions in a point which they pretend to understand, and which therefore ought
to bethus and thus ; when yet it iscertain, that before we can judge of things, we
ought firft to enquire into them, and, by a comparifon between, both, to observe wherein
they differ.
7.7
f
1. I
4
That sun-shine is not so proper ffor history. a3 for landscape and. architecture,
arises from hence;, that; on such. bccasions, iit is obstructing, and appears hard
and unpleasant; by reason of the sharpness of the shades and ground-shades, as we
have before intimated; neverthelefs if the matter require it, it must be used ;
yet with such caution, that no mif-shapen groundesnades appear to obstruct the sight,
or create an averfion. 
But if sun-fhiine were the best and most advantageous light, face-painters would
certainly use no other; of which, to this day, we, have not one instance; because
first, thé colours doi not shew themselyes. in that-light to be. what they really are.
Secondly, becaufe, it is. impossible, that, either man, woman, or child, can,
without trouble and an alteration of countenance, especially about the eyes and
mouth, fit'any time with their faces in the sun.
Thirdly, because the fun never stands-still, but is always altering.
Fourthily, because the sweetnefs of the features, would thereby be spoiled at
once. And,
3
Lastly, because it would beivery improper to hang such pictures in a room out
of which the sun is kept.

It would be. ridiculous and absurd, to say of a woman, that she is unlike a man,
unkss they: so resomble that weccan see no difference between them; for as the wo-
man is like a woman; lanid the, man like a man, so there must needs follow one of
these







these conclusions to wit, ehat he catmot or wifl nob be-it : we oould add à ehirds
as a contempt of the woman, namely, that fhie is not entireiy like a man : but this
last (which attends most people’s judgments) is most ridiculous, and to be espe¬
cially shunned by thofe of right apprehenfion, as being often the fource of-hatred
and envy, and even ruin, as experience daily shews in those, who, through prez-
poffeffior, despise every thing that is difagreeablé to theit work and fancy.
I shall not enlarge on this point, but keep to my puhpose, af shewing the pres
possesfion of fun-ffmne-painters, as well as others : and, to be the better understood,
premise, that there are thrée things wherein the whole matter iconfifes, and which
we must first fix, and distinctly observe; namely, a fun-shine, a comman light, and a
faint light, which differ from each ocher afmnuch in faft as nantie.
The first is strong and fhanp, iche seoond broad, but nât fharp; and the third, faint
1
e.
and melting.
The first causes distinet ground sades; the seéond makes melting ones; aad the
third, faint ones.
The firft receives its colour from the sim-; ’the seoond, foom the zhouds.; iand the
third, from the blue of the sy.
We will subsoin, that the first may be cortsideredi as-a man; the fecond, aas a
IrI
7It
woman; and the third, as acthild..
Wh6 will now fay, Thât the childl is not igoed, because it inmot so lusty, strong
and bright as the father of mgther; or ghat the woman is. notso, because fhae in
7.,
nôt entirely like a man ?
Observe then, how thefe unthinking sun-shmne-painters judge further of fhe fe-
tond and third lights: Ir is not bread, say 'they-; whereby, we anesto under Rand, that
it is not so sunny and sharp in shades as in their paintings : Broad, brondt they
speak to their disciples in so luw a toue, ’that ab strunger muft hear its as if it were
a fécrét unknown to the very arti It is said ghat zhe good Philemaax was ffo, Bigotted
1to things having broad lights and ’thades, that he never painted lother than sun or
moon-light pieces ; which he evideneed, in exerting his whole force to pepreserst
Tupiter with Alemena ; whepe they are bogth feen going zoibed, and yet the sun- fhines
fo bright into the room, that you might count all the squares of cte window on the
lfloor. Poor Jupiler-' How wiolenely are yob tideakt lwith i Dares Phaebus; Outrary
to your express commands, peep through- the Slndaws, Ithough you churged- him tol kidt for
three days and three nights-p But tohat sinifies- phat, Tyinks zhe painter-; the paining waft
be broad and the simncshine must be there, wete it midnight. Ead he made a moon-light,
it would have sitted that season:

But it fares with such artists as-it didl with ane, whd wwas so; fond’of, paintiag
oranges, that he never made a Ppiéce without mie:, This-zealot, having made Inte-
rest to paint the baitie of Pavia, eafkend his employer, whecher there should not-be an
orange in it ' Hour should that come to pass says the gentleman : To passytor not, tre¬
plied the painter, let me alone for- that: The other laughed; and uot dreantilag he
would put one in, after talking of other things, said, at parting Do as yhou
fhink best. The poor men, glad of the authority, was tooking in his pictupe for
’a Place for the orange; bût fearfal if he placed fo’sinesai frait on the ground, itit
might be trampled on by the horses, icorner








of- thie painting, and’ sati thercom, in 2. peyter plate, an orange as big as the- life,
and very nartrally dons; :This innocent wretch. (for such deserve not the name
of painters gives to undorstand,, thag. what as can de best, is hest, whether it he pro-

It is a constant maxim, thak thipgs, without sun-shine, finely painted, and with
muff need be good, without the word (broad) which
proper lighes and shades
they abuse by introducing it any how. Do not think thep, true artistsl that
the pieces nhich are nas boad ape apt-as good 3s those lighted by the sun, moon









CH AP. VIII. Houj Sunssbine is to be reprefented in a Piece having
a common Light.


This proposition may possibly seem straiige to. some, and perhaps a feint;
but is, in fact, so far’fram if,. or being atrifle, that it is a matter of mo-

ment, and founded on good reasons.
We take it for granted, that the sun differs. in’ force from other lights, and is à
tint lighter.
We often see in changeable weather abounding. with driving clouds, that the
sun is obscured by very thin and hanging airy vapours in such manner, that whole
tracts of land, houses, hills, &c. even whole woods are over-shadowed : which
shades however are thin, and exhibit all the objects more or less plain than in
common light.
But let uis corne to the point ; which is, te represent, in a common light piece,
a sun-shine with one and the same force of colours, each in its degree, without
impediment to each ôther;’ I mean, when the sun is not forward or in the front
of the picture, or is not, tèo t-much fpraad;: which wpuld thereby seem too
flaring.
To do it therefoue according ’to ghe rules of art, divide, for instance, a aland¬
scape into. fonr grounds ;. of which, let the first be white, and the three others di¬
minifhing in proportion : let the second white ground serve for the sun-shine: now,
it is plam, that as the common lighit on the fore-ground already possesses the force of
the colours it must needs follow, that the sun-shine which iz. one tint lighter, as be-
fore said, and has no other force than tthe fame white, nan also-have no nearer
place than that of the seoond grounc: aa plain proof, that, if it be placed on the
third ground,it will differ so much in force. Now, in order to distinguish the difference
betweon this light on the sécond ground, and that on the first and to represent it na-
zurally, we-ought to exhibit the shades and ground-shades of the objects, saarp,
doroall aad long é wihevaby we mayt peroeive, that this is a sun-light; and the other
with dull and short groid stiades, to fhew. that it is conmoa light. But the better to
coooeive the naoure of sun-light, obserwe its colaur in the moraing and eyening.
To aid those uho may not presently understand what I bave said, I shall lay
down a fhort method of management in a certain and easy manner.








Having sketched your design, and settled the parts which you would have en-
lightened by the sun, dead-colour it neatly, as if it were to be throughout a com-
mon light : but in the second colouring, you must somerohat more heighten the parts
which are lighted by the sun ; whether whiter, more yellow or more russet, ac-
cording as you would have them, and so as to perceive a visible difference : the shades
also to lie more distinct and broad, without making them glowing, except here and
there in the reflexions.
Now, if on the fore-ground, or about it, there be no white, we have an op-
portunity to throw here and there on it some sun-rays by the force of white, yelloW,
or russet, according as the sun’s colour then appears ; which could not be done, if
we had before laid the sun’s force in the off-scape.
Here, let it be observed, that if we enlighten some forward objects by the rays
aforesaid, they ought not to be of light, and bright coloured matter, such as white
marble or light free-stone, very light draperies, or beautiful carnations; but of
such tints as appear dark in a comman light;. because these strongly heightened
with the sun-like white will fetch out the same light.
Now, to finish the work with certainty, and to find, with ease, the proper tints
of objects, lighted by the sun, proceed thus : temper your white with red or
yellow orpiment, more or less yellow, as you would represent the sun early or
late. Then, instead of pure white, mix it with your light first tints of all the
objects which are lighted by the sun: whereupon you wilf find each colour to be
broke according as its quality or force, with respect ’to its body, differs much or
little from the rest. Thus the work will have the desired effect, experience, the
daughter of truth, can testify.
CHAP. IX. That the Shades of Objects in Sun-shine are not more
glowing than in comman Light.
ANY are such strangers to the truth of things, and fo little enquire into
W them, that, to retain their groundless habits, they slight reasons, and
maintain their errors. This is evident from their universal opinion, that the
shades and objects are more glowing in sun-shine than :in commonlight: which I
entirely deny ; but that the shades and reflexions. become lighter and lighter, in-
proportion as the sun shines stronger, is true.
That the sun’s light is more glowing than a common one, is indifputable;.
for, as the sun’s light is more or less yellow or red, it is natural that every thing.
he shines on should partake of the same colour, not only in lights, but also in the
shades which receive the reflexions of the grounds, and other néar objects : but,
as there are no objects (what strong reflexions’; foever they receive) which do not
here and there preserve some unreflected stades (as, when oné object is covered by the
ground-shade of another) so the said shades ought, fince they have no communication
with the sun or his reflexions, and are of another nature, to be more grey, like those
in common light, as receiving no. colour but what the air gives them.








Hereby, I think, we can best distinguisn between a
sun-snine and common
light; wherefore it is strange that people, who commonly
seek shades for the sake
of coolness, will, notwithstanding have them warm.
It is therefore no wonder to find so few winter-painters. I have seen winter-
pieces of Breugel as warmly coloured as if for Midsummer; even the very ice and
snow as glowing; though in winter all things receive light reflexions, and have
littlé or no shade, the ground-shades are lightifhi and blue, and yet every thing has
its distance and going-off; though some, contrarily, make their off-shades as warm
as the forward ones.
For this reason, it is necessary for the artist sometimes to exercise himself in sun-
shine, and make due observations on the nature of it; not making it his constant
practice, but a particular and agreeable study: if he cannot be perfect in it, he
ought at least to know as much of it as of common light, in order to use, in his
works, sometimes the one, sometimes the other, as occasion requires. Some think,
because of the broadness, that sun-shine is more easy than common light': but it is
not so; since I think it as difficult, for a sun-shine-painter to represent common
light, as a common-light-painter to exhibit sun-shine with respect to naturalness.
Many perhaps may differ from me in opinion, because, in sun-shine, the ground-
shades are distinct and limitied: whence, they deduce this argument; that in a
piece lighted entirely from a side, and the sun having meridian altitude, the
ground-shades of all the objects appear a third less than their full length, and
therefore they may be correctly measured by the compasses, each in proportion to
its length, on to the off-scape : which I willingly grant, and to which I will. say
further in their favour, that it is to be practised, not only when the grounds are
level and horizontal, but likewise in up and down-grounds, where the compasses are
useless; if the ground drip, the ground-shades will do the same; does it rise,
they do so too, as the knowing in perspective well understand; thus far, I say,
thy are in the right: but suppose it should happen, that the piece be lighted from
zeithin, or from without; Is it not then as uncertain as in common light, and, be-
cause the compasses are useless, much more troublesome to find the shades and
ground-shades, and their enlargements forwards. and off-diminutions ; which ought
to be as sensible as the sun is either off or forward; Contrarily, how easy is it in
common light, where they are small and dull; The task is therefore not so easy as
some imagine, who endeavour only to represent a right or left-side-shade. To re-
present the sun in all positions is quite another tning, and there are few such
painters : for we do not easily find a sun-shine-painter meddle with common light;
but contrarily, that a common-light-painter will fometimes practice sun-shine; and
the reason is plain, the common light takes in every thing; wherefore he who under-
stands this well, can easily give into sun-shine. The point is only, that sun-shine is
warm in the lights, but not in the shades, as some imagine.
Now it sometimes happens, that two pieces, à fun-shine, and a common light,
hang together, both having the utmost force of colouring, and so alike, as hardly
to distinguisn the sun-shine; the lights being both alike and broad ( for since the
word broad is come into fafhion, some will. paint broad, whether it be sun-shine, or

not, as well within doors as without ; moreover, the light and shades warm-). What








now is to be done, when two such pictures fhuff hang together, in. order to dis-
tinguisn the sun-shine; Nothing else verily, than to abate the strength of the one
somewhat, and. heighten the force of the othef; not by making the fhades darker,
but by a more warm and bright light, with long and distinct ground-shades, zot
onsy broad, but sharp 4 understand nere, that the common-light-piece ought not
to be iaferior in its kind but not broad-lighted or snaded, unlefs the cause
plainly appears.
But we seldom sce too such piéces together, doné by the fame mafter; because
most painters make but one of the-kind, their business : and. if it once happen, yet
they do not think, the one ought to be lighter than the other. And if they are
done by two different hands, each master endeavours to make the colonrs, anfwer
his own inclination.
Thus it happens, that the sun-shine-painters are in little concern about it ; for
think— re my dbjects to appear by the force of lighte Iwill, by tle strength of fiery
shades, maintain the superiority.
We have said before, that, in proportion to the sun’s strength, the reflexions
become lighter; the reason whereof we shall now explain.
We find, when the sun is low, and the objects are strongly lighted, that they
receive stronger reflexiens from each other ; because the sun’s rays fall not obliquely
and glancing on the objects, and those on others, but strike directly upon them,
and return reflexions : contrarily, when the sun is high, the reflexions of the light-
ed objects cannot touch the others with such a force, because the reffexion of the
light must needs revert to its origin : for instance, if in an high light, two men stand
in discourse, and the one receive the sun on his brest, and the othier on his back,
the light which falls from on high on the breast; must needs reflect agam upwards,
whencs it came, and therefore pass over the other’s head; so that the former
figure can thereby receive none, or but a very weak and almost imperceptible
reflexion.
Thus I think to have shewn, that reflexions in sun-shine ought to be represented
much stronger than in common light; the proof of which may be deduced from
the life itself-
CHAP. X. Of thé Difference of Ground-shades; proceeding either from
the Sun, or radial Point.
In pdlate XXXVI. the first example shews, the sun’s place or quarter, which I
observe as east; and opposite to it, in the west, is a building, which is lighted
throughout from the gast, not as. by rays, proceeding from a’ point and growing
wider, but by such as. are parallel to each other;. I mean, not from the center of
an asfigaed. sun at the side of the piece, but from the whole quarter wherein the
sun is; or from-the whole side of the piece, as. wide as the opening, thoughout
which he shines into it.


































































































































































































































































































































The second example shews the contrary to be false; when the sun being directly
behind the objects, the ground-shades are not fetched from the radial but another
point.
For if this were good, it mist follow; that when the sun shines directly through
the midle of a street, he would enlighten both -sides of it; whiich is contrary to
nature and to what we have shewed before. And,
In the third example, it is plainly visible, that when the sun is in the east, and the
room in’the weft, the objects, on the ground must needs be lighted directly from be¬
hind, as well the one as’the other, without the least difference : which their ground-
shades and the lines of the floor fufficiently shew both proeeeding from the point of
fight, and-the latter shewing us the caft and west through the whole room.
The fourth example in Plate XXXVII. affirms the same; representing a south-
ern colonade lighted direct by the sun, which is in the oppofite point; of which
building each column throughout cafts its fhade against the pillar behind it, not
proceedinp from a point, but by parallels aceording to the rules of perspective.
The fifch example contrarily fhews a great mistake, which yet is often committed,
in making the ground-shades proceed from an affigned point, each column seemming
to cause a particular ground-shade; which is against rule, and thé nature of
sun-shine.
It wifl not he amiss to say something here of the dight of graunds, to wit, that in
what manner soever the light comes, whether from behind, sideways or fronting,
the plan or ground will always appear alike ; that is, in the front of the piecé, thé
most light, te the sun ever so low, nay, on the horrizon : and not enlythe Aat
grounds, but every thng that receives light : the reason whereof is so. evident,
thatit would-be superfluous to say any thing more about it, than what is shewn in
the fixth example of a’side, fronting and backward light, which perspective suffiei-
ently justifies.
If some think, that when the light cpmes from behind or a-side, the ground
must be lighted ot herwise than fronting (for many keep it always most light on the
fide whence the light proceeds). I allow it, with respect to a candle or toreh; but,
speak ing of the air, must say, ithey do not at all understand the matter: indeed it
would not be very improper-in aground running off from the light : but level floors
or, grounds cannot admit of a diminution were they; if I may say so, a thousand
ftéps Tong ; nay, the ground will always be most light forwards, without any dif-
fferenCe, let the light come from behind or forwards. T think, no artist will be so.
Toft as to afk, How’then it shall appear whence the Tight comes; Since it is a
generat rule, that the fhades and ground-fhades of the objects plainly shew it.
And. in case there were no objects on the ground, the air,, ifthere be but the least
Hout, wifl make it sufficiently apparent.


















CHAP. XI. Of the Representation of different Lights in the same
Piece.
SOME thinkit impossible for different lights in the same piece to look well ;
for, say they, if it were good, Raphael, Caracci, Titian, Poussin, and other

great masters would not have rejected, but approved that manner ; even the French
acadeniy, which is arrived at so high a pitch, unanimoussy agrees, that no more
than a single light is, necessary, and rejects a picture which has more ; wherefore
they judge, that double lights are only the inventions of Dutch masters, who do
not understand the antigue, but only follow nature in order to please ignorants.
To all which l answer, that though Raphael, Poussin, and other great masters, have
nôt shewed it in their works, but only kept a single and common light, we must
not infer from thence, that they despised or rejected that manner, as contrary to
perfection in this particular : yet l do not say, that a piece with different lights is
better than one fingle-lighted, if naturally represented,; I mean only, that if it so
fall out and be judicioussy managed, it gives a painting a diversifying elegance.
I beleive, many common painters will not much thank me for disclosing this
matter ; because, should lovers desire such. a piece, they would have more troublé
in doing it. However. let. every. man do what he will, or can. It fares with
our art as with,others, if a man will learn all that is necessary, to become a good
master, he may do so ; or if he be content with half-enquiries, no body will call
him in question for it; but he who is able to represent a single light well may,
in my opinion, also do the others well. How many brave masters surmount every
thing they undertake , What should hinder their exhibiting three, or four lights as
well as one p But, let me not here approve the manner of some landscape-
painters, who introduce many small lights into a piece : a fond conceit without
any basis.
I. thought it proper to handle this matter of different lighis, to shew, that we
ought not to regard the partial opinions of ignorants, but always chuse what is
most natural and agreeable; I mean, that we should enrich our ordonnances in
general according to occasion, and without affectation. For which purpose we
shall here exhibit an example different lights, plate XXXVIII. in expectation to
hear what difficulties some will raise against it.
We see here a building or gallery, and before it, a mote of water, on the Brink
whereof is a man fastening a boat. Near the water lies an heap of various kinds
of household goods. Two men are seen bringing forwards some small vessels on a
bier. On the pavement stands a grave matron with a young virgin, directing the
hindermost porter to lay the goods to the rest. Somewhat deeper in the piece are
two soldiers; one bare-headed, carrying some household goods. A servant is
coming down the steps with an heavy chest on his shoulder. Through an arch of
this



































































































































































































































































































































































































































this gallery is seen, at the further end of a field, a garden ascended by twenty or
thirty steps, inclosed on each side by agreen hedge. Some people are seen going
up and down the steps. In the field sits an herdsman with a dog near a stone.
The forepart A, with all the objects thereabouts, is little lighted foreards, yet
strongly. The gallery B. and the figures on the same ground are lighted directy
from the side. Every thing in the field D, is lighted like A. The steps C, and
the objects on them are lighted forzard. A receives its light from South-East; B
from South; Cfrom Eeast, and D, like A, from South-East.
I appeal now to men of judgment, whether the lights ought not to differ from
each other, as well in tints as shades. A, and the field D, to the steps, receive, as
aforesaid, their light from South-East; in which point Isuppose the sun to be ;
wherefore the air is there lightest. The south on the right side, which lights the
gallery only through an opening, thereby becomes à little darker than the forepart
of the piece. The stepsC in the off-scape, covered by the right-side hedge from
south and south-east, and by the left, from north, must needs receive their light
from east, and the air over head ; whence, we may perceive that the objects are
never without light, however they are encompassed; since what they lose on one side,
they gain on the other.
I exhibit here another design, plate XXXIX. also tending to shew different
lighis in the same piece.
Let us consider ’it as a’square room, which can receive its light from the four
cardinal points : for instance, we suppose A, to be north ; B east; Csouth; and
D west ; again, No. I, to be north-east; 2, south-east; 3, south-west, and 4,
north-west: between these points are, south-south-east, east-north-east, &c. which
are needless. Now, we ought to observe, this room being open on the four sides,
and a figure standing on a pedestal in the middle of it, and lighted from the four
sides, from which side it would receive its strongest light: certainly from the east,
where the sun is; and next, south-east; north-east, atint less; then, north and
south, still a tint darker; and so the same with south-west and north-west: the
west side only should be the shade.
By these examples, I think to have sufficiently cleared the point touching the
natures and effects of different lights; and also shewed the advantage of knowing
them, as well in sun-shine as common light, with respect to the variety either in
landscape or other subjects; together with the abundant means they afford for
enriching an ordonnance, and that above the common method. I subjoin, that
in a judicious use of them, we must be very careful in their disposition, that they
may not, as Ihave said, seem forced, but natural and necessary, that there may be a gene-
ral union, and that the principal part have its predominancy.
CH AP. XII. Curious Observations on Sun-sbine.
HHave already said much touching sun-shine, and yet, as a matter of conse-
quence for history and landscape
painters, shall from three designs (which
for that purpose I exhibit) make a general observation upon it; and thereby








shew the mistakes of some, and the good qnalities of Schers, as a prefident for
those who would get honour by living embellishments.
Three young painters had once a controversy about
the representation of sun-
fhiine : they were each of different tempers; one cross and positive; another, meek
and of good judgment, and the third was by the others generally accounted silly.
In the end, they resolved, each to make an ordonnance ; and to shew their skill,
the two first chose one and the same design. See the fketches in plate XL.
The first had given all the objects, without dictinction, a yellowish light, and
made the shades strong and glowing; thereby pretending to express the sun as
fetting ; not considering, that he thereby exposed his ignorance, as having made
the ground-shades too short.
The second had exprest the’shades and ground-shades not so sharp or so long;
as representing the sun much higher, and à littie fainter; yet herein shewed so
much more conduct, on making the woman and boy, who are looking at an
huntsman sounding his horn over tne wall (whom the man coming out at the gate
shews them) put their hands over their éyes, as nature zeaches ; when the other,
who had represented the sun much stronger, had not taken any norice of that circum-
stance.
The first placed a man before the tree, steeping in the sun ; the second, con¬
trarily had placed him in shade behind the tree; and some other people were sitting.
in repose against the wall, in fhade, to avoid the sun’s heat.
The third, had made a delign of his own (see plate XLI. to shew his nice ob-
servations on the sun; which the others, as counting him silly, at first laughed at.
He had represented a naked boy sitting in an open window, and making bubbles.
with a pipe. The child received his light forward from the common light of the
room. Through the window appeared the tops of fome houses, and part of as
cedumn, with a sun-dial affixed to it.
Now on a nice examination, it appeared, that this -last had best beftowed his
thoughts on the sun, and that neither of the others had fhewn so many good
effects in their pieces as he, in so small a compafs; for, first, he exhibited the
ccolour of sun-shine in the sky and on the tops of the houses, sufficiently differing
from the common light: secondly, it is not enough to reprefent the sun strong or
weak, or with long or short ground-shades, but we must also see, by the ground-
shades, hozo late it is ; wherefore he had introduced the sun-dial, the ground-
fhade whereof was on 9: thirdly, he had observed the dubioufness of the edgy
objects going off : and lastly, to shew that we cannot bear the sun’s excessive brightness
without doors, he had placed the child in the window, in the common ligiit of the
room, that he might, with more liberty,stare about at the bubbles than he could
in the bright open air. Thus he justified the conduct of him who had made his
figures shading their eyes, and advised the other to give his figures those of an
eagle, said to be the only bird which can look against the sun.
By these natural observations, the others owned themselves convinced ; with
excuse, that they laughed not at his skill but his choice, which at first seenred odd
to them.




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































CHAP. XIII. Of the Sun s three Qualities.
As we ought not only to view, as far as we are able, the wonders of nature, but
 also to represent their likeness; so we shall now make our observations

about the most beautiful of things.
Who can be insensible of the three qualities of the sun, viz. his splendor, heat
and colour; Can any light exceed the sun in brightness and clearness, or any fire
be more invigorating or consuming, or any colour have greater power ?
The sun-beams, says à certain poet, penetrate the debth of the sea, andrender the san-
dy grounds light; imperceptible things, sensible, &c. What light can effect what this
does ) It is faid that lightening can blind the eyes; though this is rather caused by
its suddennefs than its light.
As for the sun’s heat, Ovid tells us, that, Phéaton being of an ambitious temper, im¬
portuned his father to let him drive the chariot of the sun; which request being granted, and
the horses proving too head-strong, and he ignorant of the course, driving out of the way,
thereby set the earth on fire. The gold in the river Tagus was seen flowing along.
This powerfal light inslamed the Eastern countries, as Ethiopia, Lybia, &c. in such a man¬
ner as to make the inhabitants black; as we see them at this day : the lakes, rivers and fount-
ains boiled azuay ; even the fea became a fandy valley. He, who would know more,
must consult Naso himself.
It is said, that the rolling and frightful noise of the thunder, will melt metak
in an instant : which is not improbable, since the penetrating power has a great
effect upon them. Two flints, by collusion, will produce fire. Even two pieces O
wood will, by friction, do the same, though in themselves of a cold nature.
In relation to the third quality the poet proceeds thus : Phabus, fays he, in his
light hair, and sitting in a glittering chariot beset with carbuncles, gilds all things,
he shines on, with a yellowifhi colour. What light has such a brightness, and beau-
tiful colour: What saltpetre, brimstone or other combustible matter can reach so
far, and spread from east to west; The white moon and sparkling stars, nay the
sudden lightenings themselves are all weak and faint, if compared with the absolute
beauty and splendor of his lively colour.
I therefore very much wonder, that such an ignorant can be found, as I. met
with about five or six years ago. Even he, who set up for a great master, plainly
asserted, that the sun is blue, nay, azure blue.
Was there ever harboured a more absurd opinion, than one which makes thè
most transcendant brightnefs and most penetrating object, the weakest? since every
one knows blue to be the weakest of all colours, and by which every thing is
made to retire. What light can be drawn from blue ; Does a blue body produce
green, red or yellow , Yes, says Momus, ablue object will cast a yellowishness; a
yellow light, a blue one; and a red, a beautiful green : also, a yellow drapery
will give a green reflexion; a blue drapery a red one; and white, a black oue.
Moreover, the light of the sun is well exprest, when the main lights are whitisn
blue,







blue, and the reflexions yellow and warm. Thus, says he, we must reason about
all colours lighted by the sun.
I think this the bluest position that can be ; for, in painting the sun and
all other objects after this manner, could there be a more ridiculous picture ,
How green, yellow, blue, and spotted would it appear) — But many are fond
of party-colouring.
We shall give here a discription of one of this master’s pictures; a work as
frivolous as his judgment about the sun.
In this piece he had represented, a Vulcan hammering a piece of iron, a foot
long; one half whereof was red-hot, and the other he held in his hand : he had
also exhibited a Venus, with the same precaution, sitting stark-naked and uncon-
cerned in the midst of the sparks.
Now, are not these fine thoughts, and worthy of representation ; Does he not
seem to say —
This iron is not heated by the fire, but painted of a glowing colour è —-
And indeed he shews it plainly, for the pinchers, which Vulcan ought to hold the
iron by, lie by him on the ground. Moreover he was foolisn enough to paint a
fire against an hanging. But why do we wonder at that, why should he not do
it, since a painted fire cannot burn;, We might suppose him as wise as the man
who set a piece of ice to dry in the sun, that it might not wet his back in carry-
ing home.
To find such wretches among mean people is truly no wonder; but among
painters, and such as set up for great masters,. it is past my understanding.
Those men, who are unacquainted with the true qualities of the sun, may be
excused ; but they, who know, see and are sensible of them, and yet through care-
lessness or solly make such grofs blunders, are unpardonable. Artistsl be then
advised in things ye do not rightly understand, that ye may be sensible of every
thing art can effect.
Is there any thing which we cannot immitate with pencil and colours; whether
heat, cold, day or night, earth, air, water, fire, wind, thunder, frightful ap-
paritions, sweet sounds of voice or instruments, sorrow, joy, bitterness, forrowness,
&c. even, invisible things, as the sound of an horn or trumpet, &c.
But, let us now see how these things can be exhibited : Are there not abundance
of motions, postures and pafsions, which herein afford us help, and which nature
herself and daily instances shew uss if we will but take notice of them ; What then
can be wanting to make our meaning plain and clear to every body  Does not an
uiexpected sound cause a sudden emotion; a thunder-clap, consternation , a
frightful specter, terror and trembling, a burn, rage, and a contraction of the
members, sourness, pinching the mouth and closing the eyes ) bitterness, a
loathing contraction of the features, sweetnefs, a placid countenance ?
As for the representation of hot countries, we know, that both men and
beasts seek there shades and caves for shelter and repose; also, that it is usual to
wear umbrellos, and go either naked or dressed in thin silks : in cold countries
we find thé contrary ; for there, people repose and recreate in the sun, or where
he gives the most warmth; they sit in an hut or house by wood-fires;: and if the
country be near the north-pole, they are cloathed in wooll and the skins of bears,
and






and other wild animals. Thus we see, one fort of people seeks warmth, the
other, coolness. Here; the sun shines hot; the snow abounds. The hot Indian
appears almost naked; and the Laplander and. Russian hug in party-coloured furs.
But as these effects are owing to the sun only, whose insluence on these countries
is in proportion to his nearness to or distance from them ; so we know, that the
heat or coldness of each climate is thereby caused, and the sun feels hotter in
one place than another.
Since we are treating of the sun, we shall also shew how the poetic expreffions,
describing him, are to be understood.
Poësy and painting, being sisters, agree intirely; and though fables and fiacti-
ons be not thought necessary for a painter, yet they are delighting and useful,
and we cannot be good painters without some aid from poëty. We may make
use of poetic thoughts, as far as the history, whether sacred or profane,, will ad-
mit, and as the nature of a thing can be thereby expressed. How can the morn-
ing, noon, evening and night be more elegantly represented, than Homer does it in
some passages of his works ; among others, at the end of his Odyssee, where he
says, 
All objects appear in the moring, at the dawn of Aurora, dark; and
afterwards the imperceptible growing light distinguisnes and gives their natural
—
colours
Thus he, as to the beginning of day; and elsewhere of the morning
and evening he has it, — As when Phabus fatigued; hides in Thetis’s lap, &c.
He says further,— Aurora, the day-dreak, and fore-runner of Phabus, rose in.
the east in her turn, sitting in a purple chariot, and gilded the tops of the moun-
tains, &c. And Virgil in one passage says - Aurora, risen out of Tithon’s saf-
fron-bed, &c. And in another,The sea was now got rosy with morning-
ray : the orange day-break appeared, in the high heaven, upon the rose-colour
chariot, &c. Again, as soon as the day-break, riding up heaven, to be rosy, &c.
All which expressions give us to understand, that Aurora’s light begins with red-
ness, and grows gradually yellow aud stronger as she gives way to Phaebes.
We need not say more of the names which the poets assign this great heavenly
luminary ; nature has the same daily in almost all those qualities; and he who does
not consider nature will reap little advantage from my observations.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Nature of the Sun, with. respect to different
Countries.
ORMERLY at leisure hours, I diverted myself with-reading the descrip-
tions of several Eastern and Northern countries, written by Linschot, Olaus
Magnus, Archbishop of Upsal, and others; and on one side, l saw the Cape of Good
Hope, where the sun’s great heat is tempered by the sea-breezes, asit is through
all India, Java, China and other regions. Of Cina, writers say that it enjoys the
sweetest air, and the inhabitants arive at great ages, and no contagious distemper
is heard of amongst them. I read also of many costly and strange rarities, and of
the






the coca-tree yielding a refresning hiquor; and what elfe was worth obferving. On
the other fide of the world l viewed Greenland, which I found to be exceffive cold,
and full of high mountains covered with eternal snow; the feas abounding with
whales, and the air piercing and rigorous on the comfortable sun’s departure ; amd
like the country, the people rough and savage, as we see in the Goths, Fin. and
Laplanders, and other bordering nations, where cold air and nature have great in-
sluence on the people.
Digesting these things, I had a fancy to make two sketches of them : in one I
represented, according to the writers, palm and cocoa-trees, little water but many
hills ; and for the embellishment, some naked blacks; the light, a sun-shine: in
the other, I could exhibit little else than fir-trees, wooden huts and drifts of ice;
the people I had cloathed with beasts fkins, and some hunting wild bears, others
busy in dragging a whale on the ice, which they had killed with harping-irons ;
in fine, a circumstance of their manner of living
These scratches were lying on my table, for further improvements as they oc-
curred in my thoughts ; when a gentleman, on making me a visit, cast his eyes on
them, and, though but slightly scratched, bought them of me; and, at the
same time bespoke another piece, the subject whereof I should have from his son,
then newly arrived from India.
Accordingly the son described to me, a certain place in India (where he had
lived) generally inhabited by Blacks, except the governor himself, and some others :
He instructed me in several particulars, as well manners as dress and other things,
proper to the country; all which, I set down, and then made a rough sketch of it
with a pen, in his presence; in which, he faid, I had rightly taken his meaning
This being done, I feh to colouring it, in hopes thereby to get his future favour;
which I did. The young gentleman’s affairs in the mean time, calling him out
of town for three weeks, his father, on his return, had a meeting of some friends
and, on that occasion sent for the picture (which was finished) and at the same
time, desired my company. The piece was instantly hung up; and, after the
gentleman had a little viewed it, he took me by the hand, and whispered these
words,
.It is very well done ; but lforgot to tell you one thing of great moment;
yet you can alter in half an hour’s time. To be fhort ; l had taken the sun too low, and al-
so made him fall into the piece sidezbays ; which occafioned long groundesnades; where-
as, I should have made him vertical (or over head) as he most times appears in
that country. 1 was confounded, and owned my fault ; for his criticism was juft,
since the great heat must be exprest by the sun’s vertical position. Here 1 saw, that after
all my pains, I had failed in the main point, for the reason aforefaid. The gentle-
man’s judgment was as right in one point, as wrong in the other; for he must
needs be acquainted with the nature of the climate; but his saying, how eafily the
fault might be rectified, reminded me of the case of Apelles, and I thought,-
Ne sutor ultra crepidas ; because he thereby discovered his ignorance ; for rubbing
out the ground-shades would not in the least have bettered it ; and to enlighten the
figures from on high, would be more work than to begin a new picture. Never-
theless, he taught me to make my advantage of it in Time to come.




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































CHAP. XV. Of the Sun’s Light upon Objects at Rifing and Setting.
Tis unaccountable in many artifts, who handle an art, whofe theory is built on
mathematics ; its practice, on experience, and the execution on Nature ;
that-they take so little notice of the three points wherein lies their honour ; es-
pecially in the lighting of objects in a fun-set ;. for the sun how low soever, cannot
shine on any object under the parallels ; namely, not in the least from under-
neath, were the object, if I may say so, as high as the clouds ; and yet we see
mariy paintings, wherein-the objects are, by a fun-set, more lighted from under-
neath than above : which is contrary to nature; as we may daily experience, in
walking against the sun, how troublesome it is to shade the eyes. We turn our
heads sideways, or hold an handkerchief before our eyes ; even the hat is no de-
fence ; and yet the sun never takes it underneath.
This may be plainly evidenced by perspective ; to wit, that as the horizon
limits our sight, and the sun cannot, with respect to the eye, descend lower ;
therefore he cannot send his rays upwards, but along the ground, or parellel.
must needs shine into them. I even dare to say, that, werethe brim of your hat
ten acres broad, and parallel with the horizon, it would not cast a shade of a pin’s
breadth over your eyes, nor the sun so much as take the under parts of the brim,
though we were standing on an eminence.
But, to he the better understood, let us consider plate XLII. where, on the
fore-ground, Tplace a figure with a board on its head (like the  Americans) level
with the eye-brows. Naxt, we see an high building, with a. projecting cornice
running towards ghe point of sight; and, on the other side, an high column with
a figure onit, having sucha board on its head as the other. Now: vou may per-
ceive, that thie sun does not strike underneath against it, but sends his rays paral-
Eel, Imean when he is sehting. Draw then a ray from the sun parallel with. the
board of the fore-figure, and see how much shade its eyes will have. Fetch ano-
ther ray from the front or cornice to the sun’s center;, to find how much fhade the
projecture will throw on the frize ; dothe same by the figure on the column : then
you will perceive, that the joints of the stones in the building will be parallel
with the sun’s rays, and that the off-corner of it, though lower than the near one,
will yet be alike with the near one, and the frize parellel with the ground.
If it be objected, that when we lie out at a window, the sun is lower than the
window-board we lean on, and does not fhine onit : I answer, that we only ima-
gine so ; for if we rightly observe, we shall perceive a fmall ground-shade of the
crofs-piece of the window, though ever so faint; wherefore we are enabled to
conclude, that as long as the sun fhines, nay, if-but a finger’s breadth above the
horizon, the, ground must receive some light ;. and, of consequence, as -long as
the ground is somewhat lighted, it is impoffible for the sun to shine on any thing
from underneath. Suppose, for instance, a column six feet high, lighted by a
sun-






sun-set ; if this column through anv visible shade on the ground, the ground must
have some light; and if so, how is it possible that the sun should shine from above
and from underneath at the same time; And’ if it be granted, that the sun does
not light the column on top, its ground-shade must needs be infinite; in which
case, the capital ought just to be lighted from underneath, and the ground, of
necessity, to be without light. This is ah undeniable truth, though thepoint be
alittle handled by writers; even seldom heeded by masters : it is also no wonder
to see some fail in it ; the most probable reason for which (as l think) is their ig-
norance in perspective.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Application of Sun-sbine and other Lights.
Tis an old and rooted evil, and thereby become a law, rather to gratify our
fancies and paffions, than consult reason : most painters verify this in their
cnoices and uses. To represent sun-shine, say they, is pleasant, and delights the
eye ; therefore we must always introduce it. But this cannot be ; since the va-
rieties of the seasons, and a change in all things visible demonstrate the contrary.
This light is indeed very agreeable in a landscape, but very disserviceable within
doors ; for, how ridiculous, in a great entertainment, would sun-shine appear on
the table ; And how could the guests see one-another ; Or, how could the
glitter of the plate be expressed, without obscuring every thing else ,
What a fine piece would that be, where the white table-cloth must be mixed
with black ; And how agreeable would it look to see the ground-shades of the
window-frames and squares expressed on the table and floor. Sun-shine is not
always proper; and yet some will not give themselves time to think whether the
subject require it or not ; as in Christ’s crucifixion it is improper, because the
scriptures mention the sun to be hidden.
The better to explain my meaning, I shall exhibit three different lights in as
many ordonnances relating to the person of our Saviour.
Of CHRIST’S Crucifixion.
Here, on Mount Golgotha, is the place of suffering. The sun, though at noon,
is obscured by a dark cloud. Behold how the place is lighted, from the right
side, where are the cross and people, receiving a strong and a broad light from
the clouds ; all this appears on the second ground. The figures on the fore-
ground, shadowed by a cloud, are not so broadly lighted, but unite gradually in
force with the others, until they come to be alike broad-lighted. About the
third ground the sky is darker, and full of heavy clouds, which, as they rise,
seem to draw a little crofs towards the sun, which is on the right side.







Now, we must follow truth-as much as possible; and nof our fancies or choices.
Here, every thing ought to be still and inactive ; Christ is dead : Does not this
furnish sufficient reason for mourning ,
Wherefore l chose the aforesaid light, as
best expressing forrow. And yet it is-not proper on all occasions, as may appear
in the two following ordonnances; one of which is strong and broadly lighted, and
the other with sun-shine, sharp and long-shaded.
Truly, a piece with these considerations, and exhibiting the nature of things
and times, must needs please the curious : even the very hearing such reasons and
observations can make a lover knowing ; especially, if he be instructed by a good
master in right principles, and is somewhat conversant in drawing. Such a one
may even convince painters, if he have a particular genius, quick apprehension
and a good memory ; improve his time, read good books, and shun such company
as prattle much and do little.
To converse with the fkilful and judicious is very commendable, but the con-
trary, injurious. Reason should always take place, and a discerning judgnient
not to be rejected. Rather do something less, and weigh it throughly. Au-
gustusts’s saying is, on this occasion, not amiss, Festina lente ; Haste zeith ease.
Good things will endure, but those which are so seemingly, must decay. But
my zeal has carried me too far, and therefore Ishall return to my purpose in the
ordonnance.
Of CHRITT’S Burial.
The rock on the left side of the piece, which opens a little forward, and has a
dark and deep entrance, is the place of Christ’s burial. The funeral rites are perr
formed within, and one or two lamps are seen somewhat to light the hollow. The,
body is carried in by three or four men. The time is about the evening, and the-
sun does not shine. Behold the people against the rock, almost without ground-,
shades, as being lighted from on high, and a little forward ; because of another
piece of a rock rising up there by the side, alike with the former. Observe the
three figures on the ground, standing between the two rocks ; those, wanting the-
fore-light, must needs receive it from behind. Somewhat further, on the third.
ground (which is the common road) some people are coming close by the trees..
standing on the right side of the piece, who, on the other side beyond the large
rock receive their light from the left side; a plain proof, that, were they more ,
distant in the field, they would be lighted from all sides.
My principal remark on the piece is this. This burying place belongs to
Joseph of Arimathea, and lies near the city of Jerusalem, as the text shews. He is
there with his people. who carry in the corps. Now, my intention is, to light
this foremost group as strongly as possible, and yet without sun-shine: the light
comes almost fronting, by reason of-the side rocks, which obstruct a side light ;
so that they can scarce have any shade other than from behind through the rock or
burying place, a little from some cypresses standing on one side of it. Between
the two rocks, I shew, that the people coming forward, must needs be lighted
from behind, since they are still half in the open air; and that those somewhat
further off in the road, against the side trees, ought to be lighted forwards, back-
wards,







wards, and from the left’ side, where the rook is wvery slow; consequently have But
little shade on the right side of the treës; againsti which; theiri groud-shades:
fall.
The other group and the stone-heaps in the field, on a lower ground; I’shiew to.
be lighted from all sides, and to have no other shade than from below, and-the
deepest hollows ; because the sky is settled; and without clouds. Now, it is cer--
tain, that few will relisni so nice an observation; since they follow their own fancies
without further inquiry : yet if any of the circumstances were omitted, the matter
would also be less apparent.
The chief regards. had here are to the light; the time or hour; the situation of
the burying place ; and the quality of the man who performed’the funeral rites,
not only as to his person and authority, but also with: respect to his dress; to-
gether with the manner of the solemnity, according to scripture : all which ap-:
pear-plainly. As for the stone-heaps in the off-scape, they are burying places
Jerusalem (of which the aforesaid is one) we see them:
raised up and down about
small and mean, large and stately, according to the conditions of those who:
caused them to bemade ; as the scripture testifies.
Liet us now observe the third ordonnance.
Of CHRIST’S Resurrection.
Ftagain reprefent here a rock ; before the entrance whereof is sitting the young.
man orangel, on the stone of the’ sepulchre, in shining rayment; speaking to the
chree women, and’ pointing upwards. Christ arising, is surrounded with rays-like
thgfe of the sun ; whereby; two of the women (one beholding him with her hand-
over herseyes) are so strongly and sharply lighted, that their shades, by reason of
the nearness of the dazzle, fall very distinct on the ground forwards, and on tevery
thing-else thereabouts. One of these women, as nearest the young man, thereby
réceives strong reflexions ; when the third (who is stepping towards the-sepulchre).
is without the reach of either-light; aud though receiving, in a manner, some
light from the air; yet melts in the broad- shades. Somewhat further, on the- se-
cond ground; the trees also; along the way, give broad shades. In the off-scape
is-séen Jerusalem in a rising mist ; because it is day-break ; the Heavens abounding
with thin. clouds mostly in the sun’s quarter, which on the right-side of the piece
appears’a little on the horrizon, somewhat yellowisni and purple:
Now, if a lover or master will, with due reflexion, join his thoughts with.
mine, and not fear any trouble in the performance, I’question not but he will, by
such a representation, satisfy. co-artists, and merit the name of a great master.







CHAP. XVII. Of the Propertios of the Sun and other Lights in
tkeir essential Representations; and’of- the chief Times of the Day.
We need not say further, that lights differ in their kinds, as having in the

preceeding chapters, :suffiiciently shewed their natures, effects, and
qualities; yet, to finisn this head, we shall here subjoin some particulars which
could not before have place.
As for the sun, my opinion is, that he cannot be represented in any picture. ;
first, because the eye is too weak to behold him; and therefore his force cannot be
expressed otherwise than by his making all objects dark and black. Secondly,
because when he shines directly in our faces, we cannot perceive the right shape
or colour of things, unless we shade the eyes, as nature teaches.
For the same reason, I think, we may not represent a burning candle, torch,
or other matter giving a great light, unless we also exhibit the objects as this
light makes them appear to us, and not as by their colour, stir and union, they
 really are ; for the further from the candle the more faint they become. It is
therefore folly to maintain, that the natural force of candle-light, efpecially if the
flame be seen, can be imitated, sinceit is past our fkill to give the other work its
appearance ; for when the light of the candle shines in our faces, the most deep
and dark colours, even black itself, appear neither darker or blacker than thoy
would in a dark day. But we shall afterwards treat more largely of these lighta;
and therefore now proceed to say,
That, those who love to paint sun-shine may observe, that it. is proper for
sacrifices, combats, bacchanals, dancings, sports of herdsmen, and sundry other
jovial occurrences and histories, which require great bustle; but very improper
and obstructing in councils, pleadings, entertainments, academies, wedding-
ceremonies, and other such circumstances. But cloud-light gives an uncommon
decorum and naturalness in solemn affairs ; fuch as, aslemblies of magistrates,
pleadings, and other business of authority and consequence.
The third of the lights, of which we have spoken (the torch or candle) is pro-
per for mournful occafions, for dying persons, burials and such fike ; efpeciaky
in the open air.
The sun appears agreeable and delightful in the open field, when, through
thick bushes and trees, his rays here and there light the grounds, and the people
are seen reposing or diverting in the shade; but he acts against nature, who
exhibits tender and beautiful virgins bafking in a sun-shiny field, staring at the
sun, and talking and beholding each other with as little concern as if it were but
a candie or star-light; since he himself would leave their company, and retire to
shade,
To prevent any mistakes of which kind, let us describe the chief times of the
day.








Doy-break.
This first-born time of the day favours the enterprizes of great generals in be-
sieging or storming a town; no time more proper for it, by the example of. Joshiua
in taking Jericho. This rule, though not without exception, has been observed
by all nations; of which l could give many instances. The battle of Pompey
against Casar began at that time. It is also the proper time for hunting; as in
the representation of a Diana, Cephalus, Adonis, or any such subject. Judicious
masters always chuse the hour of the day which best agrees with their story.
This time is of singular advantage for the half tints it gives ; exhibiting all things
in their natural colours ; whence arise an uncommon agreeableness and decorum.
The Morning.
This time principally rejoices nature; even inanimate things are sensible of it:
the glittering light takes the tops of high mountains, and causes, both in build-
ings and landscape, great shades, appearing very delightful.
This light, at
breaking out, gives uncommon sweetnefs when the objects shine in the water; as
also a certain freshness mixed with vapours, which bind the parts of things so well
together, as entirely to please the eye of the knowing.
At this time the Heathens offered their sacrifices; and we read in the books of
Moses, that the Children of lfrael had not only their morning oblations, but also wor-
shipped the golden calf at that time. The Jezs retain those customs to this day;
as also did the ancient Christians, who often baptized in the morning; as was
likewise Christ in Jordan. The Persians moreover honoured the morning by their
offerings. Wherefore we ought to have due regard to the time of the day on all
such occasions; and take especial care that the light on the principal object and
place, according to Poussin’s conduct in a picture of Christ restoring the blind to
fight; wherein the greatest and strongest light is entirely spread over our Saviour.
The Light between Morning and Noon.
This light is not very fit for objects, if it be not broken by some accident of
rain, storm or tempest. Such a time may be proper for mournful occafions; such
as the last judgment and our Saviour’s suffering, when (as said in the last chapter)
the sun was darkened;, which looks frightful, and causes an expressible amaze-
ment : wherefore fine and pleasant weather would, on such occafions, look ridi-
culous.
Noon.
At this time the sun, darting his glittering rays, shines in full splendor; where-
fore l desire those, who use this season, to think that nature effects, by the force
of this light, what cannot be represented; since we often fail in our utmost attempts
for that purpose : whereby it happens, that in endeavouring to make things come
forward,






forward, we often use such a force of light, on the fore-ground, as far exceeds that
of the sun; as in the case of draperies of a fiery colour, or the like. Certainly an
unaccountable way of proceeding.
Nevertheless the sun’s light may be hidden behind mountains, buildings, &c.
This hour gives rest to human labour. The Scriptures tell us that Christ, tired
with his journey, sat to rest on the well; which gave the Woman of Samaria occa-
fion to hear his wonderful prediction;. his Disciples, also wearied, sat down near
him. He who endeavours truly to represent the natures of things, must especially
observe the times and hours proper to them.
The Afternoon.
As'this season is most liable to diversity of weather, by means of driving clouds,
which occafion many overcasts, it is very proper in the representation of bacchanals
and licentious actions. But these are not always fixed to that time.
The Evening.
Labour ceasing at this time, it gives liberty for all sorts of pastime; as dancing,
walking, &c. If you would represent the marching home of an army, or herds-
men driving their cattle out of the field, this time is the most proper for them.
This light frequently changes its colours by the interposition of rising vapours,
which it draws ; but does, notwithstanding, most times enlarge the superficies of
objects. When the shade do not receive the reflexion of other objects, they ought
to partake of the light. This season is quite different from the morning; yet no
less agreeable, by its small glittering lights, if we keep the general light somewhat
dusky, which creates great masses or parts ; especially when the colours are some-
what dispersed by a judicious master.
At noon the sun’s light must proceed from on high, giving short ground-shades;
But in an evening his light must be low, and causing long ground-shades.
This morning is like the evening;, and with the moon-light agrees.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Moon and her Representation.
QUESTION not but many of my positions and observations in this point
. will be censured as heterodox, for being contrary to both ancient and modern
practice : nevertheless, I shall not fear to enforce them, that discreet artists may
enquire whether they are founded on reasons, or not ; especially seeing they are not
new inventions, but corrections of old mistakes; as l think I shall prove.
I suppose then, that it is a grofs error to represent the moon lessthan the life;
because, how distant soever she be, we nevertheless see her like the sun always retain
her natural bigness: and if this be granted, the contrary must be unnatural, and
therefore forbidden toa painter, who is the imitator of true nature..







Had I a mind to paint moon-shine, I would, wlthout injury to nature, Imanage
at, as I have before. said, l would represent the sun; that is to exhibit her fhine,
but not her body (for the light is of greater moment in a picture than’the- bodios
of either the sun, moon or a candle) lighting my objects thereby either from behind,
sideways or forwards (and as well in figures as landscape) somewhat darker than
the day-light, that it may appear a true moon-light, and not a sun-shine i(which
it very much affects by its sudden lights and sharp ground-shades) making the blue
sky here and there, with some glittering stars. And to maké it still look more
natural, we may, if the subject permit, introduce up and doun torches or other
lights, burning piles of wood, offerings or other fires, as occasion requires, and
tbereby make the lights stronger, and the colouring russet and more yellow; yet
the shades not to be so sharp as those of the moon. This would, in my opinion,
have a fine effect, especially if the said accidental lights were mostly ordered in
dark places. But we ought principally to observe, that in the whole there must
be seen more darknefs than light, and that no colours appear so beautiful as those
of the sky, in reference to the moon, unlefs they be red, yellow, and such others
as are peculiar to burning lights ( as we have shewed in the first chapter of the
fourth Book ) for light red and yellow become dark : the moon’s brightness, con-
trarily, makes dark blue and sea-green appear lighter; but black keeps its post;
wherefore little light red, and as little dark blue ought to be seen in the picture.
By such a disposition, we gain two advantages ; 1. A natural light. 2. An un-
tcommon variety in the colours.
If any one find any difficulty herein, he may please to know, that he is no more
obliged to exhibit the moon than the sun in his piece; because the former takes
its course round the heavens as well as the latter, and may therefore be placed
as the elegance of the figures and by-works require, since both illuminate the
earth and its objects forwards, backwards, and fideways.
As to quality, in three particulars the moon is so like the sun, that there is no
difference between them : as, 1. She always throws her rays parallel as well as
he. 2. All that is lighted by her is broad and sharp. 3. The shades on the
ground are plain, and conform with the objects: but the reflexions are not so
strong as in sun-shine; because the moon-light is weaker than the sun’s, by reason
of the oppofite natures of those two luminaries, the one being warm, and the
other cold; and as the moon receives her light from the sun, she can therefore
not have so much power to impart it to the earth; nor the objects, lighted by her,
appear so distinct to the eye. Again, as the sun often alters his colour by means
of the vapours which he exhales, so we find the same in the moon, who, by the
same means becomes also more pale or yellow in proportion to the vapours
about her, or the air’s rarity or density.
Can it be doubted, whether such a piece of moon-light, without the appearance
of her body, be such, when the darkness, broadness, and sharpness of the ground-
shades, and the palenefs of the colour are well observed, all which conjunctively
express evening or night. If it be a question, Whether this were the former
practice.; 1 say, I have no business to enquire into that, since we ought not to
accommodate the art to fancy, but our senses to the art. It is to as little purpose
















































































































































































































































purpose to consider, what- is done; but rather, what may or ought to be done,
according to the dictates of right reason. In short, it is impossible, when the
three afbresaid qualities are well observed in a piece, it should fail of representing
a very natural moon-light.
As my position runs counter to old custom, and therefore not so easy to appre-
hension, I have endeavoured to explain myself by the three examples in plate
XLIII.
In the first, I stiew the moon in her natural bigness, yet without the piece; be-
cause she would atherwise come too, near the horizon, and cause too long, and
disagreeable ground-shades.
In the second, sne is exhibited-after the old way. And;
In the third, I shew only a starry sky, with the strong lights of a moon, who,
as in the first example, is without the picture.
If. any one think, that the moon’s body gives a strong glitter, elegance and
life to a piece ; l say, the sparkling light of the stars does the same ; especially if we
make them, as large as they appear to us ; but not in a perspective-way, as be-
ing between heaven and earth, like the. moon. However, we need not represent
them all, but the chief only; such as, the chariot, the triangle, the serpent, the
north and evening star, and such as make a known figure; all which, as having
nofigural being, but only the shine of very small light, may be eafily expressed,
by small points.
We may also make the moon, though without the piece, appear in the water,.
and cause an agreeable reflexion in the waving. furges; and, by chusing such a
side-light, we have the advantage of reprefenting all things mast beaatifal, neither-
more nor-less- than in. sun-shine or common light.
Ii must:subjoin-another. important consideration; which is, that as the moon’s
light is sometimes obstructed by high, objects, such as. rocks, palaces, trees, hills,
&c. so fome parts mustineeds be dark; in which, the reflexionst of so weak a light
have no power to enlighten or fetch out the objects or bodies- in them, though.
ever so-near. For-tIist reafon, a painter ought- to-avoid such accidents, and not to
iatroducs. thenp unlefs; through necessity, to create an- harmony or force ; and to
place. tham mostlyt forward, or in. the off-scape, against the sky for setting them
between both. cannot but make a disageeable spot unlefs;it be broke by
somer wacer wherein reffexion of same, stars or other lights of the air appear;
and, into such. a choice of- landscapes- or visto, you may introduce, white-
marble-images, huildings, light by-works, and light-coloured stuffs, which all
together look agreeable : and as- the night-vapours are more dense then those of
the day, so. the distans objects become more suddenly dark and undistinguishable.
Forget nat, that:in windy weather, themoon as well as. the north- star, is encom-
passed with a yellow. ring.
If any person be not yet fully satisfied, let him please to weigh the following
paspable reasons : the sun, moon and stars cannot diminish; because we can ner-
ther approach nearer nor goi further from them-; but all sublunary. objects. can,
by our recess or appraach. lessen. or magnisy : and; to prove this, take a glafs of
the- size vou intend your picture ; place it before a window, and draw on it the
prospect, with the moon, as it then appears to. the eye ; which done, you will:
see-









see how large she ought to be painted. Now, if- you approach with this glass some
thousand steps nigher towards the sun or moon, they will not appear bigger on or
through the glass, but have the same magnitude ; whence arises the falsity of those
representations, which diminish the sun, moon or other meteors as well as. the
figures.
I conclude then, that the pictures, exhibiting Nature contrary to what she
ought to be, are liable to censure, and that we ought to seek truth by ratiocina-
tion, and then, waving old customs and prejudice, to believe our own eyes.
I shall further illustrate this matter in the chapters, shewing, what is meant by
a table; and of the uses of magnifying and diminishing glasses, and of the difference
between large and small, warm and weak painting ; to which we refer the curious
artist.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Effects of Artificial Lights, as of a Torch,
Lamp, Candle, or Fire.
AVING, in the most plain and concise manner, treated of the effects of
the sun, moon, and star-lights, we shall, on the same footing, speak also
of the auxillary lights, which necessity, for the ease of mankind, has contrived, and
art brought to perfection.
Ithink it not amiss to shew here, in the first place, the force and property of
these particular lights in such a manner as l conceive them.
That of a flambeaux or torch, is at night the most powerful and beautiful ;
having two qualities, to wit, of affrighting and rejoicing. Its light is very proper
for bacchanals, entertainments, plays, and other jovful meetings; and on the
contrary, frightful in sorceries, apparitions of ghosts, and such-like nocturnal
and unexpected accidents.
The lamp is melancholy, faint and gloomy, and therefore proper for burials,
prisons, near fick and dying persons, and on other mournful occafions. This
light is most agreeable within-doors, and in caves, grottos, or frightful and un-
frequented places of small extent.
The nature of this light, and its effect on colours, are the same as those of the
sun, with respect to its falsifying the colours ; but the light and reflexion are not
so strong; for which reason, the artist is often at a stand in the uses of them, arising
mostly from his slighting this light as a matter not worth his observation.
In reference to shades, they are not much unlike those of the sun, as well in
broadnefs as sharpnefs; yet with this difference, that the sun-light falls more uni-
form on objects, as he is more distant from them; and because in the evening,
but especially at night, the vapours are darker and more dense than those of the
day : whence it follows, that all objects, deprived of the lamp-light, disappear;
and by reason of its nearness, can be lighted but in part.
To confirm this, we shall exhibit a mathematical instance in plate XLIV.




















































































































































































































































































































































































1



Fix a point A forthe centre of the light, from which all the rays flow. Draw
under it a candlestick of a certain height, as four feet above the grouud. Then
sketch three or four columns going off further and further from the said point of
light: iet thesebe eight feet high. Next, set one foot of the compasses on the
said point, and extending the other, so as to touch the extremity of the first pillar,
sweep a segment of a circle on the shaft; do the same with the other pillars. Now,
you will perceive that the first pillar is least touched, but receives the strongest
light, and that above and beneath the touch, the light falls weaker and weaker:
moreover, that the furthest column is most touched, by means of the greater
sweep of the compasses, and therefore it will be lighted allmost all over, but
also most weak. Whence it is plain, that objects lighted by such lights, are ne-
ver lighted intirely and uniform. And were they touched and lighted alike, it
would be faint and dark, that we should perceive nothing distinctly, either in co-
lour or ont-line, more than in a weak moon-shine.
If any want further information how lapply this to practice, I shall now freely,
impart it.
First, I sketch my ordonnance on blue or dark drawing paper; then Imake my
plan, to shew the places of the figures and other objects, which Islightly scratch;
next, l assign a point for my light, either high or low as occasion requires ; on
this point l set one foot of the compasses, and with the other, touch circle-wise
(with an extent equal to each object’s distance from the said point) all the objects
wherever it happens : by this means lfind the parts, which, as nearest the light,
ought to have the strongest light; and consequently the diminution of the light
and colour shews itself in proportion as it goes off from the drawn circles.
As for the reflexions, they are in the same case with all lights; the brightest,
largest, and strongest give the strongest; and the purer the light, the more yellow
appear the colours both in the lights and reflexions : contrarily, the fouler and
more vaporous the light, the more russet seem the colours.
A candle is yellowish.
The light of X
A lamp is russet.
A flambeaux, or torch, is more red.
Artists, who delight in representing such lights, ought to regard the three sol-
lowing useful precepts.
I. To keep most light together.
2. To take special care in the melting and lighting of their out-lines.
3. To observe the naturalnefs of the several lights, whether candle, lamp or
torch.
It must also be noted, that the space between the eye and the light, as likewise
the first object or sigure (if it come before the light) ought to be tne darkest ; but
if it be behind the light, it becomes weaker both in light and shade, occasioned,
by the vapours, which, as before has been said, appearing more dense in the
evening, the night-light more affects them and enlightens them.
Add to this, that the main-light being tempered with light yellow, russet or
red, the diminution and breaking of those colours ought to be found by black ; I
mean, by black and the proper colours wherewith the objects are shaded, and








more or less weak in proportion to their distance ; for the farémoft darkness, and
nearest to the light is more warm than the hinder and furthermost, which, in pro¬
portion to its distance, becomes more blue ; yet, much more in the open air than
within doors ; because the vapours of the air are more subtile than- those of con-
fined lights, which being made with lamp-oil, rosin, or the like, emit a foul:
smoak.
Bnt as to the foremost objects must, by means of a confined light within-doors,
needs be subject to much shade, whereby they often maintain but :a. smalllight on
their extremeties, it will be found, that such outward lights appear more or less.
strong. that the objects lighted straight forwards, according as the stuff whereon it
falls is either rough or smooth. As for the reflexion, with the light shining
through thin folds, l observe the same management as I prescribe for sun-shine,
touching those parts: but, in breaking the colours, let me subjoin, that the fore-
most darkness must be the greatest, and therefore less falsified by. the light than,
those whdch are more distant ;:- the-colours. therefore keen cleaner, and are. less
fouled ; and still less in the open air, than within doors.
I am even not afraid to add an easy method for finding the diminution of. the
tints on objects, according to their distances, not from the point of sight, but:
from the candle, torch, or lamp. Cut a strip of paper or vellum, as long as from
the center of the light to the furthest corner of the piece. Let it be a finger and:
half broad at bottom, and cut away to a point at top. Than paint the point with
such colour as you give your light, yellowish or russet, diminishing it gradually in
proportion to its going off from the light. Next; with a pin, fix the said point in
the center of the light, so as to move it about at pleasure, to all the objects near to
or distant from the light. Then divide this strip into degrading feet, small at the
pointed light end, and from thence gradually larger; by which means the strip
will shew, without trouble, the right tint to temper.
For the objects going into the picture towards the point of sight, you may make.
another strip, the reverse of the former, to wit, light at the bottom, and diminisn-
ing towards the top or point, to be fixed on the point of sight.
If you would use any more helps for the diminution of the colours, and less
troublesome, try the following method.
Having, in my ordonnance, exactly designed the figures after the life, I paint
it like a common light-piece, without breaking the colours more than perspective
requires. The light I take as from a candle or other matter, proceeding from a
point within the piece, whether within doors or in the open air. After which,

take a thin glazing vellow of the same tint I give to my light, and scumble it
neatly and thin over both lights and snades. This yellow must not be too dark,
because my main heightening is taken only from a common light ; wherefore
asphaltum, yellow lake, and dragon’s blood would be so warm and sensible, as to
take away the mistness inseperable from night-pieces, unlefs it were before painted
accordingly, to the-no small trouble of the artist. Now as glazed things common-
ly abate of their neatness, you may, if it be necessary, re-touch, the main. lights,
as well in the faces as other parts, and thereby fetch out their force again.








The-advantage arising from this method’is, that there is no kind of night-light,
whether of lamp or other oil, pitch, brimstone, eandle or torch, but it may be
represented with the same trouble ; because it depends only on the tempering the
lglazing eoleur; the best iof which, in my opinion, is gum-booge, light pink or
yellow lake mixed with a little vermillion.
I think these very good methods ; because sometimes in night-pieces, especially
in great bustles, we use twe, three, and more particular burning matters for
lights; and by this means we obtain a sure method for fetching out those light and
fires, not only-at night, but also in the day time, in the evening, nay, in sun--
shine, where we, often meet with flambeauxs, torches, burning altars, or piles of
ewood.
But ilet me not proposelthefe precepts as laws, but examples to exercise the
artist’s curiosity, and for his :proficiency; wherein T wiffi my labours may be of
service.
CHAP. XX. Necessary Hints in the Use of Perspective.

Have been long considering a point, which, in ty opinion, is very remark-
able, and yet has never beeni settled; though I think it may be done :it re-
lates to the execution of historiés, either within or without doors, ’and landscape
embellished with figures.
My thoughts are, that as perspective afsigns a certain distance for viewing a
picture with respect to its magnitude or smallness; or a large pièce with large
figures, and other objects going off, to wit, on the second and ’third grounds,
those objects ought to be as neatly finished as those on the fore-ground, provided
they keep their faintness, caused by the interposing air. Thisposition, Tthink, is
founded on certain and natural principles.
But I must prevlously suppose, that when we say, a piece is well finished; it
must be understood that the whole is so, and not a part only. If we begin in-
quiries. we ought to push thém as’far as poffible, to enable us to say, such a pièce
is aftfully executed; nay, so perfect, that nothing is wanting : for that cannôt
be affirmed, when the fore ground’is finished and well painted, and the second
and’third grounds but slightly touched. T grant, that we sometimes see pieces
with small figures, though loosely handled, accounted finer and more artful than
large pictures laboured and highlyfinisnied; yet it must be allowed, that more
work is necessary in a large finished piece than a small one loofely handled : the
very words (finished and loosely) imply it. My opinion is, that if we be not
wanting in trouble and time, as artful’a piece may be produced, as what has been
hitherto done, yet only by those whounderstand art and its rules in theory and
practice. And though it seëm difficult to attempt a thing new, we must not there-
fore be discouraged’; for, What great. things have not been experimented and
performed ; What did not Aexandere Had he feared danger and trouble, he










would never have gone the lengths he did : he had a mind to do it ; this created a
resolution, and that finished his hopes.
But, to return to our subject, let us- suppose, that a picture ten feet high, with
figures as big as the life, ought to be viewed at ten feet distance; and that a
smaller one five feet high, with figures half as big as the life must have five feet
distance ; and thus the smaller tne nearer, according to perspective : now, the
question is, Which of those three pieces ought to be most finished ; Many will
cerrainly say,—The last, But my opinion is, that each of the three pieces
inust be painted equally neat, because, each has its determinate distance with
respect to its bigness.
Again, there is another such piece ten feet high, but divided into. three
grounds, whereon are placed the same figures as in the three former; to wit, those
as big as the life on the fore-ground, those half as big on the second, and the last
on the third ground : the question now is, Which of these three grounds ought so
be most finished ; Being all in one picture, the judges will, contrary to what
they before asserted, say, The first; and that the hindermost must not be so neat
and finished; since they can never relisn that the figures on the second and third
grounds ought to be painted as neat and elaborate as those on the fore-ground;
for say they,— Who would perceive it at ten feet distance; Nay, Who ever
saw such a painting; or did it,
But the case is not, whether there have been such pictures; but, Whether they
ought to be so3 We are not ignorant, that it is the custom to finish small pieces,
the smaller the neater; and large ones contrarily, bold or loose. Now l would
fain know the reason why there should be more work in a figure of three feet than
in one of sixp Can it be proved that the small one ought to have a fold, nay, an
hair more than in full proportion; But what other answer can be made, If the
custom were not good, it would not have prevailed, nor lasted so long.. Never-
theless, as long as we reason thus without foundation, and bigot ourselves to
common practice and old custom, we shall never advance. It is not the proper
way to go forward ; and therefore many keep their old station. But l want to be
informed of new things, without which, art cannot improve. Variety nourishes
the mind. Igrant, that men sometimes produce new things which meet not with
public approbation ; but, Whence come they ; Either from false grounds and
inconsideration, or else an immethodical way of explanation.
To express my thoughts perspicuoussy, I have exhibited
them as plain as I
could in plate XLV. and question not but you will apprehend my meaning.
Numb. 1. Has three pieces fronting, with their distances of ten, five, and three
feet and an half.
Num. 2. Is the same in profile, with the measure or visual rays which limit the-
distances, whether great or small ; being the same position as
Num. 3. Where they are all three in one.
Now, my original question, with respect to Numb. I. is, Which of the three
pieces ought to be most finished, lf any one say,The small one, because it
must be viewed nearest. I afk again, Whether there must be more work in the
small than the large one; Now behold Numb. 3. where thay are all three in one,
according.



































 
































































































































































































































































according to perspective; and let the question be, Which ought to be most
finished, the foremost or the hindmost: You will certainly answer, That it shews
itself, that the figures on the fore-ground must be more finished than what is fur-
ther off, and that there must also be more work in the large, asbeing nearer.
But how agrees this with what was just now said, that the smallest of the three
pieces ought to be most finished; since now you say, the largest must be so ; for
example and objects are the same; and it is already granted, that the smaller it
is, the nearer is the distance asfigned ; and that in the smallest or furthermost,
when nearest, there ought to be as much work as in the foremost: and though
you will’say, that the last figure is fainter than the foremost, yet there is not a fold
less in it than if it were quite forward, and as big as the life.
Iurge further, when I highly finisn a figure in full proportion after the life, I
must sit at least as near as the model is high, to perceive even the most minute
parts of it. Now ifl would make another figure half as big, also after the life,
to place it on my second ground, How must I then set the model ; Ought l to
keep the same sitting, or must I remove further from it à This last is never done ;
for if we were, we should, instead of a painting-room, want Westminster-hall, in
order to model an off-scape figure after the life. But supposing it were so, Must
I then fit so far off that I may see it more naturally ? It is certain, that l should
not see the half of it. And though it may be said to this, that what cannot be seen
in the life, ought not (to make it look natural) to come into a picture ; yet, pray
observe, that supposing l make in the off-scape, a figure of a foot and half high,
and the subject require it to be holding a thread, to which hangs a medal of the
bigness of half a guinea, the question is, Whether l must exprefs the medal, but
not the thread ; Again, were I to express a window without the glazing or lead¬
work, or a door without hinges, or a key-hole, What would those things be
taken for, if these did not appear ; A medal dropping out of the hand, an
open window, and a sereen instead of a door.
From all which premises linfer, that if things be practicable, and have any
bigness, they ought to be expressed in the little, and, as I may say, even to a
thread. The distance makes them natural, and if well painted, and the diminu-
tion be exactly observed according to the remoteness of the objects.
Whether these observations will pass current lknow not ; yet every man has the
liberty to use or let them alone, as, he pleafes.
CH AP. XXI. Of the different Colouring in great and small Pieces.
ryHSS proposition is.a consequence of the preceeding; and’to be intelligible,
I shall shew my thoughts by the following example in plate XLVI.
There is a gallery twelve feet high and twenty-five feet long, divided into three
pannels, each sive feet wide and ten feet high. The two outward pannels are







cloathed from top to bottom, and the middle one but half way from the top down-
wards ; and under it is an handsome seat. The three cloths are tobe painted By
three several masters, I suppose with landscapes, all having a like horizon, but
different points of sight. One master embellisnes-his work with figures, either
fable or history : another introduces architecture and imagery, according to his
gusto: and ’the third adorns his with cattie, or what else he thinksfit.
The question is now, in order to produce a general decorum ggreeing with na¬
ture, Whether these masters otght not to be concurring in-their work, with- re-
spect to perspective, force and deminution : Certainly they ought ; for the light
must in all the three pictures fall alike, either from the left, right, before or be-
hind ; the air must be the same, since theyall ought to appear as one landscape,
seen through three openings, as two doors and a window.
But now, another question arises ; Whether the figures in all three, ought to
be as big as the life à This will be agreed to, with respect to those on-the fore-
ground. But how then will it be, in the middle picture, which is but half the
size osthe two others 2 How shall figures be introduced there, in full proportion ,
For half a foot of ground, or five feet, is too much difference.
Now, if the master, who is to make the middle as the smallest piece, paint it
as strong and warmas he is able, nay, as a face in full proportion of Rémbrant, iit
would be intirely against nature, and the rules of art. But, to return to our
example.
I suppose the off-scape, either in a small or large piece, tobe one and the same;
even were the one as small as the
palm of the hand, and the other ten yards high:-
the reason and exampleswhereof, I have sufficiently shewed in the last chapter, and
shall further enforce, in its place, in tiat treating of what is to be understood byfa
painted table, whether landscape, historv, portraiture, &c.
We know
But, before I leave this subject, I must still’ start another difficulty.
u
that a large painting is often copied in little ; and the contrary : now, if, for in-
stance, all that is large in the original be lessened in proportion in the copy, How
can they look alike ; as in the design with the two doors is exhibited; in bogh
which are large clouds, and in the other small ones; and all that is in the off-scape
scems more distant in the one than the other. If the off-scape in the small picture
be that of the great one, By what can you proveit; since the objects, which, in
the greatest distance in the small piece are hardly visible, appear in the great one,
so large and distinct. To which I answer, That, every thing appearing in the
one, is, and remains in the other always the same, but so much nearer: and this
is evident ; for, Is there any thing in the world, which how remote soevever, can-
not be still remoter 3 It has been formerly sad, That every thing on earth is
subject to the laws of perspective, except the fun, moonand’stars, and’ what else
is seen in the firmament, with respect to their forms; as for ’the clouds, they are
moveable bodies, and therefore must, be considered as earthly objects, lessening
and’enlarging according to their distance, height, and lowness; all these things
I say, can go off and approach, be distant and near. Besides, there is a’difference
betwen a copy and an original, as well in the form as use; l say (in, the formy
because










































































































































































because the- one ought tobe viewed afar off and the other near : moreover,
it ne-
ver happens, that the copy is hung by the original; but the fellow to it.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Difference of Force in large and small Painting:
and the Effects of magnifying and diminisbing Glasses.
EewO be better understood, we shall begin with the air, and take these two
points for granted; namely, that all dark objects, in proportion as they

go off, become on their light parts, lighter and lighter ; and the light ones con-
trarily, darker and darker, how clear soever the weather ; yet less in sun-shine, as
éxperience sufficiently shews.
Now, ifit be afked, Whether the colour of the objects do not thereby also loose
its nature and purity ; 1think it can loose but little ;f and only in shade, which
broke by the other side of the light, is gradually transformed into the blue of it,
in proportion as the objects go off; or to speak better, until uniting with the off-
scape, they at last disappear.
Consider also the difference between small paintings in the open air, and those
within doors, in reference to the going off; and the colours.
We say first; that the air without is the most clear and bright light, in the ab-
sence of sun-shine; and though an apartment must needs be lighted from without,
yet it will be less in force and brightnefs, and therefore the objects more darkish,
both in lights and shades.
Secondly, The objects cannot so visibly grow faint in their going off ; because,
by the smallnefs of the distance, few or no vapours are perceptible.
Thirdly, the shades are not subject to any alteration or mixture, but retain their
natuzal qualities, because there is no other light within doors, than what comes
through the windows, and this has not power enough to cause any reflexions,
save some little near the window, nor give any colour : so that by the darkishness
the objects, whether portraits, figures, flowers, &c. retain their natural colours
intirely, as well in shades as lights : wherefore, since the beauty and purity of the
colours appear best by the serenity and brightnefs ofthe air, they must contrarily
abate in their effects and force by means of the darkness.
Ishall here propose a small instance, for explanation.
Let a good master paint any thing, as a portrait, landscape, figures, or cattle in
oil, as small and neat as a miniature-painter, and let both these masters chuse
their subjects most beautiful and natural : now view the two paintings together,
and you will find, that the one differs as much from-the other, as within-door-
light does from the open air. It is therefore unnatural and against the rules, to
use that warmth and strength of colours, in order to force small and distant objects
out of their proper places, or to make the window sly towards us, instead of going
off from us. We ought, moreover, to know that things painted in little, can
never






never be taken for the truth, fince it is undeniable, that the life appears therein
no otherwise than at a distance, viz. through a door, window, or other opening,
whether within or without doors ; wherefore they ought to be painted in such a
manner, that when hung up, they may not appear like apainted board, cloth, or
flat, but a natural window or door through which the life is really seen : which
cannot be effected by the force of warm shades or hot colours, but by the retiring
and tender ones, broken by the interposing air, according as the weather is more or
less clear or misty : and this, without exception of any ordonnance, whether land-
scape, architecture, history, &c.
Experience will confirin the truth, if you view your picture through a piece of
sine gause, somewhat bluisn; for then you will find the lights of your objects gra-
dually grow weaker in proportion to their distance, without loosing the beauty of
their colours. It will even give a piece a certain softness and sweetness and great de-
corum. You may make the same experiment with another piece of gause of a grey
colour, in imitation of foggy weather ; and it will not only darken the light of the
objects, but also foul and muddle it, and make the painting look cold and
disagreeable.
Having shewn that the use of the greatest force of shades in small paintings, is
unnatural and against art, as well in within, as without-door representations ; we
shall now speak of the contrary, to wit, pieces with large objects, in order to shew
what therein, without prejudice, we think the most natural.
It is a constant maxim, that the life seen near, is in greatnefs, force, and colour,
superior to what is distant ; the one being nature itself, and the other seemingly so,
for figures in full proportion are like us who view them, in every particular of force,
aspect and colour, except motion : which being granted, it may be easily appre-
hended, if we will submit to reason, that there is a vast difference between large and
small ordonnances of figures in fuil proportion, and those half as big with respect
to the interposing air, the only true cause of things being more or less faint, and
their going off, as well in within, as without-door representations.
Let us then rightly observe, in what manner such large objects ought to appear,
that they may be natural and artful; but previously consider two things.
2. What handling is the most natural for their execution.
As for the light, Ithink the common best, and much more proper than sun-
shinc; and though some, who set up for the buono gusto, are continually talking of
painting broad, it is neverthelefs a great error, as we have often said, always and
without difference to use that manner, since it is not proper, in a common cham-
ber light, (especially in figures as big as the life, which ought to be in all respects
like the spectators, even so much, that if painted on boards and cut away, they
should not be taken for painting, but the life itself) to give them broad shades, but
dubious and melting ones, to the end that they may rise and round ; not black,
like Spagnolet, nor grey, yellow, or russet, like Rembrant, John Lievens, and many
other ltalian, Dutch and Flemiss painters, who, without difference, bring warmth,
as they call it, into the shades to such a degree as to fire them, only to cause force.
Let this be duly weighed, lest the colour of the natural, and perfect life be ne-
glected.






In my opinion, it is best to make the shade of the same nature as the stuff; ex-
hibiting in all objects, whether nudities, draperies, wood, stone, either red, yellow,
blue or green, the most proper colour, as well in light as shade.
As to the force, Ishould not be sparing either of white, or black, though many
have prétended, that we must not use white : a good painter will attempt any
thing. You must not suffer yourself to be swayed by this or that manner; fol-
low nature, and you content art. Away then with drudgery and muddling;
handle your work boldly, yet not, with Rembrant and Lievens to let the colours run
down the cloth, but lay them smooth and even, that your objects may seem
round and relieved only by art not by daubing. Let the agreement be so general,
that in truth it may be said the figures are large, strongly painted and boldly
handled.
People now-a-days think, that painting has attained such a perfection as not
to admit of further improvements ; since the beautiful and great manner, the bon
goût and hot colouring are, at this time, finely performed in France, Italy the
Netherlands and other countries, where art flourishes; but we do not find now-a-
days, wits who endeavour to distinguisn themselves among the knowing, by new
inventions. We had several of them some time since, of whom Ishall name but
two, Rembrant and John Lievens, whose manner is not intirely to be rejected, espe-
cially that of the former, as well for its naturalness as uncommon force ; yet, we
see very few followed him, and these, like him, sell short at last; notwithstanding
some were, and still are, who asfert, that Rembrant was able to do every thing which
art and pencil could effect; and that he surpassed all artists, even to this day. Was
there ever, say they, A painter who came so near nature in force of colouring, by
his beautiful lights, agreeable harmony, strange and uncommon thoughts, &c.
Having such extraordinary talents, in what could he be deficient: And is not that
enough to charm all the world, though he had not practised a manner which was
in use long before ?
But I desire these men may know, that my opinion herein is quite different
from theirs; though I must own, I had formerly a singular inelination for Rem¬
brant’s manner; for as soon as I began to be sensible of the infallible rules of art, I
found myself. under a necessity of renouncing my mistake and quitting his, as be¬
ing founded only on loose whims and uncertain grounds, without president.
And now, methinks, I cannot any where better than here, shew the effects of
magnifying and diminishing glasses, and the various opinions touching them.
Many imagine, that a painting in little, and the life, seen through a diminishing-
glase, are one and the same; and that the small life, seen through a magifying-
glafs, and a large picture, appear alike : but these men are much mistaken, and
as wide from truth as the East is from the West.
The glafs ground hollow or concave, shews near-objects in their force, beauty,
and warmth, with a diminution. And,
The glafs ground rifing or convex, contrarily exhibits faint and distant objects
in a full proportion, dull and broken.
Now; let any reasonable man view the two pieces, the small one warm and
strong, and the large, faint and weak, and determine, which of them is most like
the







the life or nature. My opinion is against both: they are like a man drest in woman’s :
cloaths, and the contrary ; for one is too strong, and the other too weak.
But admitting these men to be in the right, and we were to side with them, we
should, by this their position and application of it, discover their wrong notion;
since they make the large strong, and the small, even as strong as the large.
By which, and the aforsaid effects of the two glasses, the mistake sufficiently ap-
pears, and artists are advertised of it.
CH AP. XXIII. An Enquiry into the Difference between a large
Landscape ornamented with small Figures, and a small one with large,
with respect to the Air; the Day being supposed clear. in both.
TO be short and intelligible, we premise, that in a landscape, the air is fo
governing, that all the piece contains, whether off-scape, water, fields, trees,
&c. must from it receive their decorum and naturalness, and at all times of the
day, whether morning, noon, or evening, nay at night also; for as the air alters,
all the objects lighted by it do the same: if the day be bright and the air clear, all
things appear so: if it be evening, they are dusky, and at night, dark. The
master who has regard to this essential point, must needs succeed, and be thought
artful: and Why ; Because he has in that part simply followed nature as an infal-
lible guide ; yet he ought to be certain in lighting the objects according to their
several natures, and to observe, with me, whether there be a difference between
a large opening without embellishments, and the contrary, with respect to the
air. By the air is meant the superior part, which in a clear day is commonly called
the blue of the sky.
We say that the two unlike objects in landscape, to wit, one ornamented and
the other plain, ought, in order to look natural, to be alike clear, and neither
lighter nor darker, ifthey both exhibit the same hour of the day; and if one were
of a darker blue than the other, it is a mistake and unjustifiable, for one of them
must needs be contrary to truth.
Now, it may be here objected, according to the old way of thinking, that a
master of his art may, for decency’s sake, freely correct and alter Nature when sne
is obstructing: butl answer in few words, that in that case, nature ought to com-
mand, and art obey. What can be the purpose to paint in landscape the blue of
the sky two or three feet above the horizon, as dark as if it were evening, when all
the objects in the piece are lighted with the utmost brightness and force, either
sideways or fronting, although the sun be setting, even the shades lighter than the
upper air. Consider how such representations must look in the eyes of the know¬
ing, and whether it be otherwise than a day-occurrence or stage-play represented
in the evening. What advantage would accrue if évery body had true knowledge
and judgment in the art, if we did not shew them art; What love can it gain ' He
who knows art is very sensible of what it aims at; wherefore a lover of truth ought





















































































































































































































































































undertaking things out of their way ; not that they should not be able to perform
them, but on an apprehension of falling from a good into a bad manner; fince
experience shews, that each supposeshis own manner the best.
I think I have found out a method for those accustomed to large and strong
things, to fit them for the small and weak. The cloth you design to paint on,
ought to be primed with a light grey ground for the large work, and with a dark
and warm ground for the small; so that having no other patterns, whether figures
or landscape, than warm and strong ones, you may temper your colours accord-
ingly, and get rid of your old custom. Herein a pallet of the same colour is also
necessary, that the colours tempered on it may produce in painting, the same force
or weakness. And to shew that this method is of greater moment than some may
presently imagine, I shall relate what once happened to myself.
A certain gentleman had his hall-ceiling lined with five cloths, primed with a
pearl-colour; and being afterwards desirous of having something painted on them,
proposed my doing it; whereupon 1 made designs to his liking, and had four
cloths sent home to me (the middle one large and square, and three smaller round
ones) but in lieu of the fifth (which was got rotten by dampnefs) a new one was
sent to me, not primed with a light ground like the rest, but of a brown colour.
After I had dead-coloured the work, and viewed it together, Iperceived that the
shades in the last cloth were much browner and warmer than in the ethers; and
though in finishing I endeavoured as much as posfible to help it, and bring it like
the rest, yet something remained in the shades of another nature, which some
persons judged to be better than those of the other cloths, those especially who
were implicitly addicted to the warm manner, without considering in general
whether it was proper or not. Thus, l found that the ground of a cloth may often
mislead us, and put us beside the mark either in nearness or distance; but knowing
the reason of it, if it happen again the fault is our own. And thus we may in-
sensibly, and without compulsion, pafs from large things into the small, and from
the small into the large.
We shall further observe on what occasions the aforesaid means may be made use
of to advantage.
1. In painting a light landscape.
2. In painting halls, rooms, &c.
3. In night-pieces, apparitions, and candle-lights; and as well in little as in
full proportion.
For these three particular designs, we may prepare the grounds of the cloths
thus. That for the landscape ought to be primed with pearl colour; that for an
apartment, with umber; that for apparitions or candle-light, with Ologa’s earth,
or umber and black. The first, more or less bluish, according to the quantity of
fky; the second, somewhat brighter and more warm, according as you intend to
exhibit either a common light or a sun-shine; and the third, according as it has
little or much light, depth or approach, smallness or largness; yet the larger,
the more black. We think those colours, befides the tints, very useful and ne-
necessary not without reason ; because they have affinity to the nature of the
subject;






subjects; the first, to the blue of the szy; the second, to the reflexions; and the
third, to the shade.
I have often madeit a question, whether it were worth while to mention these
particulars, because I am’tensible, some may think them trifling; as I willingly
own, they seem to be : but on better confideration of the matter, and how many
things are neglected which either offer of themselves or seem trivial, though of
absolute use, my suspicion abated ; with this consolation, that how minute soever
my thoughts may be, I shall be satisfied, if they any ways tend to the advantage
and improvement of art, and instruction in it.
Wherefore, re-assuming the subject, I say, that the cloth may be prepared thus.
The colours, being ground up stiff with fat oil, ought to be mixed very thin
with turnpentine and the cloth painted over, with a soft tool, in this manner.
The sky, blue, and the ground, gray or green, more or less dark as your ordon-
nance and design require. Now, if it be afked, how we must proceed in case of rising
objects, as trees, houses or other things coming against the off-scape, and above
the horizon, and which fill up a great part of it; l answer, That my meaning is
not to provide such painted cloths, without previously knowing, what we are to
paint upon them; for we must first sketch our thoughts on paper, and then con-
clude how much or little sky or ground must be painted, blue or green, yellow
or black. In those grounds we have no occasion for fine and costly colours ;
common ones will serve, if they have a good body and cover well. For the blue,
take indigo and white; for the ground umber and white, or lamp-black and light
oaker; for architecture and other stone-work, umber, brown oaker, &c.The ground
thus laid, and being dry, has three desirable qualities.
I. It is fit for work, being even and dull; wherefore the colours, how thin so-
ever, take at sirst; which a smooth or glossy ground will not admit without
much trouble.
3. It is durable, by its relation to the tints and colours painted on it; which
hold their perfect beauty and force ; which they éannot be, when the ground is
of another colour or tint, such as white upon black, light blue on dark yellow,
or red, &c. in time appearing more and more through though, ever so fatly
painted.
3. It is expeditious for him who has a ready hand and quick pencil and
desires to paint up his defign at once, which otherwise, cannot be done with-
out dead-colouring.
This method has still further advantages then some may perhaps imagine;
it is particularly useful in ceiling-pieces, not only in areal representations,
but also bass-reliefs of one colour, whether white, grey, violet or yellowish.
Judge now, whether the trouble of preparing such a cloth be not small when
compared with the great advantage arising from it.
As a proof of it, I have observed of the great Bartholet, that when he was to
paint a portrait with a purple or black drapery, he laid in the drapery flat, with
a fingle dark purple or black, without any folds, and, on finishing, only heigkten-
ed and shaded it, and thus worked up the piece at once.










CHAP. XXIV Of the Lights within-doors.
THIS light ought to be ranked among the day-light, as taking its rise and
government from thence. This, commonly called a chamber-light, we di-
vide into three forts.
The first enters through doors, windows, and other openings, and proceeding
from the air, thereby causes.
The second, which is occasioned by reflexion as from a wall, ground, or other
objects
The third subsists in itself; as proceeding from a candle or torch. The lights
have different natures.
Those of the open air are clean onthelight parts of objects, and donot alter them
more than in the open air, causing the light to be broad, and the shades dark.
The second falls more or lefs pure on objects according to the colour and nature of
the grounds and walls; their shades being dim and disappearing, and only the
deepest shades visible and strong ; the room in general, both above and below,
being thereby lighted, as well by the force and effect of the wall within, as by the
ground without. Of the ground-shades we shall say nothing here, as having, in
another place, treated of them, and their force and diminution.
The candle light we have also, in a particular chapter, sufficiently shewed how
so manage, as likewise sun-shine; which last, we think, as we have often said, very
improper to be represented in a room-
Many have thought very improperly of those lights ; taking, in a perverse man-
ner, the liberty which Horrace allows to poetsand painters; and pretending to help
the defects of nature, doit in an extravagant manner, making no scruple to break
down a whole wall of a room, to let a beautiful light on their objects, as strongly
as in the open air.
They even go such lengths, that, though they have doors and windows, they
give every thing their proper ground-shades, except window-frames, crofs-pieces
and piers; as if a wall were not a solid body as well as a man, table, chair or other
furniture; imagining they may do so, that nothing mav obstruct the figures : but,
in my opinion, it were better to take away the cause of such an evil, than to spoil
the property of things, by representing it.
In painting an apartment, we ought well to consider the architecture ; to aid
it, and give it a proper division and shew a door for passage : as for the windows,
whether many or few, it must appear by the objects, and by the ground-shades
of the crofs-pieces and piers ; and that plain in sun-shine, but dubious without it.
And, in order to make this last point clear (which in this chapter we chiefly
aim at) I shall, in the two examples in plate XLVIII. plainly express my
sentiments.
The first exhibits two different lights falling in through two different windows,
the one proceeding from the clear air; and the other, by reason of a near building
before













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































before the window, somewhat broke, little or no air being seen above that. building
between the windows is a large pier,or blank wall.
Mark those windows with the letters A. anb B, and the blank wall with C, and
then observe, how the shade, which the pier Cgives on the ground, is cut, on
both sides, by the light falling in through the windows A and B, and how acute
it terminates, and how the light A is weakened by that of B; moreover, what
a fhort touch of light A gives, when that of B goes far into the room as also
that the figure d; receiving the light from A is dusky, and has a fhort ground-shade,
and the other figure, contrarily, receiving its light from B, is lignter, and its
light broader, and gives a longer ground-fhade. Observe further, that the nearer
the figures are to the light or window the purer and more plain are their ground-
shades ; when, contrarily, the column C placed against the pier C, gives a double
ground shade, the greater overcoming the less.
The second example shews the same things, according to the condition of the
lights, which are altered and come in from behind.
The third and fourth examples, in plate XLIX. shew the same things in land-
scape for the same observation prevails in both with respect to light and shade as
to the colours in the open air and their alterations ; l have said enough of them in
a proper chapter.
I think it great heedlessness, in many painters, who, in giving their within-
door objects a side-light, do not mind, whether they stand on the near or off-side
of the window letting in the light; nor consider, that the light coming in through
a narrow opening; spreads, and by reason of interpofing vapours in proportion to
the force of the light, there must needs fall a proportional weak or strong shade
on the ground.
great general Epaminondas ; whereon no observation of light is neglected; all
things have their natural effects, which make the piece look so charming.
Tyros must not think it irksome to mind so many observations in matters of
consequence ; which when once well apprehended in their principles, nothing but
carelefsness will afterwards make them slight. ’: Endeavour then to fix the prin-
ciples and knowledge in your memories by the. help of judgment, and all things.

will certainly have a natural and easy issue.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Applicagion of Lights to the different Species
of Histories, with a Table an Ordonnance of all the Lights.



THAT we may not be thought to keep any thing back from the artist,
which may be of service to him, I judged it necessary to subjoin this chapter
to.the lights, though we have so largely treated of their natures, qualities, forces
and effects.
A drawing






A drawing and out-line, how fine soever, are not agreeable before they are
shaded; and when this is done as nature and art require, it exalts the former, and
gives an additional lustre to nature; for a sober light suits not with bustling figures,
with respect to within-door representations, because it abates the elegance and art
of the other. As in the murder of Casar in the Senate-house; or the death of Cato.
But, let me not be hereby supposed to overthrow my former asfertion, that sun-
shine is not proper within doors, since, on such occasions as those, there must be.
found such a medium in the light, as there is in the colours between the more
and lefs beautiful, and as we have shewed to be, between sun-shine and common
light.
Again, this light would be very improper in a salutation of Elizabeth and Mary,:
or the story of Stratonica; or that of the queen of Sheba: these require a more
tender, soft, and sweet light, and therefore a common one.
If this be not observed, a good out-line may be spoiled; as when a fhade should
happen to fall on therising parts, or a ground-shade pass over them.
Were we to make an history, wherein both paffions, the sedate and stirring.
should meet, requiring consequently an opposition in the lights, we ought to
Place the acting figures forwards on the first ground, as having the predominancy,
and to adapt the light to them as much as possible.
Accordingly, a story now occurs to me, wherein the three principal paffions
must meet in one composition, I mean that of Ahasuerus, Esther, and Haman ;
Esther, shews a supplicating and meek posture and countenance : the king disco-
vers wrath and paffion ; and Haman, astonishment and fright. Now in order to
cast well the light on those figures, according to my apprehension, l would dis-
pose Esther in the greatest light, somewhat in profile; the king, in the strongest,
I mean, where it falls most and has its chief effect, and encrease it by the force of
colours : but Haman 1 would place fitting on the other side of the table, in a dim
light, the rather to sereen him from the king’s wrath : and, as it is a feast or ban-
quet prepared by Esther, where every thing is royal and magnificient, I think the
common light here the most proper, because the sequel of the story, and the king’s
rage, are but accidental.
We shall conclude this book, with the following
Ordonnance, or Table of the Lights.
Here, the beautiful and darting Aurora is dissipating the foggy vapours of the
gastly night by her agreeable day-break, that the moft perfect productions of rich
and liberal Nature may appear in their true qualities, forms, colours, and full
lustre ; fhie descends from on high, holding a clear lighting torch, and driving
dark night into subterraneous hollows.
The more radiant Pabus, sitting in his chariot, is mounting out of Thetis’s lap,
gilding all things under the azure heavens, not excepting the snow-white
lilies.







The chaste Diana, with her sharp-pointed silver horns, is satisfied with what
her brother imparts to the world, as serving not only to revive, but also to be a
beacon to the paths of mortals.
The hellish Megara Tisipone, with her stinking torch, creating anxiety and fright,
fretting at it, flies this irresistible light; inflaming all things in her way ; even
tarnishing all beautiful objects and colours with her dark and nasty vapours.
You see here, the bright morning by its pure rays surpassing all former light;
but the sun, by his fiery force, gains the laurel, gilding all that his beams can
touch ; whereby we perceive the weakness of the silver moon, not able to distinguish
objects and make them apparent.
We exhibit here, at a moderate distance, on the right side of the piece four
round pedestals of equal magnitude, with their plinths and mouldings running to-
wards the point of sight.
On the first, as being the morning, is seen a bright star, giving a short ground-
shade, ending in a point.
On the second, appears the sun, in full lustre, giving a long and broad
ground-shade, sharp and plain, like the object.
The third has the moon’s presence, which produces a-like ground-shade.
And,
The fourth, whereon iz. a lighted torch, causes, by this light, a long and en-
larging ground-shade.












THE
ART of PAINTING.
BOOK VI.
Of LaNDSCAPE’S.
HERE the god Pan sits playing his pipes, with a pipe resting on his

arm; and about him are three women, franticly dancing hand in hand:


one of them is dressed in green, and on her head is a chaplet of herbs


intermixed with field-flowers; another is in blue, adorned with a

chaplet of bulrushies and white bell-flowers ; and the third is in black
or dark rayment, wearing a chaplet of roots and mushrooms. These three
figures reprefent trees, rivers and grounds. The place opens an agreeable country,
enriched with woods, rivers, and hills.


CHAP. I. Of Landscapes in general.
Tis a constant maxim, that
Variety’s the soul’s refin’d delight,
And the chief viand of her window’d sight.
VARIETYis the soul of mirth, sting of pleasure and the sauce of life ; it is
so gratifying, that without it, we think ourselves slaves; and by a con-
stant return, we wish to live for ever : without it we covet death, because the
soul, as pent up in a dungeon, calls for enlargement. But he is much out of the
way, who hourly wants variety, since any excess is both ridiculous and hurtful, as
well






well to thé agent as the patient.
He who proposes à livelihood from art, is not to
please himfelf only, because his happinefs or unhappinefs depends not on himself,
but others, according as his works plexse or displeaie ; and, as every creauture has
a. particular liking, and when in company, they are not to be satisfied with one
fort of food, but with a variety ; so a judicious artist should strenuously endeavour
to qualify himfelf for every person’s taste, like an expert apothecary, who stores
his ffiop with all proper medicines for the general good, and thereby gets money.
Let this suffice to hint, that a landscape-painter must not be wedded to one choice,
either too sticring and extravagant; or too reposed and melancholy; because it
would please but one set of men, and his advantage would therefore arise but from
few : whereas, variety will allure both forts, and his fame be the greater.
Ithoughtit proper to premifethis, as an advice to many : let us now, ere we
come to the effence of this branch of painting, considering, that a landscape is
the most delightful object in the art, and has very powerful qualities, with respect
to sight, when by a sweet harmony of colours and elegant management, it diverts
and pleases the eye. What can be more satisfactory than to travel the world
without going out of doors; and in a moment, to jurney out of Asia into Africa,
and from thence back to America, even into the Elysian fields, to view all the won-
ders, without danger or inconveniency, from fun or frost; What is more ac-
ceptable than shady groves, open parks, clear waters, rocks, fountains, high
mountains and deep misty vallies ?

All these we can see at once; and how re-
lieving must the fight be to the most melancholy temper ,
These circumstances being fo glorious, entertaining, and useful, let us consider
what conftitutes a fine landscape.
It confists principally in an orderly dispofition of lights against darkness;
whence arises the good harmony, which insensibly deceives the fight, in such sort
that though it be a flat cloth, yet it exhibits a natural prospective opening, even
nature itself.
Landscape requires two qualities to make it delightful.
1. Disposition. 2. Colouring.
The disposition is an artful bringing together of irregular objects, which never-
theless feem not to be against nature, or impossible.
The colouring, is a conjunction of proper colours in the aforesaid objects, ac-
cording to their situations and qualities, agreeing with the nature of the air in
such manner, as to repose and pleafe the eye.
And yet all these qualities cannot alone produce a perfect landscape, unless a
good choice precede ; which confists in joining together variety of objects, viz.
woods with vistos, wherein the eye may lose itself ; rocks, rivers, and water-falls,
green fields, &c. delightful to the eye. Herein lies the strefs of a landscape, and
painting is very like nature, with respect to things inanimate; not to mention
many others, as the embelliffments, which give it the utmost perfection. How-
ever, this variety confists not only in the difference or irregularity of the ob-
jects, az trees, hills, fountaine, and the like, but in the diversity of each of them ;
for instance, bending and strait trees, large and small hills, wrought and plain
fountains, cottages and palacés; green and russet lands, &c. The same diversity-








is to be observed in colouring, according to thé seasons of the year ; that lovers
may not be cloyed by producing, with the cockoo, always the same thing ; as
stir and motion, crocked and mis-shapen bodies of trees, waving branches, bar-
ren grounds, blue mountains, or beasts, birds, huntings and the like ; or, con-
trarily, always repose and quietnefs, strait stems, clipped trees, level grounds in-
tirely green, standing water, and the same light, colour, and nature.
We have formerly said, that a table or picture hung up, and viewed at a deter-
minate distance, appears as the life without-doors ; of which, the frame shews only
the thickness of the sill wherein it is put, or wall, against which it hangs. The
question is now, Whether such a painted opening can be natural and deceiving
without sixing a point of sight and an horizon equal with the eye of the spectator:
and, whether it be the same, to place them higher or lower; And further, whe-
ther the thickness of the frame be sufficient to snew the thickness of the wall,
without- continuing it upon the cloth; I say positively,—No,-and that such an
opening cannot be natural, much less deceiving, if one of those requisites be
wanting; which I prove thus. Take a chair, and sit at the window, with your
eye just level with the sill, and then you will observe that the horizon, or greatest
distance parting the sky and earth, will, as I may say, approach towards it and be
parellel with your fight, and that therefore you can see nothing but sky : then
arise, and you will perceive rhe horizon also rise, and that your eye is always level
with it, discovering here and there objects on the ground. Now, consider the in-
sufficieney of your picture, when its point of sight does not agree with your eye,
and how nature, joined to your imagined art, is perverted, your deceit made ap-
parent and your intentions spoiled. It is therefore evident, that the picture, in
whichthe point of sight is placed must determine your distance, and that the eye
ought never to leave the horizon, but be always level with it. If the eye be lower
than the point of sight, all the objects must needs seem to tumble forwards, and
the fore-ground to sink. If you are above the point of fight, the fore-ground rises,
and all the objects are tumbling backwards. How then can this seem natural and
deceiving; Wherefore there is no other way, than to hang the picture in a cer-
tain place, and six a distance whence it is to be viewed without alteration. As for
the frame, it is necessary to shew the thickness of it on the cloth, in order to
know at once, the distance from whence you ought to view it; because its angu-
lar rays are directed to the point of sight.
l am not insensible that this position may seem strange to some, who will object,
that they never observed any such thing in Houssin, Titian, Bril, or Francesco Mola,
or other good masters : but the old saying shall plead for me; Example is better than
precept. For they endeavour to follow the mistakes but not the virtues of those
excellent masters. I am sure, that had those great masters thought of these ob-
fervations, they would not have rejected them. Do you want demonstration, that
every good master approves of what I say, and follows it ; Shew me but one
picture, drawing or print of theirs, exhibiting an inward visto out of an hall or
chamber, wherein they have forgot to express the thickness of the framing or
walls ; since, otherwise they must depart from the naturalness, and we would say,
that instead of an off-distance, they had represented a picture or tapestry. I there-
fore






fore conclude, that if nature require this in a picture, it is still more necessary,
when we would have the picture taken for nature itself, in order to deceive even
masters. But some even think,If I arive in the art, to their heights, I shall be
satisfied. In the méantime, art despairs of attaining great lustre by further im-
provements.
But, to re-assume our former position, my opinion is, That what has been said
ought to be regarded, when we meet with any thing in halls, chambers, galleries,
and the like, whether in niches, above or in chimneys, or on other occasions : and
the main point is, to place well the horizon according as the piece stands high or
low. My usual practice was, to make the thickness of walls plainly appear in my
paintings; and would always have done it ; but on painting, on a time, for a lover
of quality, was obliged to alter it for his pleafure; on a furmise, I did it to save
work, not for the good of it; affirming, that the painting was thereby docked,
and too much incumbered : but the child must have a name; he imagining that
the alteration made the work look larger.
Here let it not be thought that my piece was wholly taken up with the ordon-
nance, and the thicknefs afterwards painted upon it ; because that would be great
folly. I first squared out the thicknefs, and then adapted my design thereto, as
being more convenient than afterwards to paint the thickness over it, and thereby
dock too much of the work.
Now, to give the studious artist a right notion, as l think, how to compose a
good landscape, after an easy manner, let him him consider,
I. The nature of his subject.
2. What country he is to represent.
3. What season of the year, what month, and what hour of the day.
4. Whether the subject require sun, or moon-shine, clear or misty, rain or
windy weather.
Having fixed these points, let him proceed to seek proper materials, bringing
them together agreeable to his general design, and disposing the objects in their
proper places, each according to its nature and quality.
Next, let him place the point of sight in the middle of the piece, higher or
lower, as he would have less or more sky or ground, considering whether the
ground is to be a level or not, and thus to order the figures equal with the eye, to
discover directly whether the painting be seen through an high window in a low
ground, or from a low ground to an high; for it is commonly known, that if
things be seen from an height, the figures ought to be under the horizon, and
when viewed from a low place, they must rise above the horizon.
Having done this, let him chuse a proper light, falling in either from before,
behind, or afide, to light the object accordingly: and then to dispose the
principal object (if possible, and the subject permit) in the best place, in the
middle of the piece ; at least from off the edges of it.
Of divers paffions, if the matter require it, I mean, if the landscape be mixed
with history, one ought to predominate, and surpafs the rest in greatnefs, beauty,
and elegance ; filling always the greatest part of the piece with it, whether by
means of trees or buildings. The by-works must be suitable to it, the better
explain the matter.






If the subject be a wood, it ought to be adorned with wood-gods, guides or
terms, tombs, seats for repose, wood-nymphs, and many other thinga proper
to it.
If à river, it may be handled in the same manner, with the addition of river-
gods, naiades, or swimming water-nymphs, fishermen, swans, and other such
ornaments.
If a field be the chief object, it may be fet off with shepherds and shepherdes-
ses, cow-herds, bacchanals, and others.
Rocks and caves require the same management ; with this caution, that the
eye be taken with the principal object only, without ather regard to the by-
works, than as aids and incidents ; for in fuch conduct lies the beauty and good¬
ness of a landscape.
As to the ornaments of modern landscape, such as of the famous Everdingen,
Pynakker, Ruysdaal, Moucheron, and others who follow the modern manner, they
do not call for the aforesaid embellishments, as having other sufficient matter, viz.
cottages, fishermen, carriers, waggons, and such daily rural occurrences, which
are as proper to it as the antique; for the decorations alone, in my opinion,
make a landscape either antique or modern; unless we exhibit modern and known
places, wherein the antique would be very improper, as Breugel, Bril, and Hans
Bol have done, without distinction between the lowest life, and what is better :
for Nature is in her objects now, as she was a thoufand years ago; woods, fields,
mountains and waters, are always the same; and therefore Nature is modern,
that is, imperfect: but she is antique and perfect, when we judiciousty adorn her
with uncommon and magnificent buildings, tombs, and other remains of anti-
quity; which, in conjunction with the ornaments above-mentioned, compose an
antique landscape. But when a modern prospect on the Rhine is decked with
antique figures and stories, it must look ridiculous ; since cottages and civil and
military architecture will evidently discover the prudent folly of the master, though
otherwise excellent in both manners.
CHAP. II. Of the Light, Form and Grouping of Objects in Landfcapes.
ET us now proceed further, in considering the principal qualities and pro-
L perties requisite in a fine landscape : these, in my opinion, consist,
2. In a good disposition of the irregular objects, as welk with respect to. their
matter, fhape and form, as their colour.
2. In the number and grouping them.
2. In a good ordering of the light.
By well difposing the irregular objects, we produce life and motion; the objects
confist of crooked, stralt, a-wry, high and how; and by the colours we effect the
fame; when one thing is faint and weak, another melting, this strong, that hard.
The





















































































































































































































































































The grouping consists in joining those irregular objects; as of two bodies on
two different grounds, that on the fore-ground ought to be smaller than the
other on the second ; thus, if a sitting figure come torward, a standing one must
be placed behind it; and on the third ground, a décumbent figure; on the
fourth, a climbed one, and beyond it a standing figure again, &c. Trees,
rocks, buildings, cattle, and other things occuring in landscape, may be dis-
posed in the same manner so far as concerns the irregularity of objects; which,
in their matter and colour, I shall shew in the following example. See plate L.
Isuppose then, in a piece, five grounds with the off-icape, of which, the fourth
is'the largest. On the fore-ground I place a vase of dark porphiry, numbered 3.
On the second ground, a fountain, numbered 4. On the third ground, an hedge,
numbered 2. On the fourth ground, a statue, numbered 5. And the fifth is a
low off-scape, numbered 1. Thus much may suffice as to grounds going off be¬
hind each other; the same disposition ought to be observed on a single or level
ground.
As for the light, its principal management lies in opposing brownness and dark-
ness to middling and greater light : but when two lights are to set off each other,
the colour must effect this; as for instance, when a lighted figure is to come off
against a light off-scape, the former must certainly be of a darkisn colour, as
having no shade ; and then it will produce a good effect : for the chief manage-
ment lies in placing a warm-coloured object against a light, faint and weak off-
scape, contrarily, light and faint colours against dark and warm grounds; the
foremost and strongest object against the deepest lointain; and the objects further
off, against nearer parts of the off-scape: and thus, light objects against dark,
and the contrary.
The artist also ought to observe, that two lights must never be above each
other, unlefs one be visibly different from the other in force, either in colour or
tint, lest one seem to run into the other; which, at a distance, would be a pre-
posterous union.
Moreover, part of the lointain should always be broken, and the eye, on one
side or the other, kept nearer, either by means of a wood, rock, building, or
other object. A part of the horizon also should always be seen; or, for want of
it, some level object, such as a fronting wall, colonade, or the like. This will
produce satisfaction to the eye, and elegance in the piece.
No one will deny, that unequal numbers are the most perfect ; according to
the demonstration both of philosophers and mathematicians. This inequality I
also observe and follow in my disposition of figures, thus :
First, I place one figure on the fore-ground; then, three on the second ; two
on the third; and four on the fourth ground ; and then again, one; and so forth :
and thus, as. well on a single level ground as where they happen one behind ano¬
ther. These, unequal numbers in the groups are, certainly, not of the least mo-
ment in. landscapes.
As to the colour mentioned before, it is to be especially noted, that the co-
lour which is predominant, and has the chief place in the piece, must no where
else be seen than with little parts, I mean, of less beauty, quantity and dignity.








CHAP. III. Of the By-Ornaments in Landscapes.
T is usual for landscape-painters to have a particular inclination for one choice ;
one affecting wild and desolate prospects; another, reposed and soft ones;
and a third, northern or frigid views, sun and moon-shine, water-falls, downs,
watry and woody prospects: and the reason is, because most people, by a strange
impulse, seem rather to covet the gifts of nature than the heavenly ; which afford
what is whole and most perfect: in a word, they seek only a part, though all be
to be got. This proceeds from youth and ignorance, wanting fundamental
knowledge, and therefore not judging what is most beautiful and profitable, nay
what they themselves are fit for. But it is most unaccountable, that many land-
scape painters are not able to embellisn their own works: to which some may ob-
ject, that as they have not made it their practice, so they are content with hand-
ling single prospects well, leaving any thing else to the owner’s disposal. A sad
story, that they cannot do their work without help l Whence it is evident, of
what moment it is for à landscape-painter to embellisn his own work, whether
the design be his own or borrowed; since certainly, if he be master of his
art, he must also know what is most suitable in his picture; not trifles, or figures
to no purpose; but histories, fictions or parables, taken from Scripture, Ovid,
or Asop; ornaments which will enrich the work. But this is seldom done,
because few have time to spare, or love reading. As for me, 1 would rather
want prints and drawings than books. As an history-painter, I make use of
books, and descriptions of landscapes and beasts: but were la landscape-painter,
I should provide books of history ; for, What should I be the better for exercising
one particular part, of which I am master, and neglecting others as necessary to
be known ; I need not learn what I already know: but it is impossible to get
skill in things without inquiring into them. Have I time for perusing novels;
why not also for necessary things; Am Icurious to know the state of the war,
or desirous of peace for the sake of art : of what advantage is. the peace if l do
not qualify myself to meet it:
As there are few or no painters who have no particular manner, so few are qua-
lified for embellishment, since every one strives to excel in something, and to get
a name by a certain wonderfulness therein, either by beautiful colours, extrava-
gant draperies, broad and funny lights, or round and dusky ones; which often.
spoil a work instead ofs bettering it: these they cannot forbear (their chief talent
lying in them), though they frequently have a contrary effect, when they are to
adorn other men’s works. We must also observe, that there are two. forts of by-
ornaments ; the necessary, and the unnecesfary. The necessary are such as ap-
pertain to the matter, to wit, immoveable and fixed ornaments. The unneces-
sary are the moveable anes, viz. men; beasts, birds, and the like; which, with
re-






respect to landscapes, cannot be considered as necessary, but only as tending to
give the pieces life, that they may not pall but delight the eye.
To be more plain in this point, we shall consider, what a painter ought to ob-
serve and fhun in the by-ornaments.
I say then, that it is very indecent to place a woman alone, resting near a
priapus; much more, in the company of men, unless you would exhibit a
strumpet. It is also improper that a woman, well dressed, should sit alone by a
way-fide, or in a wood, or stand prattling with ordinary people. It is much more
proper to make a man sitting, and a woman passing by, than the woman sitting
and the man passing by, or holding discourse, unleis he be inquiring the way.
It is also much better, that a sitting man shew the way, than one who is passing
along. If there be a company of men and women, let not the men be idle, and
the women loaden; and if a woman be resting by herself, do not assign her a
greater burthen than she can conveniently carry alone, whether bundles, trunks,
or vessels. A woman of fafhion should never travel alone through woods or val-
leys, especially if youthful, without the company of, at least, a damsel or child.
Shepherds and shepherdesses, husbandmen and women, suit well together. Where
there are no sheep, a shepherd or piper, or lasses with chaplets of flowers, are
improper ; because such people are not sent into the field to prattle, but work ;
it is better to inquire after the shepherd than the sheep. Country-people’s chil-
dren are seldom within doors in the summer time, but generally abroad in the
field with theirparents, looking for birds nests, gathering wood or slowers, digging
holes, making garlands, and in other childisn actions. In mad sacrifices, or
country feasts and merriments, no people of fafhiion should appear, without good
reason for so doing, or that they are spectators, and stand somewhat off. Aged
people; especially men, should not be seen ; because they take no delight in such
recreations.
It is against nature and reason to assign a dolesome place for mirth and fcast-
ing; or, contrarily, one embellished with figures and fountains, unless the sub-
ject require it. By such distinctions as these we may know a good master.
He is an happy painter who knows how to adjust his by-ornaments to his
landscape, and this to them, thereby making both remarkable: but he deserves
greater commendation if he govern all things by the landscape. The figures or
by-works are certainly of no less moment than the landscape itsels; yet he may
be satisfied, if he continually endeavour to make the one as good as the other.
Such an artist is much preferable to others; for the frequent use of prints, or
other men’s works, is not the right method to become a master; vou rely too
much on them : not that I disapprove of them, because they convey fine idcas,
and stir up the mind (I must even acknowledge, that I should have been insussi-
cient without their aid), but you must get truly sensible, what lengths you may
go in the theft, not to fall into the common error, out of which it is difficult to
extricate yourself.
In treating of the immoveable by-ornaments, we must observe, that noth ing is
more displeasing in a landscape, than always to see houses behind, against tlie
off-scape; and, on the sides, nothing but trees and hills, or scarce so much as








one stone upon another : this repetition must needs- be disagreeable; wherefore
it is no wonder that those who are ignorant of architecture avoid it as much as
possible. But it is furprising to me, that many landscape-painters will not be ac-
quainted with that art; even rather never desire to exhibit it (how beautiful so-
ever), than to be at the trouble of learning it; or of following the models of
others, which are so plentiful, and made for such purposes; a point so easily
attainable, and giving a piece so great a decorum. I have been long studying
the cause of it, and can find no other than a want of inclination and knowledge
of its virtues and value : it is out of the way to think that landscapes consists on-
ly of trees, hills and green fields, without houses; or, if there be buildings,
ruins or triumphal. arches, that then it is no more a landscape, since no one will
take a history in a landscape for a landscape, or a piece with architecture and
some trees, for a landscape or history, but a prospect with buildings. A land-
scape, set off with an hundred small figures, will never pafs for a figure-piece :
but, without figures or houses, it is like a wilderness or forlorn country infected
with the plague, and where consequently no houses are standing : it would indeed
be a very proper Greenland view.
CH AP. I. Of immoveable Ornements; Tombs, Houses, &c.
V HE tombs, exhibited in landscapes require particular notice; as giving
not only a good decorum, but also a probability to the places of their situ-
ation; that they may not be contradictory to truth and time.
The most sure method is, when you introduce such a piece of stone-work, first
to chuse a proper place for its standing, where it may be most conspicuous to
passengers, in order to draw their attention ; wherefore they are made more or less
sumptuous and elegant, according to the condition and dignity of the deceased, or
those who cause them to be set up. They are commonly placed in the fields near
high roads; or, at the entrance of a shady grove, or else within it; yet in such a
manner as to be easily approached, and seen by those who pafs by. If they be
costly and finely adorned with figures and other carved work, they are usal-
ly fortified against the injuries of time; some are crowned with arches, or
else with small pediments and mouldings supported by columns; and topped with
a copper vase placed between two children turning on pivots, and holding iron
clappers, with which, when moved by the wind, they strike on the copper, and
create great noise; their motion was occasioned by an hollowness in their backs:
and this was done, they say, to drive away devils and evil spirits, who, as they
imagined, continually haunted the graves of the dead. Some of these tombs were
encompassed with low close walls, to fence them against the north-wind. They
were most times placed on raised ground or hillocks, especially in desolate coun-
tries; and we need not question the goodness of their foundations, though we
often see them in ruins or sunk down ; fince nothing, though ever so strong, can resist
eating






reating time. It is not improbable, that about such places-were benches for rest;
and the more to draw the people they sometimes made fountains near them. The
-ashes of the deceased were commonly reposited in a certain urn or box placed on
the top of the tomb, or else in a niche near, elegantly carved, and inscribed with
hieroglyphic letters or characters.
Those graves or tombs were so adorned with emblems and figures, as always
to make us sensible, whether they were sacred to an heroe, philosopher, statesman,
sylvan deity, or who else; if we may credit the remains, and ancient writers. It
would be too tedious to enumerate all the particulars touching these tombs; and
as those things serve only for by-ornaments to painters. I think what I have said
is sufficient, with the addition of what concerns their materials : these were various,
viz porphiry jasper, all sorts of marble, red, black and white; also copper and
other metals; and sometimes ordinary stone. We see often an altar near them,
whereon they used to offer to the memories of the deceased.
Of Cottages and other By-ornaments.
Cottages and country-houses are usually low, having their greatist conveniency
and extent below; and as the inhabitants possess but few goods (no more then
what will supply their necessities) their rooms are but few. These dwellings are
order, disposition or division. They sometimes wattle them with a weaving of
reeds and rushies, clayed over. The roofs are thatched, and not much windowed ;
commonly dark within, and sineared without with a light colour, red, white or
grey, that they may be seen at a great distance. These houses have often wells
or water-troughs near them, or else fountains or cisterns hollowed out of a tree,
or made of stone. The fountains are mean and artless; but near the town, they
are sumptuous, and magnificently adorned with statues and other ornaments. We
also find vases or elegant pots with bass-reliefs, standing on high pedestals, above
reach, to preserve them from damage. Sometimes they are a little decayed and
broken, or ruined by time and weather; as also by the barbarity of soldiers ; as
may be perceived in the fragments of columns lying up and down in the roads,
or near them ; likewise pieces of frizes with bass-reliefs; and beautiful cornices,
the remains whereof, and their basements are still standing. We see also, about
the place, pieces of broken colosses; some half within ground, others lying tum-
bled into a morass. And, in the woods appear stone-lions and lionesses, resting on
pedestals, and spouting water out of their mouths. On hand-rails, they used an-
tiently to place sphinxes, if their meanings did not allude to the secret of scien-
ces ; for then they commonly supported columns, pyramids and tombs. They
used frequently, as it is still sometimes the custom, to rase heaps of stones bear-
ing inscriptions and characters. They likewise set up posts for guides, or figures
for the same use ; especially in winding and crofs ways ; where we may often see
terms







terms at the ends of roads or lanes, to advertise travellers of danger, in case a
morass, water or other stoppage should crofs the way. Whence, the word (term)
takes its origin, signifying, bound or limit. Those terms are like a reversed pyr-
amids, square; with a gaping head on top, generally of copper or other metal;
have a fine decorum, and give a piece uncommon grandeur, if well placed, and
suitably adjusted in landscapes. To conclude this chapter, 1 advise the artist not
to use these ornaments too profusely ; nor repeat them without some diversity, be-
eause otherwise he will prove cloying, to his little honour or advantage.
CHAP. V. Of beautiful Colouring in Landscapes.
f any thing charm the sight, I think it is the beautiful green of trees. How
do we long for the lovely spring; Is any thing more refreshing to the eye than
the first greens of that season; Spirits and diversions seem then to revive in all
creatures. If a real prospect have such effect, that of an artful and agreeable
landscape has not much less, wherein the bright green and other delightful co-
lours shine.
But, though it is not probable, that a landscape painted intirely green should
please more than one in foul and grey-green colours, yet we ought not to use ver-
degrease to fetch out a fine green ; fince though it be the most beautiful, yet is
not the most pleasing to the eye; and moreover, very fading and changing.
It is nevertheless to be lamented, that men who pretend to great skill in paint-
ing landscapes, intirely banish beautiful green out of their works, and introduce,
in its place, black, yellow, and other such colours.
It is true, that plants and herbs differ as well in their natures and qualities as
shapes and colours; that some are of a beautiful green; others, blue; some yel-
low or russet; others, grey ; some of a fenny ; others, of a watry colour; never-
thelefs art teaches us not to imitate the faded and mean, but what is most charming
and agreeable. In the diversity aforesaid we see the object and the mean, and the
beautiful and most beautiful.
If now it be said, that the artist ought to exhibit every thing that is beautiful,
as well as the contrary, and that he only apes nature; 1 allow it; but then he
must be an imitator of well-formed Nature, and elegantly paint her most perfect
parts.
But by my position, that beautiful green is best and most charming in a land-
scape, let me not favour the perverse opinions of some, that colours cannot be
too beautiful, either, in history or landscape, though thev exceeded nature itself
(of thisI have largely spoken in the chapter of the harmony and placing of
colours) for at that rate, how can one colour set off another; What becomes of
the harmony or conjunction of colours, when as in music, high tones do not
agree with the low; How can gold be fet off by gold; or pearls, by pearls à
Were






Were all things composed of those two precious bodies,
richnefs would not be
apparent. The proverb says, Tenues ornant diademata cunae.
That is,
The gold of crowns may boast its native worth,
But meaner objects bring its lustre forth.
Many painters have erred in this partitular; of which I shall give one instance.
A certain artist had once painted a landscape, wherein the first and second grounds,
and every thing belonging to them, appeared beautiful and natural; but on the
third ground all was very grey and foui : on this last ground he had placed a man
in a beautiful ultramarine garment, as bright as if he had been on the fore-
ground. He was told, that those two things were unatural and opposits; I mean
a foul and muddy green and so beautiful a blue garment; which was moreover
(as the man was walking in the sun) painted as bright and beautiful in the shade
as in. the light, though the light should have been more broke. But the main
error lay, in breaking the green of the off-scape too much, and not at all bring-
ing down the beautiful blue vestment, though at the same distance. This exam-
ple may suffice to shew, that the parts ought not to be broken or fouled so sud-
denly, though we see it done by many, in order to make the foremost parts look
beautiful and strong. Nature shews no such sudden alteration, nor clear weather-
such mistiness in sun-shine.

CHAP. VI. Of the leafing of Trees.
MANY painters find the léafing of trees an hard tafk. Most of them in
 this point ape the manner of this-or that master, without consulting or
studying the life; by which means, their leafing commonly becomes set and stiff,
and always of one manner; insomuch that we cannot distinguisn, in their pictures,
the elm from the willow, or the oak from the linden.
Nature instructs us to know them from a-far, by their different colours as well
as by their growths and shapes; wherefore, to proceed regularly and gain emi-
mence, in this study, you ought exactly to observe the life, and the several forts
of green and leafing seen’at a distance, whether they are close and massy, or thin
leaved and branched, and whether they hang in clusters, or uniformly on their
boughs. Mind nicely the difference of their colours in their several kinds, as
well while growing, as in perfection and decay. Also the sizes of their bodies,
short or long; and whether they grow straight or crooked, in dry or watry places.
Another difficult point, but which causes the greatest decorum, is the round-
ness or relief of the trees : a good method for effecting this is, to observe how
large the spread of the tree is : suppose it thirty or forty feet; the upper round-
ness or near-side must have the strongest light and shade; diminishing gradually
every five or six feet and the extremities to melt into the sky, or other by-work,
though.






though the light should happen to fall into the piece from a-fide; for the more
the light approaches you, the stronger it touches: and if, on that occafion, you
light and heighten the utmost edges, it can add nothing to the relief; because
the light rounds off too suddenly; and having once painted it too strong, you
cannot help it by glazing, without muddling; since it will always appear distinct
from the other parts as well in colour as neatness.
There is also as great a difference between the bodies of trees as their leaves ;
some are more beautiful and painter-like than others; these again more strait and
sound ; those differing in colour from others, &c. But a chief regard is, not to
place afhi or linden leaves on oaken bodies, nor those of the willow upon elm;
for each stem must produce its own leaves ; though this conduct be not heeded
by many. You ought also not to put young and beautiful leaves upon an old
stem; for the former is like setting a man’s head on a monkey’s carcass, and the
latter like patching a child’s face upon an old and decayed man’s body.
We likewise often see, in common light landscapes, the leafing lie very sharp
and edgy against the sky : whereas Nature teaches, that even the leaves of the
foremost trees unite with the sky on their extremities, and appear dull against it;
and, in the off-scape, still more dubious.
CH NP. VII. Of the placing and fellowing of Landscapes.
r Find nothing more disadvantageous and irklome to a painter, than to wed
himself to one manner of reprefentation : Nature herself, and the following

precepts, will shew the error of it.
First, with respect to the several places where the pictures are to be hung ; for
I hope noone will argue, that a piece suits any place; and without a variety in
the manner of a master, I cannot judge whether he be a true one, or how rich
his thoughts are.
Secondly, Because the artist ought, in his ordonnances, to comply with the
fancy of the proprietor, as far as reason and the rules of art and decorum permit.
As to the first, common nature shews him his error. Do we not behold sun-
shine and sine weather with greater pleasure and attention after a storm; And can
it have a less effect on our senses in a picture, There is even no country so des-
picable, but in less than nine miles distance it will exhibit a new prospect. How
can it displease a painter sometimes to represent stormy weather, aud then calm
and delightful sun-shine; since the great unlikeness causes variety, and this
charms the eye. Now we see a shady grove, then a wilderness, next, a reposed
landscape, &c. Great water-falls, huge oaks, rocks, and the like objects, well
handled, look also very pleasing in a room. Thus we might, as I may say, shew
the world in epitome, and behold it at one view.







If a painter always follow one manner, how often will he expose his weakness
and incapacity, If it be sun-shine, what places will he find to suit all his pic-
tures ; Can he place them always in the sun, in order to shew their naturalnefs,
But granting the work to be placed in such a light, another unhappiness will still
attend it ; for the sun-light will fall into the picture from a side, and the real sun-
shine will come upon it fronting.
From which premises it is apparent, that the common light is not only neces-
sary, but always the most advantageous for chamber-pieces.
A good painter ought to be prudent in the disposition and choice of his work,
carefully observing the nature of the place, that his art may not disjoin, but aid
the architecture ; making his landscapes (in order to look like nature), the fur-
ther they are from the light of the room, so much lighter than those which are
near it ; for otherwise they will look but like pictures.
The second confideration (which is a great addition to ornament, respects the
fellowing or matching the pictures well; and though matching-pieces be very
well known, yet many people entertain wrong notions about them. Their opi-
nions, touching what is necessary in a fellowing-picture, are various : but they
generally agree, that it consists of an uniformity of conception and disposition of
objects, colour and light : to which some add, that if one landscape be a flat
country, the other ought to be the same; if one be rocky, the other ought to
be so too: in short, they must be so much alike, that, on coming together,,
the one seems to be an impression of the other; in both, equal sky, equal by-
ornaments, equal filling; nay, so very equal, that there must not be a white.
speck in the one but the other must have it also.
My belief is, that these niceties are owing to the wilfulness of artists, and
that, in a matching-picture, nothing more is requisite than an equal point of-
sight and uniformity in the figures, when it. must hang at a like height with the
other : he who would join the rest of the particulars, seeks the fifth wheel on a
waggon ; for why, after satisfying my curiosity in vicwing a solitary wilderness,
shiould I not enjoy the pleasure of a pleasant plain; or a woody landscape in op--
position to an agreeable water-view and a delightful prospect; I think the word
fello-es sufficiently implies, that they are two pictures of equal size, alike framed,
receiving the same light, whether they hang above or next each other, mostly
alike filled with work, and the figures of equal magnitude, and lessening towards
the point of sight. And as for the thoughts or design, the more different they
are, the more agreeable; and the better shewing the richnefs of the master’s
fancy. In a word, a landscape suits best with a landscape, and architecture with
architecture; and more is not, in my opinion, required in well-fellowing a pic--
ture--







CHAP. VIII. Of the Lights in a Landscape.
ALTHOUGH we have largely treated of the lights in the preceding
book, yet I find myself obligated to say somewhat about it, with respect

to landscapes; especially front-lights in pieces which face windows : this point
puzzles many painters, and not without cause, since it is a critical proof of their
capacities.
The chief reason of this is, that artists will not venture to undertake any thing
that is unprecedented; and no one has courage enough to set the example. They
plead a main difficulty arising from hence; namely, that, having a front-light,
they cannot make shades on the ground or objects, but must find their effects
going off and force only by the darkest. touches; as if the driving clouds did
not cause large ground-shades, which daily experience shews they do. In the
next place, these men tacitly confess their ignorance of the force and harmony of
colours, in chusing dark objects against light ones, and the contrary ; for, placing
against an off-scape of green trees, light coloured objects, such as white, rose-co¬
lour, light and strong yellow, and the like, you have no need of large shades.
Would you make objects against a light-coloured building, let them be of dark
colours ; or, a vase of a warm and brown colour, and against it, a lighter ob-
ject again ; and against the off-scape the foremost work is made strong by the
diminution of the tints; since all that goes back or retires becomes darker and
more dusky ; as the shades, on the contrary, grow fainter and weaker the fur-
ther they are off. Again, the grounds themselves can afford us great helps; one
may be light yellow, another green, another bluishi, according to their qualities,
as we shall further shew.
As to the figures, they may have a sufficient and natural side-shade for setting
them of ; for those, which are on the side of the piece, which most goes away
from the light, will receive much more shade than the middle ones; as also a
ground-shade ; because they go so much afide from the point of sight, and the
further, the more.
We conceive also, that if any houses, or other upright works, running towards
the point of sight were placed quite on the side, the one high and the other low,
as here, a grotto with a visto, there again something else with rusticated stone,
or ballustrades, &c. and before them a water, along the extremity of which,
some vases or figures were standing on pedestals; these objects, I say, although
they had no perfect shade, yet, with respect to the light, would suffice; ,and
moreover, throw ground-shades against each other; which would give the whole
work a great decorum and elegance.
If it be objected, that this management would cause too great a force on the
objects without the piece; and make it look empty in the middle, and the eye
of course be drawn too much to the side; moreover, the two corners of the piece
would then be too confining: I answer, that if the ordonnance be disposed on
such













































































































































































































































































































such a ground as aforesaid, and the colours well chosen and ordered, the
large light in the middle will be found the strongest, and the side-work
more close and compact; and by ordering some pedestals with vases here and
there against the large and broad shades of the buildings, they would produce a
fine effect.
Many dare not introduce any ground-shades on the fore-ground, in such a
fronting light, in order to break a little that large light, and make it go off; al-
ledging, that the wall covers it, and thinking, that no more ground-shade can
be seen on the ground than that of the wall : but these men are much mistaken;
they stand and behold the place, but do not consider what is built over their
heads ; what high stories, and what large ground-shades those things ought to
cause on the fore-ground going off, which they must imagine to be seen without
doors above the opening of the piece ; for, though it stand against a plain wall,
yet it artfully represents an intire open pannel in the room, the light whereof falls
directly into it.
To be the better understood in what I mean by (objects without the piece, or
outworks), I add the following demonstration in plate LI.
In the part A place a point of sight, B, and draw from it two visual lines, C
and D: now all that is without those lines, is without the piece E, and called
out-works, and may be supposed to represent a continued stone-work united and
joined to the wall F, whereby shades and ground-shades fall on the ground; and
all above it being sky, you can, as is said, shew the height of the house or
chimneys, by ground-shades falling into the picture.
Here it may be afked, Whether the figures in the middle (which on this occa-
sion make the principal light), ought not to be altogether, or always the major
part of them, in the snade; To which l answer, that the height or lowness of
the house must govern in that point ; for, if it be high, the ground-shade will
be longer; if low-roofed, neither so long nor broad.
This method, so far as it relates to fronting-pieces, is as well founded as help-
ful, and, though never practised, it is however not to be rejected : but no body
will lead the way, without sceing the examples of others. And yet, every day,
as we walk in sun-shine, we may make this observation in nature; the sun shevs
us examples enough. Moreover, it is natural in viewing things, rather to have
the sun behind than in our faces; and yet many represent the sun-light behind in
the picture, and not one does it fronting; as having no knowledge of the natures
and effects of colours, nor of making lightnefs and darkness against proper
E
Portrait and
grounds, and, consequently, do not understand due harmony.
bass-relief painters dare venture to do it, and find so much advantage in it, as
thereby best to deceive the eye, to their great honour.
I will freely,
If the artist think he can apprehend me better by an example,
give him one. See plate LI. aforesaid.
I place then, on the right side of the piece, a row of houses running to-
wards the point of sight. The first is square, with a step into the door-way ;
the door is half hidden behind the frame of the piece, and ornamented with two
pedestals with sphinxes. Two. or three feet over the door is a small moulding











Near this building stands another, rising somewhat
which supports the roof.
higher; the fide-walling whereof is plain, and in front are a door and window.
On each side of the entrance stands a pillar supporting the entablature, and there-
on is a compass-spandrel. Next this are seen rails running up to another house;
which is higher tnan the first, and lower than the second. Ten or twelve feet
further off stands an high wall, running a-crofs the piece; and in this wall, on the
left side of the point of sight, is a large open gate-way, through which we see
the off-scape. Above this gate, on the right side, appear the tops of some large
and high trees, which sill the sky. In the middle of the piece, we exhibit. an
octangular stone, and, against the front-cant, a water-trough. This stone is
about eight or ten feet high, and has, on top, a ball. On the left side, without
the piece, stand some trees running towards the point of sight.
Now, observe the light (which, as has been intimated, falls into the piece
fronting), and what ground-shades the objects give each other, and their course
with respect to the sun’s height.
He now, who understands perspective; may easily guefs what shades such ob-
jects will give on the ground, how large and long they will be, on what they
will fall, across, and running towards the point of sight: likewise, how much
this front-light will exceed a side one, in brightness as well as colours. All
things parallel with the horizon are intirely lighted by the sun; and contrarily,
those which are parallel with the visual lines, are dark and without his reach, and
so exactly limited, that the least projecture, even of an inch or a straw’s breadth,
will receive light, as the example shews.
As for the set-off or harmony, no one will doubt whether it is less to be found
in a fronting sun-shine than a side one; for, what is wanting in shade the colours
and tint will doubly supply.
This fort of light, how odd soever it may seem to those who never tried it,
neverthelefs affords many beautiful and advantageous accidents very pleasing to
the eye; but I must observe, that the wider and larger the piece is, the more
charming it becomes, than in a narrow and high one; because, the more the ob-
jects approach the point of sight, the less shade they give, and the further they
go off sideways from it, the broader are the shades.
I did not propose to say any thing further about the lights and their qualities;
but in the course of writing, something of moment touching them still occurs to
my thoughts, which I think worthy of observation, as being so uncommon, that I
doubt whether any instance has been before given of it; it is touching the air or
common light falling from on high thro’ an opening into a round and close temple,
or any place of retirement, rocky repository for the dead, &c. I suppose the open-
ing as the design will permit. Now we have formerly shewed, that common light,
contrary to that of the sun, illuminates the objects with widening rays ; wherefore,
all things, going away from the center of the round temple, have longer and nar-
rower ground-shades; as the nearer the said center, the fhorter; even so much, as
in standing just under or upon that center; they gave not any ground-shade at all,
cxcept under foot. On the contrary, it will be found, that such objects receive
stronger light from on high than those which go off sideways, and the further they
go






go off, still the less’: yet we perceive the contrary in the reffexions from the
grounds. The more the objects approach the center, the lighter they are in re-
flexions, be the ground even white, or blue, red or yellow, light or dark.
As for the course of the ground-shades of the obejcts, let them stand where they
will on the aforesaid plan or ground, they flow from the center or middle point
directly under the light.
CHAP. IX. Of Landscapes in a small Compass.
ceffary as a general rule for all choices; which we shall exemplify in
landscapes on almost the same basis as that of history; to wit, that there is a differ-
ence between a landscape in a small compass, and the contrary; and that the for-
mer is more artful and troublesome than the latter, though having less circum-
stances : to which, we shall subjoin the requisites necessary to both, in order to
make each in its kind equally good; together with a remarkable touching the by-
ornaments.
As to landscapes in general, they are, as we have shewed, in the same case as
histories; to wit, that a large ordonnance in a small compass, carries more art,
knowledge and esteem than the contrary ; because the objects require more work,
and a more plain and distinct expression of their qualities; which in small ob-
jects, in a large compass, is not so nicely requisite ; for the nearer we approach
the objects, the more senfibly they become. As in histories, variety of thoughts
and objects occur (for composing ordonnances, either small or large, with 2, 6,
20, 50, even an roo figures) in palaces, halls, galleries, towns, villages, in the
field and woods, plains, rocks, wildernesses, common roads, buildings, fountains,
and statyes, solitary places, with tombs and grottos, sea-ports, cascades or water-
falls, in order naturally to exhibit therein all sorts of occurrences, the heroic and
pastoral as well as the satyric, mournful, joyful, and merry. And though we
could order all the aforesaid. particulars into one piece, yet they cannot produce
such an effect, in reference to art, as each singly will do it; it being certain, that
things seen from afar, as we have formerly observed, never satisfy curiofity so well
as those which are near ; whereby they become to us more distinct, as well in
their existence and form, as colour. We know, that the more the objects dimi-
nisn and go off from us, the more they abate of their littlenefs, not only in their
superficies, but also in their out-lines and sways. A tree’s body full of holes and
knots, appears smooth and even at a distance ; even the crocked will seem almost
straight, and the whole leafing as one mafs.
It is true, that a’large and concise landscape does not give general satisfaction ;
yet we know that an asfembly of few (but people of judgment) will never break
up without doing business.; when, contrarily, a meeting of the vulgar seldom
does any thing without confusion. It is. the-fame in music with many voices;
they







they make a great noise, but never affect the senses like the single voice of afine
woman, accompanied with the basso continuo ; which intirely charms us, makes us
figh, even sometimes shed tears; and this is only caused 1. by the force which lies;
in a solo, supported by the bafs. 2. By the distinctness of the words sweetly ut-
tered ; and lastly, by their sense or paffion : all which is not to be found in a.
great concert ; because we cannot understand the words, much less the sense, but
fix our attention on the general harmony only. It is true, a great performance of
mufic will please common sense, but an artful solo is for people of judgment ; the
former does in some measure, affect the body, but the latter touches the soul, and-
leaves lasting impreffions.
The principal difference between small and great landscapes lies in the point of
sight. In the great, in a small compass, the horizon is commonly somewhat low,
and in the sniall in a large compass, high : in one is a high ground, in- the other a
valley ; the one is a natural representation, and the other looks like amap : the
one keeps a good decorum, let it hang ever so high, and every thing looks up-
right; in the other all things seem to be tumbling; and it appears well no longer
than while on the easel. In a great landscape in a small'compass all is seen plain:
and distinct; at least one part, according as the choice is ; in the small in a large
compass, we can perceive nothing perfectlybut the general; partly, because the great
light creats a faintness, and partly, because the piece is viewed at a great distance,.
as hanging commoniy above other paintings: it is even a certain maxim, that as
pictures never hang below the eye, unless in an auction, so a landscape with an
high horizon, must always needs be false. I leave the contrary to one’s judgment,.
hiow much more decorum and advantage it has, when of such an extent as to be
placed high or low, even up to the ceiling, without fear of being hung below the
cye, when the other must find its comfort under its set height, without hope of
ever gaining its decorum, unless by coming casually on the easel again.
After having shewn, that a great landscape in a small compass, with a. low ho-
rizon, can bear hanging above the eye,, and look becoming; and that a small one
in a large compass, because of the high horizon, loses its-true quality, to the de-
termint of the painter : we conclude that there is no better method to be used with
a landscape of large extent, in order to make it becoming and natural, than to set,
as aforesaid, the horizon somewhat lower; since such, pieces are always placed.
above, I’may say far above the eye.
But here, perhaps, a difficulty may be started, namely, that if the horizon be
set so low, the sky will overpower the principals of the picture : but in answer, let
me afk, whether the sky is to be locked on as-an useless patch ; Does not the sky
most adorn and invigorate a landscape, and make it look agreeable ; Must we
suppose the earth to excel the heaven’s in magnitude à Ay, but say they, There
is nothing to be seen in the sky--But is a beautiful sky such a trifle, and so easily
to be painted ? Is it not more artful to represent: thin driving clouds than a flat.
ground, here and there an hill or plash of water; grass or herbs ?. A beautiful fky
is a proof of a good master; but if it seem two large, we have an help for-: that::
make the fore-ground somewbat large, and then a tree or two, thick or thin-leav--
ed, will take up enough of the superfluity, and break any thing that is obstructing..








Likewise a building may serve, either fronting, or in profile; or, instead of it, a
pyramid or obelisk : these, not to be flung into the off-scape, according to usual
practice, but brought on the fore-ground great and strong, letting the tops of
those objects advance high, in order to fill, and thereby, as I have said, in some
measure here and there to break the sky. But here it may be again objected, that
such large trees would not look fine, becaufe their leafing cannot be seen. But is
the leafing of a tree of more value than the top of a beautiful building, pyramid,
or any such uncommon object; Must these give place and be left out for the
sake of a tree ; Would it not look wonderful, and be a great pity that one in an
hundred should lose its leafing ? Let one, two, or more boughs shoot forth;
there are enough without them. I say then, that by this means, the sky will be
fufficiently filled, and the difficulty removed. And now the skv is moderated,
and the greatest force lies in the landscape and by-ornaments ; the fore-ground is:
elegantly embellisned, the off:scape broad and deep, with an extant equal to my
wisn ; and the horizon-such, as I need not fear the tumbling of the objects.
When I speak of placing forwards great trees, elevated buildings, pyramids
and large figures for by-ornaments, some may possibly say; That then the ground
goes down behind; and rises forwards ; fince they cannot relisn any thing they are
not used to, and. which requires the objects. to be somewhat more finished and
larger than in their common way : but although I have thus shewed the preference
of one manner of painting before the other, yet ldo not prescribe it as a law to be
always followed. My design is only to illustrate what is fine in the one above the-
other.
CHAP.X. Of Painting Rooms with Landscapes.
HThink this point to be of moment; and weighty enough to be considered with
attention ; the rather, since some painters often happen to see different ma-
nagement with respect to the rules for painting halls, parlours, &c. and therefore
cannot resolve on what is most suitable and advantageous for those apartments
and when they are to perform something therein, so many difficulties arise, and
their opinions so much vary, that they are at a stand whether they shall represent a
picture, or a painting in the manner of tapestry, or nature itself.
As to the first fort, we must be sensible, that the pictures being all of a size, and '
placed orderly, will. be taken by the knowing, for abstracted paintings, having
no relation to the room ; according to the notions of those, who, being masters of
a good collection, are indifferent where their pictures hang, whether against bare
walls or hangings. As to the second fort, it is certain, that paintings made in the
manner of tapestries, will never be taken for real tapestries, be their borders ever
so beantiful and elegant ; and therefore have not the effect which the master pur-
poses. The third fort, viz. to represent nature, is certainly the best: for; what:
can be wanting, when-the work is natural,, artful, and proper to the place ?







A representation of tapestry is à lame picture. And à picture not agreeing with
nature and the place, is also deficient ; wherefore, a master who paints such, is un-
pardonable, because, instead of adorning the room and preserving its architectonic
order, he at once spoils both.
I was once afked, whether any certain rules, besides the light and point of
to be observed throughout, as’far as concerned the compartition and ornaments;
and that, whether painted or real, they must correspond with the door, mantle-
piece and alcove, and the whole work takes its proportion from an order, that it
may look proper, and make up one compact body. Now, if a wall were to be
covered with a single picture, it must be handled in the manner of an hanging: but
a picture is somewhat more brittle than a tapestry, and sooner damaged by hanging
so low. Chairs must not be set against it; if it get hurts or dents, they are not
easily repaired: a sarbase is much better; and besides, the wall is sometimes so
long, that it cannot well be seen at one view. Wherefore, when the diftance is
too small, it is better to divide the wall, and to use more than one point of
sight.
If now there be a door in the middle, or on each side, they ought to be left free,
though they are without mouldings, and even with the cloth ; for the room must
have at least one passage; but not painted over, according to the practice of some,
with trees, hills, or stone-work, as if it were not there : a very common error,
and which no master will justify, unless we have a greater eye to profit, than the
general elegance of the work. Wherefore, it is more adviseable to enrich, the
door or doors with sine mouldings or ornaments. If the door happen to come in
the middle, a beautiful frontispiece, adorned with carving, will look magnificent :
this, in order to save building-charges, might also be represented on cloth; yet
some artists who are not used to it, will not easily be induced. to undertake it, but
rather so much more landscape ; though on due consideration, and for the sake of
decorum and naturalnefs, they had better call. in the assistance of another hand for
their help. When now there happens to be adoor, butnot in the middle, it will
be proper, for obtaining regularity, to order also one on the other side; unless it
be even with the wall, and the moulding of the surbase run acrofsit; in which
case, you may make something or other on its upper part, suiting with the land-
scape, such as a stone with bass relief either distant or near. I say, you may do so,
but for my part, lshould not much like it: wherefore, my opinion is, that two
doors are much better than none ; and though you might nevertheless incline to the
last proposal, in order thus to have a larger piece, yet it is inconsistent, since the
ceiling must have its support according to its compartment. Under each summer
ought to be something, either a pilaster or term, or else the piece must have a
circuiar head. But rooms are seldom so ordered, perhaps, because some men
love to engross all the gain to themselves, exclusive of the assistance of others; and
were some permitted to do as they please, they would paint over every thing with
flowers, fruit; or history : an architecture-painter every where mouldings.
They
may even in time go such lengths, that could the floor be painted as well as the
ceiling,







ceiling, we should see in every stone, either a flower-pot, visto, or an history, ae
sometimes we see it in iron chests.
I say then, that an artist, though the whole work be undertaken by him ohly,
must not introduce more of his particular branch into it, than reason and decorum
require ; taking the affistance of a friend in such parts, if there be any as he has
not studied; for variety refreshes the eye. I think an hall or room, with one fort
of pictures, like a shop wherein are sold but one fort of goods. To give an in-
stance, let us suppose a room, with a side-wall, thirty feet long, divided into
threé pannels ; and the surbase round the room and the pilasters between the
pannels, to be either of painting or wood, as I find it proper; and over the
chimney I propose a piece with figures. I, though a landscape-painter, undertake
the whole work ; but, not being able to manage the chimney-piece, desire the
assistance of a figure-painter ; because a generous painter, if he expect praise and
honour, must not so much regard his gain as the decorum of the room ; a cloth of
five or six feet, more or less, in such a grand undertaking, is but a triffe : let
another hand get something by it, ifit tend but to the ornament of the work. I
order a figure-piece over the chimney, because it is the principal place of the
room. For, what business can a landscape have there,-the horizon whereof
ought to be without, nay, much lower than the picture ; Wherefore, in so
principal a plâce nothing would be seen but fky.
We are very senfible, that if in such a room, we represent nature, we cannot
introduce into one pannel, a morning into the second, a mid-day, and into the
third, an evening, nor use various countries; all must have one and the same air.
We grant, that were the room comparted into four pannels, we could exhibit the
four Cardinal points, or the four seafons, provided each piece had a particular
point of sight:
As for the difficulty of the left and right light, to which the side-pieces must
needs be subject, and the light falling on the wall fronting, from the windows,
we have sufficiently spoken of it, in tne book of lights and shade.
And now, if throughout, we see a continued or natural landscape, the air alike,
and the leafing of the trees running from one into the other, when they are ex-
tensive enough, I imagine the painting must look well, and nature and art be fully
satisfied. If Iam not followed by every body, l am sufficiently honoured by doing
justice to art and the curioûs.
CHAP. XI. Of ornamental Painting without-doors-
FTER having treated of Roman painting with landscape, I think this the
A fittest place to speak of ornamental painting without-doors. This point is
very useful for two reasons ; first, because by certain paintings, adapted to places,
Secondly, because
we discover what fort of places they are, and what uses put to.
it will.






it will be of service to artists frequently concerned in painting vistos, foliage, and
other things without doors, in leading them to further thoughts.
Ithink it most proper to ornament summer-houses, (which are at the ends of
walks, and usually benched) with grottos, set off with figures and fountains; but
shallow and side summer houses look best with bafs reliefs of a darkisn colour. In
houses of pleasure, for drinking, talk or other amsements, suit grottos, fountains,
figures, urns, and vases. The ends of galleries become architectonic views, and
the piers between the windows, niches with figures and bafs reliefs, according to
the thicknefs of the wall. In gateways, having rooms on each side, figures and bafs
reliefs are proper; as also fine architecture, set off with terms and other such
things : yet on the sides and sofitas of windows ought to be foliage only.
But, to return to the summer-house painting, we must consider, that as the kinds
are various, so there suit to each, particular representations as well in design as co-
lours, according to the different lights.
If the building be square, and have the opening in the middle, and the painting
exhibit a bass relief, the light ought to be fronting ; but if it be close-roofed, the
light must come more from below. Again, if this building bedeep, or the open-
ing which gives it light, far from the wall, it ought to be lighted mostly from
the reflexion of the ground ; yet, if the opening be wide, the light may proceed
somewhat from the side : but contrarily, when the summer-house is shallow, or
the opening near, and one part of the painting is in the light, and the other in
shade, its own natural reflexion must be seen in the shady part, that the work may
look like a real carved bafs relief : and, because no tenderness or pleasantness can
be used in it, as being in shade, Ithink the parts there ought to be handled some-
what more large and strong, I mean, with few littlenesses, in order to make them
come out, and for preventing confusion, that at a further distance the work may
look becoming. Thus much as to light.
The colours in this case, if well chosen and put together, add no small lustre ;
of these, I think the three following forts the most proper, namely, free-stone,
blue stone and white marble, by reason of the greens of the building, which cover
it, and commonly shade the painting, and impart to it more or less of their colour;
which however, looks lovely and sweet, especially upon the white. The two
others, blue and free-stone, may be used for by-works ; since purple, violet or red
cannot have here a proper place, by reason of the discordant green, producing an
inharmonious mixture. But, if a clean light fall on the painting without being
shaded, then the three last named colours appear well, as does also a flesh-colour,
and have with the green, a good effect, as being by means of it improved : and
the green thereby becomes beautiful and lively ; especially when placed between
blue stone ornaments, which every where unite with the green, and keep together.
But in this management let me be understood to suppose the summer-house to be
wide ; where what has been said is, on each side, next the opening without,
painted on boards, giving little or no shade,
In the painting, ought also be considered its shape, whether circular, square,
octangular, oval, or any other, which will best suit there.
As






As for the subjects ’or designs; they must be governed by the situation of the

place. Flowers are sacred to Flora; the spring, to Venus; fruits, to Pomona;
vines, to Bacchus ; herbs, to AEsculapius, corn, to Ceres ; music, to Apollo, who is
also the parent of the seasons ; procreation, to Priapus; and fruitfulness, to Diana.
From these heads may be drawn abundance of matter for the ornament of summer-
houses.
Now, to be more plain in what I have before asserted, Ishall exhibit two
examples.
For the one, I place Zephyrus and Fhra in the middle of a square or round piece,
as occasion requires ; thesé are both seen fronting, mutually embracing in a lovely
manner. He, sitting on her right side, has his left arm about her neck, with his
right hand holding her’s, which rests on his knee, and she speaking to him very
friendly and lovingly, almost mouth to mouth. Her head inclines over the right
shoulder. With her left hand she is taking up a wreath out of a basket of flowers.
Her lap sways to the left, and his to the right; and between them are sitting one
or two Cupids twisting a garland about a flaming torch. He is almost naked and.
winged, having a trumpet lying by him. She is airily and finely dressed.
The other example consists of three figures, and exhibits Flora on the right side,
Pomona on the left, and Apollo in the middle, touching his lyre, and sitting some-
what above the twoothers. Flora has a cornu copiæ full of flowers, and Pomona’s
is silled with fruits, and she holding a pruning-knife. Apollo sits fronting. Fhra
looks forward, with a finger on her mouth; and Pomona, as in a furprize, tosses
her head backwards and sideways. These goddesses sit in profile against each other.
The by-ornamennts round about, consist of children or Cupids.
Such designs as these, especially the former, are most proper in flower-gardens ;
but where there are most fruits, Pomona takes place. Here you must observe, that
l order these two compofitions for bass reliefs, somewhat more than half rising,
and lighted fronting; but when the lights comes froin a side, they ought to be
very faint, or little relieved; as we shall further illustrate in the book of statuary,
treating of the three forts of bafs reliefs.
In slower-gardens suit best distant vistos, or groves ; contrarily, in walks with
trees, the ornaments should be rivers, sea-havens with hills, buildings, rocks, and
fuch like ; as they are not shaded by trees, but receive a pure and open light.
Yet in summer-houses and, places for rest, which are somewhat shaded by the
greens, vistos are not proper, but rather bafs reliefs, consisting of one, two; or
three grounds.
On the court-yard walls, between the house and garden, suit also bass reliefs of
one or other of the coloured stones aforesaid ; likewise terms, urns and vases with
greens, in case no natural ones be there ; or else fountains, with their water-falls.
Against agreen hedge or wall suit well, circular hollows, with busts in them,
if also thereabout stand no natural ones. These busts may be painted of white or
light red marble, or other light coloured stone.
The places before-mentioned are the principal and most common, but seldom
happen to be together ; yet if they should, the methods aforesaid will be of uie,
and you may enrich your thoughts by their means, since they are laid down









as well for hints as examples: and if you also consult the siné designs of le Potre,
vou will never be at a stand. But the better to aid the conceptions of a young
master, Iwillingly subjoin another ordonnance of my own invention, as follows.
I place Venus in the middle of the piece, sitting quite naked between Pomona and
Flora; this latter stands on her right side, crowning her with a chaplet of flowers,
and Pomona on her left, offers her a branch of peaches, which Venus receives with
her left hand, who sitting high and almost strait, maintains a fine air and charming
deportment; and thus by her triplicity affording an agreeable harmony of beauty,
smell and taste, (for here beauty implies sight)and if the place be higher than
broad, you may join Apollo to their company, somewhat off and fainter, sitting
plaving on a cloud : and thus you may, in the most proper manner, exhibit the sive
senses. However, Apollo is not so absolutely necessary here, since Venus, or Beauty,
also implies harmony ; but I bring in Pomona, because fruits and flowers generally
go together ; for flowers grow and appear all the year round, as well as the fruits in
fummer and autumn. There are also fruit, which blossom at the same time as the
flowers do, to wit, peaches, apricots, almonds, &c.
In a phyfical and kitchen-garden, 1 would place Asculapius the son of Apollo,
god of phyfic, as the principal of the piece, and to whom the garden is sacred,
standing in the middle between Apollo and Diana; the one with his quiver at his back
sits on his right hand, or near him, holding a scepter topped with a sun, or else a
slaming torch; and the other, on his left, adorned with a moon, either on her
head or in her hand, and equipped with her bow and arrows. Asculapius holds a
staff twined with a serpent.
The moon or earth, causes the seed to rot, which Apollo. or the sun, by his
warming and searching influence causes to rise. As to phyfical herbs, three virtues
are ascribed to them ; warming. and cooling, and a mixture of both : these may
be oppositely represented by the aforesaid three persons ; since, by AEsculapius,
with his staff twined with a serpent, is understood Prudence, in moderating one herb
by another, and by art to make them work their effect.
Having thus largely handled this point, I shall confirm it by some figural ex-
amples respecting what has been before said, in order to shew what sort of paintings
and ornaments are most proper in such places where we usually represent any thing,
and which must govern a careful master, in order to make his designs conformablé
thereto. Observe then, beginning with the first sketch, what Ishall further say.
I. If the proprietor be desirous of having the place painted all round, what fort
will be the most proper ; colours or bass relief.
2. What obstructions may be there, to hinder the naturalness of the work in
7r.
some designs.
3. At what distance it ought to be seen either from without or within, since it
must be executed boldly, or neat: accordingly.
4. Whether the painting is to remain there constantly, winter and summer.
You see then, in the first example of plate LII. a place inclosed bys two side
walls, at the end of-which is a summer-house equal to the whole breadth ; the
entrance into it is in the middle, and on each side is an opening, through which
the representations of A and B, the one on the right and the other on the left, re-
ceive








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































ceive theirlight; as the middle piece C has it fronting. Over the summer-house
and wall appear the tops of the hind-buildings D. Now the question is, What
subject is proper for C, a visto or a bass relief; A green prospect, such as a
woody country, or slower-garden, would have no good effect in this green sum-
mer-house, when seen from without, where it ought to be viewed ; because a
mixture of green with green affords neither variety nor delight. A sea haven, or
a court, adorned with statues, fountains, cascades, and such like elegancies,
would appear exceedingly fine, viewed from within (for those colours look well
among the green), but seen at its proper distance without, they will be found to
be false and contrary to nature, by reason of the tops of the houses D, which,
being behind, and rising above them, discover a general stoppage : whence it
follows, that nothing is more proper for the middle piece than a bass-relief.
Let us now consider what is best for the two side-pieces seen from within; the
one, as said, receiving its light from the left, and the other from the right. A
bass-relief cannot, in my opmnion, be decorous there, because the eye must not
be so closely confined. They ought to be vistos, as not having the inconvenience
which attends the middle piece to hinder their naturalness: the summer-house
heing roofed in, the light therefore falls more advantageous on these two places than
the middle one, as being without the glare of it : wherefore vistos must be best
there; and even the fainter and bluer, the better, as before intimated. An haven
with shipping, a court with fountains, islands with hills, a street-view of fine
buildings, temples and galleries, together with a blue off-scape, &c. These are
very delightful objects, and produce, -between the greens, a variety and deco-
rum : now, we ought to observe that the two pieces A and B, though they re-
ceive their light from the place, yet, if we please, may be lighted otherwise ;
because they are without-door prospects, having no communication with this
within-door place, as thé bass-relief has, which is confined to it. Thus much as
that to side; the same observations are proper for the sides E and F.
The second examplé, in plate LIl. aforesaid, exhibits a garden with parterres,
also walled in. In the middie is a gate of letticed work; and, on each side, a
shallow letticed seat covered. over with greens, noted A and B. In the back of
each seat is a circular representation; and over them appear the tops of trees,
as of a large orchard, marked C. Now let us consider what subjects will be most
proper for the seat A and B. First the1, observe the distance whence the work is
to be seen, which is from without, on the near-side of the parterres. Here, af
in the preceding example, vistos are not proper; and, because the place is so
full of green, more green would not look well : wherefore, half raised bas-re-
liefs would be best. As for the colour, we have before prescribed it. The sides
may also be adorned as before in the last example, observing what objects rise be-
hind and above them. Here, on one side, are houses, and on the other a green
wall.
Behold now a third sketch in plate LIII. discovering a walk with trees ; at the
end of which stands the painted object A. Heréin you have great liberty, and
may use your pleafure ; since the design stands free from any obstruction. This
only is to, be noted in it, that, because it is a long walk, and, in nature
itself








itself we are oftentimes tired with travelling such an one, we have no occasion to
make it longer by perspective and other views, but rather stop the walker by
a sine prospect, and invite him to a little contemplation and reft, that he may
afterwards the better go forward : wheréfore, we here suppose, a beautiful
imagery, fountain-like, of white marble, placed in a grotto or niche arched
with green, and therein painted, in full proportion, and with all strength,
Cephalus and Aurora, Zephyrus and Flora, or Venus and Adonis, and such like : or,
you may represent there, in a rock, having several holes discovering the sky,
(udmus killing the dragon; or, a Diana with her nymphs; or a term or faunus,
accompanied by bacchanals or satyrs, with their instruments, some of which
spout water; or else you may exhibit a sleeping Silenus, with the nymph Egle,
squeczing mulberries on his face. All these are proper subjects for the place,
and suitable to the occasion.
You may also paint some terms on boards cut away, and place them against a.
green wall on both fides of the niches, windows,
or circular hollows; wherein
may be set busts or casts, as you see in the second
example; of fuch colours as
before mentioned, and which appear lovely among the green : thefe terms may
represent bacchanals, satyrs, gods and goddesses, some naked and-others dressed,
according to the season and place.
CH AP. XII. Tables or Ordonnances of Venus and Adonis, for the
Embellishment of Landscapes.
HAT I may conceal nothing from. the artists, but as much as possible
rouze and enrich their genius, I have pitched on this subject far the or-
nament of landscapes : and, though it be common, yet I question whether it
was ever handled in such a manner.  I divide it into three ordonnances.
The firft is, Venus’s making love to him.
The second, his taking leave of hee, to go a liunting, or rather to be killed.
And,
The third, her finding him dead.
The fable is this. Venus was, according to the Poets, very much enamoured
with the youth Adonis, notwithstanding his coldness and insensibility : and yet he
refrained not from kissing and caressing her for a season ; which much incensed
Aiars, and raised his jealousy and rages as often as he saw the youth in her lap-
The first Ordonnanse.
The place opens, a pleafant and agreeable country, stored with every thing
that can delight the eye, woods, hills, valleys; rivers, and stone-work, except
houses








houses and temples. Iset thé point of sight in the middle of the piece.
Be-
tween it and the left side, on an hillock, I place the goddess and her spark, at-
tended by the three Graces, who are to adorn her ; one of these is twisting a wreath
of flowers, another is crowning her with a chaplet of them, and the third is
bringing a basket of fruit. Some Cupids are toying about her; one especially is
fitting at her feet, blowing Adonis’s horn: at whom he smiles; when Venus, with
her arm about his neck; with her hand presses his against her breast, or kisses it.
Behind the aforesaid hillock, against the off-scape, I place some thick-leaved
trees; the highest in the middle of the piece, and those to the left somewhat
lower and thinner. Behind them we discover the remains of a colonade, rising
and appearing:half behind the hillock, and running towards the point of sight.
On the same side forwards, l set a crofs low wall, which the hillock stems.
Against this wall, which is but three or three feet and an half in rise, I place à
water-god fitting asleep by his vase, and encompassed with greens : and in the
corner, against the frame of the piece, I place a large willow tree, or-one and an
half. And thus half the piece is filled. On the right side forwards, I plant a
knobby mossy body of a tree, about six or seven feet high; and close behind it,
a large and beautiful one fully leayed. Somewhat bevond appears an high square
spedestal, whereon stands a large and elegant vase. These objects are in a line
running towards the point of sight, making a way between it and the hillock,
which is wide forwards, and diminishing at 'the end of the fore-ground; where the
second begins, and runs out into an open field ; whence to the horizon are seen
some faint hills.
Let us now come-forward again. In the right side corner, Envy kindles the
fire of war ;’shé is flying with a broken stinking pitch-torch in her hand, and her
head beset with twining serpenits, secretly fhewiing Mars the: two lovers. And
now we see the devouring god of war an his bellys with-ione-leg over a stone,
lurking behind the pedestal, and staring eamnestly, between it and ithe green of
the trees, at the cause of his jealousy; nis spear and fhield lie at his feet.
I once saw a print of Julio Romano, wherein he-has placed Mars in the off-
scape, purfuing Adonis sword in hand ; which I think too obscure and far-fetchect.
The sense may be tolerablé; yet it is against the fable; for Ovid dues not men-
tion that Adonis was killed. by. Mars wath. a sword, but by a. wild boar, through
his instigation.
In the mean time, I doubt not but this my fketch and disposition will seem
strange : nevertheless, if well executed, it will certainly appear sine with the pe-
destal, low wall, and- colonade ; since such things create great decorum and variety
in a landscape.
The light; I assign, is bright sun-shine-
My intention heré is, to represent the month of May, or the Spring, when every
thing is coming forth and blossoming; though I am very sensible that the green
of the trees, by the diversity of colour, is, in the summer, more painter-like ;
however this must not be like a summer; besides, the island of Cyprus is not like
Holland, or other cold countries, where the greens come up late; for, otherwise,
I should not introduce à basket of fruit.
NOW,








Now, if it be asked because I still set on the large pedestal a vase, and that
directly against the hillock, where Venus and Adanis are with the Graces, whether
this would not throw a very large ground-shade over those figures ; I say it would
not ; because I assign the sun a meridian altitude. Moreover, I do not set the
pedestal so near the hillock as to be any obstacle to. the sigures. The foremost
tree, because it rises so high, can also as little prejudice them, its ground-shade
passing by them, over the willow in the corner, or at least a part of it; which
makes the colonade, against which it spreads, fall back, though the trees behind
the hillock can sufficiently effect the same; since I make them either dark green,
or else in shade, and the little leafing hanging over the lovers, in the light; in
order thus to have below some darkness for setting off the lovers: my intention
being to place that group directly in the sun, in onder to have there the principal
light.
But here I may be reproved on a supposition that l act counter to my own po-
sition; namely, that in sun-shine people do not stand talking without shading
their eyes : which l do not deny ; but let it be considered, that the gods are not
subject to human frailtiés, and therefore they can look against the sun : and to
solve the difficulty with respect to Adonis, who is not a god, I make his upper
parts in shade, receiving agreeable and strong reflexions from Venas and the
Graces.
From whence arises another difficulty; namely, by what means this ground-
shade can fall on him only, fince they are sitting so close together, that Venus’s arm
is about his neck, and one of his hands presses her breast; and therefore she must
needs take part of the same shadé; To which, I answer, that there are means
enough, by one thing or other, to find that shade. And as for Venus, she may be
so disposed, either a little backward or forward, as. to receive light enough.
Now, that Mars and Enzy, at the stone, may not draw the eye too much from
the principals, by making them in the light, I bring not much sun into that
quarter; I mean that I set the foremost whole stem of the tree, and a great part
of the hindmost, with part of Mars, in a ground-shade, occasioned by something
without the piece; and to let that shade run, on the fore-ground, just to the
low wall ; breaking the residue here and there somewhat with bushes and shrubs :
I might also place there a priapus-term, or other object, in order a little to fill that
corner.
We have before said, that neither houses nor temples must enter the compofi-
tion. Why not they, say some, as well as the terme To which l answer, that the
fable makes no mention of any such objects : and let me afk, who should live in
the houses ) It is not said, that Adonis, though a man, had any houshiold, or that
he worshipped in a temple.
This piece may be richly embellished with ten or twelve figures, though. Mars
and Envy are but partly figures. Some landscape-painters may possibly object
against so great a number, for that those, well executed, would better become
an history than a landscape: but the answer is easy; the figures are small, and
the landscape large.
We shall now proceed to the colours and actions of- the figures.
We






We represent Venus in her linen, yet with her upper parts and legs almost
bare, under her, on the grafs, appears part of a light red garment.
Adonis’s garment is greenish blue, or dark violet.
The two Graces, standing next to Venus, are drest in light-coloured garments of
changeable stuff and broken colours, preserving, about that group, a great mafs
of light : for which reason, I chuse such colours as do not cause any unseemly
reflexions in the carnation of Venus or Adonis. Her garment, who is crowning
Venus with a chaplet, is rose-colour ; a fecond, more forward, and with one knee
bent, is in white, and has a flower in her hand; and the third having the fruits,
and standing on the left side, and somewhat higher on the hillock, has an aurora
or straw-coloured garment. We need not say much about Mars and Enzy ; since
Caesar Ripa relates enough touching them. Nothing is more proper for Mars,
than a rusty fillemot or blood-coloured coat;, and for Envy, than a black one-
As for the motions of Venus and Adonis, they are fronting in both; but their
feet more or less turned to the light.
Adonis, on the right side, inclines his upper parts towards Venus, with his right
hand on her breast, and his right shoulder coming forwards ; his under parts are
fronting, and his leg extended, and his right drawn in, as if he were about to
rise; his face fronting inclines a little over his shoulder to the child who blows
the horn. Contrarily, Venus, resting on her right thigh, applies, in some mea-
sure, both her knees to his extended leg ; her face, in profile, turning towards
him, fronts the sun; her breast is also seen fronting ; she draws back her left el-
bow, in order to press his hand to her breast.
On due consideration, these two figures will be found to have a natural and easy
contrast or opposition, in motion; since I have endeavoured to give myself fuil
satisfaction touching all the actions exhibited, before l set the layman.
But I must return again to the ordonnance. I forgot to place two children be-
hind the foremost low wall;- of whom; the one is leaning over it, and, with
a finger on his mouth, and head sunk, is shewing the other the steeping river-
god. I place them there, first, for decorum’s sake ; and, secondly, in order to
break, in some measure, that long and stiff piece of stone-work. The water-god
is of a brownisn yellow hue, almost as dark as the said stone-work; and for two
reasons ; first, for the sake of repose; and, secondly, to prevent a mafs of light
there with the children,, to the detriment of the principal : besides a further pur-
pose ; to adorn the pedestal of the vase with a bass-relief, representing a bacchanal
or dancing nymphs; and though it come in shade, yet l assign it strong re-
flexions. There ought also to be added, one or two dogs afleep; of which,
the one awaking, stares back with prick'd up ears, at the sound of the horn.
I have before said, that one of the Graces should be dressed in white; but noW,
I cast a beautiful blue veil over it, as proper to break the strength of the white-
A piece, thus executed, is sufficient for the production of many others ; espe-
cially if we duly consider how many things are observed in it, which by few is
taken notice of viz. the quality of each figure, its origin or emblematic signifi-
cation, &c. Many fictions are painted from the Poet’s description, but few
people weigh the writer’s meaning, though attended with an cxplanation; which
however,






however is only general, without the addition of the circumstances, though well
known to the writer; as the shapes, dresses, colours, paffions, and other remark-
ables : whence we may conclude what must be the case of those men who do not
make themselves masters of all these things; and how easily they may mistake, even
pervert the sense of the writer or Poet. If the fact lay in the spring, they re-
present it in summer; if in a winter morning, theys exhibit an autumn evening :
ought the opening to be a solitary place, or wilderness, they will introduce diver-
sions : should any person have a red drapery, as proper to him, it is made blue,
yellow, &c. We grant that the fable may be fepresented plain enough;
and who the characters are, and what they are doing, presently conceived; but
the drift of it is wanting.
It is unnecessary to enlarge on this table or ordonnance further than to observe,
that Mars here signifies vengeance ;, Adonis, the cvinter; and Venus, the spring;
which is the reason why these two last cannot agree.
The Poets write, that there were four who went under the name of Venus. The
first was the daughter of Calum and the Day. The second was brought forth of
the froth of the sea, being conceived in a mother of pearl, and conducted to Cyprus
by the airy zephyrs : it was she who bore Cupid to Mercury. The third was the
daughter of Japiter and Dione, who was wedded to Vulcan, chief of the cuckolds;
and the fourth was the Syrian, called Astarte, who courted the love of Adonis, and
to whom Solomon erected altars to pleasure his concubines. Whence we may
judge what great disparity there is between these Venuses.
As for the wild boar, it implies the night, ignorance, impiety, filthiness,
lewdness, &c.
The second Ordonnance, or Sequel of the foregoing Story.
When Adonis was now tired with kissing and flattery, or, to say better, when his
forrowful fâte drew near, and the dogs, scenting the boar, set up a cry, he, deaf
to Venus’s intreaties, wrested from her embraces, and jumped up eager for sport.
We must previously understand, that we are obliged to confine ourselves to two
principal points; namely, the general disposition, and the light: and though,
on a due consideration, it may possibly seem to be chosen less advantageous than
if it were a single piece (which I willingly allow), yet, as it now serves to match
another, it therefore requires the same light, though a reversed one might bet-
ter become it; because then I should be at greater liberty : but even then, the
dispofition would not be different enough from the former.
We have, in the book or ordonnance, shewed, that when two pieces hang to-
gether, they ought to have a certain conformity ; especially landscapes with small
figures: as if, for instance, the heavist work be in the one on the right side, and the
visto on the left, in the other or matching-piece it must be contrary; and yet, not-
withstandingthat necessity or rule, which however subsists, Ifind something which gives
me greater satisfaction, and better expresses the sense, as may appear in the sequel.
place as in the preceding ordonnance, the point of sight in the middle of the
I.
piece, and on the right side an eminence, ascended by three or four steps, fronting






or parallel with the horizon. upon it, at the end against the off-scape, I represent
an open niche, almost square and compass-headed, adornedronboth sides, with pilas-
ters, supporting a small but elegant cornice, here and there somewhat broken. About
the niche, hang festoons of poppies, which are fastened to the crown of the niche,
and being buttoned up on each side, their ends intwined hang down together.
Thro’ this niche, having a seat before it, we discover an agreeable view of woods,
lawns, rivers, roads, &c. This eminence takes up a third part of the piece,
running off steep on the inner side. Forwards, against the steps, which are mostly
in shade by trees without the piece, to the corner whereof stands the goddess, we
place her gilt chariot drawn by two pidgeons.
On the left side, betwen the point of sight and the frame of the piece, stand
three or four great and beautiful trees, in a row, runing from the fore-part of the
piece, and by the hillock towards the point of sight. In the corner, behind the emi-
nence, rises an high and rough rock, also running towards the same point, making
between both a narrow passage, which forwards is over-run with bushes and grass;
and behind is bare, so as to discover, through it, the off-scape and end of the rock.
Forwards in the rock, I make a large craggy hollow, into which the water falls
with impetuosity. Thus much mostly as to the fore-ground: at the end of it
runs a narrow crossing river, from the eminence to the back part of the rock ;
along the side whereof, Ishew a plantation of high trees, in order to make the
off-scapes, which is seen through them, apear as in a valley. On the level whereon
stands Adonis ; l set, between two trees, a white marble basis, with a broken term,
and its trunk lying near it.
Thus I have shewed the general defign ; which I quistion not, will appear more
uncommon and wood-like than the other. The third I hope to make still more
wild than this, because the subject requires it. Some may possible think it is to
be an agreeable and delightful ordonnance ; but the sequel will shewit to be other-
wise; for in this, I represent the month of August, and the sun somewhat darkened
and fiery, instead of shining brightly, the air gloomy and cloudy, as if it were go-
ing to thunder; the wind also bloes, and every thing is shaking and in motion,
not one way, but as in a whirl-wind, the dust, like a vapour, rising from the ground
in some places.
Perhaps you did not expect this fort of management, but on due consideration
of the case, it will be found both natural and artful.
We now proceed to dispose the characters.
The Goddess, seeing the evening approach, doubled her courtship. The cold
Adonis contrarily, eager for sport, hearing the noise of the dogs, hastily arises from
the eminence. Now, all things are in an hurry, Venus follows him with intrea-
ties ; but in vain ; Fate seizes and pulls him along with her. The Graces are in con-
fufion ; one runs after him; another, fearful of the goddess’s swooning, and tum-
bling down the steps, supports her; the third, sadly shrieking and crying, lifts
up her open hands on high. The boys are in contention; one is hawling Adonis
away, and the other stopping him : Cupid lies thrown on the ground : others run
with the dogs before. Tke wild boar appears in the before-menfioned narrow pas-
sage, between the eminence and the river; set on by Gruel Rage with a pitch-torch









Now this ordonnance seems to have much more work than’the preceding; and
yet, if considcred, it will be found’otherwise; and that in the former, the figtres
are only more scattiered : besides, in hearing things related, they always seem mors
to us, than in the picture itself.
Venus, I exhibit as coming down the steps, as also one of ghe Graces, whe rune
after Adonis, isince he is slipt out of the goddess’s hands. The youth, I represent
running juft in the middle of the piece, between the eninenee of the trees,three
or four paces beyond the steps, whereon the goddefs stands beseeching him in
tears. He is almost half in the ground-shade of the eminence; for I have said,
that the sun is setting. The children who attend the dogs, are entirely shaded by
the stone-work on the eminence, which is so high and large, that the bodies of
the last trees do not escape it. Venus stands with her right foot on the lowermost
step, and with the left on thé middlemost on the inner corner, stooping ; her un-
der parts almost fronting, and her upper parts turned siedways towards him ; pres-
fing her folded hands, with ’the elbows forwards against her body, and sinking
her head, looks from him towards heaven. I place one of the Graces by her side
as coming down, embracing the goddess about the waift with fear and concerns
and, with amazement, looking to the left after Adonis. The other virgin, who
runs after him, is now with one knee on the ground, with-her left hand shewing
him the goddess, and with her right hand holding a skift ofhis coat; so that she
is most seen from behind. The third has, as is said, her hands stretched on high,
and her face is swelled by the violence of her outeries. Adonis, as in great haste,
advances his right leg, turning his breast to the right to-the light; he holds a spear
in his right hand, high close to his side, which a boy is withholding with all his
strength; for which, another angrily strikes him with his bow. Adonis-looks downr
wards, with his face fronting, at the virgin who is at his feet;, pointing, with
his left hand, which is fore-shortened, at the wood; by which anm Fate is pulling
him thither; she is flying, and has a rudder of a fhip on her shoulder; hertright
shoulder and right breast come forward, her other parts beifg fore-shortened, and
her face turned backwards. Before him, I represent a Cupid also flying, and pul-
ling him towards the wood by the string of the horn which swings by. his side.
This boy is seen quite from behind, with his feet flung out, and holding his bow
in his right hand, with which he is threatening another, who is tumbled down, and
lyes also fore-shortened, with his head forwards, and’feet towards Adonis;. he is all
in shade, except his head, and the hand with which he scratches it;-his torch lies.
near him extinguished.

A slappet of Venus’s red garment comes about her right arm, and swings behiad
over her left leg. The chaplet of iflowers falls from; her head :down, her- back-
Fate is dressed in black, with à. small’slying veil over-it. .

3 .
Behind the broken term are iseen the arms of Mars, viz. his armour helmet,
shield, sword and spear, lying oa the ground in shade. Now, although Mars does
not appear in his own shape, but in that tof the boar in which he was metamor-
phased, yet we need not wonder at it, bedause, we must not suppose, that as he was
a god, he entered into it stoekined and fhoed. Some may possibly afk, Whether
he could not do it in his full habbliments; and I say, he might; but then I must








ask again, How we should know it? The dresses of gods and men have no sen-
sation, either-good or bad; they are even of no ocher signification than to
make the person known; for, were they subject to the paffions arifing from heat
or cold, thoy would also share the punishments of the body, as the head, hands,
&c. do.
Yet it may be very reasonably afked here, in case we were to represent tho
canicrous Aglaura, metamorphased by Mercury into a touch-stone, whether her gar
ments should not be quite black à and 1 answer, that nothing but her bodv
should be so ; for otherwise my affertions fall to the ground, though I have said,
that the dress makes the person known : nevertheless I shall in this point fur-
ther explain myself.
2
The king Lyncus approaches the bed of his sleeping guest Triptolemus with inten-
tion to slay him. Ceres appeared at the very instant, and took the weapon from
the king; at the same time transforming him into a lynx, a beast like a tyger;
for violating the laws of hospitality. This story l would represent thus. Tho
king is. not there ; the beast l make taking to flight, shaking from himi, aboug
the floor, the purple garment and crown. This I think most agreeable to nature
and probability. Add to this another instance.
Juno, says the Poet; in wrathful jealousy, beat the poor Calisto so much, that
she was metamôrphased into a fhebear. Now, How is this to be represented,
in order to know what she was, man or woman; l would represent the frighted
bear as taking to flight, not cloathed, but dragging her garment behind her
along the ground. Here the bow, there the quiver of arrows, strap, and other
ornaments-
Yet in what a mean manner have I seen the king Lyncus represented by Testo.
He stands with the dagger in his hand, cloathed and crowned, having for legs
the frightful paws of a bear.
Thus Ihave affirmed, that cloaths serve gods and men only for distinction :
which brings to my remembrance, a print of Poussin, confirming what I have said.
It exhibits the Elysian fields, with the happy souls at rest, and Youth, or eternal
Spring, dancing and strewing flowers. Here we see Hyacinthus, Narcissus, Crocus,
Adonis, Ajax, and many others, in sitting postures, as when living: whence we
may easily perceive, how difficult it would be to know them without their partir
cular badges: of distinction, as the spear, horn, fountain, helmet, chaplet of
roses, &c. and how impossible it was Poussin, so excellent and learned a man, to
make sjaæ known; seeing he there represents him in the same rage or despair, to
to wit, stabbing himself, as when he was before Troy. A great mistake, in my
opinion, with respect to probability. I should rather have left it out; as also the
chamber-pot or cistern wherein Nartissus is viewing Himself.
I can hardly believe so strange a design to be of Poussin himself; since Ajax is
plaged in so cruel a posture among the happy souls; a man who, being a felo de se,
rather deserved hell. Why may not Sispphus, Ixion, Prometheus, or Tautalus, whp
are doomed tohellish’punishments, be of their company ; lt is true, that Ajax
acted only against himself, on account of the arms of Achilles, to which he had a
.











claim, and the others offended the gods ; one stole the fire froin heaven, anothen
had the impudence to trepan the goddess Juno to his lust by an ambush, &c.
Testa has, in my opinion, in many particulars, exhibited the same representa-
tion, better and more intelligible than Poussin, as being much larger, and more
pleasant and painter-like : but yet he runs counter to the probability of that place
of rest; as we may perceive in the two figures of a boy and girl, where he is
taking some flowers out of her lap, and she, in return, is ready to scratch out his.
eyes ; being an old quarrel revived. Now, in fact, neither hatred, quarrel or
jealousy, nothing but repose and peace should appear there.
But methinks I hear some say, that I derogate from the worth of those two- great
men, by thus exposing their mistakes, and that it is easier to find faults than to
make a thorough composition; which I perfectly own: nevertheless my intention
is not in anywise to build a reputation on their errors ; since it will appear,
throughout this work, that l am no kinder to my own mistakes than to those of
others; and this with a view of shewing artists a way for avoiding such common
defects, and of making them more careful to mind probability in all parts.
Here let us make a comparison between an architect and a painter. A good
architect ought first exactly to know what ground is most proper for his pur-
pose, in building a temple, palace, &c. as, whether it be firm-or marshy, and
to which quarter he must order his front; and then to proceed to- work. If a
painter intend to represent a courtship or a military exercise, offering, or any
thing else, he will also look for a proper place whereim to lay the subject. The
architect makes a plan of his court with all its appertunances; of a temple,
with the choir, altar, and other particulars, &c. of a fortification, with its bas-
tions, ravelines, rendezvous, &c. A painter likewise exhibits the Elysian fields,
or the garden of Flora for canesses; a temple, for divine service ; a court, with
the king and his retinue; or a forest for hunting. Now, if a person enter tho
temple, during divine service, with-a sword in his hand, or be stabbing himself
in the Elysian helds, among the happy souls, in order to give his soul a second
reniove ; Would you not conclude those things to he very improper for such
places, and fitter for Troy ? l afk, Whether the sacred temple and fields are not
thereby profaned à and were dogs to be hunted in the palace-court, or place of
rendezvous, would it not be ridisulous à Ajax never entered the Elysian fields be-
fore his soul’s separation, yet here he stabs himself again-: Has he another soul
to depart from him a
Let us now proceed to the description, division, and consideration of the,
Third and last Ordonnance.
The goddess of love perceiving all her endeavours to be fruitless, and grow-
ing impatient for Adonis’s return, took her chariot, drawn by two swans, and
drove swiftly towards the wood, in order to seek him, leaving her Graces behind,
as useless at this juncture, as we shall further explain at the end of this ordon-
nance. Cupid follows her shrieking. The unhappy youth, bit by the wild boar







in his groin, lies gasping against'a lafge oak ; where, at last, Venus finds him in
his blood : wherefore stepping from her chariot, like a frantic, sne bewails
hi, abhorring her godhead, and eursing the-cruel tyranny which prescribes law
to heaven and earth. In the mean time Adonis expires, and his waving soul is
taken by Mereury, and carried to the Elysian fields,
This fable I represent thus.
Adonis is lying on his left side, fore-shortened, with his neck against the trunk
of a large oak ; and his right breast and shoulder upwards ; his left arm extend-
ed; and the right close to his body, holding the spear which is partly un-
der him ; his head hangs almost on his left arm, a little foreright, with the right
check upwards ; his feet are turned towards the left corner of the piece, for-
wards ; his left knee, resting on a fmall rising, or stone, is half drawn up; an
hunting-horn lies at his feet. The dogs at his head, on the left side, howl and
yelp. éupid, on his right side, stoops down, and looks at Venus shrieking; at
the same time opening Adonis’s garment, in order to. shew the bloody wound to
his-mother; who, affrighted, starts-back, and raises her hands towards heaven.
Cupid’s back is, by the goddess, partly in the ground-shade ;. his breast is fore-
shortened, his feet close, and knees somewhat bent ; holding a torch in his right
hand. Veuus, as hag. been said, raises her hands on high, putting out her right
leg, and drawing back her left foot on a cloud, which, behind her, runs up to:
the right under the chariot ; her upper parts incline over the said left foot ; her
chin is’sunk iato her breast; and thus she beholds the wound. Her breast is-
fore-shortened, and her right hip is fronting. Behind the aforesaid oak, against
which Adonis is lying, the chariot is seen in profile, on some waving clouds alike
with the horizon; which about Venus descend gradually lighter and lighter to:,
underneath her foot. The chariot, though gilt, yet kept dark by a cloud, is
elegaatly wrought with children, festoons and foliage; behind, on top, is a large
star, and the chariot partly hid by the body of the oak. Forwards, between the
middle and the left corner, stands a-stone, about threc feet square, with the
broken trunk of a term, the residue whereof, as the head and a part of the body,
lie on the ground, among the-bushies and shrubs. This stone stands somewhat
obliquely, with. the left corner towards the left side of the piece; close to which.
side rises an high tree; and a little further, another, quite overgrown five or six
feet high. Behind the stone, among the shrubs, thistles and thorns, the boar,
attempting to fly, lies wounded in blood and dirt on its fore-legs, with its mouth-
wide open. On the second ground, on the right side goes Atropos with her
sciffors in her hand and distaff on her fhoulder; being, almost ta the middle, hid.
behind the ground- and in shade, except her head and a part of one shoulder.
The principal view is on the left side of the point of sight.. A little above it-
slies Mercury-with the soul of the youth, in order to carry-it to the Ehsian fields.
They are both seen fore-shortened, with their right sides fronting. The youth is
quite naked, having his arm-cross his breast, his legs close, and his left foot a
little above the other. Mercury. holds him: with his left arm behind about the
middle, and, looking at him, with-his caduceus forwards, points to the place they,
are:








are going to. A small garment; of this winged’mefsenger, isi slyihg behind him
upwards.
The ground is craggy and rocky, here and there over-run with grafs, thistles

and hollies.
The light comes from the right sido, alittie fronting, and’-ghe weather is rainyl
The air is winter-like, yet calm. The trees are bat thinly kaved, except some
which can endure the winter; as’ cypfeis, Jauréf, elm, briar, &c. which must
give the: most green here-: The-end of- the fore-ground, on the right side; to
the foot of the goddess is in fhade. by à bush and some small trées. Venus, Ca-
pid’s upper parts, ’the dead body, with tiie ground, and the tree againstwhich ie
lies, are strongly lighted. The stone forwards, under: Aconis, is mostly shaded
with the fore-ground, by some èypresses on the right side, quite forward in the
corner. Some piecés of the term (whicl represents a faunus of salyr); lying some¬
what further. receive a little light. The boar, whose hind-parts are hidden be-
tween the left side of ’the stone and the tree standing by it, paftakes also of that
shade to almost his neck. The happy foul, flying with.the winged. mesfenger,
just by thè treë or chariot, is, with’him, from the feet ’tp the middle, shaded by
the leaves and branches of the trees’; and are far above the horizon, so that the
green of the trèës alffiost touchets their héads. The fign Capricorn, in token of the
first winter month, appeare in the air; very faint; and lighter than the air; it is
i
e
just over the chariot, where the sky is darkest.
As for the colours, 1order them thus. Venus is in an airy dress of pale rose-
colour, with a blue veil over it. Adonis, with his right shoulder and breast bare,
has a light sillemot vestment, with violet reslexions ; his checks are pale, and
lips livid, and so are his hands and feet, yet he has a beautiful skin. Venus is
very clear and tender skinned; her face and hands warm Cupid is of a middling
complexion. not so clear as thé goddess, and somewhat-more rosy than Adonis.
Venus has light hair; Adonis light chesnut, and Cupid brown hair:
This subject requires more cyprefs and myrtle than other sorts of trees.
The ground forward, from the right side to beyond the stone, is marshy.
I do not introduce the Graces-here, ’as in the preceding ordonnance, because
they are improper; for they must not attend Venus on forrowful occasions, as ha¬
ving a quite different use and meaning, as we shall here observe ; and the rather,
since in the former ordonnance we have shewed the significations of Venus, Adonis,
1.
Mars, and the wild boar.
Hesiod testifies, that they were threë sisters, who by the painters, aré represented,
young, jolly and agreeable, hand in hand. That their dresses were flying, thin and
gay, discovering their nudities. That the eldest was named Aglais; the second,
Euphrosyne, and the youngest; Thalia. Seneca proceeds further, and shews their
qualities and significations ; saying, among other things, in his Treatise de Bene-
ficiis, that some by the first imply comfort itself, that the second receives, and the
third retaliates it. Others again are of opinion, that by this triplicity, are signi-
fied the three particular delights or kindneffes, to wit, shewing kindness, receiving
kindness, and requitting:: But that they sheuld be-represented thas: hand in
hand, without some occult meaning, is not likely, but rather, that thereby is sig-
nified































































































































nifsed, that bestowell beffefits paffing from-hand ta hand, iat laft retuen to the per-
fon who first bestowed thom. Theysarg reprefeated as having a jolly-air ; because
benefits, ito be perfectly agreeable, -ought to be conferred frankly’and liberally ;
without which, the act loles its igrace. : Their youth signifies, that the memory of
past benefits ought never to’igroun shale. Their virginitydheus, that they are pure
and upright, uiversally be meficiab lwithout hope of return, whiph sulliesithe be-
nefactinn. Theirthin nayment ishenvb, athat the-e njoymheat iayst bé so igreât as to




To say more, would be àa repetitioi of wlat has been already handled in the-
chapter of hieroglyphics and theif significations.





CHAP. XIII, The, Fablé of- Dryope, for the Embellissment of
Landscapes.

AVING in the preceding chapter, delivered what I had to say touching a

fine fable, and the myfterious sense of some circumstances, I. find myseff

nbliged, by the-satisfaction which several of the best artifts have found therein, to
gratify zheir. defires, and: to give- an handle for axercife, in fketching, such
another.
I have chofen for this purpose, the fable ofDryope, and will. adapt it as much

as possible to the ornament of landscapes, making it'a without-door prospect.
The story, according to Ovid, is this. Dryope, insensible of the sorrowful
difitster that was to befall her, on a certam time took awalk by à lake encompaffed
with-myrtles, with intent to make the nymphs of the place, presents of garlands
tif flowers. Stre took with-her, her little son Amphisus, not a yearold, accompanied
by her sister Jole, with a bafket of flowens anrd wreathed garlagds. Near the lake
stood a tree, zatled Lotos, bearingred bloffoms ; of which she trafhily broke a twig
zo pleafigre her child ; but perceiing blood to-issue. from it, and -that the whole
tree was thereby violently agitated, she was much affrighted ; and the more,
when in going thence; ’she felt her feet to fasten into the earth.-; for sne was trans-

formed into a tree.

lexhibit the subject (see plate LIV. ) in a delightful vallev, (according to the
testimony of the poet) planted with myrtles, and encompassed by abrook. Inthe
middle of the piece, I place, as the principal, tthe tree Lotos, full of red blossoms
and thickty leaved. From this tree Dryope broke off the sprig. I make it to.
shake and move so violently, that the trunk of it by that means-become distorted
and winding. On’the left side; Iplace the raffi Dryope, of a beautiful air, and
black haired, having her son Amphisus about the middle in her left arm. She ad-
vances with her left foôt towards the-tveer a little drawing back the right : her
upper parts fallhack still more. In her right hand, lifted up, sne holds the bloody
sprig, at which she stares in confusion. Her left thigh comes forward. Her up-
per







per parts sway to the left; her broast isc-ahriost fronting directly against the light;
her face in profile more or less turns back and. her feet are by this time fixed in
the ground. We see the child’s hinder parts, and its head is set off against her
breast. Her sister, on theright side of the tree, standing over against her, I re-
present with light hair, and in the iutmost concern, wringing her clasped hands
against her left cheek. . Her head turned to the right, hangs over her right shoul-
der ; her breaff heaves, and her under parts draw quite back. Her knees are bent,
her right foot flung out, and the left drawn back, as if she were fainting away.
She is about fourteen or fixteen years of age. The nymph who supports Dryope,
is placed between her and the tree, holding her back with her left hand, and with
her right uncovering the leg, and shewing to the sister, at whom she looks, that
the foot has already taken root. Another nymph, who is taking the child, has
her left side fronting, yet her back parts are mostly visible ; she is on her knees,
the left forward, the other quite drawn back, pushing with her foot against a
water vessel, which at the brink of the water she overturns. A third on the right
side, comes running, quite astonished, with a lap full of flowers; she points with
her left hand towards the others, and looks to the left at her companions fitting
on the banks of the river, which partly runs between the trees towards the point
of fight. The one arises and looks forward with amazement, and makes it known
to the other sitting towards the water, who therefore supporting herself on her left
hand, turns her upper parts to the right, in order to look back. They have
mostly chaplets either on their heads or lying by them.
Thus much, as to the disposition and actions of the moveable by-ornaments,
which consisting of virgins, each is contrasted according to her paffion. We now
proceed to the immoveable ornaments..
On the left side, on a rising ground, between the the trees, I place a large front-
ing Priapas term, without arms or legs, mostly in the snade against the off-scape,
which strongly throws off the foremost group. On the right side forwards, half
in the water, l set a square large rough stone, whereon lies a garment or veil, and
a parcel of leaves and flowers. In the pannel of this stone is carved a Fatality in
bafs relief. Behind it, and between the nymph with the flowers, I place on the
ground a basket of chaplets.
As for the season, it is laid between summer and winter, in the ripening autumn
and in sine weather for the time of year. The light is a side one a little fronting.
The sun may be put in or left out, as every one pleases, because it is not men-
tioned or insisted on in the fable.
I shall next proceed to describe the further circumstances of this ordonnance ;
since without shewing the light and darkness, harmony and colours, it is imperfect
and not fike aature. It must be granted, that the harmony and shadowing often-
times shew themselves, and that tne light is sufficiently apparent to him who un-
derstands perspective : but whether there may not occur still something beyond the
common guess and judgment, I very much question. As for the colours, they
must needs be expressed ; since without it, it is impossible to know or penetrate
mine or any other painter’s thoughts.
I therefore






Itfietefore aflign Dryope, as the principal character, ablue sattin garment; one
flappet whereof goes over her right shoulder and comes under her girdle, and the
dther is in her left hand, with which sheholds the naked child about the middle,
when the remainder, with an under flap tucked in the girdie under her left breast,
covers all her other parts down to the feet, except the left leg and foot, which is
rooted in the ground. Her under garment, as likewise the open sleeve about her
left arm, is yellowish white with green reflexions. Her garment next the left
leg is open. The foremost nymph is almost naked, having no other covering than
a sine white small scarf about her middle. The dresses of Dryope and lole are in-
termixed with gold in order to make a difference between them and the nymphs.
The nymph who is naked’from the middle, I drefs in a dark green gown, gather-
ed at the navel, and fastened by. a girdle. lole has an airy garment close-sleeved,
of a bright rose colour, girt with a broad girdle of dark violet embroidered with
gold; and under it a flowered coat open below, and giving freedom tothe legs. 1

fhe stone forward is greyish, and the vessel dark red.- The ground next the water,
is grassy; and thus a variegate the whole: fore ground. The nymph, who on
the right side of the second ground comes running, has afgreenisn. breast garment,
loose and untied withoût sleeves, and fastened but on one shoulder, the left breast
and legs being bare. The other sitting further behind on the edge of the river, I

leave quite naked Her companion has a small green scarf.. The stone Priapus
is dark gray inclinable to violets
As for the light, I think that the major part ought principally to fall on Dryope
and the two nymphs next her, and on what else belongs to that group.
The re-
sidue may be little, and mostly foreign lighted, either from behind, before or
sideways ; yet in such sort as that the cause thereof and the snades (as by what
and from whence) may plainly appear; gtherwise they will be but loose fancies,
without foundation.
Some may possibly question, whether hereby the light will answer my purpose,
because l assign Dryope ablue garment over a yellowish white one, judging, not
without seeming reason, yet without knowing my intention, that the contrary
would look more decorous ; namely, the light over the dark ; because the great-
est and strongest mafs of light falling on her middle parts, to wit, belly and legs,
the naked child would be more beautifully set off, if her breast or upper parts.
were dark, than against the yellowissi white. This with respect to the light, I
willingly allow, but not as to the colour; for l designedly made the garment blue
in order to make the naked nymph beautiful; and yer, with intention that that
part might keep a strong and broad light : for this reason, I have chosen a stuff
for itaccordingly, it being brown, that sattin has a gloss, and almost the same
force as gold or silver ffuffs. The red garment of lole, as being a beautiful and
light colour, will'be sufficiently, yet too much, set off against the dark ground :
but the blue has,here, on account of the great mafs; more power, though having
more light about it ; for the red is but a small spot. I have as much as possible,
considered thé probability ofthis representation, and the harmony in the dispofi-
tion of the eolours ; assigning each figure its particular and proper emblematic co-
lour, not only in the draperies, but also in the nudities, giving one a fair and ten¬








der, another a more brownish sxin, and so forth. Each figure-has likewise its par-
ticular characteristic; the head of the water-nymph is adorned with white bell-
flowers; that of the wood-nymph with wild plants; and that of her who comes
running forward, with field-flowers. If it be wondered, that I make mention of
sattin, since we rarely hear it was in use among the ancients ; I say the observa-
tion is just with respect to statuaries, but not as to painters ; because I have met
with several old pictures wherein I have seen sattin represented : but how long
that stuff has been known to the world I’cannot tell, nor shall enquire. In the
mean time, it must be allowed to be a beautiful and elegant stuff; as are also the
changeable silks, though in a less degree, and more proper for young people.
If any difficulty arise from my introducing into this story a Priapus-term, since
there’s. neither god, man, faunus, or satyr, in the whole piece, nor the least sign
of any indecent action, Iwill give him my reason; which is, that the Poet, re-
lating the first cause of the disaster befalling this unhappy woman, afcribes it to
the tree Lotos ; because when a woman, and Priapus could not satisfy his lust with
her, he, in revenge, transformed her into that tree bearing her name, laying a
curse on those who violated it; and still retains that vindictive humour; where-
fore I place him here, as the first promoter of the accident.
I insist largely on these fables or ordonnances, to give a handle for further
inquiries into them ; for Ovid is not full and particular in all his fables, and we
are obliged to fetch à great deal from ather authors,
He gives us no right idea of the tree Lotos, (a. stranger to these countries) nor
mentions, what sort of leafing it has, or its virtues, or whether it be of a moist
or dry nature, or where it grows most plentifully ; wherefore, as far as I have
met with them, Ishall produce the testimonies of some authors about this tree, to-
gether with the emblematic sense and explanations they assign : a very proper part
of knowledge for a landscape painter; whose inclination leads hini to something,
uncommon, and desires to pafs for learned among the curious and knowing.
I have found, in general, that the leaves are round ; which at the rising sun-
open, and as he goes down close, and at night double; wherefore, when we in-
troduce no sun-shine, they must be represented doubled or shut.
As for the misterious sense, we must know, that the Agyptians paid more ho-
nours to this tree than any others, on a belief, that it was a mediator between.
heavenly and earthly things. It is moreover used to represent the sun’s rising and
setting; especially with the addition of a child sitting on it, by which they signified
the morning vapours, which the sun’s approach dispels. And because it opens
and shuts its leaves with the sun’s rising and setting, it is sacred to Apollo, as a tree
peculiar to him, and out of respect shewing its leaves to him only.
The rough or hairy Lotos was also much venerated by the Romans, who offered
the vestals locks of hair to it, « as they did those of young men to Apolle, or to
his son Asculapius.
The Greeès sacrificed their hair in the same manner’to the rivers of their country,
as having a certain relation to this tree,-which they imagined had such intercourse
with the gods, that they made it their seat : and therefore it was planted in
morasses.








Ialblichus testifies, that these trees require much moisture; whence the ancients
inferred, the first cause of procreation : therefore, calling the ocean the father of
all creatures. And, observing the round leaves, round stem and round fruit,
they would by this mofl perfect figure, intimate the perfection of the highest
Deity, especially when a child was represented sitting on atree : which Ovid like-
wise alludes to in this fable, when (as Mr. Pope has rendered it) he says,
 Now, from my branching arms this infant bear,
 Let some kind nurse supply a mother’s care;
 Yet to his mother let him oft' be led,
 Sport inher shades, and in her shades be fed ;-
We shall now proceed to,
A second Table or Ordonnance relating to Dryope.
The story is this. As soon as Andræmon was advertised of the sorrowful accident
which had happened to his wife Dryope, he hasted to the place in company with
his father : but they arrived too late to have any speech with her before the meta-
morphases. A rough bark had now seized her body and members, insomuch that
she was only to be known from other trees by her shape and soft voice. Her
arms made two branches, abounding with leaves ; besides her head attire, cover-
ed with greens. Both the father and son hung about her neck, and wept; and
with the child, at her request, kissed her for the last time : whereupon she was
divested of her human shape at once.
In the former ordonnance, I have ordered thè river forwards, and in this,
sideways. Dryope, all but her head, transformed into a myrtle-tree, I place al-
most in the middle of the piece, standing upright, a little to the left of the point
of sight. Andræmon takes her about the neck and kisses her left cheek. His aged
and sorrowful father complains of the sorrowful mishap to a nymph standing near
him, with his right hand tearing open Dryope’s linen, in order to shew her the bo-
dy ; which beholding, she raises her shoulders, turning her head away, and look-
ing down. Another nymph, having the little Amphisus in her arms lifts him up in
order to kifs his mother. Jole I place in great lamentation at Dryope’s feet; and a
step further stands the tree Lotos. On the second ground, onthe right side, I set
the term of Priapus, cross-hung with festoons of flowers and greens tied under the
navel ; and before it a small smoaking altar, with some people offering. On the
left side, on the fore-ground, I place the large square stone, half under water, with
a nymph leaning on it. These are the heads of my design. The view is on the
left side of the point of sight, and consists of hills, and waters; and because I re-
present an evening, the air is full of vapours and dark clouds ; and the trees, by
reason of the wind, are in agitation.














Now, as this piece is the fellow of the former, all things should, of right, be
equally full of work ; but because this ordonnance has the greater variety, as ex-
hibiting some men, I have been necessitated to depart a ltttle from the original
disposition, since what is introduced into the other must needs be seen here ; as
we have largely treated in the zist Chap. Of Ordonnance. Wherefore I place
Dryope fronting, with both her arms lifted up, and pretty near each other. Hef
head loosely hangs down between them, to the left. Her arms, from the elbows
upwards, together with her breast, and a. little of her body, retain their first
forms. Andræmon is seen, on the left side, standing on tip-toe in order to kiss
her left cheek, which she offers him; his right arm is about her neck, and his
left on her breast. A little forward stands the father tottering, and, near his
side, the nymph, to whom he complains; at the same time opening Dryope’s un-
der-garment, only tied on her shoulder with a ribbon, and turning his head and
tipper-parts to the left, with his face towards heaven. The nymphs stands
close behind him very dejected and sorrowful, raising her shoulders, and looking
downwards with her head a little sideling off from Dryope ; her left elbow is drawn
in, and her open hand up at her head; her breast is bare, and in the light. Her
under parts are fronting, and her right leg flung out. Andræmon’s garment, fall-
ing from his fhoulder, hangs about his heels. The nymph who, on the right
side, where the ground is somewhat lower, is lifting un the child, falls back in
her upper parts, with her head hanging forwards ; she rests on her right leg,
having'the left. lifted up against the tree ; her back is fronting, and turns to the
light, and her under parts have a contrary sway. The child, whose upper parts
only are seen (the rest being hidden by her head), stretches out both his arms for-
wards, towards the tree, pressing one of his feet against her body. Jole, sitting
squat between her and the tree, leans her left shoulder against it, with her head
coming forward, and her hand on her face, having 3 cloth in her lap. On the
left fide, without the piece, at the end of the fore-ground, I place two nymphs;
one with her legs in-the water, and resting on her right elbow, and holding her
chin, and with ghie other hand under her right arm-pit; the other sitting with.
her legs behind the former in the water, and resting with her right arm on a
vase, and hef face and right breast fore-right: they are both naked and wingedt
Near these stands a third, holding a long staff, on the top whereof is a pine-
apple ;’ fhie has, about her, a wild beast’s fkin, and points with her right hand
forward; in which position her right-side is seen. Behind her, on the aforesaid
stone, lies Dryope’s garment; and on the same side forwards rises a large tree,
incumbered with wild bushes and sprigs.
The light I take, as in the former; from the right fide a little fronting;. for,
were it a left one, it would. hot so commodioussy bring the light parts together in
a group; and the rather, ’as 'the piece is a fellaw of the former.
1 reprefent then the éxpiring Dryope bare almost to. the middle, by the drop-
ping her under garment;: which, as in- the former, is yellowish-white. Her
face and breast retain their ffeshinefs and colour, but her body downwards grows
darker and browner, like wood-colour, till at last it is perfectly woody ;
as hap-
pens also to her arms,, which, to the elbons, have their former colour,
but at


























































































































































































the fingers are woody and branched. Her face to the chin, with that of Andrae-
non to the shoulder, is in the shade of the greens of her head and arms. Andras-
mon, as a man of repute, has a fhort greenish grey couloured coat, embroidered
with gold ; his upper garment is reddishi purple, dark and warm; and his legs
up to the hips are in the shade of the tree. The old man is dressed after the
Persian manner, in a gown reaching to the calves of his legs, of a light sillemot
colour, with large violet stripes and gold leaves ; his upper garment, sleeved and
quite open, is beautiful violet ; he has shoes and wide stockings ; his cap, like a
The
.t
turband, curling on top, lies with his staff at his feet; and his hair is grey.
nymph by his side is half shaded by him; that is, her whole right side, from the
shoulder dowuwards, except her knee, which she advances ; her vestment is
greenish blue, inclining somewhat to dark. The nymph with the child has an
airy blue garment, girt about the middle; her right shoulder is bare, and the
slappet of her garment ruffled about her legs by means of the wind. The virgin
behind her, and between the tree Lotos. has a white garment. The Priapus-term
between the trees is by them mostly shaded; and off from it, passing by the
point of sight, the major part is filled up with small trees, which are dark or in
shade, and brightly setting off the foremost group.
The two naked nymphs, on the left side, receive little light. The air on the
horizon is full of vapours and melting ; because l do not give here the sun so-
bright and clear as in a fine morning, nor so strong as at mid-day, but more or
less vapourish, and therefore the whole appears of a russet colour. The clouds.
are large, thick, and heavy.
The sky might also be properly enriched, by exhibiting in it the three Parcae or
Fatal Sisters ; since, having done their bufinefs, they are again ascending. In
such case Atropes, with the thread and scifsors, ought to be foremost; next to her
Lachesis with the spindie; and behind her Clorho with the distaff.
Let us noi exhibit Andræmon and his family’s return homc, in,
A Third Table or Ordonnance of Dryope. Sec Plate LV.
The late Dryope, after her fate, stands, with-the tree Lotos, at the end of the
fore-ground. A little to the right of the point of sight, and from her to the
left side, appears a bending way, like a crescent, coming forward ; against
which the water from the right. side, about three feet lower, is wasning. Quite
forwards, against the shore, lies a passage-boat. On the right side, without the-
picture, I represent a-piece of very high ground, running towards the point of
fight. At the bottom of this ground, and almost level with the water, runs a
path, edged with some watry trees; and even. some of them in the water. The
lecond-ground rises hill-like, against the off-fcape, especially on the right side,
from whence to the left side, through the hollow of the rock, is seen a further
off-scape Behind this hill or height appears the beautiful top. of Andramon’s.
house.








I believe it will not seem odd to the knowing, that 1 introduce so much high
ground and water about so small a spot of low land, because the Poet lays the
fact in a lake ; for which reason, and in order naturally to shew it, I exhibit that
corner, with the way crescent-like, as being but a part of the lake.
The question is now, Whether a painter may not take some liberty for deco-
tum’s sake , l answer, he may, so far as not to take away the property of the sub-
ject; for what the writer lays down must pafs for a law; whetefore we may well
conclude, that Ovid does not say any thing without reason. Some may possibly
think I could have made a more delightful choice : but it may be observed, that
this fact is of a contrary nature; I seek not for pleasure in the midst of sorrow,
which here is my principal scope, as may appear by what follows.
In the path on the right side I represent some bacchanals and satyrs trooping to-
wards the hills. Among them, one is carrying a Priapus-term on his shoulder,
with a large vessel in his other hand, and followed by tygers and panthers. As
for the transformed Dryope, I let her under garment, of the colour before said,
hang on the tree : near which stand three nymphs; of whom one embraces it
with both hands as if she would shake it; at the same time looking upwards at
the leaves. The two others are talking together; the one pointing forward at
the sorrowful relations, who are departing. I place lole forward, by the boat,
with her sister’s garment and a basket of flowers in her hand; which, weeping,
sne gives to the waternian. Andræmon, coming a step further, has his son Amphi¬
sus on his left arm, wrapped in his garment; he is speaking to the waterman, and
shewing him the place whether he would be carried. Behind him follows the fa-
ther ; who, fixing his eyes towards heaven, on the Hesperus, or evening star, seems
to complain of the unhappy fate of his daughter.
I shall now fully describe the figures, and their actions, and dreffes, and other
necessary circumstances.
The boat, tied to a post, lies somewhat sideways and fore-shortened. The wa-
terman’s right side is fronting, inclining to the land, with his back directly in the
light; he receives with extended arms the garment and basket of flowers which
lole gives him. His vestment is light grey, girt with a large black girdle, which
is buckled ; his right shoulder is bare almost to the middle. Jole appears with her
left side fore-right, and her breast swaying towards him; giving him the basket of
flowers with her right hand, on the arm whereof hangs her sister’s garment; her
under parts are fronting, and her feet close, with knees a little bent; she turns
her head to the left wiping her eyes with a fl-ppet of the veil which she has
about her neck. Andræmon, with the little Amphisus in his arms, stands on one
leg, and is stepping towards the boat; his upper parts turn to the left, his breast
fronting, and his right arm put out sideways, in order to shew the waterman, as
has been said, the place he would be carried to; the purple garment is fastened
on his right shoulder, and from under his arm, slinging about his body, he thereby
partly covers the child; and with another flappet of the same, which he has in
his left hand, he supports and holds the child, on his rising hip against his left
breast. The child holds him fast about the neck, with its left hand in the open-
ing of his under garment, leaning back with its upper parts from him, and hold-
ing















































































































































































































































































































ing up in the right hand a garland of flowers, at which it stares to the right side;
one of its feet is seen hanging down between the folds of the garment, and touches
the hilt of its father’s sword. The old man, who follows him, has his back.
turned towards the point of sight, and seems to fall back with concern ; his face
is towards heaven ; his right leg is put forward, and his left, whereon he stands,
drawn somewhat back ; his right arm is crosfing his body; and in that hand he
holds his staff, against his left breast; and thrusting out his left hand he points at
the sorrowful father and motherless child who are before him, and in this pos-
ture seems to make his complaint to Hesperus. The tree with the nymphs, and
what else rises on that ground, shine in the water; as does also what is standing
along the water on the right side. Andramon with the child is, to his breast, pa¬
rallel with the horizon; because the ground rises forward, and is level with the
boat,
I have largely handled the aforesaid three ordonnances, to shew that landscape-
painters want not matter for ornamenting their works with histories or fables pro-
per to the landscape. These things are also of use to history-painters, for repre-
senting richness of matter in poor occurrences. Wherefore to be copious, and
further instructive, I shall handle one fable more, as also a design of my own :
And then, for the conclusion of landscapes, make a comparison between what is
painter and un-painter like; the latter whereof is, by ignorants, commonly called
the contrary.
—
CHAP. XIV. Table or Ordonnance of Erifichton; and the Emblem
of a Satyr s Punishment: Both serving for the Embellisbment of Land-
scapes.
VID relates that Erifichton, avery vile man, was, by the goddess Ceres,
).
whom he had highly offended by cutting down an exceeding high oak-tree,
consecrated to her, punished with insatiate hunger; insomuch that, for want of
food, he was obliged to sell his-own daughter. See Plate LVI.
I represent this in a delightful landscape, or without-door prospect. The light
comes from the right side; and the point of sight is in the middle. On tlie
left side I exhibit a stately building. with a beautiful frontispiece, of the Dorick
order, ascended by three steps running towards the point of sight. Beyond the
steps I place an hand-rail, four feet in rise, running from the house by the point
of sight. In the return of it stands a vase. On the right side is a-river, with a
wooden bridge over it. By the water-side appears part of a town-wall, which the
water walhes and runs round. The residue is an off-scape, here and there planted
with trees. Next the hand-rail l plâce the hungry Erisichton; who, with his cap
in his left hand, is tumbling his told money into it with his right hand. His
daughter Mestre stands behind him, near the steps; and the merchant stepping up
shews her the door, with his right hand, wherein he has a bag half full of
money;






money ; at the fame time holding her with his left, by a flappet of her garment.
Lean Hunger behind, between her and her father’s right side, pushes her forwards.
with both hands. This is the main of the subject.
The merchant looking proudly and gravely at the daughter, is dressed in 2
sine violet-coloured garment, reaching just below the knees ; it is girt about hia
middle ; he has a fillet about his head, and he is loosely stockined and shoed, ac-
cording to the Spartan custom : he is seen mostly from behind, resting with his
right foot on the upper step, and drawing up the left from off the middle one.
The daughter stands on her right leg, with her left foot just on the lower step, a.
little drawn back ; her under parts are almost fronting more or less from the light,
she-sways her upper parts to the right, wishfully looking at her father, whoin she
is unwilling to ieave : with sorrow and tears fhie seems to move the merchant’'s
pity, and to follow him against her will; she has an handkerchief in her right
hand, with which, up at the left ear, sne seems to wipe her face, supporting the.
elbow of that arm with her other hand. Her garment is pale yellow, with green,
reffexions, and being slovenly gathered under the breast and tied with. a ribbon,
hangs in tatters below the calfs of her legs ; she is bare-footed, has a beautiful
mein, yet is somewhat thin ; her hair is light, twisted with small blue ribbons.
Erifichton stands quite stooping, with bent knees ; his garment tied about the
middte with a rope, is fillemot, and reaches behind to the calfs of his legs, being
so open on the side as to discover his bare hip and leg; his left shoulder is also
naked, his hair and beard grey, and he is lean and swarthy : his stick stands against
the hand-rail. As for hunger, Ovid describes him thus; With frightful hair,
eyes sunk in; mnouth and lips livid, teeth yellow and slimy, and a thick skin dis-
covering the bones and entrails : he is seen almost to the middle above the back of
Erisichton. The pillars of the frontispiece are grey, the house and steps free-stone,
and the pavement the door is of, large blue ftone; and from thence down to the
river, the ground is plain. In the front of the house are carved two Cornua Copiæ.
The vase is of a reddisn stone. On the left side of it, behind the hand-rail; rifes a.
great spreading tree in full verdure, which gives a large shade against the house ;
the stem of it is encompassed with ivy and other green, which take away the light
of the off-scapebetweenit and the vase, together with the sharpness of the hand--
rail, against which the daughter is brightly set off with decorum. Against the wing
of the house, without the hand-rail, 1shew a vine. At the door waits a young,
servant. Quite forward in the left corner, stands a watchful dog, tied with a chain:
and barking.
In this representation I have had an eye to three principal circumstances; indi-
gency, necessaries of life, and opportunity. Indigency seeks relief where it is to
be had; if not in town, elsewhere ; wherefore, 1 represent necessity in both father
and daughter, coming for relief to the substantial man’s country seat, who lives in
plenty. The further circumstances, as, the bridge, town, and horns of plenty,
explain themselves.
Ido not place lean hunger near Erisichton, contrary to what Ihave formerly said,
namely, That, when a pafsion can be expreffed in the person himself, we have no
need of an emblematic figure to make it known-: Hunger is placed here for two
reasons :





reasons : first, because want cannot be perfectly expressed here in its full force,
through a present intermixture with something else ; as, the happiness of having
found the means whereby to relieve it ; to wit, the money. Secondly, because
Erifichton is not so naked, that his consumed body, according to the poet, can be
shewed as occasion requires.
The reason of my putting in the dog, is not only for the enrichment of the dis-
position, but also to shew, that he who possesses much wealth, should likewise
watch it. Moreover, it is usual for the country people, but chiefly men of sub-
stance, to keep those creatures as well for pleasure as use.
This fable is seldom seen in painting or exhibited in a print otherwise than in
Ovid’s metamorphases, and that in so simple a manner, that without the explana-
tion under it, it is scarce intelligible : for, What can be inferred from an old
meagre man’s receiving a purse of money from a gentleman, with a young woman
appearing between them ; How can the inequality between riches and poverty
be conspicuous, when they as like in dress as if they were brother and sister; and
this in a landscape, or the middle of afield, where is neither house, nor other token
of their habitation ?
The conclusion of a story is not all that is necessary to be red, we ought to
know the origin, the fact and sequel of it. First, it is necessary to know the man
and who Erisichton and his daughter were, to express this naturally in their persons
and dresses. Secondly, we should know by whom they are, punished, and in
what manner : and lastly, by whom, and by what means made easy. After a full
all their circumstances, most naturally ; such as the place, &c. After which, the
enrichments and diminutions will follow of themselves. We may at least con-
ceive, that they, who will not study the point, cannot go such lengths as to per-
form so small a story as this, much less one of greater dignity, in a natural and ju-
dicious manner.
Ishall now, agreeable to my promise in the conclusion of the last chapter, give
another embellishing example, in an emblem of my own invention, for the sake of
those who will not inure themselves to historians or poets, nor confine their free and
rich thoughts to such. a restriction.
Sweet Repose disturbed by Lewdness. An Emblem.
Here are seen three young nymphs of Diana’s train, tired with honting, reposing
in the shade of the trees a little off from the road, and near a foamy water: which
some fauni and satyrs espying, they were resolved to have some sport with them.
Wherefore, acquainting their affociates with the matter, they silently advanced
towards the place in abody ; bringing with them one of the largest Priapus termis
they had, together with two panthers a vessel of wine and some grapes. Being
arrived, and seeing the nymphs almost naked, and fast asleep, they planted before
the place the aforesaid hideous scare-crow; and then softly ftole their hunting
equipage, as quivers, arrows, bows, &c. and hung them on its genitals, fasten-
ing them with the straps, which they buckled. They moreover decked its head
with







and adorning them with vizors. Not stopping here, they seized as many of the
virgins garments as they could, and tossed them upon the high limbs of an ad-
joining tree ; and to prevent the nymphs climbing up in order to regain, they
tied the two panthers under the tree ; and after having set down the wine and
grapes, pleased with the project, they covertly retired to a peeping place to wait
the issue on the nymphs awaking. Each of the gang had brought with him his
instrument, as, the double hautboy, cymbal, tabor, timbrel, &c. wherewith,
because it was evening, and they might sleep too long, to beat up their quarters.
But the plot soon miscarried, through an unexpected accident; for another nymph,
who was possibly seeking for her company, happened to arrive at the place, and
seeing the panthers lying under the tree, and thinking they were wild, shot at
them and killed one. The satyrs seeing this, came out of their lurking-hole, and
pursued her, but she escaped by flight. They then concluded, they had waited
long enough; and observing that it grew late, and that the aforesaid little bustle
made the nymphs begin to stir, they in a full body of satyrs, fauni, bacchanals,
even all the tribe of Bacchus, set up with their instruments so loud a noise, that the
nymphs started up on a sudden; and, full of fright, looked for their cloaths: but
being now thoroughly awaked, the term presented before them, with their hunt-
ing equipage hanging about it. This sight, but especially that of their cloaths on
the tree, much surprized them and put them to the blush; not knowing what
course to take in the exigence. Not one durst approach the block in order to take
her weapons. The vile crew all this while kept perdue, laughing at them unob-
served. The distressed nymphs perceiving no body near them, run to and fro,
considering how to get their cloaths again; but on their approach to the tree the
panther arose, making so great a noise that they knew not whether to run. Cries
and lamentations here were useless : they above an hundred times invoked the aid
of Diana; yet in vain. The eldest, named Cleobis, at last took courage, and went
up to the term, with intention to get the veil from it to cover Carile, who was na-
ked ; saying,-Ahl Why are we such fools to be thus scared, and only by a
wooden black ; Why are we afhamed ; Some-body has certainly been here ;
but now the coast is clear, l am resolved to throw it down. Come, sisters, and
boldly give an helping hand.-— But she had no sooner uttered these words, but
all the gang appeared, mocking, scoffing and hooting : any one may determine
who was on that overture, most dashed and concerned. A little satyr shot at the
term, and took the quivers from it, shewing the nymphs the unseemly member,
with an hearty laughter. This (but especially when other scoffers shewed them
the cloaths on the tree) highly provoked them. To take to flight was not ad-
viseable ; one pushed them this way, another that way. During this game, a
noise of cornets was heard, which suddenly put an end to the laughter ; each
made off, leaving all things as they stood. The term of Priapus fell to the ground,
and the panther at the tree endeavoured to get loose. Now, Diana appears, at-
tended by her train of nymphs, who shot their arrows at the lewd crew, the dogs,
at the same time, tearing the panther to pieces. The fearful nymphs appeared
much afhamed, and prostrated themselves at the feet of the goddess; to whom
they





they related their misfortunes, and the affront put upon them by the gang of
satyrs; shewing her at the same time, the term, the vizors, their cloaths on the
tree, and what else was done in despite to them. The goddess, to shew her
resentment, gave immediate order to pursue the rioters, and would not enlighten
the night till she had revenged the insolence. Some accordingly made towards
the woods, others to the brooks, and the residue took the field : in a little time,
part of them were made captives; for of the three who pursued the nymph for
shooting the panther, one was catched in the net, and five others, together with a
bacchanal, were hawled before Diana in irons ; whom she sentenced to be tied, two
and two together by the feet, and whipped by the three affronted nymphs with
thorns and holm-leaves so severely, as almost to. kill them. Three others fhe
judged to be hung by their tails on the limbs of trees, with their heads just touch-
ing the ground. Not yet appeased, she caused him who was taken in the net, to
be therein plunged into the water, by two or three nymphs, till he was just ex-
piring, and the water came out of his mouth. The bacchanal must see all this,
on whom was bestowed an hunting knife, wherewith if she thought fit, to release
the delinquents, to cut off their tails : which after much reluctance, she was at
last prevailed upon to do; and then, tying their hands behind them, Diana said,
Go now, and shew vourselves to the rest of your wanton gang, and tell them, that
thus 1 will punish all those who dares to mock the chaste Diana and her retinue.
Is not this now, though a feigned story, matter sufficient to furnisn many
landscapes; The landscape-painter ought to observe here a representation of
different paffions ; bashifulness in the nymphs ; wanton joy in the saytrs ; severity

and resentment in the goddess and distress in the insolents.
You see here the alluring pleasure of committing a crime, and the bashfulness
and distress of those who suffer the evil ; but at the same time, the grievous conse-
quences, and punishment attending wickednefs and insolence. In fine, the sweets
and punishment of evil, and the reward and unexpected relief of virtue.
Can it be denied, that such a representation in landscape will not generally
please; Surely it is not impossible to make other such designs. On wnich oc-
cafion, I hope it will not be tiresome to the reader if l now shew what is understood
by the word (painter-like) as a very necessary point for a landscape painter.
CHAP. XV. Of the Word Painter-like. )
THERE is scarce any thing in the world which is not liable to a good or bad
construction ; and judgment alone chuses in all things a medium, out of
these two contrarities, which is certainly the most beautiful and best. This is an
especial truth in the art of painting; which has such a power as to affect people
two different ways : first, by virtuous and agreeable representations; and in the
aext place, by those which. are mean, mishapen and contemptible ; both equally
efficacious






efficacious in contrariety.
The former recreates and charms a judicious eye, and
the latter is its aversion.
It is therefore indisputable, that the painter-like, or
most beautiful choice, implies nothing else than what is worthy to be painted ;
and that the most mean, or what is not beautiful, least deserves that honour : as
for instance, suppose there were brought before me a basket of ripe, unripe and
rotten fruits mixed together; I must, having my judgment, chuse the most re-
lishing, or those which appear most beautiful to the eye, and reject the rest.
A landscape adorned with sound and straight grown trees, round bodied and
finely leaved, spacious and even grounds, with gentle ups and downs, clear and
still rivers, delightful vistos, well ordered colours, and an agreeable blue sxy,
with some small driving clouds; also elegant fountains, magnificent houses and
palaces, disposed according to the rules of architecture, and richly ornamented;
likewise, well-shaped people agreeable in their action; and each coloured
and draperied according to his quality ; together with cows, sheep, and other
well-fed cattle. All these, I say, may claim the title of painter-like ; but a
piece with deformed trees, widely branched and leaved, and disorderly spreading
from east towards west, crooked bodied, old and rent, full of knots and hollow-
nefs; also rugged grounds without roads or ways, sharp hills, and monstrous
mountains silling the off-scape, rough or ruined buildings with.- their parts lying
up and down in confusion; likewise muddy brooks, a gloomy sky, abounding
with heavy clouds; the field furnished with lean cattle and vagabonds of gypsies :
such a piece, I say, is not to be called a fine landscape. Can any one, without
reason, asfert him to be a painter-like object, who appears as à lame and dirty
beggar, cloathed in rags, splay-footed, bound about the head with a nasty clout,
having a skin as yellow as a backed pudding, killing vermin; or in fine, any
fuch paltry figure 2 Would younot rather conclude suchthings to be the jest of
a painter à
For my part, Ibefieve that the difference between the fine and the ugly, is too
great not to make a distinction between them. Iam well pleased, that some call
the works of Bamboccio, Brouwer, and Moller, and the landscapes of Brueghel, Bril,
Bloemart Savry, Berchem, and such masters, painter-like : but l oppose to them,
Raphael, Correggio, Poussin, Le Brun, &c. and in landscape, Albani, Genouille,
On this occasion, I shall, before l conclude, also- consider the word designer-like,
a word which is as much perverted as the other : for instance; crooked trees
abounding with knots and hollownesses, rugged clods of earth, bursten and sharp
rocks, human bodies robustly and roughly muscled in Michael. Angelo’s manner,
faces large featured, long nosed, wide mouthed, hollowe eyed like Tefta’s. These
objects we have extolled for designer-like, though as absurdly and improperly, as
The masters therefore are very imprudent, who encourage their-disciples to
seck and draw in so troublesome a way, after such objects, as tending to nothing
else than learning them to make out-lines. Do they nor ehuse a round-about-
way to bring them into the right path; Nay, How many die in the purfuit,
who, had they taken the other way, might easily have got throught Where-
fore,






fore, it is more adviseable to draw after the beautiful and sedate fimplicity and
greatness of Raphael, Poussin, and other excellent mafters, than after any of those
other paltry and mis-shapen objects. This must be agreed, thar if the bad and
deformed be painter or designer-like, the beautiful is not so, the case admits of
II
no alteration; and consequently the worst must be best, and the best worst.
both be good, there is no room for choice ; and you may at that rate mingle
beauty with deformity, joy with sorrow, ripenness with unripeness, gods with
beggars : but since beauty is attracting, and deformity offensive, this certainly is
true painter-like, which supposes the bestand most agreeable objects; which alone
ought to be called fo, and sought for.
Yet there are occasions, wherein both must be observed; either that the story
requires it, or that, by means of deformity, we are to set off what is beautiful,
and make it predominate : but theu the painter who understands beauty, may
more easily abate, than the other exalt himself above his knowledge and capacity.
Wheresore l conclude, that beautiful nature is the best choice, and the most
painter-like.
I shall now for the benefit of such artists as are not rich in invention, give a
compendious description of variety of objects in a fictitious view.
CHAP. XVI. Of Painter-like Beauty in the open Air.
HE dav was almost shut in, and the agreeable western sun giving long and
charming ground-shades, when I purposed to divert myself with a walk ;
not without reflecting, how many fine observables-are overlooked, which if hand-
led according to rule, would be of service : a carlessnefs often proceeding from
too superficial and groundless a method of study, which will not permit the
thoughts to six on things of most importance.
where nothing was-wanting which could tend to the repose of the mind; every
thing was beautiful and orderly. Blind chance had no hand in this-5. I could
plainly perceive with- what ardour and pleasure Nature and Art had mutually be-
stowed their benefits upon it. The roads or passages were so neat and level, that
in walking you hardly seemed to touch the ground. A sweet and refreshing wind
reigned there ;. which so allayed the sun’s heat as to make it indifferent whether
you sat in it, or in the shade: the rich- leaved trees; as beautiful in their stems as
their greens, moved almost insenfibly ; when the young and tender sprouts, as
yet but thinly leaved, careffed by the mild and gentle air, seemed to rejoice. the
silver leaves by a sweet motion, glittering like medals: the sky was fine blue,
losing gradually in thin air towards- the horizon : the small clouds not violently
driving this way and that, moved slowly and quietly. till they got out of sight. The
white






white swans beheld themselves in the clear brooks, freely winding and turning
without feeling whether with or against the stream.
In this delightful region, I found a very beautiful fountain, the bason of which
was of white marble, furnished towards the road with rocky bowls and scollops
to receive the water; the figures standing upon it were most elegantly chosen :
round it stood low and close May-trees, against the green whereof, the white
marble was magnificiently, yet modestly-set off; causing thus a pleasing mixture
in its shade.
From thence, l took to the right hand, along a level and broad way, on both
sides faced with a parapet of free-stone, whereon stood forwards two large vases of
flesh-coloured marble, in shape and ornament like those in the Farnese garden ;
wide on top and without covers-, but instead of an Iphigenia, the faint carving
consisted of dancing women. These vases had a wonderful fine sweep, the figures
were ordefly disposed, and in all parts alike and moderately filled with work; and
because the bas relief arose so- little, the whole appeared as yet fresh and un-
damaged.
The parapet was built after the Doricorder, and its pannels were adorned with
foliage and branch-work, twined with reeds.
The end of it let me into a wide sandy road, on the left side bordered with a
gentle flowing river, and on the right, with sine and large trees ; along the brink
of this river were planted only grey and whitisn willows, not all alike streight and
large, but some leaning over the water, others close branched and leaved, others
again, thin and young, discovering the glitter of the water: on the right side,
where the road run high, stood, as I say, large and heavy trees of various kinds,
such as oak, afn, lime, wild olive, pine, cypress, &c. Some with straight stems,
round tops, swaying branches, and fine greens ; between which, some tender
suckers with their small and upright stalks and airy leaves afforded an inexpresfible
elegant variety. The brown cypresses laden with their fruit, added no small lustre
to the green of the other trees, to my great delight. Under these trees grew
some wild simples, and various kinds of large and small leaved plants intermixed
with thistles and thorns in an agreeable and most painter-like manner. These un-
der growths, but especially the grafs on the sides, were in many places dusted by
the road ; which, by their union, caused a charming decorum.
At proper distances, along both sides of the road, were placed for the ease of
travellers, some low free-stone feats, in the form of a long and narrow architrave,
supported by two square pillars.
Going on I came to a cross-way, where l found a term, or guide set up. Here,
not to gowrong, Iwas at a’stand which way to take: in this doubt l recollected,
that those guides have commonly their faces towards the way strangers and travel-
lers ought to go. This term, was down tothe lower belley, like a man, yet very
musculous, and the head resembled that of a saytr, and guarded with two large
crooked ram’s horns ; it stood in a gap. between some large trees, half fhaded
with leaves and ivy ; it seemed to he made of marble, but very much be-dripped
aud fouled with green liquor. A little from it l saw, on a white marble plinth, a
decumbent statue of a naked nymph, resting with her elbow on a vase shedding
water,







water, which flowing down the plinth below the way, which was there a little
rocky, run into the river : this figure was very agreeable. I wondered at first,
fince it stood not far from, and lower than the term, that yet it was much cleaner,
thinking that in such a place it could not well maintain its beauty and whiteness;
but my wonder ceased on perceiving that there were no high trees over it, but that
it had a free air : another reason was, that being so low as to be reached over,
possibly some draftsman had been at the place, and wiped it clean ; on such a
conjecture, ltook some water out of the vase into my hand, and rubbed a part of
the shoulder, which confirmed my suspicion, for l discovered that some parts were
already become smooth and glossy, by being handled and rubbed.
Stepping à little further, I saw another sight as fine as the former ; 1 say, fine
with respect to art. It was an ancient tomb or sepulcher of light red marble, in-
termixed with dark grey, and white eyes and veins, with a lid or cover of lapis
lazuli. This tomb was supported by four white marble sphinxes without wings,
resting on a large black marble plinth, which, through its dustiness, seemed to be
lightisn grey. The ground under it was rugged, yet level for three or four feet
round the plinth.- This work was generally encompassed with sand extending to
the sea-shore, which it faced; and, ten or twelve steps further, the sea was seen
foaming. In the middle of the belly of the tomb, was a round bass-relief within
a compartment of oak leaves ; it exhibited a flying eagle, with thunder in its
bill.; whence l conjectured it might be Phaeton’s grave; and the rather, because
there stood, near the corners, three very old and large cypresses; of which the
hindmost was as yet whole and sound, but the forward ones, by weather or other-
wise, so damaged, that one had lost its top, and the other was on one side half
unbranched and bare. Behind this tomb, stood a large pedestal of greyish-blue
ftone, on which had formerly, as it seemed, been set an urn, now flung down,
and lying near it half buried in the ground : it was somewhat broken and da-
maged : I could make but little of the carving upon it, since that was under-
neath, and the ear or handle of the urn lay upwards ; wherefore, in order to see
what it was, I began to clear the ground away from it; but had hardly dug a
foot deep, before l perceived a piece of a chariot, and half a wheel in the shape
of a star; this, I thought, must be the chariot of the sun, as being not much:
unlike it.
This work thus seeming old, and yet the tomb with all its ornaments as new as
if just set up, l thought it must have owed its preservation to some heavenly in-
fluence. I was so entertained with viewing it on all sides, that l. was wholly taken
up with it; without reflecting, that as fortune favoured me, l’otight to hasten to,
other things. of consequence before it grew too late; yet I resolved, though I
stayed all night, not to leave the delicious place before I had exactly designed in
my pocket-book every thing remarkable in it. I then went ten or twelve steps
forwards from it, in order to have a full view of every thing thereabouts-; and
sitting down, there opened a perfect ordonnance ; for, on seeing the trees-behind
and on one side of the decumbent nymph, and, on the other side, an- easy afcent,
with a small cottage in a low ground behind it, 1 could not but observe how ele-
gant and becoming all the by-works kept themselves : the trees behind the tomb
appeared.






appeared dark, and thereby flung it off strong and brightly, the objects on each
side appearing faint. Further on l discovered a small bridge; and, in the off-
scape, some hills, &c. all which I presently sketched and shaded; marking, for
shortness of time, with letters or figures, the colours of the stones, and their
tints, together with the lightnefs and darknefs of one object against another, and
also against the sky.
Having done with this, and walking further on the right hand, I came to a
very large and weighty bridge, of one arch, which had an exceeding great span
ending, in the crown, in a point. This opening discovered an even plain, reach-
ing almost to the horizon, with cottages and houses here and there, in a vil-
lage-like manner: they were not meanly boarded and plaistered like ours, but
regularly built with stone, though plain and without ornament. This bridge
came from behind the trees on the right hand, and preserved a communication
over the road, with an high and large rock on the sea-shore : it was possibly pla¬
ced here for the sake of a dry passage to the other side in case of floods.
Going under this arch, l found myself in the open field, near another sort of
common buildings, which, at a distance, 1 could not perceive, on account of
some intervening trees. These were herdsmens habitations, and built with mean
materials, yet in a fine manner with respect to art. Some stood on ground-sills,
others went up two or three steps, but the generality of them had their entrances
even with the ground. Some had square doors, with circular windows over
them; or else round frames, stuck instead of bass-relief, with rams, ox, or goats
sculls, cut in white stone, according to the condition of the inhabitant. The
lower windows were in form like the doors, and a diameter and half higher than
wide ; or else, twice the breadth in height. The upper windows of such as had
two stories or small garrets were mostly round. Some but single-storied, had
compass-headed door-ways; and over them, long octangular windows; and if
any smaller over them, they were square. The roofs were generally flattisn,
and tiled for bringing off the water forwards. Some, in my opinion, much ex-
celled others in grace ; having, over the door-ways, small balconies with compass-
doors into them, and the windows on each side square and equally high; and
over them round ones again. On each side of the aforesaid doors or entrances,
were made, in the walls, square vent-holes, like niches contracting inwardly,
and cross-barred with iron. The pediments were Doric or lonic, and of whitish
stones; the lower story grev, and the rest free-stone; some were painted light-
reddishi, others white free-stone or grey. Some doors had pillars or seats on each
side. Some houses I saw also joined with walls, wherein were round holes.
Here and there appeared large gates, as of neat-houses ; one was open, and
seemed to be like a place covered in ; most of the windows had wooden shutters,
which hinged on top, and kept open by sticks. Those houses, to secure them
from the overslow of the river running in the neighbourhood, stood much above
the level of the way. In fine, l omitted no remarkable relating to these coun-
try peoples manner of dwelling.
Somewhat further, and without this village, I came up to a round temple,
having a lofty and elegant frontispiece. It waa ascended by a flight of ten or
twelve






twelve steps, with a free-stone ballustrade on each side, adorned with two sphinxes,
facing each other, which were headed with caps, and bodied with houses or co-
verings, after the antique manner. Landing on these steps I came up to a por-
tico, fronted with eight columns, entablature and pediment of the lonic Order;
the pediment had a fine intire bafs-relief, not much rising. The columns were
continued round the temple, two and ’two together, resting plinths and basements.
Over their ornaments ran a gallerv, divided into parts by pedestals, whereon
stood fine statues, one answering each pillar. Behind the ballustrade of the gal-
lery ran up pilasters of the Corinthian Order, two and two together, and between
them large windows, finely wrought according to that Order, as was the frize
and cornice with grave foliage, modillions, &c. On this arose an open dome,
inclosed with a close ballustrade, covered in with a compass-roof, whereon was set
a sun.
Though l was not mych conversant with architecture, yet I perceived a very
regular disposition in this building, which, among these adjoining, also orderly
and beautiful, loftily and magnificently distinguished itself; appearing like a pre-
cious stone set in enamel, though neither had other ornaments than simply those
of the Order. The contiguous houses were low and extensive, with high chim-
Behind these stood a
nies or towers, yielding, in my opinion, a fine decorum.
close plantation of trees, mostly pines and cypresses, which added no small lustre
to all this stone-work. On each side of the before-mentioned steps was a fountain
or square bason, adorned with two pretty large lionesses, couching, on pedestals
and spouting water.
Thus l faricied l saw this glorious lofty, and especially painter-like sight: When
we come to treat of architecture, and the choice of beauty
within doors, I shall be
at the trouble of stepping into this temple todescribe its inward wonders.
Oh l How comfortable is the shore after a tempestl What a defference is
there between a lovely sun-shine and a gloomy night I Between fresh and lively
youth, and stale old age 1 Love solaces in gardens of pleasure and beautiful
palaces ; but Envy lurks in desolate wildernesses, among the rubbisn of things
which it defaces.  Abandon then, true and young artists l vour blind zeal ; beau-
ty does not triumph, nor is here attended with what is deformed, spoiled, fouled,
or broken, but takes up with things simple, or less beautiful without defects.
Wherefore I think, that these two kinds of beauty differ as much as the verdant
and delightful summer, and the dry and barren winter. Who, in building for
pleasure, would make a patch ; Or, in making a garden, fill it with half-rotten
trees ; He must be an unaccountable man who seeks delight in a desolate wil-
derness. Is it not then evident, that those men have vicious tastes, who endea-
vour to fetch beauty out of deformity , A princefs sufficiently shines among her
ladies by her state and costly attire, without setting off her lustre by a comparison
with a swine-herd. When we meet with fine marble statues, are they not pre-
served with care from ill usage, and the injuries of time ; though the latter spares
For,
nothing :
Gutta cavat lapidem, non vi sed sæpe cadendo.









But probability ought to be observed in all things, that we need not inquire,
what is modern or ancient, without being therefore broken or over foul ; since
stones much handled will become sinooth, yet without damage : and, Why should
a man be made a judge of what is beautiful and fine, who came from a foreign
and wild country, and never saw beauty ?
In oppofition to true beauty, let us now represent the other sort, and leave the
point to the determination of the judicious.
CHAP. XVII. Of Things Deformed. and Broken, falsely called
Painter-like.
HANGING the scene, we shall now consider what is also, though unjust-
 ly, called painter-like ; and this in an imaginary way, like the pre-
ceding.
In walking, I saw a large gate, the door whereof was broken to pieces by an
huge oak blown down against it. Creeping through it, I found myself as in a
strange country, so very rugged, desolate and rocky, without paths or roads, that
I knew not where to walk ; the ground was no where so even as to reston. Here
I saw the fragment of a column ; yet, lying so obliquely, that I could not sit on
it : near it lay a piece of frize and cornice, with an end sticking up; and not
much further was another stone, pretty level, but in a morass abounding with
vermin. I nevertheless endeavoured to get upon this last stone; and then, with
my cloak under me, laid myself down upon it. Which I had no sooner done,
but somebody called,—-Hark ye ; go from it ; you lie in my way.
I, not
dreaming any person could be here, suddenly looked back in surprize, and sawa
young man sitting on an hillock, who, as he said, was drawing after the stone I
laid on. But, on recollection, he again called out, that, if 1 would stay there
but half a quarter of an hour, I fhould do him a great favour. This l consented
to, not without afking him, What he was going to do with such paltry fragments 2
He answered, ee They are the finest things in the world to. introduce into our
pieces. When I have such a fine parcel as that piece of a column, and this water
before me, with the addition of a stump of a tree, and a small dark off-scape be-
hind it, they, together, immediately compose a perfect ordonnance. Oh l you
cannot imagine, how extraordinary and full of variety these objects are. This is
the finest place on earth for a curious artist; all is painter-like; every thing lies
so loose, pretty and wild, that few good masters would refuse coming hither to
design these wonders ; and nothing but the present high wind hinders their being
here now. ’







Upon this prattle, I viewed him from top to toe ; he sat all in an heap, with a
board in his lap, and a small ink-horn, and a magnifying, or spectacle-glafs in his
hand : on his head he had a night-capalmost down to his eyes, with his left leg
over his hat, poffibly to save it from the wind ; a small light coming from between
the trees, shone on his lap. Poor man l thought I, how feelingly you can talk
of what is painter-like, and what satisfaction you must find in those things : if
there be any more artists of your stamp, this must be the place to find them in.
The truth is, the more I viewed him and heard his talk, the more I blamed my
own judgment for not discovering such beauties as he did. Now, perceiving he
had done, I went towards him to see his work ; but before l could come up to
hiin he had packed up his awls, and was gone another way. Behind the trees,
near the place where he had been sitting, l found another spark, who stood and
drew after a small rivulet full of big and little clods of earth and pebbles, which
he neatly designed on drawing paper, aud marked with their different colours.
His whole port-folio was full of such-like painter-like trumpery ; such as muddy
water, decayed and broken stones, pieces of wood, barren shrubs and bushies,
rough grounds, toads, snakes, &c. I afking him what branch he made his study)
He answered, that be had not yet practised any ; but hoped, if he could get all
those things, and perform them well, to become a good landscape-painter; ee For,
said he, those objects are so uncommon, that the best masters give themselves the
trouble to seek them. But, continued he, I cannot but wonder, that some search
here and in other places, and can scarce find a piece to their goût, nay, often re-
turn without doing any thing: when I, on the contrary, discover a thousand
things, both delightful and useful, whenever l cast my eyes. Were 1 to design
every thing I meet with, I should have work for many years. Look there, said
he, yonder is one of that tribe, prying about ; I have not yet seen him sit down
any where  I thought within myself, that it was strange, any man should run
about in an error in so wild and desolate a place.
Going on, Icame to à large and hideous rock, split through, and having one
part hanging forward full of sharp angles, open hollows and cuts, over-run, here
and there, with mofs and barren shrubs. On the right side was a deep morassy
valley, going off very steep, and on the left appeared an inaccessible ruined
building, like an heap of stone, swarming with adders, snakes and other vene-
mous creatures. Behind me the ground was so uneven, full of ups and downs,
and pathlefs, that l thought it impossible to get from the place. On the point of
returning back, Isaw a man creep on all-four, out of one of the holes or hollows
of the rock, and thereby cleared a passage for me. This man told me what won-
derful things were to be seen on the other side ; but 1 was scarce crept half
through, before l heard a frightful thunder-clap, which shook the whôle rock ;
wherefore, redoubling my speed, and being got through, I found that the top of
the rock was tumbled over the right side; which made me suddenly retire from
thence, fearful that another part might fall apon me. What also raised my aver-
fion, was the sight of a tomb crushied to pieces, and almost sunk into the ground,
and near-it lying a piece of a large trunk of white marble. I could perceive by










the base, that it had been a term ; and being curious to know what might be
hidden behind it, Igot on the tomb, and. saw through the trees, downwards, a
frightful pool. I therefore took to the left, where I thought the ground was
more level : three or four stepsfrom thence, I sawa white paper fluttering before
me along the ground, and after it ablue one, somewhat larger ; both which I ran
after and took up. The blue paper appeared to be a drawing after the aforesaid
tomb, when intire and standing, which made me judge that he must have been a
good master who had thus improved it in the draught. Possibly, thought I, he
is hereabouts. My conjecture was not groundless; for stepping a little further, I
found the poor wretch- lying under a large oak which had been thunder-struck ;
the stem was cleft from top to bottom, and a large limb lay across the man’s bo-
dy : his port-folio lay near him, emptied of all his drawings. This sight affright-
ed me; and approaching near, I heard him sigh : he perceiving me, called out
presently for help. I cleared the limb from off his body as well as l could,
whereby, and after much pains, he disengaged himselfrom the leaves. He was,
to my wonder, no where hurt, save a little in his left hand, yet of no consequence.
Ireturned him his papers, and afked him, Whether he had seen the tomb in the
condition wherein it was drawn ; He answered, He had. When, going to shew
it to me, he in amazement started back on finding it in ruins. Oh l says he, does
this lie also tumbled down, and my drawing scarce finishedl We then went
together further up towards the left, and regained most of his papers. He
told me, that his companion had left him, and run away on the approach
of the storm ; which induced me to think, he was the person who
came creeping on all-four through the aforesaid hole.
On our coming down, we found many already drawing after the broken
tree under which the good man had lain, with the utmost application.
It was their unanimous opinion, never to have seen a tree more painter-
He shewed them his drawing, and
This talk surprised us both.
like.
said, That the tomb was the only object he found intire thereabouts ; and
this being demolished, there was nothing left to please him. But this
they scoffed at, and answered him, that such things. might easily be made
out of one’s head, or found in prints.
In short, it was great diversion to me to see one as hotly clambering up
one place, and another creeping through some hole, for the sake of designing
the rock and tomb tuinbled down, as if they were going after treasure.
Taking leave of this person, 1 pursucd my way ; but was obliged, for
the sake of a ruinous fountain, the vases, mouldings, and other ornaments
whereof lay across and stopped the way, to take to the right hand. On
the remains, adorned with bafs relief, I found not one intire figure, every
thing being excessively mouldered, fouled, and over-run with wild plants and
shrubs. Its bason lay awry, with a corner sunk into the ground, broken,.
and full of earth or mud. A boy, who had been sitting there, came and
afked me, Whether 1 could not tell him, which part of this heap of stones
was the most painter-like , ’te I have been long making a choice, says. he,







of something good out of it; but the number confounds me; the parts are
all so broken, that 1 cannot find so much as a whole hand or foot. I
have, shewing me his drawing, pitched upon this among them, with much
ado. I believe verily, there was not such another undamaged bit in the
whole ruin, though of little consequence. It was a plinth with the right
leg and foot of Apollo, wanting the great toe. He said that he, with eight
others, had been drawing every thing after the heap, except this fragment ;
the foot of which was not, according to their fancies, broken enough. I
comforted him with saying, that he had picked out the very best thing of
all, when he owned, that he had made the choice through the persuasion of
another, who was now gone away, to whom the leg, by means of the sandal
and straps, was not unknown. This boy, I thought, ought to be set in a
right way; and his simplicity pleased me.
Turning then to the right hand, as I have said, I came into a dismal
place, which, by the largeness of the pavement, and arch work supported
by great pillars, seemed formerly to have been a palace.
It was here so lonesome and gastly, that l was seized with a cold swcat ;
wherefore I mended my pace, in order to get out of it; and, being got to
the other side, and ten or twelve paces from it, I found myself again at
the lake before-mentioned ; near which lay a shattered tomb, with the corpse
half tumbled out. The head and one arm rested on a large root of a tree
lying near it; the lid was almost slid off, and just on the totter, and a
snake, from underneath, was creeping into the tomb. A sight frightful
enough.
The sun, now on the point of setting, darted his refulgent rays between
some heavy clouds ; the sky was moreover dark blue, and on the horizon
yellowishi striped; which, along through the trees, strongly glittered in my
eyes. I saw a grave man carefully designing this sky in colours. In pas-
sing by, I said to him, ee Sir, you have met with a fine sight; that is a
true stalian fky. Yes, says he, I am very sensible of it.
Stepping further, I heard another thunder-clap ; and the tempest increased :
which obliged him to pack up his tools, and go off, and made me resolve
to be at home before night.
Now, I leave it to the judgment of the knowing and judicious lovers,
to determine, which of my two representations is to be accounted painter-
like ) I have sufficiently expressed my sentiments touching them.
But it
is to bé lamented, that Tyros, in their youthful ardour, are infected
with this poison, and made to believe, that in thunder and stormy weather,
they must run abroad, to design such mischances and defects of nature,
at the hazard of their healths and lives; though not able to chuse out
of them the most beautiful, for want of judgment to know what is
good, and, by some additions, to supply defects. These things are the
pastimes of great masters, but the chief study of the less knowing..








Be therefore, docible artifts. Not so intent in gaining your embellisn-
ean have them by vrote, Sueh ' elde eh lidin Prieehpildi inten doubes,
than bring ye to certainties.
In order then to qualify the judgment, to make a good choice, recourse
may always be had to the remains of those great masters, Raphael, Poussin,
and many others, to enlighten us by imitating their illustrious examples.
The End of the SIXTH BOOK.








 
T HE
ARa of TAENTNG.
BOOK VI.
Of PORTRAITURE.
Emblém. Touching the handling Portraits.
NATURE, with her many breasts, is in a sitting posture. Near
her stands a child lifting her garment off her shoulders. On her

other side stands -Truth, holding a mirrour before her, wherein


she views herself down to the middle, and is seemingly surprised


at it. On the frame of this glass, are seen a gilt pallet and
pencils. Trazh has a book and palm branch in her hand.
CHAP. 1. Of Portraits in general.
SINCE we meet with no presidence in the art, nor pretend to insist
on ceremonies, we shall treat of things as they occur to -us, and as :

clearly and profitably as possible.
But first, give me leave to say, that I have often wondered how any man
can, prefer slavery to liberty, and, by departing from the essence of the art,-
subject








Of Portraiture.
subject himself to all the defects of nature. I speak of such great masters as
Van Dik, Lely, lan Loo, the old and young Bakker, and others, who though pos-
sessed of great talents in the art, postponed what is noble and beautiful, for what
is nore ordinary and common. The truth is, and we have seen, that sooner by
this means than others, men have obtained the honour of gold medals and chains,
&c. Nay, the liberty of prescribing laws to princes ; staring them in the face,
drawing their pictures, and many other privileges, whereby they have acquired
great riches. What an unheard-of reward did not Apelles receive, when Alexan-
der gave him his dear Campaspe, in order to save the life of that great artist, by
satisfvinghis love, inslamed by drawing the picture of that beauty l When I
consider these things, I am surprised, that all painters do not give in wholy to
pertraiture ; since now-a-days money is preferred to learning, lucre to virtue, and
honours dispensed to men in proportion to their riches. But, leaving this sub-
ject, we will proceed thoroughly to consider every thing relating to that branch
of the art.
As in music and singing a good ear is requisite, so in portraiture it is impossible
to excel without a good eyc ; such an one, I mean, as is governed by sedate and
sober sensation, and not by self-love or passion. Next is required a regular design,
containing an exact proportion or division of the parts, not only of the face, but
of the whole body, that the sitter may be known by his picture, which may be
most agreeably done by mixing the fafhion with what is painter-like; as the great
Lely did, and which is called the painter-like or antique manner, but by the ig-
norant commonality, the Roman manner.
Next, we must be thoroughly judicious in the graceful choice of the light, and
the place where the person is to sit, that the face may appear to the best advan-
tage-; and then the body is to be disposed to the most natural and becoming
posture.
The next business, and which gives it the greatest lustre, is, the colouring, that
each person and his parts may have their proper colour, and such as appears in
his daily converse ; not such as proceeds from extraordinary emotions. Let the
artist beware of inelining to any particular manner, like some, whose work is
thereby better known to be theirs, than the friends of the sitter know the picture
to be his.
As for the choice of light, in order to apply it most advantageously for the be¬
nefit of either sex, it is certainly a matter of great moment; since the fair sex
commonly partake of more delicacy and grace than men, so they must have a
light as beautiful and agreeable as their persons.
But ere we proceed further, it will not be improper to look into the origin of
portraits, in order thereby to shew-the aim of those who cause themselves to be
drawn, and the profits which masters get thereby.
The ancients used to cause those, from whom the Common-wealt had received
extraordinary benefits, either in war or civil affairs, or for imminence in religion,
to be represented in marble or metal, or in a picture, that the sight of them, by
those honours, might be a spur to posterity to emulate the same virtues. This
honour






honour was first begun with their Deities ; afterwards it was paid to heroes, and
of consequence to philosophers, orators, religious men, and others, not only to
But now
perpetuate their virtues, but also to embalm their names and memories.
it goes further ; a person of any condition whatsoever, have he but as much mo-
ney as the painter afks, must sit for his picture : this is a great abuse, and sprung
from as laudable a cause.
In noblemen indeed it is a very commendable custom; because, being descend-
ed from great families, the lustre of these ought to shine, to encourage their suc-
cessors to keep up their glory, and to prevent sullying it by unworthy actions.
As for à general, or admiral, who has died in the bed of honour, gratitude, I
think, obliges us to raise a monument to his glory, and to animate brave souls
in future times, to immitate his virtue. But what is this to the vulgar ; pride on-
ly spurs them to it. The rich do it that their children may boast of it; the
master of a numerous family does it, that the world may know he is a father;
he who has fired a magazine of the enemy must be drawn, with this great ac-
tion, though perhaps tnere was no body to hinder him. Has a citizen’s wife but
an only babe, he is drawn at half a year old ; at ten years old he sits again,
and, for the last time, in his twenty-fifth year, in order to shew her tender folly ;
and then she stands wondering how a man can so alter in that time. Is not this
a weighty reason; A reproveable custom, if painters did not gain by it. But
again, portraits are allowable, when a lover is absent from his mistress, that they
may send each other their pictures, to cherisn and increase their loves ; a man
and wife so parted may do the same.
But to return to the original matter; l must warn the artists not to give in too
much to what is common; or humour ignorant people so much, as not to re-
serve to themselves some liberty of doing what they think proper for the sake of
reputation : surely this cannot be strange advice; for a master who prefers money
before art has no more dangerous a rock to split on, since the ignorant multi¬
tude usually insist to be drawn according to their own whims. One says ’to à
good master,—te Draw me thus, or thus; let me have one hand on my breast,
and the other on a table;’ another must have a flower in his hand, or a flower-
pot must be by him; another must have a dog, or other creature, in his lap;
another will have his face turned this or that way ; and some who would be drawn
in the Roman manner, must be set off by a globe or clock on a table, whether
such ornaments be proper or not. On mentioning the Roman manner, I find that
it signifies a loose airy undress, somewhat savouring of the mode, but in no wise
agreeing with the ancient Roman habit.
But many other inconveniences attend portraiture ; as first, the ignorance of
those who sit; for some of them, having no right notion of their own mein and
shape, often refer the judgment of a fine portrait to the eye of achild, or servant;
and what they say, Monsieur and Madam believe, either to its praise, or dis-
commendation.
A second inconveniency arises from a wedded inclination which any one has to
fuch and such objects; judging, as they like or dislike, not only of pictures, but
even the life itself ; for though they may be afraid to pass sentence on à fine
history






hiftory or landscape, yet a portrait must not escape them, as thinking it within the
reach of their capacities.
Thirdly, we nnd many artists never pleased with other mens works, but being
full of themselves despise every thing they see, though as good as their own; and
this perhaps on no better bottom than a pique against the artist’s conversation,
talk, dress, or money ; or else because of his greater fame: and yet if ten per-
sons happen to applaud a fine picture of this eye-sore master, they will at that
juncture, chime in with them, to sereen their prejudice. And on the contrary,
if but a single person afterwards find fault, they immediately turn the tables against
ten others. Again, if apiece of their friend be brought on the carpet, though
never so faulty, they will applaud and justify it at any rate, though against their
own convictions of conscience. But this partial and prejudiced humour is most
prevailent in those who know least.
A fourth set of men are those, who, being always of an unealy temper, dislike
their own, but applaud every thing other men do: these indeed are not so noxious
as the former, because they only hurt themselves, whereas the others hurt every
body.
Fifthly, there are a prejudiced set of men who find no taste but in easv and-
grave airs and postures; others in stirring and hurrying ones ; others in violent:
ones : some think that womens draperies ought to be loose and soft; others will
have them of velvet or fattin, or else party-coloured : this thinks that a dark or
brown ground beft sets off a figure ; anether chuses a landscape, or green curtain,
right or wrong. Are the- colours beautifully chosen, the picture smells of them;
are they broken, they seem muddy and foui. How can a portait please so many
opinions ? It is not like an history full of figures, where we can introduce va-
riety of sedate and stirring action, more or less beautiful colouring, loose or set
draperies, dark or light grounds, &c. Because this is but a single figure.
Our businefs then, must be to find a way between soylla and charybdis, to enable
the artist to paint a good portrait ; for he who makes due reffexion on every thing,
can prepare himself to overcome the aforesaid difficulties.
CHAP. II. Of the Defects in the Face and other Parts.
HE defects, which are seen in nature, or in simple life, are three-
fold.
1. Natural ones.
2. Accidental ones.
3 Useful ones.
The natural ones are, a wry face, fquint eyes, wry mouth, nose, &c.
The accidental ones are, loss of an eye, a cut on the cheek or other part of the
face; pits of the small pox, and the like.







The’usual ones are, those. habitsito-which we aecustom gurselves from- our in¬
faney ;. to wit, contraction of the eyes and. mouth, or closing, or gaping of the
latter, or drawing. it in. somewhat to this or that side, upwards or down-
wards, &c.
As for-otherbodily infirmities; how many have wry necks, hunch backs, bandy
legs, withered or short arms, or one shorter than the other ; dead or lame hands
or fingers ? Among these, some are unavoidable, and others may be either left
out; or handsomely hidden. The necessary ones ought to be secn, because they
help the likeness; such as a wry face, squint eyes, low forehead, thinnefs and
fatness, a wry neck, too short or too long a nose, wrinkles between the eyes,-
ruddiness onpaleness of the cheeks, or lips, pimples or warts about the mouth,
and such like: among those which may be hidden or left out, I count a blind
eye, a wound, wen, mole, pits of small pox, too many pimples, &c. a red, blue,
oghairy spot; as also habital usages; such as- hanging lips, pinchings or draw-
ingsof the-mouth and eyes.
Ithink also, that the common and useful dress of a person is a great addition
te-likenefs ; for no sooner is the dress altered, but the look does the same, and
shews itselfeither more or lefs pleasing and agreeable ; and thereby the person be-
comes more tor lefs known : to obviate which, I advise the artist above all things:
to get first a true likeness of the face, and paint it. to the sitter’s satisfaction; and
then he may freely manage all the rest as he thinks fit, and thereby get honour
and commendation ; since the life itself in such a dress, cannot any more alter.
The painter should likewise discover and- know, as much as possible; the nature
and temper of the person sitting, and in what circumstances lies his favourite plea-
sure ; that he may, when sitting, be entertained with talk pleasing to him, and
his air thereby kept steady and serene, and his posture natural and easy; avoiding
every thing tending towards sorrow or frightful relations ; for these are apt to ruffle
the mind, and so to discompose the face, that it cannot easily be got right again :
but if the sitter himself do by his talk, difcover his own bent, the painter ought
to humour it to the last, whether if-be jocose or moderate, without exaggeration-
or diminution ; yet with such a variety, as not to prove tiresome, and make the
face alter.
He who cannot thus-manage and furnish outa discourse, will be the longer ere
he hit the likeness. Some will even sit three or four times, and each time with a-
different air; and were they to sit ten times; I fancy something new would still
offer.
Another hindrance may be, that painting-rooms are often hung with such sinutty
But
pictures as frequently put virgins to the bluss, or alter their countenances.
though for improvement, fine pictures are necessary to be always in view, yet in a
paintingeroom, there ought not to hang the wanton picture of Mars and Venus
casched by Vukan; or Dina’s:bathing,, though done by Van Dyk, or Joseph and-
Potiphar’s wife ; for; though these may hang in a corner, yet when the eye hag
once catched them, it. will retain them; because theirideas make continal iin-
preffions on ithe mind; even against its will; and therefore: the bare remembrance
of such things must put a young and chaste virgin to the blush. Must it aot create
a longing







a longing, to see a picture of two beggar-boys fall greedily on ripe fruit, the one
eagerly biting a piece of fresh melon, and the other a bunch of grapes, with the
juice falling down his chin on his naked breast? The room then should be hung
with every thing modest, as fine landscapes and flower-pieces, which will amuse
the sight without disturbing or tireing the mind, or altering the countenance ;
fine portraits will also animate à sitter to keep him serene, and make him emu-
lous of their airs : a large looking-glais may be likewise of service, if so hung that
the sitter can see himself in it, for, thereby discovering any disagreeableness in his
look, he will correct himself, in order to have as good an air as he desires; and by
such methods as these a painter may become great.
We will now proceed to consider how many mistakes some painters commit in
relation to the first observation of natural defects; these endeavour to their utmost
power, to express punctually the deformities and defects of a face, without
scruple, to wit, a blind or squint eye, or the like, though they know that it is an
enemy to grace, and on no other ground than a false belief that it creates a greater
likeness. But who loves to be reproached with his defects, when they can be art-
What would become of grace, which teaches, that a painter-
fully hidden ;
should make as beautiful a choice as possible ; which these blemisnes obscure. I
think therefore, that we cannot lay too great a strefs on what concerns the make,
position and turn of a face, that the eye be not offended with blemisn, or deformi-
ty, or the posture look disagreeable.
How monstrous is the picture of a certain admiral, who seems to stab himself
with his staff of command, and has a defective eye turned directly to the light; be-
cause, according to the saying, he is best known by it. Would not a-more pro-
file view have suited him better, or to have flung the side with the blind eye into
fhade ; Would it not be ridiculous to paint the Duke of Luxemburgh in profile, to
represent him the better, and that his hunch-back might be the more vifible, for
no other reason, than that most people knew he had one )
Nature abhors deformity, and we cannot behold it without aversion, and a
quick turn of the eye from it : a squint-eyed person cannot see himself in the glass
without inward trouble ; especially one of the fair sex, who; in other respects,
tolerably handsome, cannot bear to see an instance of her deformity in another,
but will basfifully look off or down to the ground. How much worie then must-
it look in a picture ; The life may be sometimes seen on an handsome side; which
in an ill chosen picture we can never expect : whence it is natural for one who has
a blemish or defect in an eye or cheek, always to turn the best side to. the light-
In short, we do not desire to do any thing, walk, stand; fit, talk, but with a be-
coming air. Have we fore eyes, we hide them under our hats ; or if a lame hip,
we endeavour to walk briskly ; have we fome humour or pimples in a cheek, we
either hide them with a patch, or paint the other side like it; have we bad teeth,
we keep the mouth shut ; ora lame hand, and hide it not under our coats, or in
our pockets. If nature acts so, how can such defects please in a picture ; Such a
flattery then as is agreeable to art, is not only aflowable, but commendable; es-
pecially when the sitter is so disposed in posture, that the painter himfelf cannot
perceive it.







Alke any one wha wears a piece of black silk over an hollow eye whether he de-
fires to be draun from that fide ; I believe nots Aperson with a wooden leg cares-
not that the deformity should appear in a picture : such an one ought to be drawn
in half length only : but if the heroe insist upon the introducing such a leg, on a
supposition that is an honour to have lost a limb in his country's service, the
painter must then comply with his defires; or else contrive it lying on a table
covered with red velvet : if he desire it after the antique manner, it must be con-
trived in a bas relief, wherein the occasion of it may be represented ; or it may
hang near him on a wall, with its buckles and straps, as is done in hunting equi¬
pages ; or else it may be placed among the ornaments of architecture, to be more
in view. But what praise or advantage will an artist get by this, when a judicious
master sees the picture ; He may perhaps plead in excuse, that the sitter would
have it fo. This indeed I cannot argue against, because we usually say to whom
we employ, Do as l would have you, right or wrong. We have an instance of a
gentleman, who being drawn in little, and comparing the smallness of the eyes
with his own, afked the painter, Whether he had such ; However, in compli-
ance, and for his pleasure, he desired that one eye at least might be as big as his
own; the other to remain as it was. A sad case l a miserable subjection l for
though we cannot compell others to be of our opinions, yet l pity those who must
fubmit to incongruities. But, not to dishearten the artist too much, we will
proceed to,
CHAP. III. The Observables in a Portrait,
particularly that of-
a Woman.
ELF-CONCEIT and self-love seem nathral to all, but especially to the female
sex ; who, whether their pictures are drawn on their own accounts, or thro’

the desire of others, imagine they deserve such homage; nor stops it here, for
although they may possess a tolerable share of beauty, yet that is not satisfactory
enough; they must be flattered, and their pictures painted in the most beautiful
light; and unhappy is the painter who abates but half a drachm of such a
beauty.
For these reasons the master is-obliged to have a principal regard to light and
colour; but to the light chiefly, since it is well known that nothing gives greater
offence to ignorant people than shades, and still more, when they are strong and
broad : they believe they speak to the purpose in objecting, Well, how can it be
possible that my neck and cheek should have such large shades, when Idaily con-
sult my glass, and find my skin all of a colour and white , And ’then the painter
is blamed. But are not such reasons weak and absurd ; Since, ifa man, how
tenacious soever, meet another, who by long. absence and alteration of dress, is,
got out of his memory, he will naturally turn him to-the light, in order to know
him and his features. This conduct has been wonderfully observed by Barocci in-
his







his picture- of Mary paying a visit t9- Elizabrth twhen big with-child; in-which, by
his method-of placing the figures, and the ataegtion of the faces, we seem: tot
hear them. talk, looking earnestly at each other.
I think those masters have made the best choice who have chosen a front-lighto,
and thereby kept.their colours most natural and beautiful ; since thig-light is,cer-
tainly most advantageous, whether the picture hang-against a wall, or where-else.
But here seems, to-arise a.difficulty, since we formerly said, that we ought. to fix,
a certain place, and the, point of sight and distance, and to. dispose the light so
as it can fall on that place ; to-which the answer is easy ; porfraits have,no fixed
place, as we shall further shew in another chapter, as also how far and-on: what.
occasions we must- confine ourselves to that rule.
The best way to settle this- point is, to follow those who have chosen their-light:
almost fronting, and, as before said, such a colouring as naturally appears to the:
eye, besides a good choice: since I. think the case of placing a portrait te be-the-
same as that of curious china, which, whether it stand high or low, shews- itself
every where beautiful. My reason for this is, that objects, which have such a.
front-light, have an exceeding fine effect, and great relief, when, they come
against a dark ground; and still finer when the light falls on, them somewhat
from on high, if tha-sitter. and some accidents do not hinder it; in whigh case,
reason and our eye must best-direct us. Viewjbut this fineness in asposture painted
leaning over an hatch, or out at window, and what great decorum the-
touches and shades about the most relieved parts cause in such an object; as
Leonardo da Vinci has well observed.
Of the accidents which I just now spoke off, I shall mention two or three ; some
persons may be. toa long and sharp-mosed, or too hollowreyed; for such, a low
light is most proper; but where it is otherwise, an high light : in this manner a
judicious master ought to help the defects of ’nature, without adding to, or ta-
king any thing from them : yet, to. the sorrowof impartial masters, the contraty.
is too much seen ; for; as. I have said, that history-painters chuse and follow what
they have the greatest inclination for, so it is with many portrait-painters, their
work is better known by their particular manner than the sitter by his picture.
Permit me here to make a comparison between those two great masters, Titian
and Van Dyk, with respect, to the judgment 1 have heard made on their works.
Of the latter it is said, that in the delign, grace, and choice of a portrait-figure,
he was the most skilful; nevertheless I have seen many of Titian’s (who, in most-
mens opinions, has the greater reputation), which scemed to me incomparable,
though less agrecable: here my position, about the particular choice of masters,
takes effect again; because l think, that the defect in agreeableness is peculiar to,
Titian’s country, and limits his choice, and therefore he is the lefs culpablé;
when, on the contrary, our region prefers what is gay and elegant before the.
majestic. and grave; and likeness is the chief object both of the sitter, and the.
artist, every thing else being looked on as by-works and ornament : a poor judg-
ment methinks of people of sense l For if a portrait have not, besides likeness, an
agrceable disposition, the little knowledge of. the master will presently, appear.
It is true, that we meet with many odd faces in the life, especially among vul-
gar






gar and clovnisn people, yet I fay that, be they ever so rude, agrecableness
should be observed in their pictures. By agreeableness I understand the dispo-
fition of a posture in general ; as when the face has an advantageous turn more or
lefs totthe light, up or down, in order to create handsome shades, and to shun
unbecoming ones; for every face requires a particular observation ; one, an high
light, another, a low one; this a side-light; that, an almost fronting one :
I
speak not yet of many other requifites, such as the sway of the neck, shoulders
or breaft; or of a proper back-ground; all which considerations are essential to a
fine portraft, as well in refpect tothe naturaluess and colour, às to the motion :
but ef the light and back-grounds we shall say more in the next chapter, and
now return to our comparifon. Some think that Van Dyk’s paintings are but wa-
ter-colours, compared with Titian’s, whose pictures have so much force in colour-
ing, fights and fhades, that those of the other cannot stand in competition with
them, nay, that his colouring is inimitable, and whereby that of Van Dyk ap-
pears faint and weak : a ridiculous opinion indeed l However, that Van Dyk and
Jitian differ much in colouring, 1 allow; but neverthelefs think, that we need
not run to the Italians to prove it, since, if the stress lay in strong colouring on-
ly, Rembrant need not give way to Trtian. But whence arises the mistake; Most
men chime in with thofe simple judges who approve no histories, landscapes, or
portraits, that are not painted in the Jralian manner. My opinion is, that the
whole of the matter lïes more in the difference of climates than in the handlings
of the masters; for let an Englifhman’s picture. hang near an stalian’s, both
handled with equal fkill, and each represented according to his hue and nature,
there will appear a great difference between them; the sweetning softness of the
Englihman will charm as much on onc hand, as the strong and glowing colout
of the Italian on the other. On which of these two pictures has the master be-
stowed the most pains , Are not both praise-worthy, as having each expressed the
character natural to his figure ?
But not to go abroad for comparisons, with respect to particular climes, our
own Netherland affords differences enough : two brothers, of the same parents are
born in the same town and. hour; one of them is brought up to the sword, and
endures all the fatigues of war, and the incommodities of hailx snow, wind, rain,
sun, smoak of salt-petre, &c. whereby his complexion is altered, and becomes
swarthy. The other brother, contrarily, is educated in saloons, sine apartments
and tender conversations, by which means time cannot so much affect him; each
sits for his picture, to à feparate and good master: now these two picturés being
brought together, Will the painter be censured for the difference of tints and fea-
tures; or will it be objected, that nature has not been rightly followed; or that
the pictures are not like; An impartial judge will determine that both are good
and natural, and that each master has duly mixed art with nature.
I have discovered a great oversight in some artists, which is, that when the
face was finished, they had no further regard to the life, but chose a posture, at
pleafure, out of drawings or prints, without considering whether it suited the per-
son, and whether the dress was proper to the condition and countenance of the
sitter; nay, whether the head matched the hody : certainly a great heedlessness :
For-






For if a body must be added, what more proper than the life itself, And though
Many disre-
the layman be good, and helpful, yet it is not equal to the life.
gard this, thinking they have done enough in hitting the face : but all the while
they are preposterousty joining an airy drapery to a sedate and grave head, and a
grave and stiff dress to a merry face. But further, the hands are entirely neglect-
ed ; if a pair of fine ones can be got of some other master, these are made use of,
without regard to the life, which may perhaps have short, thick and coarse
hands. How can these things agree ; Is it not almost the same as to dress Flora
—We have the
with the drapery of Vesta, and Vesta with Flora’s, Artists say,
prints of Van Dyk, Lely, Kneller, and others, for fine examples; and as Lely has
followed Van Dyk in graceful action and draperies, so we have a liberty to immitate
him and others. 10 which I willingly agree ; but then we ought to do it on
the same footing as he did ; in his postures he has not merely, and without alte-
ration followed Van Dyk, and still less without judgment ; as may be seen in his
U
of P.
two celebrated pictures of Nell Gzuynn and the D-
: the one, a
wanton and buxom lady, he has so represented; and the other, being a widow,
and more sedate, appears more modest.
By this rule we must walk in the use of those great masters; but if things be
done without making distinction of persons, and their conditions, the artist will
work to his dishonour. He who steals thus, may indeed call'the work his own,
without reproach; none will object, as Michael Angelo did once to a painter who
practised it to excess :
-What will become of your pictures at Doomsaay, when the
parts shall return to their ozen wholes, seeing your works are made up of stolen pieces à
Moreover, in this theft, we ought well to observe, how masters best applied
every thing, with respect to youth and age, as well in postures as draperies and
by-ornaments ; what suits an alderman or heroe; a merchant or citizen; noble-
man or plebean : hereby we shall discover the aims of the great masters in thus
managing these particulars, and learn to immitate their beauties in a sweet and
agreeable manner.
CHAP. IV. Of the Choice of Lights, Draperies, and Grounds in a
Portrait-s-and of the Point of Sight.
N the preceding chapter we have laid down as a rule, that a front-light is
the best to be chosen, and the most beautiful, especially in the fair sex; and
I think it the more necessary when the face itself is also chosen in front, because
then the greatest force will fall directly upon the most rising, or relieved parts ;
but I shall now subjoin, that since the life, however we dispose it, either from or
near the light, fronting or in profile, yet supports itself, though the light be not
advantageously chosen, which a portrait cannot do ; we therefore must needs, in
order to make it appear as it ought to be, accommodate the light to the dispo¬
sition of the face ; for instance, when the face turns somewhat sideways, the light
must be adapted to it; when it is quite in profile, a side-light will be best, be-
cause






cause then a great mafs of light remains together, to wit, in the forehead, nose
and cheeks, which are not broken by any ground-shade, but united by the
roundness; which shews us how to represent rising nature, and causes a becoming
relief.
We see that many, without difference, be the figure in full proportion, or in
little, give the touches under the nose so black and dark, that it seems as if a
black beetle were proceeding thence ; whereas it is certain, and nature teaches it,
that when the light falls strong on the nose, the nostrils and their ground-shades
can never appear so black ; and yet some think they have done great feats in using
force and strength, and will do it even in a fair and tender face, and no bigger
than the palm of the hand, although the deepest black should not have force
enough to shade the other objects of à darker colour, such as hair, a cloak or
other garment; by which sort of management the face seems to jump out of the
frame, and to desert the wig, hair, and garment. We must not so understand,
when we teach that the face must have the main light; we mean only, that all
ought to keep due order, that it may look natural. Each colour of the by-
work ought, according to its lightness or darkness, to have its moderate shade
and dark touches, as the matter it consists of is either solid or thin and transpa¬
rent; and in proportion as the objects lessen, so must the force of their colours
diminish, as shall be further illustrated in-the following chapter, to which for
brevity we refer. We see an excellent example of this management in the fa-
mous Netscher’s artful portraits, wherein he has judicioussy handled the darkest
shades, and main-light-touches, according to the natural force of the colour.
For the better understanding of further observables, I have found it proper to
mention some other particulars concerning the disposition of lights, according to
occasion, consisting in light against dark, and the contrary; and though every
thing thereby becomes relieved, and is set off, yet that is not sufficient; for the
placing of colours against each other on suitable grounds, and a contrast in the
objects, whether moveable or immoveable, is of great consequence and decorum :
and although we have handled these things at large in the Book of Colouring, yet
we find it necessary to recapitulate them here, with respect to portraits, and the
retiring grounds or vistos behind them.
Observe then, whether a fair and beautiful face will become a light grey, or
lightifh blue ground; and whether a warm complexion and strong colouring,
against a glowing or yellowisn ground, will please the eye. I speak of the face,
not the draperies, though both together make a portrait. But let the fair
and beautiful face of a woman be placed against a warm ground, and then the
light parts will not only be thereby flung off, and look more agreeable, but the
shades will also be softened, and appear more tender; for it is unnatural to force
a fair and tender virgin, who shews little or no motion, out of her seeming apart-
ment-; as some by their glowing shades and reflexions have endeavoured to do;
whereby their faces, on the shaded side, look as if a lighted candle stood behind
them, which penetrated their skin : this is as unnatural in the open air, as with-
in doors.









This example of a woman is enough to prove the contrary conduct with re-
spect to a man’s face, according to the aforesaid rules touching the disposition
and placing of colours on suitable grounds; namely, that the strong ought to be
painted against the weak, and the weak against the glowing and strong ; wherein
is also comprehended light against dark, and dark against light.
Whence it is evident, that back-grounds contribute very much to the charm-
ing grace of objects; nay, I dare say, that the decorum mostly depends there-
on : and though many imagine, that a dark or black ground always becomes a
portrait, yet it is no rule, since, as before has been said, each individual colour
of the objects requires a particular back-ground : besides, if such things were to
be taken for rules, the art would smell too much of an handicraft ; for a dark
colour against a dark ground can have no good effect, and that of a white or pale
against it will be too hard ; therefore a medium must be judicioussy observed in
both, that one colour may suit with the other. In the draperies the conduct is
the same; one person best becomes light, and another dark cloaths ; blue suits
one, and red, yellow, or green, &c. another: the artist must then take care not
to force Nature, but help her as much as posfible, and represent her always most
beautiful.
If any one would know my reason for thinking that many errors arise in this
part of the art, it is, that the colours of the naked receive more or less, or too
much force by the by-colours of grounds and back-ornaments : It fares with
them as it is said of the camelion, who changes his colour as often as he is pla¬
ced by different colours; though this is occasioned by his elegant and shining
scales, when, contrarily, the human skin is dull and not shining. However we
shall find, that he who paints a portrait twice, and each time on a contrary
ground, yet with the same temperament of colours, will perceive a very great,
nay, incredible difference : as I. have on several occasions experimented in the
life ; to wit, that when some virgins were in a room hung with yellow, they look-
ed sickly and grey, notwithstanding their fresh colour ; but, contrarily, being in
a room hung with violet, their colours shewed themselves very beautiful ; whence
it appears, that the alterations are oftentimes occasioned by the adjacent objects.
Let him who doubts this make trial of it in a portrait, by laying a ground with
water-colours on paper, and after the face is cut out, placing it against the pic-
ture instead of a back-ground. But I think there is a convenient way of pre-
venting the aforesaid alteration; namely, by fixing against the wall, behind the
sitter, a garment, cloth, or something else of the same colour, or near it, which
we chuse for our back-ground: thus we may be sure of hitting the right colour,
and make the painting look agreeable.
In order to represent an extensive back-ground, and chiesly in a small picture,
be it an apartment or landscape, some shadiness should be contrived between the
figure and the distance, as a column, curtain, body of a tree, vase, &c. These
objects being in shade, or of a dark colour, the lights falling on the off-works
will not prejudice either the face or drapery, though both be light; but, on the
contrary, the figure, as receiving the foremost and greatest light, will thereby be
relieved, and look more agreeable.




















































































As for the draperies, fince they confift of different and various colours, each
of a particular nature, and littie agreeing with the colour of the face, they also
require each à particular ground, beft suiting and uniting with it; to the end
that, though differing among themselves, they may have a perfect harmony with
each other, so that the eye be not taken alone with the face, or the draperies, or-
naments or by-works; but, by this sweet conjunction, insenfibly, conducted all
over the picture.
It will not be improper to treat also about easiness and sedateness in posture,
opposed to stir and bustle, and the contrary : namely, that the picture of a
gentlewoman of repute, who, in a grave and sedate manner turns towards that of
her husband hanging near it, gets a great decorum by moving and stirring hind-
works, whether by means of waving trees or crossing architecture of ftone, or
wood, or any thing else that the master thinks will best contrast, or oppose the
sedate posture of his principal figure. And because these are things of conse-
quence, and may not be plainly apprehended by every one, I shall explain my-
felf by examples in plate LVII. touching the elegance and harmony of back-
grounds with the figures.
In No. 1. I reprefent a beautiful face against the light of the ground ; and
the drapery, which is white, or of light colouring, against the dark of it; these
oppofitions thus meeting, produce a sweet mixture above, and below an agreeable
relief or rising of the under part of the body ; whereas, were it otherwise, the
face, as but a small part of the body, would look too fharp and disagreeable,
and the under part of the body would have no force.
In No. 2. being the portrait of a man of a more warm and swarthy complexion,
we see the reverse of the former, because his colour, and that of his dress, are
of a different nature ;, yet the ground is very ornamental, and each sets off the
No. 3. shews a man with a drunken face of red, purple and violet, and some-
what brown and darkisn; which is set off by a white marble or light stone ground,
and gives it a fine air.
In No. 4. is an example of the contrast in off-works with the drapery of the
figure ; shewing the opposition of moveable objects with fixed ones ; for herein
are seen rounding and crossing folds against straight and parallel off-works. And,
In No. 5. appears the reverse ; where the folds hang straight and mostly dovn-
wards, and the off-works crofs them.
No. 6. gives us an example of the opposing action and posture of bodies in two
fellow-portraits ; for the man; being on the woman’s right side, turns his face
sideways towards her; his body is fronting, receiving the light from the right
side.
In Ne. 7. we see the contrary in the woman’s posture ; her face is fore-right,
and her body sways sideways towards the man; she also is lighted from the right
side.
The figures numbered 8 and 9 represent also, yet in a different manner, the
contrast in the motion; for the woman, standing on the right side of the man,
has







has a sedate motion, and set and hanging shoulders: but the man, contrarily, is
in active motion. And,
No. 10. shews a proper method to exhibit a great extent, or seemingly such, in
a small piece ; for the figure stands in a strong light; the by-ornaments, viz.
curtain, vase, pillar and walling, are in shade; and the off-scape or hind-work is-
light again, but somewhat broke by reason of its distance.
To conclude this chapter, Ishall say something of the placing of portraits ;
and of their point of sight.
As to the former, it is certain that when we see any painted figure, or object in-
a place where the life can be expected, as standing on the ground, leaning over
a balcony or ballustrade, or out at window, &c. it deceives the eye, and by being
seen unawares, causes sometimes a pleasing mistake ; as it frightens and surprises
others, when they meet with it unexpectedly at such places as aforesaid, and
where there is a likelihood for it. If we are thus misled by a representation of
nature, how great must the master be who did it l The knowing esteem him, ig-
norants cry him up: if this be the case, we ought to endeavour to follow nature
and likelihood, and principally to observe the rules of perspective ; for who can-
doubt, that a standing, sitting, or moving figure, artfully painted, and placed as,
aforesaid, will not have the same effect as the life itself ?
Hence it follows, that low horizons, or points of sights, are the best and most.
natural in a portrait, and will most deceive the senses, if the light and distance,
with respect to the place where the picture is to be set, be well observed;, other-
wise the effect will be contrary to what we expect.
This conduct is chiesly necessary in portraits hanging high ; for being. so much
above the eye, they must needs have a low horizon. But as portraits are move-
able, how natural and like soever they be, and well handled, if they hang not in.
proper places, they will not have a good effect : hence the mischief attending them.
is, that by continually changing their places, they cannot always be painted
to a certain height and distance, and consequently baffle our rule : a difficulty
which the greatest masters must struggle with, and this branch of the art is
liable to.
Having now shewn that a low horizon and point of-sight are best and most na-
tural, as supplying, in some measure, this inconveniency : How much must they
mistake, who always chuse anhigh horizon, They are on a level with the sitter,
and yet place the horizon manyfeet higher; nay, they think, those who do other-
wise act against nature and art. Some will have two points of sight in one piece,
one for the figure, another for the ornaments; one level with the eye, and the
other for the off-scape; one hand higher or lower at pleasure, or about three or
four fingers breadth above the middle. Although these are inexcusable errors, yet
I think it vain to attempt their redress; but hope the judicious artist will weigh
what Ihave said, and endeavour to avoid them.































































































































































































































CHAP. V. Of Portraits in Little.
THERE are many things, as I have formerly shewed, which if we will have 
them transport the senses by their natural representation, we must always
exhibit in their natural proportion and force of colouring: but in a portrait it is
otherwise ; for this may as well be done in little, as in full proportion, provided
the diminution be well observed ; and besides, it has some relation to historical
management. We could say the same of a little flower compared with a great
one ; for if it were coloured in proportion to its distance and diminution, it-would
be in the same case with a portrait in little:. But it is nevertheless certain, that in
festoons, garlands, flower-pots in niches, groups of flowers, &c. serving for
ornament of chambers, little slowers are of small account ; nay, never seen wove
or embroidered in any stuff: whence some may be induced to think, that a por-
trait in little, as big as the palm’of the hand, has as little property in a square
against the wall, especially when it receives its light from without the frame, and
is handled with as much force as the life itself; which, with respect to force, Ial
low : nevertheless, a small portrait may, in order to make it look more natural,
be more easily helped, than small flowers placed against a door, window or other
flat; which, in my opinion, can in no wise be made good; but a small portrait
may, as I shall prove in what follows : in order to which the artist must previously
consider.
First, How much the life in proportion diminishes; and consequently, how
faint it must be.
Secondly, that the picture cannot receive its light from without the frame, as
being too far from it.
Here, perhaps, it may be afked, Whether a portrait of a lady or gentleman
leaning out at window, in the manner of old Mieris, Mezzu, Vonder, Neer, and
others, would not be good and natural ,: I say, Yes. But then the window
must also go back ; for as it would be difficult to represent its- going back from
the frame, since no object, whether ceiling-or sloor, &c. is between them, in
order to create distance, and make the picture fall back ; something may be intro-
duced in full proportion, to shew the depth and distance, according to the differ-
ence to be seen in the following instances in plate LVIII.
In No. 1. we see a common fault in the figure leaning on aframe : in this there
is no other way to make the figure go baek, than by taking away the frame. And,
although,
No. 2. shews itself within the frame, yet it would be to no purpose, did we
not assign a sufficient large breadth or thickness to the frame ; for in such case, we
must not regard an hand’s breadth of cloth, whereon to repiresent something in full
proportion, as an orange, flute, book, &c. Yet,
No. 3. shews a good method, and in my judgment, the best and most natural.
I remember,:







I remember, amongst the paintings of a certain lover, to have seen one of a
Doctor with an urinal in his hand, thrusting his arm out at window, so that the
shade of it, and the glitter of the water plainly appeared on the sill of the window.
Next the window a maid-servant was seen standing at the door, speaking to a
woman in the street with a child in her arins : some other figures appeared in the
front of the picture, seen to the shoulders only, as if standing in the street. On
the sill of the window were lying a bottom of blue worsted stuck with needles,
also a pair of sciffors, a piece of dark blue cloth, and a thimble, all in full pro¬
portion : to be short, this picture was by an artist, with the owner’s leave, sen-
tenced to be docked; in order to which, he drew a square chalk-line round the
window, which contained the Doctor, and cut away all the rest round about it,
hitting here an head, there an arm, without sparing any body but the Doctor,
who was instantly put into a smaller frame : thus the piece was half cut away,
and for noother reason, as the artist pretended, than that the Doctor alone was
sufficient to satisfy the eye, the rest being superfluous. A wretched fate for so
good alpicture l But some painters will keep the old road, because it is difficult
to correct a rooted evil : they do as the old woman did, who being exhorted in
her last sickness to embrace the true faith, answered,
ce She would follow the steps
of her fore-fathers, were they all gone to the devil. 7
So it is with a portrait in little, which has nothing of nature but the features,
and looks like a puppet ; whereas there are well-known methods to make it appear
as big as the life; nay, to move and speak, as I may say : but being slighted,
the figure seems immoveable, dumb and little, and therefore unnatural.
On this footing, Imean to shew, that all things may be naturally represented
in little, except a moon-light, which baffles all our fkill.
Now, if itbe afked, Whether too nice an expression of parts in a small portrait,
would not be superfluous and unnatural, with respect to distance, and whether less
finishing would not be better ; I say, No; provided it be not so strong and warm
as the life ; for the figure not being exhibited in open field, it cannot have so much
mistiness and vapour about it : and therefore the neat pencilling cannot be ob-
structive, especially if managed with sxill, as the principal parts well touched,
and the tender and melting smallness in the broad parts the same, so that at the
proper distance the one is seen more, and the other less.
Here may arise another question : Whether such pictures are not of the same
nature with what is seen through a prospective-glass, since every thing appears so
plain, elaborate and neat à But l answer, that they are not, nor can ; because
the glafs exhibits the life without the interpofition or mistiness or vapours, and
with strong and warm shades, which overcome its smallness.
I have often wondered at such small paintings, because they seemed as if l was
looking in a Nuremberg looking-glass, or through a prospective, since they appeared
not like the life, but little moving puppets.
Now, another difficulty is, that since such paintings cannot, according to our
position, be made good without the addition of some by-ornament, as imagery in
whole or half figures, vine-branches about the frame, or something lying on it, in
order to fling them off, it would be hard for those who can only paint a whole or
half






half length figure, and aim at nothing else than to become masters therein, where-
as, he who is better versed, may by a due observance of what has been said, easily
overcome the before-mentioned difficulties.
CHAP. VI. Of the Application of Requisites with respect to the different
Conditions of Persons.
T will not be foreign to our main design, to put the artist in mind of the appli¬
cation and right use of such materials as may enrich a portrait, and make it
look the more noble. This is so great a point in portraiture, that when well
known, we need never be at à stand through the mishape or defects we often
meet with in the disposition of a portrait, and which sometimes must not be hid ;
since we have often means enough for obviating them with seeming reason, and
without foreing nature ; as a long and narrow face may be helped by a hood, or
other head-dress; a thick and too round a face by the contrary : a figure too
lonesome may be embellished with a pillar, pedestal, slower-pot, table, and such
things as are proper to it, which serve nor only for ornament and grandeur, but
also to express the sitter’s lustre and virtue : but care must be taken that the figure
of the sitter, as the principal object of the piece, sill up the major part of it, either
by a spreading sway of the posture, or by the addition of some proper by-work ;
by which means it will have a good effect.
Since it is certainthat the vices as well as virtues have two powerful qualities,
and though contrary to each other, yet both tend to good purpose; nay, a wicked
person, may, by a virtuous example, be rescued from evil ; and a virtuous per-
son, through bad example, led into error and ruin ; but virtue being joined to vir-
tue, fears no evil ; contrarily, the evil will make us avoid evil. So pictures
should create an ardour for virtue, and especially those of religious and good
persons : since this, as we have said in Chap. I. gave the first rise to their repre-
sentations, in order to perpetuate their memories, as well as their virtues and
glorious actions.
To come then the better to this excellent point; let us by noble by-works make
them with their persons, in a conspicuous manner. Wherefore I shall lay down
some examples, though drawn from heathen story.
Among the Heathens, some were so virtuously endowed, that they need not yield
to christanity itself ; Lucretia and Penelope in chastity; Cato in steadiness and cou-
rage; and many others whom we shall for brevity omit, to pass to the sketching
chamber, or other apartment; and an example of a chaste virgin shall be that of
Lucretia. It is said, to her honour, that she was descended of a noble family,
and so virtuously educated, that she delighted only in that. Now, whether we
represent






represent her living or dead in that character, we may adorn her apartment with
sine tapestries, statues and pictures; in the pictures, the history of Penelope at work ;
the fable of Cronis and Neprune ; some modest emblems of gods, &c. all relating to
chastity and honour. It statues, or houschold goods be necessary, let them be
Pallas, Diana, Hymen, and especially Vesta : her bed may be ornamented with
Chastity and Stedfastness ; and on her couch may be seen some Cupids lighting
each others torches, or playing with palm-branches and olive-leaves : the apart-
ment may be here and there furnissied with gold and silver vases, cups and other
house-plate, wrought with virtuous significations ; but herein, care must be taken
not to introduce any thing foreign to the matter, or against history, which ought
to be consulted.
The handling this example may sufficiently usher in the method of treating
others, such as of Julius Casar, Augustus, Marcus, Aurelius, Crasus, Solon, Seneca,
&c. and contrarily, the stories of Sardanapalus, Semiramis, Faustina, Phalaris, &c.
As for a cruel prince, or tyrant, either in his court, apartment or other place,
even in his revels, &c. each requires its proper embellishinent : the apartment
may be adorned with paintings of all sorts of punishiments and cruelties, drawn
from the blackest parts of history, together with those who cause them to be in-
flicted: if it be Nero, let all or some of the cruelties of his bloody reign be painted,
and his qualities, with emblems in marble bas relicf ; his statues are deities or
household gods, as Mars and Megæra; he himself may be represented on a pe-
destal, with thunder in his hand, the world under his feet, and the Roman senators
bowing and kneeling before him, fettered like slaves : his drinking equipage may
be ornamented with noxious animals, as ferpents, adders, and the like ; his chair
or seat, with tygers, lyons and dragons, wrought in silver, gold and ivory ; his
throne may be supported by Jupiter; Juno, Neptune, and Pluto ; the floor curiously
and richly inlaid with a celestial sphere of Lapis Lazuli; and the meteors and
constellations wrought in bright gold ; the censers may smoak in all corners of
the apartment, but chiesly about his statue. If the scene lie in his dining room,
the household gods may be seen thrown down in all corners, especially the simula-
crum of Roma, with its head broken off, and lying near it, Jupiter, Apollo and Vesta
are principals in this companv. In fine, every thing that can denote a wicked
man, or monster, art must exhibit. The same character should also appear in the
actions, looks, and dresses of his retinue or guards ; for we usually say, et Like
master, like man.
But not to dwell too long with princes, we shall also speak of other characters,
and shew what suits them.
With a burgomaster suits the statue of justice ; and in paintings or hangings,
some emblems of it, representing the rewards of the good, and punishment of the
bad ; the fasces (or rods and ax) are the true token of a consul, or burgomaster.
With a senator agree the statue of policy, or government; and in paintings or
hangings, some representations of the laws ; besides prudence and care for the
state.
With a secretary the statue of Harpocrates; and in tapestry, or bas relief, the
story of Alexander shutting Hephestien’s mouth with’a seal-ring; also the emblem of
Fidelity, or a goose with a stone in its bill.
With










With a director (governor) of the East-Idia Company, the figure or statue of it,
to wit, an heroine with a scollop of mother of pearl on her head, in the nature of
an helmet, and thereon a coral branch a breast ornament of scales, pearls and
corals about her neck ; bulkins on her legs, with- two dolphins conjoined head to
head, adorned with séa-shells; two large Thells oh her shoulders ; à trident in her
hand, and her cloathing a long mantle ; a landscape behind her of an Indian pros-
pect, with palm and cocoa-trees, some figures-of. Blacks, and elephant’s-teeth-
This figure also suits an admiral, or commander at sea, when a sea-fight is in-
troduced instead of a landscape.
Withe a divine agrees the statue of Truth, represented in a christian-like manner;
or else this same emblem in one of his-hands, and his other on his breast; besides
tapestries, bafs reliefs, or paintings, and some christian emblems of the true faith,
and a representatinn of the Old and New Testament, and in the off-scape, a
temple.
With a philosopher, a celestial globe, the statue of Nature, and a representation-
of the four elements, &c.
2
A general should have a white staff in his hand, and the figure of Mars in a
niche; if a landscape be seen, a trophy may be reared with Victory sitting on it :
he may have Hercules for à statue.
With ae sea-insurer, suits. Arion on a dolphin; and in a picture,, à sea-haven
with a ship under sail making towards is; on the shore the nigure of Forlune, and
over the cargoe, Castor and Pollux.
With a steersman suits the figure of Precaution ;. besides a compass: and in a
picture, the four cardinal points.
With an engineer,, the figure of Industry ; besides a map of military
architecture.
With an orator, or speaker, the figure of Elequence, or Mercury, without his
purse, and besides him a roll of papers, in the off-scape, a person mounted on a
stone, and surrounded with an attentive audience.
With a virtuous young man, the figure of Virtue; and on a wall Horace’s em-
blem of the young man in the stadium or course ; or else the young Hercules stand-
ing between Virtue and Vice.
Some thingsare also. proper to women, to betoken their virtues and qualities ;.
as by an imminent woman for reputation-the statue of Honour, and by it some em-
blems of Fidelity, especially oeconomy, or family government, and some medals
relating thereto.
With a widows agrees well the figure of Humility, or emblems tending towards.
as also Perseverance.
it,
With a young and sober virgin, suits the figure of Neatness ; an embroidering
frame and its furniture ; besides emblems relating to it; among which, that of-
Business, shunning Idlenefs, Pride and Gluttony, have a principal place.












CHAP. VII. Of the Saiting of Colours in Draperiex.
 
HE’ suiting of colours in-portraits cômes: now before us, à matten
of as great ionsequence as the former, and deserves no less

attention.
Many think, though without ground, that deep red best becomes a red-faced
person ; deep yellow a fallow one ; and all pale colours a pale one, and what is
strange, black and dark colours, a swarthy persou : but this must be rediculous
and without reason, if we confider what a strange erdonnance thefe people would
make. Truly, if the art were so, there would be no difficulty in finding agree-
ablenefs, and every one would be able to dispose it as it obght to be; and if this
were a becomingness, variety would be no art : nay, the fafhiion itself, which
alters four times a year with respect to colour, would not be allowed every body to
wear; as in fpring, green; in summer yellow; in autumn, red; and in winter,
fillemot. Yellow or fallow-faced persons durst not wear red ; or red-faced ones,
green : but enongh of this. Let us now return to what sober art dictates.
Beginning with the head and its hair, I say, that deep or strong colours, such
as deep red, deep yellow, deep blue, &c. best fit a person who has brown hair.
Those who have fair hair, beft become half or weak colours, such as purple,
lightblue, violet, green and rose-colour.
A yellow-haired person best becomes violet, blue, and whitissi yellow, as masti-
cot, and’such like;. these are the chief colours which l know. But here we must
observe, that the lighter the hair, the more weak the drapery ; and the darker
the hair, the stronger the drefs.
He is a prudent master who well knows how to express in his pictures the dif-
ferent naturez and complexions of people, and to distinguish persons full of fpirit
and fire from the meek and dead-hearted ; the sickly and weak from the healthy
and strong; as to whom we may use draperies of the following colours : with the
red or firey fuit best draperies of half or broken colours, with little red in them ;
the pale suits no yellow, or other pale colour; the fallow the same ; but white is
very agreeable : brown complexions become not dark or strong, but white and
all light colours. The Blacks love white above any colour, and think no dress
better beconses them than a light coloured one; and not without reason; for,
Would not a black man with black. or dark cloaths be frightful to look at ; And
how ridiculous it is for a pale virgin, to dress in all sorts of light and païe-colours,
in order to look less pale ; and that one who is red, wear nothing bat red for the
same reâson. Hereby, mstead ofhiding a small fault, the mafter would commit
a greater; and yet this is the common notion. But if I may give my opinion, a
red and fiery faced person, dressed in red, seems to me like a red painted statue ;
and a pale looking person in a light or yellow dress, as sick or dead. Wherefore,
if we would be artful, we must manage otherwise, to wit, that those whom we
would






would represent healthy or fickly, ought to appear such by contrary colours ; as,
lively colours for a sick or unhealthy person; and weak and faintonesfora healthy
person : yet let me not be here misunderstood ; I say not this as a positive Jlaw,
: without. exception, but as an hint to tyros. The more experienced know, what
the art teaches; for she is not deficient : but as the drapery sometimes over-rules,
:so we can manage the naked accordingly ; for instancc, red drapery requires a
:middling carnation, between pale and red; so also it ought to be with a pale
tcolour. When I say the decorum consists in an opposition, it must be understood,
tghat oppofition has its degrees, which we ought to know and use according to
tghe. different occafion, and’the grounds -against which they happen to come : but
in general terms, the naked must always seem to. be of a distinct nature from the
draperies.
ICH AP. VIII. 'Of the Fnitation of great Masters in painting Portraits;.
and of copying their Pictures in general.
J
RE twe leave the subject of portraiture, Tthink tliis head necessary to be
treated of, and therefore, shall shew how far, and in what mannery we may
L
engage in it;. and subjoin. somewhat of copying pictures in the same bigness, as
rwell as in diffèrent flzes.
i
I find that this imitation of masters is less observed in their design and ordon-
:nance, than in the colouring, lights and shades: this is certainly a principal point
tin aepicture, because, there can be :no decorum without it; nay. we find. some
works of smadll. masters. in this particular tolerably successful;. though, they-know
rmot, how they got- the ikrmwledge, it happening mostly by chance : they are
t oharmed with’ some fine- and taking colours. in this or that great master; these they
use at-random:in their own productions, either forwards or in the- depth, middle
1 an sides hand iftthey happen to. be paced against a proper ground, or are set off by
any aiding by-colour, the work hits right, in satisfying both the eye, and rules
of art; but if these fine colours happen to suit the grounds, then all is wrong and
the artist at a stand..
To explain this point, we shall be more particular, and clear it by examples;
though lthink Ihave already in this hook spoken largely enough of it, in treating
of back-grounds and the harmony of colours in a portrait. A certain artist having
seen a very beautiful white and green lace on a young lady’s gown, painted by a
great master, he must by all means imitate it; but being afked, whether: he had
taken due notice of the ground-colour of the gown Phe answered, No. How then
oan this finetand becaming lace have a good effect in his-works, unless by chance ?
The roafon of swhich. is, I think, that-either through-sshame orepride, or both, the
fartist takes’ something from a great master; for instance,: what he used,in the loin-
tain, the other, that it may not be known, brings forward; and what he has repre-
sented iin the open air, the other contrives in a dark rogm. : poor method of











concealment, since by a right application the theft wquld be lawfull but it is such
mens misfortune,to be, in this particular, mostiout of the way when they think they
do best : for, wanting the great :master’s wit, judgment and apprehension, they
have no true notion of his conduct, and therefore are easily msled, like Asop’s
ravan, cxposed to censure-
Since it is an undoubted truth, that we can perform nothing but what passes
through thought, and of which, cither by feeing or hearing, we get an idea;
therefore must the paintings, drawings and fine prints: of old masters give an
handle to thoughts and practice; for he who never saw a lion can never paint him
well, unless by the help of a draught, or model : as was the case of a certam
Westphalian, who representing Daniel in the lion’s den, and having never seen a lion,
he painted hogs instead of lions, and wrote underneath, These should be lions. Be
this a fable or truth, it however teaches us, that we cannot represent any thing,
whereof we have no idea; nay, if we have seen the objects, and made no sketches
or models of them, we shall never exhibit them naturally; since memory is but
the repofitory of knowlege and thoughts, from which they draw the things which
judgment esteems useful and servigeable.
I am of opinion, that two great advantages arise from copying great masters
works : the one is, that therein we see many defects of simple nature corrected by
their skill and judgment; and éhe other, that by this means we accustom ourselves
to rectify those defects, when we have nature before ûs : truly two points of great

importance.
But alas l Is an artist, considered in his natural inclnation, otherwise than a
child which, advancing in age, follows its impulse à If he perform one praise-
worthy act, how many errors will he contrarily commitp but when this bent is
conducted by reason and art, the perceptions of the mind will then, as through a
clear channel, flow pure and undefiled : which leads me in some measure to con¬
fess, that art and practice have great advantages, and are more to be set by, than
all we receive from Nature, which is often defective in desired perfection, in a
single object: but she is perfect in her performances and objects in general ; and,
in that sense, art is obliged to follow-her; wherefore, with the philosopher, I
must say of artists,
Natura incipit, ars dirigit, experientia docet.
That is,
Nature points out the way, which arts improve,
And settled practice makes a picture move.
Hence we may easily perceive what we should do to cure this great defect of
tke mis-use of other mens works ; but, that I may be the better understood, Ishall
insist on further means for doing it: if then it happen, that the artist meet with
any thing which is very taking, and he be desirous to make it his own, whether
fine colours, drapery, stone, &c. Let him take notes, in his pocket-book, of the
ground,








ground, by-colours and other incidents, as what. there is about such or such colour,
and against what ground, and whether it be strong or weak; and of what colour
the objects be, and wherherjthe warm or. weak colour be in the distance or for-
wards, disagreeing or not ; as in the Chapter of the Harmony of Colours is shew-
ed. . We must also consider, whether the-light come from open air, or fall into
a: room through glass windows ;. as is more largely taught in the Book of Lights
and Shades, and which I repeatihere; becquse l think face-painters frèquently act
contrarily, in seeing afaint yêt sine drapery represented without-doors, which with
the same tint, they exhibit in an open air.
The like heedless mistake we see in the copies of manydisciples and young
masters after old or modern paintings; for, not observing whether in lessening
their copies (which they generally do) they should not also abate the strength
of colour and tints, their colouring, as well in light as shade is as strong as the
original. The same error they commit in painting a great copy after a small
original. But this ill conduct is owing chiefly to masters when they set their pu-
pils to copy in a different size, in not admonisning them of it; but rather desiring
that they shall imitate every thing as exactly as possible; thought in fact it be
against the rule of art. It is therefore certain, that a picture with figures, of
a landscape, suppose it as big as the life, to be copied a third less in size tints in
the copy must needs be a third fainter than the original; and the more it lessens
in size, the fainter the tints, or else it cannot be good. If this conduct be of
such moment in copying pictures, of how much greater consequence must it be,
when a portrait-painter diminisnes the life, or paints a portrait in full proportion
from a small one, with respect to the weakening ro strengthening of colours.
Although it is commendable to follow great masters in general, yet it is a fault
to dwell upon some of their particulars, as an ornament, urn, vase, term, &c. with-
out striving at something new. We think, that what they have done is enough
for our practice; but this is weakness; since art and nature have such a fund of
objects, and our time for learning and living is long enough, and by consulting
within ourselves we may spur pur genius.
Others commit the same fault by a contray impulse ; for so violent is their in-
clination to some particular great master in his objects, colouring &c. that they
think it lost time to employ their thoughts on the works of any other good artist,
and being thus wedded to him, they wishi, drudge and plod to be like him as well
in errors as perfections; by this means, and by a punctual imitation of blunders
and mistakes, it sometimes happens, that the copy and the original are not to be
distinguisned, both being so wounderfully like each other; nay, their own pro-
ductions are taken for copies. For, a tyro of good ability may at first use him-
self to a good manner of designing, which he ought to be master of, before he
takes to painting, and to understand this well before he proceeds to ordonnances ;
and then, if he have a thorough knowledge of the latter, he will paint a good
picture. Yet it is often seen, tnat his work is but taken for that of a pupil, nay
worse than a copy; and what, is still lefs, it is not like his own manner or hand-
ling: and Why ; such artists, being advanced thus far, endeavouring to produce
their






their Gun inventions, no longer minding grounds and rules, but ftriving only
at novelties, care little for painting or defigning well; whence their works are
oftentimes indifferently designed, poorly handled and coloured, but well ordered’;
arising only from a neglect of their master’s instructions, and what, they know
and an itch for what they still want to know; whereby they are often shipwreck-
ed between both : pernicious effect of the bent of our youth l which cannot be
remedied otherwise than by returning to original principles and their putting in
use : for as by an èxcess in loading weight upon weight on a weak and un-
settled, though well-laid foundation the whole building may tumble, even the
foundation may dance ; so must our practice always have an eye to theory,
that the custom (which, as we say, is a second nature in goodnefs as well as
badness) may gain firi. footing on us, and be our furest guide.





















The art of painting
VIII.
BOOK
Of ARChETECTURE.

CHAP. I. Of Architécture in general.
AFTER having handlad sol. many diffegent parts of the art, we meet

also with architecure ; an art full of noble performances and fine usez
But our purpose is not to insist on all its advantages, or give a system

of it ; since such g work would be too tedious, and calls for Homer
or Virgil’s eloquence : and having been copioussy handled by several
learned pens, we shall treat noffurther of it than what concerns a painter, leaving
the rest to architects.
An ingenious history painter, if he would be universal, must needs understand
architecture and statuarry ; because he will otherwise be at a nonplus in some
things ; he ought even to be as knowing as an architect, and how to order a good
building, though it is an architect’s daily practice, and ’ghat but a part of the
painter’s.
It is certain that the human body is, in its symmetry, proportion, majesty
and grace, the most perfect piéce of work in the creation ;, architecture is no less
perfcét in. its ôperations ; it has even preduced ghe first wonder of the world, and
thereby obtaied the laurel and palm of fame.
Writers say, that Babylonians were the first, and after them the Agyptians, Greeks
and Romans, who brought it to perfection; until in the emperor Augustus’s time, it
arrived












arrived at its-highest pitch; but sunk, afterwards by the irruption and barbarity
of the Goths, Vandals, Hunns, and Longobards, who burned and destroyed all
before them. A true proof that nothing in the world is permanent and
stable !
But to come to our purpose, we must ’premise that the word architec-
ture) simply signifies draughts or designs, after which, a building is carried
up and constructed ; and comprehends the five following Orders, namely,
The Tuscan, Doric, lonic, Roman, and Corinthian : according to which, all buil-
dings are regulated, whether palaces, tomples, town-houses, triumphal arches,
bagnios, theatres, town-gates, galleries, tombs, and, other-magpificent buil-
dings, round or square, or both : I speak of their outward construction.
The word Order, is of large extent : but in architecture is, as Vitruvius
defines it. a joining of different proportionate and symmetric parts, as pe-
destals, columns, andjtheir ornaments, in such manner as to compose a perfect
order and body.
As for the entablatures over columns, to wit, architraves, frizes, and cor-
nices (which for their richnefs, have got the name of ornaments) they may
as little as the Orders, themselves, , be gither, mixed among one another, or
changed from one Order to another.
A careful painter will not only distinguisn one sort from another, from
cornice to, base, but will also take care not to put an lonic moulding on
a Doric pedestal ; a Corinthian on a Tuscan; a Roman cornice on an lonié
frize, &c.
Further, it is certain that the Orders do not promiscuoussy suit all sorts-
of buildings, but ought so to be applied (respecting their parts and orna-
ments, which also differ in general from each other) as to have an har-
mony and agreement with the whole: buildings, with respect. to their situa-
tion and quality.
These Orders must be enriched in their several kinds, to fhiew a suitable
decorum, especially the Capitals, except the Tuscan, which iis- throughout


plain and simple.
The Doric Order excells: in its triglyphs and metopes.  The Jonic, in its
valures, medillions, &c. The Roman, in the elegance of cornices, and beauty
of capitals with their volutes, and oak-leaves.: And the Corixthiaa, by its
mouldings of victorious olive leaves, and its- excelleat and agreeable
capitals.
The metopes in the Doric frize imay be-enriched. according: to-the qualities
and uses of buildings, whether temples, town-houses, honourary arches, or courts



for priests.

In the first suit best carved challices, books, wases, mitres, &c. 
In the second, the coats of arms of the Republic, or chief men in the governt
ment : also the rays and thunders of Jupiter tied together; or the Caduces (staff)
of Mercury, twined with serpents, as denoting peace-







In the, third,, various arma and trophies taken from the enemy; or all
forts of mufical and warlike instruments, as usual in triumphs and armies, huddle-
ed together. And,
In the last suit best carved ox-sculls, adorned with garlands, betokening sacrifice
which the ancients made to their deities ; oftentimes the utensils of those offerings
were introduced, to wit, altar, vases, three legged kettles, vinegar-cups, censers,
candtesticks, basons, dishies, hammers, axes, knives, &c.
Among the works of the ancients we see in the frizes of the lonic, Roman and
Crinthian Orders (especially in the two last) some foliage of cak lcaves ; which
has a fine effect, when twined with shrubs and vine branches, interspersed with
roses and other flowers. Sometimes are introduced vizards, with playing children
and running animals : also festoons of fruit, leaves, and various kinds of the most
beautiful and agreeable flowers; these tied together look nobly, especially when
judicioussy placed : but enough of this. He wno would know more sorts of frizal
ornaments, must consult the works k of the ancients, in which he will find.
them, though the before-mentioned are the principal, and most in use.
Although the ancients teach, that the fronts of buildings (which are the parts
most in view) ought to be more adorned than the flanks and rears, yet some mo-
dern masters have misunderstood this, and apprehended, as if in those parts the
ornaments could not be too many ; nay, they have crowded the mouldings of the
architrave, frize and cornice, and of the pedestals under columns, with small
carving, in such a manner, that it rather causes confusion than ornament, as ap-
pears by their works : but when used in moderation, and between tbe principal
ornaments a part is left plain and blank, it causes grandeur and decorum.
Something is also to be remarked about pediments and key-stones. Pediments
(or tops of fronts) like the forehead of a man, snew the principal aspect of build-
ings, especially when their spandrells (or faces) are agreeably enriched by good
masters with histories, sacrifices, arms, or the like, in marble, according to the
quality of the fabric.
Sometimes also are, put over pediments, trophies, coats of arms, or shields ;t
which if well cut and placed, have a noble effect.
As for key-stones of arches over gates and niches, these may be en-
riched, 
In the Tuscan Order, with wild beasts ; and between heads of cyclops, or
giants.
Inthe Doric Order, with lions heads, or Hercules with his lion’s skin over his
head.
In the lonic Order, with tame beasts, or heads of Pallas or amazons, with their
head attire.

 There is a lurge collection of them in Langley’s Ancient Masonry, lately published.










In the Roman Order, with heads of demi-gods , as Ronndas, Jiliks Casar, and
such heroes. And,
richly wrought.
CHAP. II. Of the Rises of the Ornaments, Columns; and their
Pedestals.
AVING spoken in the former chapter, of the decoration of the Orders,
we shall now, in a brief manner, treat of the rifes: and divifions of the


columns, with their ornaments and pedestals.
The ornament (or entablature) of the Tuscau column rises one modûle and
seven-eight parts of a module (by module is meant, throughout the Orders, the
pillars diameter next above the base). The column, with its base and capital
rises seven modules and a half, and the pedestal one module seven eights ; this
being agreed, the entablature and pedestal are each one fourth of the column’s
rise ; the base under the column, and gapital over it, are -in each in rise half a
module; the lessening (or diminution) of the shaft of-the column at the neck,
under the capital, is one fourth of a module, and it begins below at one fourth



of the column’s rise.
The entablature of the Doric column rises two-modules and one eight ; the co¬
lumn, with its base and capital, is eight modules and a half, and the pedestal
two modules and two fifteenths : this being fixed, the entablature is one fourth,
and the pedestal throe and three fourths-of the column’s nise. : The base and ca-
pital are each, as in the Tuscan, half a module. The diminution at the neck of
the shaft is one fifth of a module, and begins below at three parts one fourth of
The entablature of the lonic column rises one module and three fourths ; the
column, with its base and capital, is eight modules and three fourths, and the
pedestal twe modules and a half : this settled, the entablature is one fifth, and
the pedestal three parts and a half of the column’s rise. (But if the frize be
carved, the entablature is four parts and a half of the column’s rise, and in the
following Orders the same). The capital with its volutes, is little more than
half a module, and the base is just half a module (and in the following Orders
the same). The diminution at neck is one sixth of a module, and begins below
at three parts and a half of the column’s rise, divided into twelve parts, as afore-
said.
The entablature of the Roman column rises one module and twelve twentieth
parts of a module; the column, with its base and capital, is, nine modules and
three fourths; the pedestal rises three modules : which laid down, the entabla-
ture is one fifth, and the pedestal three parts and one fourth of the column’s
rise :






rise : the capital rises one fnodule and one flxth; the base as before ; the diminu-
tion at neck is one seventh of a module, and begins below at the rise of three
parts and one fourth of the column, divided as aforesaid.
The entablature of the Gorinthian column rises two modules ; the column, with-
its base and capital, is ten modules in rise; the pedestal three modules and one
third : after which, the entablature is one fifth, and the pedestal one third of the
column’s rise; the capital rises one module and one sixth; the base as before ;
the diminution at neck is one eight of a module, and begins below at one third of
the column’s rise.
The breadth of the Tuscan and Doric pedestals ought always to be equal with
the plinths or bases of their columns; and though the plinths in the three other
Orders project more at their bottoms, by reason of their sweeps, their pedestals
must neverthelefs be alike perpendicular with the upper, points of their plinths.
Let me here six the height of a statue on a pedestal placed next a column ;
since many mistake in it. In right proportion it ought not to rise higher than
two thirds of the column; but then the column should not be too high, or too
low, but stand on a base only, which is frequently continued through the build-
ing. As for pedestals, they serve only to raise a column, and augment its orna-
ment. We ought also, for elegance, to take care, that the figure and its pedef-
tal be proportionate to each other; because,, if the latter be too great or too
small, the figure would become too small, or monftrous.
In fine, as all the parts of a building ought to answer in a proportionate dis-
position, so should the figures, whether carved or painted, be neither too big or
little : wherefore they must be governed by the height ef the place where they
are to stand.
CHAP. III Of the Property of à Bailding, and Observations
thereon.
we 
Must believe, according to the evidence of writers, and the tradition of tra-
vellers, that the Italians have the best taste, as well for architecturé as paint-
ing; and though it is certain, that Germany, France, England, Holland, and othet
countries, have produced fine architects, yet at this time they are not comparable
to the italians, whose manner, which is the antique, is now followed by the most
polite nations. The old taste was known by the name of the Gothic, as a certain
writer affirms, faying, ee That the Gothic manner of building of the ancient Ger-
mans (which at that time gave law to all other nations); is quite abolishied by the
Italians: nay, he cries ont, What magnificent and choice wonders do we not
see in proud ltaly, lofty Rome especially, where it seems as if Nature and Ant have
mutually agreed to establisn their thrones, and exert their powers, in order to







make this famous city the mistress of the world, and the beauty of the universe !
St. Peter’s church, the Vatican, the Rotunda, and many other structures (serving
the whole world for examples, and without which architecture is but a confused
mass), draw yearly thousands of people and young artists thither to improve
themselves by them, for the service of their own countries ; so that the finest and
newest things which we see in those countries, lately built, and still going for-
ward, are designed in the Italian gusto. Wherefore it is to them that those fine
piles, the Stadthouse at Amsterdam, the new Lutheran church, and divers other
structures, as well without as within the town, do owe their origin and beauty.
We are then much indebted to those great artists, Vitruvius. Serlio, Philibert de
l'Orme, Palladio, Cataneo, Leo Baptista Santoritio, Vignola, Scamozzi, and many
others, who have enlightened the world with their works and writings. And
I
think that no one can be a good architect who has not studied those authors. The
French acknowledge, that their great improvements in this art are owing to the
works and precepts of those excellent masters.
We shall now speak of intire buildings so far as they serve for ornament in
painting. The goodness of a building springs not merely from the aforesaid rises,
breadths or depths of the Orders, but from an apposite conjunction (or bring-
ing together), of different proportionate parts into an exquisite body, which, by
reason of its excellent form, whether in height or breadth, appears to the judg-
ment of the knowing both admirable and beautiful ; especially when sitly adapted
to the quality of the owner, and has general conveniency with respect to cus-
In its particular parts a building requires, 1. A firm foundation. 2. A large
and convenient stair-case. 3. A spacious entrange. 4. An elegant division of-
doors, windows, and other openings. 5. An Mandsome frontispiece, &c. These
Kkilfully worked, and judiciously disposed, must needs produce a sine effect.
Thus. much for the outward face of a building.
If any object, that decorum consists more in inward contrivance, let me sup-
pose a stranger to come into a town, and, passing through the streets, he were
asked, What he thought of the buildings: What answer would he makeà
Would he not say they were either fine or mean ; Or would he say,-
I must
first see the in-sides, and whethen the foundations be firm, the apartments well
disposed and well lighted, and whether the under-ground offices be good ?--
This would be ridiculous : it is true an house must have these properties; but it
is idle to think, that therefore wé cannot judge of the building. by the outfide on-
ly ; as if the person who is- able to give a design for a fabric cannot also compart
its in-side. Let it be afked then, Wherein consists a good division within ; whe:
ther it is a science which painters know not;. whether there must be a fixed num-
ber of halls and apartments of a determinate form, length, rise, and breadth,
and what those must be ; whether there must be one, two, or more stacks of stairs ;
whether each room must have one chimney or two;, and-whether, the floors must
be wooden or stone; or whether a palace is, for its. largeness, more. beautiful
than a common or citizen’s house ?







































































































































































































































But, waving other mens opinions, we shall proceed in our purpose, so far as
eoncerns a painter in these countries, and no further. Our judgment is, that the
best proportion in-a building is one third. higher in, rise than breadth, espe-
cially if it be covered in with a compass-roof and its appertunances; but if flat-
roofed, a third wider than high, and to be commanded by a single Order rising
from bottom to top. It would be improper to adorn them with statues, bass-re-
liefs, festoons, &c. For such heavy and close structures, without weight, and
moreover open on top, are proper for an amphitheatre, but not for a temple or
palace ; I speak with respect to custom and decorum, which must allways go to-
ther, since nothing is beautiful without its natural qualities. The case is as a
woman in a man’s habit, and the contrary ; or a water-vase adorned with an
olive-branch and thunder; or an oil-vessel with tritons and dolphins.
In painting a good building there must appear, besides the architecture, per-
spective and colouring, an orderly disposition, producing elegance, otherwise it
is of no worth. Orderly disposition consists in so joining the parts, that they
mutually set off each other in a pleasing variety, and thereby exhibit a fine piece
of work, and an agreeable figure : this variety springs from the inequality of
openings, or windows, whether oblongs, squares, circles or ovals ; the disposi-
tions of these openings, near and over each other, are founded on reason, as shall
be explained by an example.
We exhibit in-plate LIX. a-temple topped with a cupola, or rather an house
round-roofed. On each side of the door a flight of steps descend ballustraded;
underneath which is a vault; and over the entrance a balcony : now, beginning
from below, we shall shew what figure each opening ought to have in an orderly
disposition. The door under the steps is square, rising somewhat more than its
diameter: that of the entrance is circular on top, and rises one third more than
its diameter: that of the balcony also rises one third more than its breadth, but is
square or flat on top; and then we meet the roof rounding again. Now let us
dispose it otherwise, and make the door below circular, the next square, the next
Thus much for doors; for we find no other than
round, and no roof appearing.
round and square ones. The same method may be taken with windows ; when
there are two ranges, one above the other, the undermost may be oblong, and
the uppermost compass, but lower: if there be another range of windows above
these, next the roof, they ought to. be perfect squares. This rule we have taken
from the works of the ancients, who always gave their openings or windows more
rise in the first story than the second, still lessening in the third, yet all alike in
diameter. Windows should never be lower than about three feet from the floor
within. If there be windows in the basement-story (where the walling is thickest,
and is usually finished with a Rustic Order), they must be square, and above ei-
ther scheme (little rounding) or flat; and thus the one snew the other, with re-
spect to roundness and squareness. If-now there were compass-windows in the
basement and upper stories, the- uppermost should be circular, and the undermost
oval, with their longest diameter parallel with the level of the building, because,
being pressed by the weight, their arch is dilated ; when contrarily the others
do not bear any weight. But circular windows are grown out of use, as not ad-
mitting light so well as the square ones.







If in the piers between windows there were niches and figures in them, and
over head, room for a bafs relief, than the table for ie must be square, but circu-
lar, where it is over a square window.
As for doors over each other, Isay, that if there were over the cornice a com-
pafs pediment, and on both sides a ballustrde with figures; then the bal oony door
ought not to be circular but square and ornamreated with pillasters; yet the door of
the entrance may be circular. We ought even not to set on the balcony a ballustrade
with figures, but ornament it with balls or other low things. The one or other
ballustrade must be also diversified ; for two parts alike in two such emminent
places have an ill effect; wherefore one of them should be close walled (parapet-
ways) and the face of it may then be enriched with bafs reliefs of figures,
festoons, &c.
I think what I have said a sufficient guide for the other kinds of buildings; for
these observations are on all occasions unalterable to a painter, with re-
spect to agreeable disposition.
There is still somewhat behind, which, though contrary to the dispofition
aforesaid, must be animadverted ; it is touching a slower garden, which if fine,
must needs be regular, as well with respect to its general form, as its particular
division ; at least the two sides ought to be alike, whether set off with pots, vafes,
statues or other ornaments. We are taught indeed, that uniformity is stiff, and
not painter-like; wherefore we Thould avoid it as much as posfible : but
weighing the precept maturely, we shall find the fauit to lie in dur misapprehen-
fion of it : questionless things proceeding from rulé and order must be regular,
but that regularity may nevertheless be somewhat hidden on occason : wherefore,
though a garden be uniform on both sides, we are under no necesfity of shewing
all that uniformity : one side is sufficient, the rest may be handsomely hid, or
broke with a tree, piece of stone work, column, or a corner of the house. But
let us not from hence absolutely conclude, regular objects to be unnecessary in an
ordonnance ; for they sometimes furnisn all the decorum of a picture ; yet if we
see but a part of them, we may conceive the residue.
More examples of breaking uniformity may be thefe : when a figure stands on
each side of a gate or alcove, a man may be placed or sit down before one of them
in order tocreate inequality ; so also if by means of à curtain, one of those figures
be shaded. If a bafs relief be set on each side of the gate or alcove, one ofthem
may partly be covered by the personages, to answer our purpose. If without
doors on both sides of an entrance, there be a carved lion or sphinx, we may break
of one of their heads. Solomon’s throne was adorned with twelve golden hons : we
need not see them all, the fix on one side fhew sufficiently, that there must be as
many on the other : two orthree entire are enough, of the rest we may see only a
part here andthere. Thus we must always manage in such Cafes.











CHAP. I. Of the matching of the varioé: coloured Marbles, as
well without as within a Building; with the Management of Tombs,
Vafa, and Bacchanalian Terms.
BJECTS have à fine effect, when nature and art are joined together by al
skilful hand; and though all eyes are not alike qualified to apprehend the
it is beautiful, and soought to be, though the one person, as I say, understand
it, and the other do not : and forthis reason; art has such a power, that though
Nature, be beautifut in her productions, yet they would not perfectly please our
eges, without the help of art.
Nature produces an infinity of fine stanes of various colours and qualities; but
art alone judges of their fitness and orderly looation as to rank and dignity, inso-
much that, though ignorant in art, we oan. clearly apprehend that it ought to be
so, and no otherwise.
We know, that ths white is foft and tender, and lovely to the eye ; the black
contrarily is melancholy and disagreeahle. We place then the black among the
red, and upon the red, white. These three coloured stones are capitals, and can-
aot be otherwise dispofed as-to théir natufes and qualities, without foreing nature,
and zunning counter to art.
However, their rank and application in architectonic use may be these.
In the Tustan Order, as undermost, black marble.
In the Doric, green.
I1
in the : Janic, yeHow.
In the Roman, red. : And,.
In the Coriathian, white.
If any afk why the ned is not set before the yellow, since the red is in its nature
daykerrthanthe yellow Ianswer, That it is because the red and green are op-
posers in strength ;. coatrarily, yellout is proper to green, since yellow and blue
2
produce green.
7.
If at any time we are obliged to place between two stones of one colour, a stone
of another, the following mixtures are mostly in use.
Between two black marbles suit best jasper, copper or brafs.
Between two serpentine, or green marble stones, the same.
Between. two red stones, white.
Between red, black or serpentine stone, Pisan white-eyed marble.
Between two grey stonies, free-stone or yellowisn white marble.
Between two dotted long veiny stones;: one that is speckled ; aad the contrary-
Between two jaspers, yellow, or ffestry white marble.
A’marblé-painter miist observe the conveniency and place for marbling : if the
plaoe be large, or an hall, then he may doit with force ; but in a smaller com-
pafs,









pass, he ought to moderate it, and keep it faint, that the place may not seem
thereby lessened, or the eye offended. If the room be hung with pictures, he
should consult men of experience, especially the master who painted them, what
colouring will fit best.


About light pictures, dark marble is best, and about dark pictures, light marble, 
as Pisan, jaspar, or any tending to a light yellow. But if it be a single
colour, such as bass reliefs, then free-stone suite best.
In bringing many sorts of coloured marbles together, we may, for instance, in
a frontispiece either single or double-colonaded and pedestrated, very agreebly
dispose them thus : viz. plante IX. The base and pedestral-mouldings may be black, 
little eyed : the block of square of the piedestal, dark red, much
dotted, less veined: theplinths of the columns and pilasters mey be white,
the columns, light red, or Pisan marble with large white-eyed veins on both sides
the eying to be alike ; the pilasters also light red, moderately eyed, the capitals
white, the architrave black, like the base and mouldings of the pedestals ; the
frize may be dark red, like the blocks of squares of the pedestals ; and the cornice
black again like the architrave ; if the frize have raised ornaments of foliage,
children, triglyphs, ox-sculls, &c. they ought to be white : if over the cornice
be a parapet, it may be entirely of another colour, and the pedestals and the
members of Pisan or other cross-veined marble, and the panels of faces of grey
marble, or white, if adorned with bass reliefs ; the figures, or vases on top also
white.
This distribution may be doubled, and varied on occasion : the frizes and co
lumns may be white, the bases and capitels gold ; and so may also the ornaments
be to wit, triglyphs, little blocks and foliage; the rest may remain as before.
In an hall of red or other marble (where the mouldings of the ornaments are
different, larger or smaller) we may make a door frontispiece, or alcove of white
or other marble; but if the members continue along the hall, ’the frontispiece or
alcove ought to be of the same colour with the room. The room may be of one
order, and the frontspiece, alcove and chimney of another. Thus the room may
be lonic, and the rest Corinthian or Roman. The pavement of the floor must cor-
respond with the building, I mean, if the room have pillasters, the bands (or
bordering marbles tying the pavement) must run up to them, whether the
pilasters stand wide or close, for they ought to be so laid, as to shew every where
a-regularity, whatever jets or breaks the door, frontispiece, alcove, &c. may oc-
casion; as a prudent gardener disposes his parterres, one round, another square,
octangular, &c. always contriving such an uniformity as closes with the borders.
In the middle of the hall, may be introduced such figures or compartments, as best
answer the general purpose, and they may be of what colour you please.
In chambers or galleries, where the sides are unlike, we are obliged to part
them by some figure coming between; and yet the bands, which bind the sides,
must come every where alike. If there be columns on both fides of the gallery,
the bands must run, croffing it, from one to the other.
Proceed we now to party-coloured tombs; and other stones.
On white
sphinxes, lioneffes, &c. fuits well a tomb of serpentine or porphyry ; and










































































































































Back plinths if no figures orother, ornaments support at, porphyry also looks

well. On bracketsof copper
or brass, the tomb may be of black marble. With
grave-stones, or other bluish
stope, agrees well violet-colour stone, or porphyry,
copper or brass. Note here,
that the black inust always be undermoft, especial-
ly when divers sorts of colours are, placed pnone another,jas we have shewed in
the Orders.





Great vases: and urns are always of the fame stone as their baïes, as well. in
niches as on pedestals; if- on pedestals, the bases ought. to project, equal with the
blocks precisely,
The Priapus-terans. anciently used in the Bacchanalia, were mostly of wood, not
very large, and pointed underneath for conveniency of carriage from place to
place, whither the gang of satyrs, fauni and bacchanals, determined to go.
Having pitched on a place for their stay, they,fixedit in the ground,- by means
of the point aforesaid. These terms were-sonretimes painted of a brick colour
sometimes also white ;, about, the mouth, and breast they were smeared with blue
grapes.
The posts, or guides, called hermes, were huge and immoveable, and of white
stone, set on rijde heaps of stone, in order to be conspicuous to travellers at a dis-
tance. ; for which realon they were, also sometimes, placed, on pedestals or blocks.





CHAP. V. Of the Veins and Eyes in Stonés used in Architecture, as
well without as within; and how to dispose them,


HE beauty in painting buildings consists in an elegant expression of the dif-
ference of stones which compose them ; and this may be effected not only
by their-divifion, but also by their colours, especially in outside-work, which is
not so. much. heeded -as the inward, and is subject to more inconveniences of
rain, hail and wind; and if standing in damp places, their effect in a few years
visibly appears, if the stones be-not very-hard, by the dropping of mouldings and
projeckures in seyeral parts.
 Fountains must be supposed to suffer much, and become very mossy by being
dropped on; and so do tombs and igrave-stones, but principally pyramids, which
age not set up so much for the sake of their polisned bodies, as for their forms
and huge bulk ;:wherefore it is no great matter whether the stones of these be of
nae fort or colour ornot : they are often seen of many sorts of stones, some as they
have been fopnd, and others changed through- time : yet the cement suffers most,
by being eat ijn; whereby the stones get sloose, and must needs drop. Again,
some stones, being more weak and brittle than others, and corroded by the air,
dampnefs and drought, are broke in pieces by the pressure of those over them,
and-thuis leave gaps and breaks, wherein the rain;gathers, out of which grow
weeds,









weeds, mofs and other greens, sometimes whole branches; all iwhieh, at the
year’s end, decay, and become green sap; triekling thence down
che ftones.
We shall here stop a little to say fomething toucning abuses.

I know not hou
some can so far relish sloveliness, as to spoil not only statues and fine figures, but
also intire buildings; if they were broken or mouldéred pieces, ruins, and other
decayed stones, it would be no damage if ever so much muddled and be-dropped;-
but it is very improper to serve intire and finé figures thus, and in places too
where are neither trees or any thing else to oecanon iti The fame they do in
buildings looking as frefh as at first; were the spots seen on them, natural to the
stones, it would be more proper than all the gutters ufually represented to ’trickle
down them : wherefore care must be taken, before we begin to paint things sup-
posed to be dropped on, that à difference may appear between nearnefs and dis-
tance ; for as spots in cloaths are more visiblé near than a-far off, so the faintnefs.
of remote objects must be obferved. But let me afk, What foulnefs of wet and
dust can stick to smooth bodies, which rain, hail, or fnow do nôt wasn off; But
they may decay and be consumed by time; especially those facing the north,

We see many inftances of decay in ancient build-
which suffer afl extremities.
ings, where are figures so eaten un by time, that it is hardly discernable, whether-
they reprefented men or women; like figures of snow partly dissolvedt by tke sun-
beams.
I speak not here so much against the dropping upon and muddling such objects,.
as. of the abuse when the cause of such an effect does not appear; for withoux
a probable reason why a thing should be thus, or thus, art becomes obstinacy.
But to return to our subject.
It is certainly praift-worthy to take some pains in shewing the stones of
buildings, and their veining and eyeing, when they are judieisusly and agree-
ably disposed, according to rule : I say it is commendable to him who under-
i. J
stands perspective.
The parts of buildings within (which are not so subject zo the teeth af time),
are not so apt to decay as those witkout ; the cement ajso Jasts- longer; which-
makes them keep elean and intire, their joints to seem afmost. iivisibie, and thé
whole to be as one stone. For this reason we must aveidk the miiftkkes of somé
painters, who vein and eye their work, and afterwards. divide it intaeftones; where-
by one vein or eye happens oftentimes to run through twubr thrée stones. at once t.
Whence we must conclude it to be what it is, meer painting and inot the life ::
whereas I think it the most certain way first to divide che work inte stopes, and.
then to marble and eye them ; observing chat each stoue have a partieilar eye, t6
Marble buildings have a beautifil effect when the architecture is fine and well,
ornamented; and this as well in painting as the dife : &rcerly dispofltion is ope of-
the best réafons thereof, without which it cannot have that vaft agreeublenefs.
A knowing architect takes especial care of che setting’the stones of is build-
ing in such a manner as to blazon its beauty, and improverit,, and’thereby cregte
harmony ; wherefore he disposes the eye-veiny stones in *he prepereft manner;
for instance, in a single-colonaded porticoy’the veiny eyes must oppose each other,
sloping






stoping from out to in, & contrarye The same method must be observed in ’the
Bdafters, -and al parts that are paired.; so that the work may appear regular at a
distance, taklag especiadt care that they be eyed alike, to keep the eye always in a
balance. between thom. The ftones for the architrave, frize and cornice, fhould
he fo chofen, that the weining fall perpendicalar, in antter to keep the members
distinct;i which they would not be were the veinr to fall in with the mouldings.
Ip remains to beobserved in marbling eolumns, that the eye-veins ought to re-
ceive the: strongest light on the relieved and swelling parts, in order to aid the flat
of the picture by art; wirich Nature wants nor, as being round of herfelf : where-
fore it would look ill, that the most dark of thezeye-veins come on the weaker
parts, because it would render the effect you proposed abortive.
Imagine a piece of walling divided into three pannels, on each side of which
stand two columns; the two first ought to oppofe each ocher; theit veming muft
either be level or run diagonally against each other, outwardly or inwardly : the

twto others most do the same,and so. on
 






CHAP. VI.Of Ruins.



HITHERTO we haye fpoken of thé beauty and regularity af intire
 buildings ; wherefore it is, proper next to treat of fraginents and ruins,
equally necessary with the former.
Thave sometimes wondered how-ir hapipens, that among the paintprs of figures
and landscape, who make use of buildings and gther-brick-work, so fow exhibit
whole and highly fmished ones : all they thew is, rains, broken walls, and de-
cayed stones, but feldom itire and perfect ftructures ; becaufe, as I take it,
they will be at no trouble to fearch antiquity for the forms and most beantiful
parts of architecture, whereby they might learn to produce something curious :
a supinity proceeding from their want of knowledge, and ambition to obtain it.
Although many think that a piece of ruins does not requine so great a regard
às an intire building, they are. much mistaken; for the one as well ’as the other
depends on measure and proportion : yet some will go and throw down a part of
à building, and intermix with it some fragmenis of capitals, pieces of frizes,
cornices, and the like, of an Order foreign to. the building; which, though very
wrong, they salve by suppofing, that when a building is in mins no one will have
the curiosity to examins the mibbisn to see whether- zhere be a wnong capital, frize
or cornice; and granting such were to be fowad,the fault would be nané, fince those.
broken parts might be brought thither gafually. But this is a 'lame excuse ;’to speak,
the truth, Icannot apprehend how anyone can be so. wilful, since no naore hnow ledge
and trouble are necefsary to the best than tthe worst things, to the whole than to
the halfs in-ghé gne :we lmust use the footruule and compastes as well as in the
other. If a beautiful remain of a great building adorn a fine landscape, and
look







look grand, How much more one in perfection 3. He then who will take pains
may certainly, by practice; overcome all difficûlties, if-he have ambition enqugh
But let me not be understood to speak against the
to- study the best things.
choice of ruins, much less endeavour to hinder any one from the ue. of them ;
since l am senfible that every man has naturally a particular taste for some thing
(as we have formerly said), wherein he may excell.. I. desire. not to discourage
painters of ruins, or to raise a pique against that: sort lof objects;. my only drift
is to shew, that we ought to study the rests of antiquity with care and attention,
and chiefly to learn the ancient state of old structures, in order to know perfectly
what they were in their best condition.



CHAP. VII. Principal Directions for painting the Ornaments off
Halls, Rooms, &c.
In this sort of work we must, in the first place, have an, eye. to, the regu-
larity and division of the architecture, and, if that be. beautiful, not in the
least hurt it under pretence of decorum, or acting- painterelike; and if at any
time we are obliged to. alter this conduct, it must nevertheless be in favour of the
architecture.
2. That the painting, of what kind soever it be, must tend to the lustre and
magnificence. of the building; I. speak with respect to painting the wood-work,
whether it be marbled or plain.
3. That the ornaments to be painted agree with shose of the room, and be
governed by the same Order in architecture.
ia
4. That in pannels, niches and windoms. ought to be artfully painted, whas
you would have appear to be real on nattirally there, whether tapestry or prospect :
af tapestry, it must appeas to be such; if a view, it must look like a view; the:
former by being bordered, and the latter by its sky or sun every whére agreeing

with the light of the room-
5. The master must beware of representing in a room chree or more different
hours of the day at the same time ; nor in histories, unless they be in the mannee
of tapestry.
6. He must never inclose white marble bafs-reliefs wigh wood-work, as being
repugnant to custom and likelihood.
Lastly, fince excess often abates the majesty of a fabric, the artist’should avoid
many littlenesses in the divisions and ornaments :: on such, occasions historical fi-
gures should not exceed three. or four feet in height, be the paintiug ever so large :
tapestry figures exceeding the life are unjustifiable ; they look. monstrous in a
fmall room, and lessen a larger.

It were to. be wishied, that great men and lovers, who bespeak such works, had
some previous knowledge of fuch things as these ;: at leaft, that they were in-












formed of them, and would asfent. to the-artist’s opinion in the execution of them;
finoe it is reasonable that his design, if it pleafes, be followed.
Few artists are sollicitous about :inside-ornaments, either in reference to their
elegance and splendor,. or their uies andeconvenience ; as is -evident in many old
masters works, wherein we generally see too great a simplicity, all is plain and.
mean ; tables, benches, chairs, kitchen-stuff, drinking-vessels, &c. And what
is. more, oftentimes a company of old and young people in a room with never a
chair in it; and sometimes, no more than bare walls, and a curtain hanging for
no purpose : orgaments and foliage are feldom seen in their works; and when:
they are, they are so improperly and disjunctively applied, that we must con-
clude them rather to serve for humour than decorum; certain signs. that such maf-
ters were ignorant, hoth. of the naturalness, needfuluefs, and application of ob-

jects.
It is. oertain that the- ancient Greeks and Ropaus were not originally so sumptu¬
ous in their house-furniture as afterwards :they came to be; and it is as easy to
think, that there was a-difference, between the nobility and commonalty, as well
in their buildings and dress, as in other zespects : the one used plate at his table ;.
the other, earthen-ware or painted -wood; the, one had bals-reliefs, statues,
hangings or tapestries-in his house; the other was content with bare walls ; each
according to. his fancy or ability. Truly f am surprised to think of my first
ordonnances, and how disjointed my conceptions were ;, often exhibiting a royal
history in a stable or cottage, and as often the contrary : questionless every maf-
ter of an house furnishies it with what is proper for each. apartment, whether
kitchen, chamber, state-room or gallery ; one apartment has a bed or couch and
its appertunances, chests, tables and chairs; another has hangings more or less
costly, floor-carpets, stands, sconces, looking-glasses, &c. Another has benches,
a chimney-piece, circular couches fitting the table, and other things. proper to
the room : and thus, other apartments.
Some imagine that chairs were: not ancieutly in use, but men sat on cushions,
as in the Eastern countries, or else rested on couches. When a certain person had
represented. Aneas and Dido in a. stately hall, and she placed on a low small half-
pace, covered with a carpet, with the young Ascanius in her lap, and Aneas by her
fide, and some ladies sitting here and there on cushions on the floor (which was
covered with a green ganpet)e l. was surprised to see a large round table stand in
a corner on a side of the painting, and this serving up as for an entertainment,
and yet not a chair nearit ; l afked the master why the ladies had not chairs or
benches, and whether this circumstance was thus to be found in history, He
answered, that in those times neither chairs or benches were known. I could
hardly forbear laughing; but afking him, Whether the company were to stand to
their victuals, because of the height of the table, he began to see liis error; yet
in excuse said, ee They will make use of the couch which stands vonder against
», This would have been a tolerable come-off, had the couch been
the hanging.
made for the table ; but by ill luck the one was square, the other round. I said
no more, because l would not augment his- blushes.
Others.






Others have made the same mistake; as was the case of one who, as the reoort
goes, representing Abraham’s offering, drew him with a scymiter or bending
sword in his hand, and a straight scabbard by his side.
l once made the fame blunder, when my inclination for compofition was greater
than my skill, in the story of Hercules foinning by Omphale. I had feen, in a de-
sign of Bartholet, that Hercules was much bigger than any of the women; where-
fore 1 also drew him larger, and dreffed in wornen’s apparel, having fleeves closed
at hands (like Sardanapalus amongst his women, in Mervan ’s Historical Chronicfe),
a distaff in his girdle, a spindte in bis hand, and pearls about his neck; and; in
order to shew that they were Omphale’s cloaths, I placed her by him stark naked.
Now I appeal to any one how well the garment couid fit Omphale, seeing it was
neither too short or too streight for Hercules, though half as tall again as fhe. But
1 afterwards rectified my conduct.
It is plain that such overfights proceed from ignorance or lame instruction,
and principally in what concerns embelfishment; 1 say, embellissiment of any
kind whatsoever, whether within or without doors ; for few know the importance
of this part of art, and the uncommon effects of it.
We may, from tlie works of old and judicious masters, here and there bor-
row some of their thoughts, and use them in a proper mamer in our own works.
The famous Pouffin, in his finding of Moses, shews the Nile, with a water-god;
and with good reason (as we fhall prove in the chapter treating of the authority
painters have to represent spiritual and manimate beings under hyman forms) :
but it is ridiculous, in my opimon, that the same figure, with all its adjuncts,
fhould be placed on the strand of a river, and near it Narcissux viewing himself
in the water ; on a supposition that, if it be but a water-god, all is well; for,
thinks the mafter,it suits well.-It is a fine figure-- Befides if Poussin durst do
It, Why may not we ) But it is against reason; indeed, were the sphinx and
children left out, it may be passable enough.
Who sets out a room of entertainment, and it does not shew whether the din-
ner be over or not, by the cloth laid, bottles, glaffes, cisterns, and all things in
order, as before dinner; and empty bottles lying in disorder, empty difhes, a
dog gnawing a bone, chairs displaced, table-cloth half turued up, and such like,
after dimer, Or,
Who can approve in Testa’s dipping of Aehilles, Thetis’s lymg in an open gal-
lery, where also is a cradle 3
As for moveable embellishments, it is improper td shew Mark Anthony and Cleo-
para in their grandeur and luxury, without a retinue, and as in a private colla-
tion, seeing we know they had such a crowd of mufic, buffoons, juggiers, and
other loofe people about them. Or can we represent Crift lying in the manger,
attended by Joseph and Marv, and the three kings waiting on him, and that in a
stable full of beast-provender, and on the wall a fan and stail hanging; befides
other utenfils of husbandry, and yet not a countryman or servant to appear; or a
chest, box, saw or square to be seen ; (xhether Joseph hired the stable, or found
ât void of people, is another consideration ;) moreover, one of the principat
figures






gures is in a fuit of armour, and bare-headed, and yet his head-piece is not to be
feen.
One of my fehow-disciples once painted a collation; and l afked him, why he
put not knives on the table à He answered, That knives were not aatique. Very
well, thought I, are then the bread’ and meat, and a three-legged stool wich a back
standing by, antique 2
It is not improper, though a small circumstanee, that a chamber-pot be placed
by a bed-fide, when a person is in it ;. even were there also at day-break a lamp
either burning or extinguished, and such like things; whereby we may judge,
what other circumstances are required.
From all which confiderations it is plain, that a judicious master must take par-
ticular thought about the by-works; seeing it is. as bad to. leave out something
ghat is needful, as to add what is unnecessary.
CHAP. VIIE. Of the Pictures proper to various Apartments.
xVHE nature, property and use of pictures in general, is, to keep the senses,.
by a pleafing variety of objects, as figures, landscape, &c. in a continual
einploy and contemplation.
Their nature has-a near affinity with that of the things they reprefent, when
those are done by a skilful hand, and therefore they can, when natural things are
wanting, fufly fatify.
Thein preperty lies in their ’application to meet places; and they cannot be
displaced without hurting, nay undloing naturalnefs.
As for the use oft pictures, it is in the occasion we have for them, and the
glaoes they are to ferve for, in order to-gratify the senses of the ouners ; they
must be well expressed, and fall in with the architecture in the agreement of the
various objects wich the ornaments of the buldings.
Ef tkis-be uuintelligible, Pfhah endeavour to explain myself. I say then, That
it is not sufficient for a painter to design work for apartments at random, and
introduve therein what fancies he pleases, or best understands; for, he ought to.
aonsider, whether it agree with. the place, and be proper there; if therefore he
would go on with certainty, he must, in the first place, consult the architecture,.
und then the three poines following.
1. The quality, or condition of the building:
2. The building itself.
4 The aparemenes in iti.
First, let him consider whetlier the owner be a prince, lord, magistrate, or
Ierokaet.
Secondly, whether the building be public, as a town-house, church, palace, &c..
ar prêvete, as- far a merchant or eitizen.
Lastly, whecher ie be an hall, chamber, parlotrr, kitchin, or che like.
Thus






Thus far in general’: but if we bulld a galaser for a kiag, the apartments must be
contrived for other uses, than those for a merchant, or even a town-house; for in this
latter we find many rooms fitted, for purposes, oppsite to à palace ; as may be seen
in that fine- model, :the Stadt-house, at Amsterdant, where architecture has wonder-
 fully disposed all the rooms to their several uses;. nor is the judgment of the pain-
ters or architects less conspictous in the proper placing the pictures, in each apart-
ment ; for each piecé (chiefly sculpture ) is so ordered, as to allude tg the rooms ;
whence we know, what uses, the rooms are put 1o, and by the rooms, what the
printings, stone-figures and bass-reliefs signify.
Wherefore it is very necessary to consider the nature of the apartments in order
govern our work thereby ; as first,
to
in the hall belew, fuits well a gray bass-relief; or else trophies painted on the
walls after the life.



In an antichamber, where people wait for commands, gray ornaments are alse
best; sometimes intermixed with slowers, but very sparingly.
In an audience, or presence-room should be tapestries, or pictures with figures,
as big as the life, of magnificent transactions which happened in apartments or
palaces.

In the ladies visiting-room must be other sorts of embellishments, such as fruit,
 flowers, landscapes, sine thoughts, virtuous representations, and the moft cloathed
and modest histories.
In the nursery, agree bafs-réliefs, and painted emblems or morals; whereby
the children may learn. good manners, and’ inure tender years to virtuous actions :
to these may be added, some flowers, fruit, birds and such like.
In the kitchin may be seen the representations of culinary furnitute, hunting
of deer, the picture. of some maid-or-gther servant, or a dog or cat; but these
must be mostly gray or wood-colour, on account of the smoke, which otherwise
would sully the colours.
In the gallery may appear all sorts of hunting-equipage painted on the walls
from the life.
In thet upper-rooms suit landscape, and all kinds of beautiful prospects.
In the mafter’s bed-chamber are proper, some beautiful faces, and naked child-
iren painted after the life.

In the childrens bed-room nothing must be seen but foliage or bragch-work.
The study may be adorned with paintings, in gray marble, of learned. men,
philosaphers, &c.
In the summer-house, being a place for the enjoyment of company and enter-
tainments, suit nothing better than merry Bacchanalian pieces, sportive, herdsmen,
dancings, brooks and fountains.
We proceed now to the decorations over chimneys, and on doors, in each
apartment.

Over the dining-room chimney place, Comus, god of meals, accompanied by
Taste and Smell; and on the door, Latitia, or Joy.
Over the hall-chimney may be Decorum, or Authority, accompanied by. Pallas,
or Virtue, and Hono’s, or Honour; and on the door, Understandipg. :









Over the lady’s visiting-room chiinney, Modesty, accompanied by Obedience
and Diligence; and on tne door, Fidelity.
Over the chimney in a saloon, or meeting-room for youth, may be seen Inventus,
or Youth, attended by Grace and Eloquence; and on the door, Gaudium, or Joy.
Over the nursery chimney place Education, and by it a young branch tied to a
stick; and on the door, Obedience.
Over the kitchen chimney, Prudentia, of Prudence, accompanied by Ceres and
Bacchus; and on the door Diligence.
Over the bed-chamber chimney, Quiet; and the door, Security.
Over the study, or closet chimney, Wisdom, or Science; and on the door,
Harpocrates.
On the doors of side-rooms going out of the hall, Clemency and Vigilance ;
and between them, Oeconomy.
On the pantry-door, Abundance.
On the cellar-door, Silenus.
On the garret or loft-door, Winter.
On the garden-door, Flora.
On the orchard-door, Pomona.
In the green-house, between the stoves, the figure of persons who, have been
transformed into trees and plants, as Cyparissus, Myrrha, Daphne, &c. On the door
within, Apollo; and on the outside, Diana.
On the stable-door, all sorts of stable-appertenances, as a bridle, saddle, houfing,
stirrups, dung-fork, shovel, curry-comb, &c.
On the privy-door, Momus laughing.
And now, that I may conceal nothing from the artists, I shall subjoin the pic-
tures proper to be put into chimneys; which may be various ; because we are
not confined to the fire, as being only used during the winter-season; the spring,
summer and autumn afford us a large field for fine inventions; and since the place,
for three quarters of the year, becomes any thing we sind proper, we can either
shut them up, or leave them open, or contrive, in niches all sorts of statues or
busts, bass-reliefs and other ornaments, as cisterns, vasa, flower-pots, bafkets of
fruit, mufical instruments, globes and such like : we can have them be open with
doors or without, with one door or two half ones, and represent vistos or pros-
pects, such as a flower-garden, a public place with fountains, a street of houses,
a grove, lane, frontispiece, pantry, wine-cellar, an alcove with a couch, or a li-
brary, and such like. In fine, we may introduce any thing that is different from
the furniture of the apartment. But care must be taken, that the painting have
a natural and high horizon, with little or no sky, to gain more depth; vistos of
apartments one within another are also not improper; but if we represent with-
out-door-prospects as aforesaid, it is more proper to paint doors, seemingly to give
the room-air: and seeing it often happens, that such a painting cannot have the
most advantageous light, and is sometimes in shade by the projecture of the chimi-
ney, we should contrive the work accordingly, and so as not to appear like paint-
ing, but nature itself.









The designs proper to such places (for the fake of those who are not fertile in-
invention) may be such as follow.
1. Spring. Flora, setting out with a gay and joyful air, has a basket of spring-
flowers under her left arm; with her right hand behind she a little lifts up her
gown : her left foot rests on a step, and her right lifts up; her breast is somewhat
to the light, behind, in a low off-scape, is seen a parterre, ornamented with vases:
behind her, we may place another figure in shade, ascending the steps, in order to
sling off the off-scape, and bring forward the fore-figure. Flora must be propor-
tioned to the size of the fire place ; if not as big as life, let her be a young damsel,
and, if-the face be fhaded by the chimney, make good advantage of the re-
flexion; the same design may be also executed with children.
2. Summer. Pomona with a basket of fruit in her lap; and in the off-scape, an-
orchard, and some Cupids busily gathering fruits and flowers.
3. Autumn. Bacchus represented in an entranee or gate-way, hung round with
vine-branches and grapes; and, if you please, a young satyn by him, with a cup :
this-design may be also represented with children-
4. Anteros. as a youth, crowned with laurels, stands on a. threffiold, leaning on
a torch or else a long arrow, pointing inwardly to a library, wherein are an astrolabe
and globe, and against the wall à lyre hanging;. his-garment, fastened’ on each
shoulder, is-reddish. purple ; his look agreeable and majestic; his mouth open,
as if complimenting somebody to come in; he stands on the left side against the
door, which comes half in snhade, against the off-scape, so that he is strongly set
off ; his face and under-parts are fronting; his breast turning to the light; this-
design either left or right is equally good, and so are the- before- mentioned,
5. Cupid is seen here : sweetly smiling, having a flask on his arm, and a spax-
water-bottle in-his hand, which- he holds up, as if he were saying,—
Rare waters!
By him is an elegant stand or tea-table, on which another Capid is placing a silver
salver with- glasses, and a silver sugar-box and spoon; behind may be seen a winc-
cellar- lighted by a candie or lamp; we should also discover part of a summer-
2
house, or fountain, or a gallery, &c.
6. In this design we shew-a serenade by three boys; the first drest. as. a Punch-
an-ello, with a bag-pipe, hautboy or flute; the second as an harlequin, with a vio-
lin; and the third as a Scaramouch with a guitar, and all three in their proper-
postures : Harlequin in set- posture stands to the right against a post, holding the
violin ta his ear; Punch-an-ello, sieting against the other post on the threfhiold,
holds his flute from his mouth, and looks forward, laughing and shewing his teeth;.
his head finking backwards somewhat into hisneck : Scaramouch is in the middle,
with his-guitar under his arm, and his head quite sunk intohis fhoulders ; he is
attentive, holding his fore-finger to his nose, and his legs closes Behind these
buffoons we might shew a balustrade aver a water in shade, and on it an ape sit-
ting; in the water may be gondolas, with mafks in them ;, or else à street, and
such like.
Because the breadth of the aforesaid opening-cannot be very great, you may, by
shutting the door more or less, or by placing somewhat between it, get advan-
tageous shades, if the matter require it: there ought at most but afigure and half
to






to be in the light, and a third, in shade. The colours will effect the same.
Such
paintings should not be inuddled, but boldly handled, and the lights strong.
Thus iuch for without-dodr views.; proceed we now to designs for, éhimneys ,:
which are closed.
1. A vase of white marble, gold or silver, or the belly gold, and the neck
and foot of Lapis Lazuli, in a niche of red marble, or porphry ; and the jaumbs
to be of a lighter stone, hung with festoons of all sorts of fine leaves, interinixed
with slowers: these festoons should be very large, liké two arms, and spreading,
in order to break the light ground, that the middle-ornament, whether white
marble, silver or gold, may have the gréater force.
2. The bust of Bacchus in white marble, erowned éither with, vine leaves , and
branches and grapes, or else mulberries with theif greens; on each side, on a
ground of free-stone, festoons of whitt and blue grapes, and between those may
be placed some proper instruments, as cymbals, timbrels, tabors, hautboys and
Pan’s flutes. The bust is on a pedestal of Pisan-marble; in a niche, as before ;
the niche must rise as much as possible, that the bust may have its full'héight;
but if the chimney and niche do not admit of a figure in full proportion, you
may make a boy of it: if you leave out the pedestal, you can place the same in
the niche, but a third less in height. Under the niche may be a faint bass-re-
lief of grey or other marble; or else a festoon, of pine leaves, intermixed with
Tome beautiful flowers.


The hust of Apollo; and on each side some musical instruments, either

ainted as carved, or natural. Under the niche may be a square pannel, and on
at a carved torch, witha quiver across, through a garland of laurel. , Among the.
some rolls of paper, with geometric and other fuch figures ; for these can be bet-
ter ordered in bass-relief, tnan among those naturally painted.
4. A deep niche; in which may be seen a table, with an elegant stand or foot
of sine wood, partly gilt : on the table, china tea-furniture, as dishies, saucers,
tea-pot, and a silver chased tea-cannister: or else coffee equipage; as a silver cof-
fee-pot, a silver salver with pipes, a knife, some tobacco in a paper, a fine cha-
fing dish with fire; and on the ground, in the snade, some bottles of wine.
5. The table in this design may be put to various uses ; it may be served with
melons, or baskets of fruit, as peaches, nectarins, apricocks, silberds, &c.
6. On such a table may be also music-books and instruments, as a lute,
violin, hautboy, &c. And on the ground, a cistern of water, with bottles of
wine standing upright therein.
7. In this last, we may place a round bass-relief, representing a sitting child,
of flefhi-coloured marble, on a blue ground, blowing bubbles:: round it, a white
marble moulding; and underneath, a festoon.










CHAP. IX. Descriptian of several Pictures adapted to the five
Orders in Architecture.
INCE no manner of describing fine apartments is more proper than this,
 which exhibits things as if we really saw them, I shall therein give an
architectonic view of each Order, and in as conspicuous a manner as I myself
conceive it. The particulars must then be well regarded, because they are so-
linked. together, that, by overlooking a small circumstance, the whole chain
may be broke, without ever getting a true idea of the thing.
We shall confine the subject to five apartments, and describe in each the pic-
tures, which shew the nature, height, custom, and other properties relating to-
the Orders of this building: and since the Tuscan Order, either in parts or alto-
gether, is. rough and massy, we shall exhibit here,
The Picture of POLYPHEMUS and GKLATEK.
Polyphemus, on the sea-shore, inflamed with the love of the beautiful Galateay
who came to divert herself on the pleasant, surges of the billows, strove to please :
her with-his singing and music, and thereby to gain her favours; but she was-
deaf to his fuit: his rough-hewn enormous size; and frightful aspect were her
aversion; wherefore she shuns him, and derides his addresses.
A calm sea was seen. On tlie second ground, to the left, appcared a vast high:
rock, hanging over the sea, almost to the point of sight; all rough, and over-run
with mofs and herbage, going off to the left very cragged; up to it huge stones
were piled on each other, as steps (but three times higher), from the edge of the
water ; on the lowermost of them sat the monstrous Cclops, as a wild and savage
man; his skin very swarthy and hairy; his head and beard full of-bristly black
hair, spreading over his shoulders and breast; he had but one eye-brow, and that
as wide as his forehead, hanging over the eye (which, according to Homer, was
as large as a fhield), placed in the middle of his wrinkled forehead; his blubber
lip turned up towards his broad and flat nose, like that of a negroe; shewing
his teeth, set like those of a saw, out of his gluttonous jaws, with a grim Jook.:
by him lay his staff, whichxlike those of herdsmen), was crooked at one end, and,
according to Ovid, bigger than the mast of a ship : a knapsack or pouch hung at
his side ; his raiment was goats-skin sewed together, which he had shook from off
his shoulders, possibly to discover to Galatea his conceited fine shape : this garment
was cream-colour, spotted with black. He ’sat very rudely, leaning a little back
against the rock ; his left leg was stretched out towards the water, and his right,
with the foot fore-shortened, lifted up, lay over a piece of the rock ; his flure,
with an hundred pipes, he held, in his left hand, up at his mouth, as if he had
been just playing. His head inclined, with his eye to heaven, towards Cepid,
who stood near and flattered him; his, mouth was open, as if he were singing,
and






and his right hand, upright on his knee, seemed to beat time. It was curious to
see the method Cunid took in the midst of his play to stick an arrow into Poly-
phemus’s breast without his being sensible of it.
Cupid was about half as big as the Cyclops arm or leg ; so that, though he had
elimbed up the second step, he could scarce reach the Cyclops shoulder, in order
to stroke, with his right hand, the hair from the giant’s eye; when, pointing
with a stretched finger of the same hand towards the sea, he laughing stuck with
the other an arrow in Polyphemus’s breast, under his lifted arm. Cupid was of a
beautiful rosy complexion, his hair yellowish white ; a quiver, tied with a red
safh, hung by his side, and his bow lying near hiin.
The fair Galatea, in the mean time sitting on a large sea-shell in the middle of
the nearest distance, was drawn by two dolphins, encompassed with tritons and
nereids, sounding their shelly trumpets, and playing on timbrels and other in-
struments ; she sat fronting in the shell, and the dolphins, which sne guided
gently, turned to the right; she was foHowed by other tritons, bearing beautiful
naked virgins, and a crowd of sea monsters, who, gradually uniting with the
farthest distance, disappeared. This whole crowd was grouped in the form of
a crescent ; Galatea appeared to surpass all in beauty.
lat first thought this might possibly be Venus herself; because three beauties
attended her, whom I took to be the three Graces; but she looked somewhat
younger, and not so wanton as Venus is usually represented ; her breast also rose
less, and her head-attire was quite different from Venus; for her white hair, twist-
ed in tresses, and elegantly flowing, was here and there stuck with white bell-
flowers; and the locks in each side tied together on the head in a tuft, and, hang-
ing down both before and behind, made plainly appear, how gently she glid over
the billows. What most charmed mé was, that, in’ this great crowd, one might
see the particular sways, turnings and affections of every figure; oné moved slow-
ly, another swiftly, as their beards, hair and veils plainly shewed; some bending
backward, as blowing, others forward almost to the water; some were full of
foam; others swimming as evenly as if. they moved on looking-glass, so that their
glitter was scarce visible in the water. This second Venus (as I. call her) had a
greenish blue scarf, which, coming over her lap, twined about her right leg ;
advancing her naked left leg, she set her foot on the scroll of the shell; her head,
a little flung back, inclined to her right shoulder; her breast projecting; and
the right arm, stretching cross, her body, supported her rein-hand on her naked
knee ; her countenance was modest and smiling; her cyes somewhat downissi,
made me think that thé sun was too powerful for her, but, I more nearly per-
ceived,, she was talking to a sea-nymph or nereid, who, near her chariot, lay be-
hind on a triton, staring towards the shore at Polyphemus, whither Galatea, with
her left hand a little fore-shortened, was pointing; the top of the rock was al-
most shaded by. a cloud, which shade run across the piece, and set off Galatea and
he zetinue. The whole group was agrecably lighted; and ’though the light was
strong, yet the shades near the water were soft and melting, by the glitter or re-
flexions of it, which, in my opinion, was a fine piece of conduct; behind the
rock, towards. the right side, appeared beautiful tracts of verdant land, adorned
witfi






with variety of ’trees, extending crescent-ways by the point of sight, and sdme
herds of oxen, goats and fheep, were grazing; in the off-scape were hills; and on
the right side a town; forwards, on the same side in the corner, a piece of a sea-
rock appeared, whiel Galatea and her company seemed to avoid.
As we have reprefented the persons of Polyphemas and Galatea, so it will not bo
amiss to shew those of the tritons and nereids also. Pausanias describes. the tritons
thus: Their upper parts, from the nagel, were humnan, but covéred with thin,
shiarp and rough scales, and downwards their bodies, instead of feet, ended in a
large split tail; their hair long and bluiffi, and entangled as if in a twist; their
cyes greenisn; their ears, nofe, and mouth, like those of men, the latter very
large and wide; their teeth like those of a panther; their fmgers and-nails like
the outside of an oyster-shieil, or such a substance ; on their breasts and bellies,
and undet their ears, they had fins like little wings, which helped them in
swimming.
Alexander ob Alexandro says, that the uereids are shaped like beautiful virgins
down to the navel; but the lower parts, joining together like a fisn, end in an
eel’s tail; their heads are mostly unveiled, their hair disheveled, and beset with
pearls, coral, and other sea productions.
Second Pictilre.
   
Polyphemus, from the top of the rock, where he sat playing, viewing his beloved
Galatea bestowing her smiles on Acis, was. so enraged ’thereat, that, full of fury,
he tore a piece from the rock, with intention to crush them both; which Gala-
tea escaped by diving into the sea, put Acis, not nimble enough in running, was
struck with it.
This piece is a fellow or sequel of the preceding: the rock is here placed on a
contrary side to the former; behind it an island allo, in the form of a crescent,
towards the right extends acrofs ; beyond it the sea is seen along the horizon, the
rock on the right side goes down in rough steps, and follows a fandy way forward
on its left, to the middle of the piece where it ends in the frame. The unhappy
Acis falls here in the sand under the huge piece of rock, wijh his arms extended,
and his face downwards, yet somewhat turned towards the sca ; He is not quite
dead, because the great weight rolling in the air only took Fim in the-leg as he
was running ; the enraged eclops not content with this, foams at mouth, and
gripes an heavier piece of the rock in order to destroy the faithless Galatea; Me-
vara, with her smoaking pitchy torch, eggs him on, and enflaming him with hel-
lisni fury, points towards the sea at the objects ofhis revenge, at which he: looks
back ; and now what a force he sheus in rending the rock ; all his members are
distorted, his sinews stretch, and his muscles swell, drawing in his mouth on one
side, with the upper teeth, and his eyes is half shut. Does he not look as if he
were anatomised or flead ; nay, the least ofhis muscles works and presses through
his thick skin; his hair stands an end, and his beast-skin garment being got loose
from his girdle, drags on the ground, and he treads on it with his left foot ; the
goat’s feet hanging to it appear to fly about according to his motion; he bends
doublé






double ons ofhis knées almost tonching his breast, and with his right foot against
the rocks he, with both hands and all his force, tears off a piece of it. Tisiphone,
half behind him with her upper parts above his head, and her facea little fore-
fhortened and downwards points with her whole right hand (not a finger)at Galatea;
her left hand are some serpents and a fire-brand; her garment is black or dark grey,
here and there stained with blood ; the sea swells and the billows beat with great
violence against the rock, as if they would swallow up the shore. On the left side
eomes Galatea in her chariot drawn by two dolphins, not gliding, as before, but
tosfing sometimes on the topof the waves, and sometimes beneath theni, with the
hinder part of herchariot almost upright; she stands stoping, with her arms slungout,
looking back with amazement, and her reins- slack, her disordered locks sly in loose
trésses-against the wind, caused by her swift motion; her veil’got loose, drops be-
hind her into the fea’; her lovely members are overpowered by her inward’
troubles ; the muscles of her neck, before smooth, now rise, her heart seems to
pant, and her legs faltering, she seems to sink ; her grace leaves her, and she is no
longer Galatea, fright has robbed her of her fresh colour, and she is rather a
marble statue than a living person.
Considering this ordonnance, Istood surprised. Is it possible, thought l, to be:
a paintingp It is certainly past my understanding ; it is reality itself, and yet it
must be a picture ;. for what is too hard for the pencil of a judicious master) Be
it what it will, it is real nature to me, and l am satisfied. But, to proceed,
In the off-scape, on the left side, some ships appear in a storm, and two in the
middle of the piece riding at anchor, and a boat landing some people : this made
me thing that it was Ulysses, who had a design on the eye of the cruel and’ glut-
tonous devourer of men : it is even sa, l can perceive them to be Greeks by their
armed gallies and whole equipage ; the’sea is white with-froth, and the waves
beat towards. the point of sight; the air as in commotion and full of driving clouds
whichicause here and there large ground fhades-; the main light falls on Polyphe-
mus, and the under part of the rock, and takes in almost the whole shore sor-
wards; but the stone which falls on Acis, is with his under parts in shade, caused
by a bit of a fide rock which strongly sets it off against the light : Cupid in the mean:
time, above the horison, comes flying forward, turning full of sorrow and cries,
to the right; down where Acis lies ; his left hand is up to one eye, and his right,
wlierein is his bow, over his head, te shade it from the sun; his quiver is reversed
and the arrows drop into the sea ; Acis lies on the fore ground with his shoulders
bare, and he is seen a little right sideways ; his hands half covered with sand, are
wide open as if he were swimming, his hair is dark, and his garment dark green.
Galatea, between him and Polyphemus, with the rock, runs acrofs the piece ; she is
seen right sideways, and her face is fronting; the off-scape, consisting of hills,
boscage, beautiful lawns and rivers, is clearly lighted : there appear also some
aattle grazing, as-in the former piece, under the impendance of the rock, and
close to the sea, lies a red cloth garment in shade; undoubtedly left there by Aeis,
which was, in my opinion, artfully contrived, in order to point out the place
where this- unhappy couple had been sitting; the shore is covcred with cockles
and. many other sea productions.  A. large greenisn coloured tortoise is seen, mak-
ing







ing froin under Acis towards the sea ; Polyphemus’s slute lies by him, but the bag
still hangs by his side ; the top of the rock is dark against light clouds driving
thither ; the light comes from the side of the piece.
After I had exactly weighed all the circumstances of the two pieces, l was con-
sidering whaj the master’s principal drift might be, and found them to be an ex-
ample of love, or slattery of the senses wantonly affecting the body without vio-
lence, in the person of Polyphemus, in the first piece : and, in Galatea an easy in-
difference without any passion ; for I perceived her motion was smooth, and her
beauty in its perfection ; she was not attended by any Cupids, because such as
have fins instead of wings usually wait on the Nereids. I was so rejoiced at this
observation, that l cannot express it.
Inquiring likewise what might be learned from the second picture, I concluded
that the author intended to express the unhappy issue of love in the person of Ga-
latea ; a passion both warm and sudden; for the least disorderly affection puts the
chief members of the body in commotion and disturbs the peace of the rest ; that
of Polyphemus is violent; Cupid is subject to compafsion only, as I think : where-
fore he is represented crying, possibly to shew a childishiness, for children com-
monly laugh or cry about things which seem strange to them.
Commentonthe Characters in the aforesaid Pictures.
Polyphemus, the Sicilian herdsman, the most savage and gigantic of all the Gclops,
was, according to Homer, son of Neptune and the nymph Thosa; the word Gyclops
signifies, having but one eye in the middle of the forehead, whereby some would
imply, the thunder and lightening, according to the Greck names of his com-
panions, Brontes, Sterope and Pyradmon, and other effects of the air, round which
they are always attending in readiness at the command of Jupiter; the air, they
say, being placed in the middle of Heaven, as an eye in the head. Thus the
commentators on Hefiod in his Theogonia (Deorum Origo deliver.
Hesiod says, that Galatea, daughter of Nereus and Doris, is so named from her
whiteness, signifying parabolically, the froth of the sea ; wherefore this poet af-
cribes toher white hair and a face like milk: he says further,that some writers would,
by Galatea, allude to the sweet water which falls into the sea, because nothing is
sweeter than milk ; and by Polyphemus, the air, which loves the sweet food.
The youth Acis, is called by Ovid, son of the river Faunus and Simethis, being
both young, beautiful and well shaped.
The Tritons are counted by most of the poets, sons of Neptune and Amphitrita,
because the sea, says Vermander, is esteemed the mother or producer of many
ftrange creatures, which its element is very inclineable to ; and the ancient hea-
thens perceiving thus somewhat wonderful, ascribed to the sea some divinity, as
they also did to those tritons, whose help they implored in dangers at sea. But they
who examine more narrowly into the Agyptian hieroglyphics, say, that the tritons
by their amphibious form of being human upwards, and dolphin-like dovnwards,
are compaired to the two watry virtues, saltness and sweetness, teaching us that
both good and evil spring from their nature and constitution, to wit, good from
the






the human nature, and nothing but evil from the fifhinefs ; for ths human form,
says Phurnutus, is compared to sweet water, which is proper for the aliment of
noxiousto the animals of the carth and air, and also to plants, causing them to
die and wither, as we read in Plutarch, of the nature of things.
Touching the Nereids, we find in Plato, that there were an hundred of them;
Héfiod says hfty, and gives us their names ; of which Glauce, Cymodoce, Galatea,
Cyrene, Drimo, Deiopeia, Xantho, Arethusa, Phillodoce, Euridice, Nesæe, Leucothoe,
Spio, Thalia, Cydippe, Pafithea, Lycorias, Ligea, Ephyre, Opis, Asie, Clymene and
Halia, are the principal : their lower parts being hsni-like has given the poets oc-
cafion to feign, that they were very beautiful nymphs who accompanied their
gods, viz. the Ocean, Thetis, Neptune, and Nereus and Doris their father and mo-
ther, and many others, who signify the different qualities and various effects of
the waters : they were stiled mothers of the floods, because the rainy clouds, be-
ing exhaled from the sea, are the origin of floods ; wherefore, on account of the
virtue of the earth’s moisture towards the procreation of animals, trees, fruits,
flowers, &c. they were worshipped by the heathens as the nurses of them.
Having largely handled the off-spring and signification of the characters in both
Har-
the aforesaid pictures, we shall pafs to a general explication of the latter.
mony in music arises from an agreeable mixture of discording and flat sounds with
concording and sharp ones ; but in love it is otherwise, where dissimularity can-
not be brought to agree, or two hearts to join which do not sympathise by an
harmony of humours. The hideous make of the Cyclops is frightful to the beau¬
teous Galatea, who shuns him for her dearer Acis ; by Pobyphemus, in this last storys
we learn that those persons sue in vain, who flatter themselves that their trouble-
some addresses gain the afféctions of those who hate them : contrarily, Acis blessed
with the smiles of his mistrefs, shews us the danger of exposing ourselves to the
resentment of a powerful rival, from whom at any time we must expect nothing
but death. It may also, I say, serve for an example of the power of beauty,
which so bewitched Acis, that he could not forbear loving, though at the expence
of his life. Thus we are bewildered by our own inclinations, and brought to the
place of inevitable misfortunes, where we are plunged in tears to the weakning of
our vital strength, as in this fable of the young and amorous Acis when Galaiea
transformed him into a fountain.
Opposite to these poetic pictures, I saw two others treating of love, but differ-
ently, as being the sacred stories of Samson and Delilah; the sense of the first is
this:
Third Table or Picture.
Samson, resting on Delilahis lap, his hair is cut off whilst he sleyt, and the Philis-
tines lie in wait to seize him-
Here Samson is sitting near the center of the painting on a carpet which covers
the floor, and reaches over three circular steps before a couch, whereon sits De-
lilah, with his head in her lap ; her right foot rests on a small foot-stool, agaiast
which he is leaning, with his left knee somewhat raised ; the foot of that leg is








under his right thigh, which is somewhat fore-shortened, but the leg is seen at
full length, with his shin fronting ; his right arm hangs down between his legs,
resting on the outfide of his hand, which is seen inwardly ; supporting his head on
his left arm over Delilah’s lap, with the elbow standing out ; he is all in an heap,
and his head hangs a little forward and sidling.
Delilah’s right arm is about his neck, and her upper parts bend a little over to
the left, when, looking another way, sne with her left hand pushes from her an
old woman, who stepsback, having both her hands joined under her chin, and a
key in one of them, and with her mouth shut smiles at Delilah. Delilah’s eyes are
fixed on a young man standing near her, who gently lifting up Samsen’s hair is cut-
ing over him with his arms extended, and legs close, and his garment between
them, that it may not touch the sleeping Samson; near him stands, a boy with a
basket to hold the cut locks ; he looks back at a Philistine, who is coming towards
them with a rope in his hand ; he pouts with his mouth, and has a finger thereon,
in order to make the other keep back a little. The aforesaid Philistine walks stoop-
ing, advancing his right leg, and supporting his body with the other, which is
quite bent ; he thrusts out his head, and his elbow is drawn in, holding the rope
with both hands close to his body. Another on the right side behind him is lift-
ing up a curtain and looking after him. Between’these two rises a large column,
and another on the other fide of the latter, whereon the aforesaid curtain hangs :
these curtains and their pedestals run towards the point of sight. Behind the last
Philistine stand three or four more. On the left side behind the old woman, ap-
pears part of the couch, supported by a lion’s paw; the top of the couch has an
ornament of foliage, from whence projects a woman’s head with breasts of yel-
sowiffi ivory, representing an harpy, and a spread wing supports a gilt moulding-
From the top of the couch hangs a light reflecting drapery with tassels down to
the ground. Forward, in the corner, appears a large pillar, or a piece of walling
against which stands an hexagonial leafed table, supported by three mermaids,
back to back, on a triangular foot of black stone. On the table are several bags-
of money. From behind the table, a young servant-like man is gently advancing
with more bags of money in his arms, looking back suddenly with knit eye-brows,
over his right shoulder at the couch : at his heels is another bearer with a copper
vessel full of money, which he lugs very heavily before him ; his upper parts
falling back, and he screwing his mouth, puffing and blowing; he is well set,
of a sedate countenance, and his hair and beard are,frizzled. Beside the couch,
below the steps, in the shade, is seen the statue of Venus on a pedestal, misteriously
representing Astaroth. Next it stands a commander of the Philistines with a staff in
his hand ; he somewhat thrusts out his head, and if I mistake not, thene are more
people behind him, lost in the snade. On the right side of the steps, close to the
foremost column stands a censor, the smoak whereof ascends up the column. The
apartment is hung round with dark tapestries of landseape, and between them. are-
broad pilasters. The floor forward is inlaid with banded compartments.
Delilah is wantonly dressed, having a nice head attire mixed with ribbons and
pearls. A long hair-lock of a brown shining colour comes over her bosom, her-
garmeng






gartent of white sattin hanging so caresly- down her bosom, as to shew- her bare
breasts and left shoulder ; the fore-part of the right leg is also naked from below
the knee ; the thigh is fore-shortened, and the sandals white; her left leg covered
by the drapery afore-mentioned hangs down by the couch as if she was standing on
it, with the foot behind the foot-stool : from her right shoulder hangs slooping, a
beautiful sea-green veil tied on the left side, the flaps whereof are partly on the
bed, on one side, and down her thigh on the other.
 Samson is of a large size, and robustly membered, of a swarthy hue, with black
hair and beard, and hairy breast : his drapery is dark purple, which fastened.
with a girdle about his body, buckled on his side and gathered about the waist,
cemes down between his legs, covering the right thigh, the flaps of it finely fold-
ed, lying sideways on the carpet. The old woman’s head is bound with a yel-
lowish cloth, and her garment violet or blue, with streight sleeves tied under her
breast and over her hips. The young man with the scifsors is in a short green-
sleeved coat. The boy next him, the same but somewhat more ordinary : the
haig of each islight, and tied behind with a white ribbon. The soldier with the
rope in his hand, is. swarthy, and dressed in a light yellow coat reaching to his-
knees, with dark and dull iron or copper straps three fingers broad, about the
waist, over the navel, and the same on the shoulders ; his helmet is plain and of
copper, ha« a dagger by-his fide, and dark bufkins and sandals, with strings to
the calves of the legs. The person behind him has also an helmet, in the form of
a dragon’s head ; his body is covered with a beast’s skin, and he has a tauncheon in
his hand. He, who on the-left side, carries the copper vessel with money before
him, has a light grey cloth rolled about his middie, and coming down half way
the thighs. The table is eovered with sine red stuff, hanging down on each side.
The floor carpet is dark, and variegated like Turkey work.
The light of the piece proceeds from the left à little fronting, as if from afingle
window, whereby the middle group and steps receive the broadest light. The
soldier, with the rope before the steps, is more lighted on a fide. The statue,
standing in the shade receives a reflexed light from the floor. The commander of
the Philistines takes a little light on his shoulders. The young man laden with the
bags of money, is, with the tables next to him, in shade, but the other bearer
receives the light directly on his raised naked breast.
Second Table, or Picture.
After Samson’s hair was cut off, and he tied hand and foot, he awakes, and
finding himself thus wretchedly trapped by Delilak, arises full of wrath, striking
and pulhing: all away from him as well as he is able, but is at last overpowered
and seized.
Here, in his fury, he stands inithe midile of the giece, turned with his left to
the light, and straddling, hiis feft elbow rises, with the hand and arm down be-
hind his head ; his right hand comes forward, with the elbow pulled back by a
quite
rope, by one of the Philistines ; his right leg advances, and the left falls
back,








back, yielding to the weight of his heavy body, which bends backwards. Two
persons lie at his feet, either knocked or kicked down, and the third lies on the
right side against a balustrade with one hand on the floor, and catching hold of
the pedestal, with the other ; his head drooping, he spits abundance of blood.
On the left side of Samson, a littie forward, stands the commander of the Philistiner,
punching him in the breast with his left fist, and with the right, wherein he holds
a staffon high, threatning to beat him. Behind the commander stands a soldier,
. who having flung a rope about Samson’s neck, pulls forward the Naxareau heroe’s
almost mastered head, whose mouth is clofe, and checks are swelling. Behind
Samson, another stooping soldier is pulling a rope fastened to his right foot. The
aforesaid balustrade on the right side backwards, runs towards the point of fight,
and the door is in the middle of it, through which rufhi in three or four men,
shouting and armed with truncheons, staves, and other weapons, of whom the
foremost, with a staffor half pike, seems to strike with all his might at the reeling
Samson. Their fury is very great on this occasion.
A little to the left behind Samson, and close to the couch, Delilah is seen em-
bracing the statue of Venus, and looking back with astonishment ; she is some-
what high on the steps, which run crofs the piece. Just beyond her, the old wo-
man is either ffung down or falling, and with one leg a little up, shews her na-
kedness, by reason of her garment somewhat turned up; she has one hand on the
sloor, and the other coming forwards. In the corner forwards hangs a part of a
large curtain, which covers part of the table whereon lies the money. The two
vouths, mentioned in the former, come running in a fright, endeavouring to
hide themselves between the table and wall ; the one is already half behind it, and.
the other is looking back, with his head between his hands.
Somson’s drapery lies half on the steps, and the refidue is under his feet, together-
with some weapons, as, half pikes and headepieces of the slain. The commander
of the Philistines has a vestment reaching belbw the knees, and a loose drapery
about his arm; about his head is allight grey fillet, fastened behind with a gold
ribbon. The main light takes Samson and the parts about him. Delilab is in a
reflecting light and deep in the piece.
These two pictures were not inferior to the two former in pafflons : the ordon-
nance, light and colouring surprised me, and induced me to think I saw the very-
action and lise itself. I was persuaded, that if Iknew not that it was. Samson and.
Delilah, I must have guessedat by their makes, faces and motions. And, what
was most wonderful, the fact and drift could not only be naturally seen, but also.
its cause, and what the issue would be, whether good or bad. In the first pièce,.
I could easily perceive that Samson was to be betrayed ; and if I did not know it;
the circumstance oft his hair cut offs, money told;. and ropes at hand;. would make
me surmise it. Yet this could not Be done without bloodshed, as in the fecond
piece; wlicre he is seized and ropedlike an ox for the sacrifice;. who, if the first
blow fail, rouses, pushes down, and tramples under foot all that he meets:with,
till at length tired, he is mastered,, and thus led back. to the altar again. Just so
it appeared to me-










Truly, we see few fuch pieces so efficaciously expressed ; every thing, as, the
apartient, by-works and incidents were so proper, so needful to explain the
matter, that the omiffion of any of them would have made the ordonnance imper-
fect. What an effect has the statue of Venus in pointing out the lasciviousness of
this heathenisn woman 3 Does not the naughty old woman, with the key in her
hand, plainly shew that she is in her own house, not in that of Samson, or the
commander of the Philistines, Or of what use would the money on the table be,
af we saw not by the bearer, that it was not Samson’s9: For, he is asleep, and the
money now brought in : but if on such an occasion, the running of the bearers,
and the noise of the money be thought improper, as discovering the plot ; I say
there is no impropriety in it, fince it is posfible to run bare-footed over a marble
floor without any noise, and to set down bags of money without rattling. All
here is husfi, no body speaks, for every one knows his business..
In the second piece, Delilad makes to the statue for protection. Why does she
Yet, she can-
flee, and why in such fear, after Samson is bereft of his strength ,
not be easy, she is tossed between hope and fear, and her anxiety makes her catch.
hold of any thing she meets with; and as long as Samson is present, she retains her
trouble. The commander’s paffionate motion is, I think, very proper; for
the dead bodies lie about him, he would not have exposed himself to the danger of
approaching Samson, had he not been securely tied. Now rushing from his lurk-
ing place, he falls boldly on Samson, possibly not so much to shew his own valour,.
as to spirit the others ; for he fooks not at Samson, but at the soldiers. The old
woman’s lying tumbled down is not improper, as being feeble-legged and full of
fcar; and although she have noshare in'the action, yet it is not repugnant to the
story, if only for Delilah’s sake; and for the same reason she is flung into shade.
Her garment turned up, can be no great scandal to an ill woman.
Let us now confider both the pictures, but chiesly the signification of Samson’s
hair, and the love of Delilah.
We read briefly in Scripture, raany things touching the hair of Samson, of which-
he was very careful, because, whilst it grew, it became longer and thicker, where-
by he gained greater strength for breaking the ropes witn which he was at any
time bound ; but, being cut off, his strength forsook him, and his whole body.
was subject to weakness.
By the person of Samson the Nazarean, we understand, a man ehosen by heaven;-
and devoted to its service; for the mei: of that order took, as I have said, especial-
care of their hair; which gave them virtue, adorning the head, i. e. the under-
standing, which, the more it encreases, the more courageous we become against
assaults of our enemies. By enemies. endeavouring to bind us, we understands.
hûman inclinations, and the fire of concupiscence. When now, through frailty,
we are seduced by this Delilah, those corrupt affections, whereby the lust of steep-
overpowers-us, and we slumber in her lap, right reason becomes useless, and we
cease todo good. Thus we are shorn by the wiles of women ; that is, by means-
of voluptuousness we are deaf to the impulses of the spirit, and then of course lie
apen to our enemies, both to scorn and crush us;’for-worldly affairs are so affecting,
that






that they have no sooner got the mastery, but we find ourselves crossed, either
by covetousnefs, love, Ratrid, jealousy, or other disquiet : but returning m our-
selves, or awaking, we become sensible of our folly, and’ through contrition, gra-
dually recover our hair, and thereby our strength; and then, dying to sin, we at
once overcome both ourselves and our enemies.
The hair cnt off, also implies, the weakness of the faculties of the soul or spirit,
or even death itself.
Euripides testifies, that Alcestus could not die before Mercury came from heaven
to cut off his hair. Minos likewise could not overcome king Nijus, unless his fatal
hair were cut off by his daughter. And Dido, says Virgil, could not die before
Juno, who pitied her long agony and lingering death, sent lris to release the soul
from corporeal ties, by cutting off her white hair, and offering it to Pluto.
These two last hisforical pictures differed from the two preceding in this, that
they were not mixed with poetic figures, as Cupid, or Love ; Magæra, or Rage,
and such like, to help the expreffion of the paffions, or. meanings; fince it is cer-
tain, that real truth could not be discerned from fiction by a mixture of both.
And although the statue of Venus, in 'this matter of fact, seem to be of that nature,
yet it is nothing to the mean point, but ferves only to shew that the plaoe was
heathenifh, and where probably such figures were common among that people.
:
3
CHAP. X. Of the Pictures in the second Story, built after the
Doric Order.
AFTER viewing this apartment, which l could not enough admire, I ascend-
ed the second story into another of more elegant architecture, after the

Boric Order. This room was not so long, but à little higher than the former,
and I met'there with the following pictures.
The valiant Hercules, after having performed many wonderful exploits, not able
longer to resist the indignation of Juno, his step-mother, through smarting rage
burned himself, occasioned by the poisoned shirt of Nessus, which Deianira had
sent him, out of jealousy, that he loved lole, daughter of Euritus, king of Oecalia.
Jupiter much concerned at this, carried him’to heaven in a triumphant chariot,
and placed him among the stars, in the number of the gods.
This prospect was wild, woody, and mountainous. In the middle of the piece
a little to the right near the point of fight, was seen alarge pile of rough wood
lving cross-ways, not as chopped, but rent afunder, having roots and branches.
The upper wood was small, and the under very large, lying parallel with the piece.
Here the unhappy heroe, the scourge of monsters was lying extended over his
lion’s fkin, with his head to the right and feet to the left side turned somewhat
backward, and his breast leaning over. His face a little rifing, and bending
forwards,






forwards, was seen in profile from the right’side, discovering resignation, unattened
with pain. His left arm was quite raised, with the hand behind, under his head,
the other arm lay out a little forward on the wood, with the hand half shut and
the inside towards the body. His right knee was wholly drawn up, with the
foot inelining towards it ; the other leg was represented hanging off as if he would
lift himself somewhat higher, Philoctetes, before the wood a little to the right,
kneeling on his left knee, supported his bent body on his elbow and right knee.
He looked downwards, holding before his face a part of his garment, as if he
were weeping, and with a toech in his left hand setting fire to the wood. In the-
midctle of the piece, behind the pile, on the second ground, was seen a trumphal
chariot, finely adorned with carving and gilding, and children with garlands of
palm ; the foremost wheel like a star, appeared sideways, half behind the ground
and the horses turning to the right, almost fronting, got somewhat higher.
Mercury was seen entire tohis left foot, which was hidden behind the ground, on
which. foot; leaning back, he supported himself. He advanced with his right
leg forwards the burning pile, with his right hand behind him, wherewith he
drew in the rein, as if he were going to stop, looking back, he was accosting Ju-
piter, riding on the air, and pointed at Hercules with his left hand quite open, and
à little fore-shortened. Jupiter’s upper parts came forward with his legs fore-
shortened towards Mercury, pointing upwards with his right hand, and scepter,
cross his bedy, and in his left holding thethunder against his thigh. Behind the
chariot, above Hercules, to the right side, the ground rose up hilly. Behind the
horses were seen high pine trees and eypresses, and some broken stems, and behind
Mernezy were others somewhat lower and further. On the left side up to the horizon,
appeared the sea, and not far in it, a rock almost in the form of an affrighted man ;
which l judge to bethe unhappy servant Lychas, who-was flung into the sea by his
master’s fury. On the-before-mentioned rocky hilk stopd a smoaking altar, and
next it, aburning fire-pan and the glub of Herzules, In the pannel of the altar was.
carved an éagle with open wings,, and ithe thander in its bill, sirring on a
fostoon of oak leaves. In the front of the piece, on the left -side, lay a verv large
body of an old tree tore up by the roots.; and the hole in the ground, thereby
made, was still apparent ; the roots abounded with fibres, and the other end came
forwards. to the middie of the piece, where it went into the frame. Here and.
there lay some May branches, and stones throvn off their bafes. On the ground,
by Philoctetes, lay Hercules’s ivory bow and quiver, adorned with gold, and of a
fize bigger than ordinary; the strap being enriched with gold buckles. On this-
quiver was a small inlaid or chased figure representing Atrapos, the last of the fatal.
sisters, with her sciffors.
This piece was strongly lighted from the right side, a little fronting. The-
hill and altar, anc hind part of the chariot, were mostly in the shade of the
trees. The fore parts of the horses, and the upper parts of Mercury, half way
his thigh, were in the light; and the rest downwards, with part of the ground,
was in shade. Jupiter, placed very high, almost to the frame, received the light
behind his head, shoulder and arm, and the rest of his body was in shade against
the light sxy. The trees behind the horses were pretty dark.
Philoctetes.






Philoctetes, son of Paans was arrayed in a sattin coat of armour, of bright
straw-colour : The straps were gold embroidery on a greenisn blue ground. His.
upper-garment hanging behind him, and tucked up about the middle in the
girdle, between it and the hilt of his sword, was crimson, also embroidered with-
gold; as were likewise his bufkins; his hair was fair, and short-curled ; he had
little beard ; his helmet and half-pike lay by him; the helmet was seen a little.
inwardly, and elegantly wrought with gold and silver ; a large white feather
hung from it carelesly on the ground.
The naked body, on the pile of wood, appeared very beautiful; the breast,
somewhat heaving, received a strong light; the muscling of the stomach and ribs
was well expressed, but on the arms and legs, faintly; the toes of the right foot,
which had yet some motion, fhrunk inwardly ; his eyes were dying, and the balls
drawn towards the corners; the mouth, somewhat open, seemed either to send
forth sighs, or fetch breath, or utter, for the last time, some moving words,
which raised the utmost sorrow in Philoctetes, and melted him into tears, as I
thought. Mercury was almost naked, having only a small green filk scarf about
him, wherein stuck his Cauduceus.
The horses were winged, and the head of one
appeared, but that of the other was behind Mercury.
This piece was particularly remarkable for the death of the heroe; and did
not lil agree with what we have before in this work observed, touching the con-
dition of a man in a very hot summer. Questionlefs, the poison not only worked
is body outwardly, but inflamed and consumed his very intrails. For this rea-
son I also thought he must die: his breath was misty, and his mouth gaped af-
ter coolnefs; his eye-lids, stiff'and heavy through inward heat, he could hardly
keep open; his sight smothered by the steam, and its motion retarded by the
slackness of the optical nerves, drew towards the utmost corners. The sweat
broke out, and he shined with wetnefs, chiefly about the breast, over which
waved a thin damp, like the fumes of boiling water; which made his out-line
unite with the ground : in this part it was, that the unhappy heroe had the most
feeling ; and where the blood, leaviag the members and seeking for shelter, was
retiring to the heart ; his breast was swelled, and, as he fetched breath, heaved
and set ; his belly was fallen in, and the ribs were prominent ; his upper parts
to the navel were of a warm and fiery colour, yet fresh and beautiful, as was
also his face ; his lips were not as yet dead nor pale, but his hands and feet al-
most burned black ; his eye-brows appeared drawn somewhat upwards, as one
who, though sleepy, strives to keep awake; the arms and legs were bare, pale
and shrunk, as partaking of death; but the fingers, knuckles, knees and toes,
were violet, heightened with yellow ; about the ribs and belly were seen some
red and violet spots of the poison; and his linen, shoved underneath at the navel,
hung in rags, the major part whereof was under his body and thigh, and partly
stained with blood. Thus the illustrious heroe, a thunder to the wicked, lay in
Jupiter, very much moved, cast his eyes downwards fideways on the pi-
agony.
tiful body, and spake to Mercury, who looked up at the celestial ruler, with con-
cern, as if he were saying, ee Look father l he is expiring.; No people wêre
seen thereabouts, except those before mentioned; nor any satyrs or wood-gods.







It is certain, that if any have been there, Hercules frighted them away in his
rage. The sorrow of Philoctetes was, in my opinion, inexpressible; and the artist
therefore, with reason, had covered his face. But why Paan’s son should be with
Hercules without servants l could not apprehend ; but fancied it was because the
painter thought it unnecessary, this bosom-friend alone sufficiently explaining the
matter : a second reason might be, because the poet mentions nothing of it; and
lastly, because the matter clears itself so well, that any addition would alter it,
and, instead of an unexpected act, make it rather appear as a premeditated fune-
ral solemnity. Whence, we may well infer, that the pile was not prepared for
him, but that he himself made it on a sudden, as the poet relates.
This artful piece was remarkable for these three things naturally and plainly
expressed ; to wit, the fact itself ; what preceded, and what followed. The be-
ginning of the tragedy was, when, having received the poisoned shirt of Nessus
by Lychas, he offered it at the altar to Jupiter his father. The sequel of his rage ap-
peared by that unhappy wretch’s being cast into the sea, and metamorphosed in-
to a rock ;. after which he burned himself; and his succeeding triumph was shewn
by the chariot which-Jupiter sends him for his deification. Renascitur ex funere
Phaenix.
The conclusions to be made from the persons of Nessus, Deianira, and Lychas,
may be these.
We learn from the Centaur, how dangerous the gifts of enemies are ; the cause
of the great heroe’s death. In Deianria we discover her imprudent and indisereet
pafsion, and the effects of her jealousy, which made her the instrument of her
-husband’s death; and in Lychas we observe the miserable reward of his services,
and that the misfortunes of servants are sometimes by the great construed as to
render obedience and disobedience equally culpable.
Over the door, opposite to the former piece, was seen another in an octagon,
equal to the width ot the door; which l took at first to be a gap in the wall, be-
cause it was a little darkishi; but approaching, I found it thus.
Second Picture.
Amphitryo being with Alcmena in her bed-chamber, had, before he went to bed,
laid the two children, sphiclus and Hercules in his shield, under a pavillion; into
which Juno, full of spite and rage, cast two serpents, in order to devour the two
innocents, especially Hercules; who squeezed them to death, and flung them at
Amphitryo’ s feet.
Forwards, on the left side, one step high, were seen the two children lying in
the shield, encompassed with a balustrade running from the fore-part of the piece
towards the point of sight, and which took up two thirds of the piece, Amphitryo,
at the children’s cry, leaping out of bed with an undrawn sword in his hand,
came to see what was the matter; and, having one foot on the step, he met with
the young Hercules, looking at him with a smile, and grasping, with both hands,
one of the serpents, which he squeezed to death; the other lying already at his
feet. Amazed at this, Amphitryo started back; the other child, bawling out, lay,








half tumbled out of the shield, with a pillow and part of the cloaths on the floor.
Behind Hercules, and beyond the shield hung the Theban prince’s purple mantle
over two half-pikes, which stuck up. slanting from the wall, and were tied toge-
ther. Over them, a little backward, the baulked Juno was seen mounting up-
wards, encompassed with a dark cloud, with her scepter by her side, in her left
hand, and, with the other lifted up, seeming to threaten with her fist, and looked
down frowning at the children. Somewhat further, beyond the balustarde, in
the middle of the piece, rose four or five steps, fetched in by an hand-rail, reach¬
ing quite crofs the piece. Behind them, at the further ene, in the middle of the
piece, was a large and deep compass-niche or alcove, having a curtain drawn up
and fastened, on each side, with two rings ; herein stood the bed. The apartment
was eight feet high, and hung with tapestries; and over them, as far as l could
perceive, the wall was divided into pannels, wherein were some faint bass-reliefs,
representing warlike acts. On the left side of the alcove, in the corner, was a
round pedestal or half column, whereon stood a burning lamp. Alcmena, much
concerned, stood somewhat stooping on the steps, looking earnestly about, with a
small torch in her hand, which sne held up high; resting the other on the pedes-
tal of the hand-rail, and holding a part of her white garment, which buttoned
under her chin, and trailed behind; her hair was tied up in a white cloth. The
hind-works were seen, by the torch, in a dim light, except.the corner wherein the
lamp stood ; which, with the door, adorned with fine foliage, shewed somewhat
stronger. From Juno proceeded some light rays, darting on the children and there-
abouts. This light was not like that of a candle, but of the day or thunder : it
mostly fell on the under parts of the child in the shield; his upper parts and head,
with somewhat of the pillow, tumbled out, were in the shade; he turned in the shield
his upper parts one way, and his under ones, another; which were fore-shortened-
Amphitryo’s upper parts, almost to the middle, were in the shade of the clouds, re-
ceiving strong reflexions from the children and the floor. I stood pondering, how
Mlemena came by the lighted torch; but, on a narrow inspection, found a large gold-
eandlestick standing near her, by the other pedestal; and l wondered why Alceus’s.
son had not taken it, yet, on further consideration, concluded, that through hurry
and fear, he overlooked it, as usual on such occasions ; which Alcmena perceiving,
she probably jumped, out of bed and seized it. Such was this picture. Theie
three lights were finely and distinctly observed : the lamp, which was distant, gave
a white or pale light, but somewhat foggy. The flame of the torch was, almost
to the wick, covered by the clouds under Juno; which, as far as I could appre-
hend, was an artful slight of the master, in order to render the foremost light the
brighter and stronger; and to avoid the necessity of making the whole piece dark ;
which otherwise he must have done for the sake of naturalness.
Juno had a diadem, and a light blue garment, her head-attire was wild, and her
locks flying about like serpents.
The poets mention; that Hercules was represented by the ancients, as an example
of all virtues, as well of the body as the soul; squeezing serpents to death with
his hands, even in his cradle; by which they give us to understand, that a man,
sitted for heroism, ought, from his infancy, to shun, pleasures, and mortify carnal
affections.







NOW, thinking to go out of the apartments, to see what was further remark-
able, I, looking up higher perceived another picture against the covered cieling;
Cupola-wise; wherefore, stopying to see it, and examine whether it had any relation
to the pieces before-mentioned, I found it to be the deisication of the aforesaid
great heroe, welcomed by Jupiter, and the whole train of gods and goddesses.
Jupiter sat in the middle, high on his eagle. Hercules, crowned with laurels,
was seen below, directly under him, standing, with one hand by his side, and
having an olive-branch in the other; he stood fronting down to half-way the
thighs, in the fore-part of the chariot ; which was on clouds; the pole of it rose
up a little to the right side, according to the course of the horses, which Mercury was
guiding to the left side upwards, swaying again to the middle, and with the chariot
making a semi-circle ; so that the winged horses were seen mostly from underneath;
their breasts fronting, and heads towards the right. Mercury held the reins in with
his right hand, close to his mouth. The chariot was surrounded with many Cupids,
having garlands and branches. Mercuary looked towards the right at Jupiter, who,
with his scepter directed him to a circle of twelve glittering stars in the firmament,
which enlightened some small clouds in that quarter. The whole Celestial body
sat on waving clouds, exulting and clapping their hands. The sun shined bright.
I was surprised that none had their badge, of distinction, except Jupiter, riding
on his eagle, and holding the thunder, and Mercury with his Caduceus in his hand,
and wings on his feet: but on consideration, that the gods are well known to each
other, I directed my eye to Hercules, and observed, that he was without his club
and lion’s kkin; which induced me to think, they were burned with his body ;
neverthelefs, hisfrizzled hair and beard, and fine mein, convinced me, that it could
be no body but Hercules. In fine, I examined all the gods and goddesses, one
after another, and began to know them all, to the very least : Apollo, by his radiant
air and beautiful body; Diana, by her black hair and brown complexion ; Bacchus,
by his jolly cheeks and members : Asculapius, by his long tressed hair and beard ;
Venuts, by ber squab members and amorous look; Momus, by his foolish counte-
nance ; and so forth. Each had his propercolours: Venus’s garment was red, Diana’s,
blue, Bacchus’s purple, Ceres’s ftraw-colour, Monna’s green and yellow, &c. which
so distinguiffied them as to leave no room for doubt. But Juno and lris appeared
not in their company; because, I suppose, the former could not bear the affront
of seeing Hercules thus honoured. I examined further, into the ornaments of the
apargment, and perceived they were so orderly and well adapted to the subject as
to raise wonder. On both fides of the room ranged eight columns of Pisan
marble, cross-cut into bands pretty wide from one another; on each side cf the
door and in each corner, one, and between these, two others standing close together,
with their architrave, frize, and cornice, and thereon a parapet with pannels, from
which sprang the coving of the cieling, in the middle whereof was this last men-
tioned: piece in an oval compartment of oak-leaves and acrons. The metopes in
the frize were adorned with foliage of the same fort of leaves; and in the pannels
of the parapet were festoons, with a crown of laurel hanging at them. Between.
the two first and last columns appeared other festoons in oblong pannels; and un-
der each, a club and lion’s skin; those feftoons were composed of palm branches,
with








with their fruit. On both sides of the door, between it and the first column,
stood a palm-tree, whose branches reached up to the coving, projecting very
elegantly over the before-mentioned picture. Those palm-trees, with the frizal
ornaments, were bronzed; the architrave and cornice, of serpentine stone, and
the frize, like the columns, Pisan marble. On each side of the door, between
the two first columns, was a large bass-relief of plain light and yellow marble.
The one represented Hercules asleep, surrounded by the troop of pigmies: the
other shewed his awaking, and hiding them in his lion’s skin. From this first
proof of his valour, he afterwards got the name of x Hercules Primogenitus. On
the other side of the apartment, opposite to this last, Hercules was seen spinning
by Omphale ; and, in the other pannel on that side, his shooting Nessus. Round
the cieling-piece were twelve small circular pannels, joined together with wreaths
of palm-leaves ; these exhibited, in faint bass-relief of fret-work, the labours of
Hercules. Between them and the piece appeared some lions heads.
Before we proceed in our relation, let us shew what the heathens understood by
the deification of Hercules.
Hercules, the glory of valiant men, shews us, by his deification, that those who-
attempt that honour in their life-times, as Anthony with his Cleopatra did, or strive
to obtain it by intreating and cajoling the people, as most of the Persian kings
and Romulus did, mistake the right method ; whereas Hercules’s whole life was ta-
ken up in freeing the world from monsters and tyrants; and no divine honours
were paid him until after his death ; for eternity, which he obtained only by
death, teachs, that true virtue will not be flattered in this life; as Aleander prov-
ed to those who were beforehand for calling him a god, by shewing them the
blood which issued from his wounds, in the same manner as. from other mortals.
How powerful and virtuous soever a man may be, as long as he draws breath he
cannot call himself happy, as being no more exempted fxom the teeth of biting
envy, than Hercules was in his life-time. The heathens worshipped him as a god,
according to their superstition ; beliving also, that though alk souls are immortal,
yet those of valiant men, pursuing virtue, attain an higher pitch of honour, and
partake of the Deity : they even affign him, in heaven, Hebe, the goddess of youth,
for a confort, on account of his strength, which is found only in youth.
Thus, in after-times, the philosopher and poet Empedocles, (vainly, in immitation
of Hercules, who made his frind Philoctetes swear never to reveal the place where he
burnt himself, nor what was become of him, in order to induce the people to
think he was taken up into heaven) threw himself into mount Ama: but his iron
slippers being cast out with the fiery stones, discovered the case andthe truth-
But, to return to our relation.
In going out of the apartment, I saw on the pavement a sphara: mundi or ter-
restrial globe, curiously inlaid, divided on each side with compartments, and cut
with elegant bands of costly marble and jasper, which ran to the center : each
stone shewed. a monster running off from. the globe, and such as Hercules, in his.
life-time, had delivered the world from.








I could not satisfy myself with the fight of this work., But having at last seen all
things here, I, by a fide pair of stairs, landed on a paffage leading to another
apartment, of the lonic Order, nothing inferior to. the before-mentioned in rich-
ornaments and marble.
CH.AP. XI. Of the Pictures in the third Story, built after the
lonic Order.
Na time, as- Sémiramis was combing and binding up her hair, news was
brought to. her of the revolt of the Babylonians ; whereupon, with one of the
7
tresses hanging untied, she immediately marched against the rebels; and bound
not her hair untill she had regained the town, and reduced the people to their-
obedience.
This courageous princess arose from her chair, half coifed; swearing with her
right thumb held’up, and with her left hand pulling her side-locks towards her,
the comb was as yet sticking. On the table by her, which was- covered with a
costly carpet of thick gold embroidery, stood a large oval looking-glass, in al
gold frame chased with foliage, and on the top were two billing pigeons of un-
polished silver. On the table lay also some precious ornaments, as bracelets,
neck-laces, jewels, &c. and her diadem, in the shape of a pyramid, beset with
stones. Behind her chair stood a young damsel, holding a gold plate with some
cups, pots, and’little boxes of perfume. Behind this virgin appeared two others
in surprise and mutual embrace. On the left side was an old matron, with her
back fronting, holding an opened letter in her left hand. A little more to-
wards the middle, another virgin was pulling away, from the table into the cor-
ner forwards, a littie fountain elegantly wrought, and resting on four wheels. In-
the fore-part of the piece, on the right fide, a meffenger was kneeling before the
queen quite dejected. At the furtber end of the apartment, in the middle, was a
gate-like opening, and on each side of it, a term, of white marble, whereon hung
shewed an entrance into another magnificent apartment adorned with bass-refee
and other imagery : at the further end of it was seen a large shallow niche, and
under it a broad pedestal or elegant seat, on the side of which sat the figure of a
woman, with the teet towards thelight, holding in her lap aglobe, whereon the right
hand, with a scepter in it, refted. Its head was adorned with a tripple mural crown.
Over it, in the niche, stood,a bass-relief-like, agrave man, in a majestic dress, rest-
ing his right hand on a truncheon, and having a torch in his left. He was crowned
with flowers, and about his neck hung a gold chain. This figure was golden, and
the ground of the niche, azure blue. The columns where of white, and the build-
ing of Egyptian marble, and the ornaments gold. Behind the matron, at the end of
the first apartment, a young damsel, by the queen’s order (which the matron signi-
fied to her) was climbed up, reaching with one hand as high as sne could, to take
down






down some arms off one of the terms’; which the matron, with the bent fore-finger
of her right hand, beckonedto her, to bring forwards. Where-upon the damsel
looking back as fhe was untyingthe weapons.
The queen stood by the table, with her upper parts turaed a little to the left;
her breast was half open, and put out ; her head, almost upright, inclining some-
what towards the left moulder; her eyes staring; hef mouth, a sittlen open, as if
she were speaking: she was drest in white sattin, over a dark blue bodice or cuirafs,
richly embroidered with gold, vand beset with precious stônes; the sleeves were
very wide, but turned up, and fastened with a gold buckle or hook ; her gown,
buttoned above the knee, and gathered up round about ; she was buskined half-
way the legs : her robe, lying on the chair, was of Tyrian purple, embroidered
with gold, and lined with ermine. The young damsel, who was busy in attiring
the head of the princess, was drest in violet. The virgin behind the chair, pushied
somewhat by the queen’s starting up, stept back and overthrew a cup on the plate,
which put her out of countenance : she was drest rose-colour; and the two, be-
hind her, in dark blue, a little greenisn. The matron had a long cloth garment
of dark fillemot, gold-bordered ; her under garment, as well as l could perceive
by the sleeve, was dark violet, and her head elegantly wound with sillets of many
colours, the end whereof hung down her back. The virgin, who took down the
weapons, had a pale apple blossom-coloured garment. The messenger was seen
sideways, a little hindwardly, in a small gold-fringed mantie, dark gray or blackisn,
hanging halfway down his back ; his under-coat was light grey, and reached be-
low the knees; his buskins were of beaft’s fkin; he had a dagger by his side, or
stuck in his girdle, with à small staff in his. hand; his helmet, having a dragon’s
head, and two wings on top like thole of a bat, lay by him; his brown kkin shone
with sweat, as did his hair, which was not long, yet tied behind.
The apartment received its-light from the right side, through à large compass-
headed window, which fell strongly on the queen, and about her, a little forward,
she caused a ground-shade on the corner of the table; by which the matron’s un-
der parts were well set off. The messenger was mostly in shade, as being more
forward than the window. The hangings, between the window and gateway, were
half in shade; which set the princeis and the attendance behind her strongly off.
In one of those hangings (which were very old, and of a dark purple colour) was
wrought, in costly needle-work, the flood and Noah’s ark; and in the other, the
confusion of Babel, and the marching off and division of the people; and above,
about the sweep of the gate, as round the edges of a medal, were Syriac characters
or letters. On the right side, over the hangings, the apartment appeared lighter,
by means of two circular windows running towards the point of sight. The ciel-
ing was covered. The floor inlaid with large marbles of various colours. About
the table, and on the foremost group, lay a large white round stone, which gently
united with the other light; yet without attracting the eye.
Forward, on the right side, behind the messenger, some steps went down to a
door below. Through the window appeared the off-scape, or part of a palm-tree.
I forgot to say, tnat the weapons hanging on the terms consisted of quivers,
bows and swords. In the bason of the golden fountain ran a spqut of water, up-
on a cloth or two, and à spunge lying in it.







Over-against this piece, on the opposite wall, was the sequel of tlie preced-
ing, in a
Second Picture.
Here Semiramis was seen setting out from her court, with an extraordinary majesty
and courage. she descended tne steps very airily. A martial fire seemed to in-
flame her heart ; which gave a glow to her cheeks; her eyes sparkled like two
stars. If she had not an helmet, I should, by her dress and accoutremens, have
taken her for a Diana going a hunting. Everything was in readiness for her march,
even to her robe; which she refused to put on contented only with a bow and
arrows and her authority. The waiting woman ran up and down stairs, one bring-
ing this, another that; one of the chief put the royal helmet on her head; a foot-
stool was set for her, below on the stairs, whilst the other was girding the sword
about her. The curvetting horse, inured to war, stood ready at the stair-foot.
The trumpets sounded, and the people, full of desire, crowded about. The pas-
sage was cleared. The horse, divided into troops, were drawn up in the inner-
court. The Messenger ran down the further steps; and the matron above, in the
gateway, was gaping and staring at the preparations. The sky was clear, and:
seemed to favour the princess’s enterprize.
Having, through hurry, but transiently viewed these things, I could not possibly
well remember every circumstance, so as to give a true description of that excellent-
piece ;. wherefore, attentively placing myself before it, my observations were,
as follows.
On the left side was seen a magnificent portico, with four lonit columns sup-
porting their ornaments ; and on each side, a balustrade and plinth, runnig down
five or six steps, to a large pedestal, whereon lay lioneffes, capped and covered,.
whose bodies were full of- Syriac characters. The gate was circular-headed; and-
over it a key-stone which supported the cornice, and wherein was a bronzed lion’s
head. Over each column, in the frize, were some forts of heads; and between
them, a faint carved quiver and lighted torch acrofs. On each fide, in the wings.
of the portico, was a niche, the bottoms whereof were even with the sill of the
door, and running towards the point of sight. At the extremities, of those wings,
were two other columns, standing against a wall, which ran, on a low ground, to
the middle of the piece. This wall was divided by flat fascias, in the nature of
pilasters; and, between them, were circular openings, through which was seen the
inner-court, and above the wall, its fide, running, deep in the piece, towards the
point of sight. At the end of the wall was such another, parallel with the fore-
most, which bounded the inner-court; and, further behind, some palm and other
trees rose above it. On the fore-ground, on the right side, the ground was rug-
ged up to the landing place of the steps, descending into the fore-court; in the
middle of which stood a large fountain, of white marble, resting on a basis of four
or eight arches, which were supported by square, smooth and high pillars, of the
Doric. or rustick Order, divided by rusticated or rock-like blocks; over this work
arose, instead of an entablature, a large plinth, three feet high, of white marble,
like the figures. On the top, in the middle, rifing three or four steps, stood a
large terestrial globe, supported by four sphinxes; on which globe sat a woman, with
her






her fore-parts towards the court, holding high, in the right hand, a sun, and
downwards, in her left, a moon. On her helmet was an eagle with spread wings,
and on her breast-ornaments a lion’s head Her dress was like that of an heorine.
On the lowest steps, next the plinth, sat the four parts of the world, fettered against
some trophies. Below, between the pillars, were copper-bronzed basons, which
received some spouts of water from within, out of a rock. This huge pile stood
in the middle of the piece, against the point of fight, half behind the wall. The
fore-court was rough; and at the further end had steps ascending as aforesaid.
Thus wasthe plan of this picture, and the disposition of all the fixed work; I
shall now, to the best of my sxill, decribe the rest.
A little to the left of the point of sight, the courageous queen was descending
the steps, with her left leg forwards, and her body bending somewhat back,
poising on the right leg on a step higher. She swayed her upper-parts to the left,
with the breast fronting; somewhat lifting up her left arm, which was guarded
with a small shield; at the same time, a stooping virgin girt her scimyter. Her
right hand, in which she hefd a bow, with the arm down-wards; and a quiver
full of arrows appeared above her left shoulder : a crowned helmet, ornamented
with a large white feather, was set on her head by another, and a third, with the
royal robe, (which the princefs thought needless in this march) was going up stairs
again, with her eyes fixed on the queen : this virgin’s right side was a little front-
ing; and she held the robe high in her left hand, that it might not drag, and, with
the right, kept the rest close to her body; her dark head-attire was strongly set off
against the white fur, or lining of the robe; and her locks, through her swifth
motion, were flyig behind, and her gown ruffing between her legs : she was girt
just under the breast, and had white sandals : the gown was open on the fide,
discovering the bare leg and half the thigh: her garment was rose-colour. The
matron, near the gate-way, stood stooping forward, and wondering, with her right
hand on thebalustrade, and looking down. Next the first step, before the queen,
under the point of sight, stood a stooping damsel, setting a small ivory foot-stool,
covered with purple velvet, for the queen to mount her horse by ; she held it with
her right hand, and with the other was tucking up her garment behind, seeming
fearful of the horse. A little from thence came, from the right side of the piece a
voung man, looking at the damsel, and holding, with his right hand, a fine horse
by the bridle ; he was seen from behind; his left leg advanced, and the right drew
quite back, just touching the ground with his great toe ; his breast projected quite
over his poise, as if he were still walking striking the horse’s belly with his left
hand to make him turn about. The horse’s breast was fronting, and his right
side somewhat fore-shortened ; his head in profile; the foremost leg prancing, and
the right drawing in, as if he went backwards ; his open nostrils were white ; as
were also the breast and legs ; the rest being dark or brown : the bridle and other
things were gold beset with stones, having a rich caparison, set off with gold plates ;
the housing was purple, richly embroidered with gold, powdered with pearls and
other costlinesses, and almost trailing the ground, with sine tassels flying up at the
horse’s motion : the mane was drest into tresses; and the tail buttoned up. A ty-
ger’s skin covered the breast. The young man had long light hair, tied behind;
his






his Coat, girt in the midctle, was light -yellowi reflecting green ; being strongly
set off. against the: purple housing; his right shoulder, with half his back, was seen
bare ; and his carnation, beautiful and fresh; his sandals were white. The horse
gave a ground-shade over the damsel with the foot-stool, and a little beyond her.
Quite on the right side, somewhat further, stood two trumpts, turned towards
the inner court, girt with beasts skins, and sounding, their trumpets, almost
like those of the Romans, were. winding like serpents, with dragons heads
at the ends of them. On the further side of the queen, the messenger appeared
running. down the steps, quite over his poise; pointing, with his right hand a lit-
tle fore-shortened, forwards at the inner court, with his face towards the queen: by
the little flying mantle behind him, might be perceived the swiftnefs of his mo-
tion ; his action, like that of a flying Mercury, being free and extensive: he flung
out his left leg, and his right foot was quite behind, and off the ground. The
people, on the second ground, below stairs to the pedestal of the first balustrade,
were seen between his legs : these people, as well men, as women and children,
stood, some wringing their hands, others lifting them up high, some embracing,
others clapping their hands; the former for fear, the latter for joy : among the
rest was seen a distressed woman, hanging her head sideways, with her arms down,
and hands folded: by her stood a grave man, talking to her almost mouth to
mouth, with his right hand pointing up to heaven, and with his left, giving her
a friendly look, he pulled her by the sleeve, as if he would have her take heart.
Some children were lying on, and crawling up the steps. In the fore-court some
troops of horse were seen putting themselves into order, and others mounting
their horses. On the further side of the place, other people were coming running
down the steps. The off-scape behind them, on the right side, was hilly. Over
the aforefaid steps, at a distance, arose a large pyramid, and some palm-trees, ap-
pearing darkissi against the clear fky. The fore-court was light, and the inner
court itself, on the left side, of white marble. The wall, on the further side of
the steps, was, together with the people, and beyond’the- lionesses, shaded by a
cloud; which strongly set off the foremost group, whereon the main light fell.
The trumpets, on the same side, with a part of the balustrade on which thgy
leaned, were in shade. Forwards,-in the corner, was seen part of an open gate,
and its side-wall running up high, just beyond the trumpets; who thereby werc
in'the snade, receiving here and there, from the opening, a little light on their
under-parts and legs. The gate was low, because the ground run off sloping
from the steps; the ground, with the hind-part of the horse being shaded by it.
The horse and young man received small but very strong lights and shades. The
trumpets and gate were strongly reflected from the left side. The people on the
second ground, against the balustrade, were mostly lighted from on high, by the
blue of the sky, and could have no reflexion, because they stood parallel, along
the stairs. Behind the wall, with round openings against the angle of the wings
of the portico, arose the top or leafing of a large palm-tree; which broke the
length of the said wall; at the same time caufing the extremities of the wings to
unite agreeably with the inner-court. The portico, fronting the light, was, with
The
the balpstrades, tof Pisax. and Agyplian. marble, witht white ornaments.
lionesses on the pedestals were of serpentine. The upper steps were of white








marble with eyes. The large and spacious landing, at the foot of the steps, was
of free-stone; and the ground, on the right side, somewhat ruffet, mixt with
earth.
The matron had, as in the former piece, a dark sillemot upper-garment, over
a violet one; and her head was elegantly wound. The young virgins were also as;
before. She, who girt the princess with the sword, had an apple-blossom-coloured
garment; her coat being tucked up behind; her head-attire was light against
shade, was putting on the queen’s helmet. The young damsel below shaded by
the horse, was likewise drest in blue. The virgin, with. the royal robe, stood
close to the foremost balustrade, almost up the stairs, behind the lionesses, which
were strongly set off against her light garment. I had almost forgot a soldier
standing in the gate, near the trumpets, with a club plated with iron on his
shoulder; he had a light grey linnen coat reaching below his knees, with stock-
ings on his legs, and on his head a copper helmet, adorned with two beast’s
horns; about his neck was fastened a brownisn red beast’s skin, with the paws to
it, and, by his side, a dagger. This man was entirely in the light of the gate.
After a thorough view of this picture, I began to consider, wherein its good-
ness lay, which was what I chiefly wanted ; wherefore, taking my pocket-book,
I set down in it the general heads in the following manner.
First, The dispofition of the irregular objects against each other, whether high
or low, standing or lying.
Secondly, The disposition of the grounds behind each other.
Thirdly, The placing of the lights.
Fourthly, The motion of the moving objects.
Fifthly, The proper by-works, climate, and customs.
Sixthly, The conditions or characters of the persons, with the dresses and
Syrian equipage.
Seventhly, The particular postures and paffions.
Lastly, The harmony of the colours.
Being much rejoiced and inflamed with new ardour for further-inquiries, I saw,
opposite to the aforesaid two pictures, on each side of the door, the following
bass-reliefs in white marble.
In that on the right fide Semiramis was standing on the fore-ground, and by
her an architect, fhewing her, on a board, the plan of a town-wall. On the
left side were workmen, busy in carving, hewing, cuting, and sawing stones :
and on the second ground, the said wall appeared faintly just above ground, and
next it was the town.
In the otherpiece the queen was seen on horseback, with a quiver behind her,
and aiming at a lion, who, rearing up, approached her, with an arrow through
his body. In the off-scape, the town-wall appeared as finished, and here and there
some palm-trees- The figures were small life, and finely wrought.
Between those bass-reliefs stood a square pedestal in a niche, and on it the statue
of Semiramis, with a dead lion under her feet. She was drest in the Assyriau man-
ner, as an Amazan, with a bow in her hand, and a quiver behind her; and on her
head










head a crowned helmet, on the top whereof lay a little dragon, whose neck curled
down the fore-part of it.
The pedestal was, porphiry, and the figure massy gold.
The niche, like the building, was intirely serpentine, and the pillars and pilasters
of Agpytian marble.
Oyer the aiche was an oblong azure-blue table or fascia, and thereon a pile of
burning wood, of white marble, out of the smoke whereof ascended a pigeon.
Over each column was a modillon of olive-leaves, which supported the archi¬
trave, and in the frize were some arms, not much rising. All these ornaments
were of gold.
In the middle of the arch-work arose a very large cupola, and therein was a
celestial sphere, of blue chrystal, with the signs and circles of gold. The half
of this wonderful machine took up the cupola, shewing itself in such a manner a3
if the sun shone on it, and enlightening the whole apartment, for which reason,
I did not before take notice, that the room had no windows. On each side of
In one was re-
the sphere were two tables of fret-work, and each had a figure.
presented Srengih, like an heroine, holding an oaken-branch, and having à griffin
on the shield; and in the other was also an heroine, signifying political government,
leading a bridled lion with the left hand, and holding a staff in the right. By
which figures and the sphere are understood the heavenly insluences, as philosophers
intimate.
1
The floor was, like that in the under apartment, inlaid with a terrestrial globe,
juist under the cupolâ; where the light, falling directly upon it, made it rise, and
Over the door, in a round copartment of palm keaves, I saw carved, in white
marble, and old sea-god, whom 1 judged to be father Ocean, leaning on a large
sea-vase, shedding abundanée of water, running crofs through the piece; out of
which arose, in-the middle a large winged lion. On the other side of the sea-god,
appeared a smnall hill, and thereon a littie palm-stem. This table was like a me-
dal of one deptb. The sense alluded to the first rise ofthe Assyrian monarchy, re-
presented by the winged lion according to the prophet Dantel.



CHAP. XII. Of the Pictures in ths Fuunth story, built after the Roman




Order.



WHEN Horatius had gajned the victory over the ffiree Caratii, and was

 going with his arms tosthel Capitol, he was met by his sister, who, espy-
ing those qf her bridegrobt, called her brother a murtherer : at which
enraged,, he drew hia sword and stabbed her, thereby staining the victory with
his; oun blood. Thaipeople- ijudging this to be a cruelty, voted, that he had
therefore rendered hiself uaworthy iof the victory, and that he ought to be put


















This sorrowful triumph happened before the Capitol at Rome, as when in its
ancient state. Forward is seen a large plain; encompafsed with walls, where lay
two large lionesses of porphiry, which, it is probable, the artist introduced, in
they have been of so long standing, yet we may easily admit it. On the right
side was represented the proud capitol of marble, and costly architecture after
the Roman Order, ascended by à spacious flight of steps. On the top was this in-
scription in gold letters, SENATUS POPULUSQUE ROMANUS, i. e. the
Senate and People of Rome. Here, they were mounting the steps with arms on
pikes. Horatius followed, sheathing his fword. Behind him, his unhappy sister
dropped down backwards, the people from all corners, flocked together, mut-
tering and cursing his cruelty;:but he, regardless of it, boldly went forward.
Before the steps, about three or four pacés length, the ground was paved with
large grey stones; the residue being rigged or uneven : the foremost weapon¬
bearer, entering the gate, held his trophy somewhat stooping within it: he was
seen from behind, having, almost the same action-as the gladiator; his left arm
extended, and his right leg on the threshold. The second, two or three steps
down, held his weapon up against his body, looking back at the- third, who fol¬
lowed close, and was speaking to him. This poised on his left leg, having his
right very much bent, and the toes of it on a step higher; his upper parts swayed
against his right breast, and the bottom of it with his right hand. The third
carried the trophy on his fhoulder almost uprights his breast projecting, and his
back swaying a little forwards, with his elbow standing out, settingthis right foot
on the steps; the left being quite behind, and off the ground, as walking on, and
the other before him, as a little stooping; those three men were called Velites, or
light-armed, and drest in linen, girt about the middle, with daggers by their
sides and plain helmets on their heads; as we see in the prints of Trajan’s column,
and other remains of antiquity. Three or four steps from thence, just in-the
middle of the piece, Horatius advanced in full armour, holding an oliver-branch
befide his scabbard in his left hand, and on. thie same arin (which, with the elbow;
was putting out, and a little fore-shortened)a small shield, whereon was represent-
ed a lion. His Breast was fronting, and the right hand lifted up and sheathing
his sword. His right leg was put forth, somewhat bent, and the other drawn far
his face fronting, he looked down on the iscabbards havifig on his head an helmet
crowned with laurel and oak-leaves; with a faather behind, which by the turn
of his head and the swiftnefs of his walk, slew to and fro.  A mantle, fastened on
his right shoulder, and tucked under his chin, hung a little over his left should-
er ; one flappet of it flew behind, and the other forwards, flinging over his left
leg. The straps under his coat of armour and on the arms were short and broad,
and rounding at bottoms. His buskins came half-way up the legs.








from him forwards was seen the expiring virgin falling back, with her feet ex-
tended towards him, and arms spread wide, the right lifted up and the left sink-
ing, her breast turned to the light, her right hip swelled, her thigh was at full
length and the leg a little fore-shortened; the left leg hid under the right: her
face also foreshortened, leaned towards the left shoulder, which, with a little of
the breast was naked ; her breast garment girt under the breast, was flving up-
wards, her upper garment sinking, slung over her right leg and a flappet of it hung
over her left arm; her light tresses, by her tumble, flew upwards. Beneath her,
a little more to the left side, was an aged woman supporting the noble virgin, and
shrieking out beholding the murderer ; she, with her breast downwards, and left
hand on the ground, and right hand lifted up, was staying with her body, the
back of the dropping Roman virgin : her head was wound with cloths and fillets.
Just behind her appeared the half of a pedestal, whereon lay one of the aforesaid
lionesses, and somewhat further behind the fellow of it, running towards the point
of sight. Two soldiers followed Horatius, who, in dissatisfaction, seemed to
turn back. Not far behind the conqueror were some spectators highly discontent-
ed ; some were pointing at him, some menacing, ochers disdainfully turning their
backs upon him, &c. It looked as if we heard them grumble. On the fore-
ground on the right side, an aged man, with one shoulder bare, came hastily run-
ning to see what was the matter; he had on a short coat with an herdsman’s cap on
his head, and a flute and scrip at his side ; his under parts were, with part of the
fore ground in shade, and his back fronted the light. A dog ran before, looking
back at him, according to the custom of those creatures. Beyond the capitol,
part of a wall with its architrave and a large compass-headed gateway, ran to-
wards the point of sight. This wall extended from thence crofs through the piece
by the point of sight, to the left fide, and was divided by rusticated Doric pilasters,
into squares, wherein were small niches. Out of this gate just below the wall,
some cattle as oxen, cows, goats and sheep were coming, with a shepherd, who at
the noise, was looking back. This shepherd and cattle coming in at the gate,
made me believe he came from the market, because it was behind the capitol.
Over the wall appeared several fine palace-like buildings, as also a column,
whereon was placed a she wolf, with the two children Romules and Remus. Above
the angle of this wall on the right side, in the off-scape, was seen, as well as l could
guefs, the rock Tarpeia, rising up very high; but neither Pantheon, Monte Cavallo,
Vatican or Colosseum, as not being as yet known : no ruins or broken buildings ap-
peared here, but all beautiful and whole, except some little houses; since the
town had not been an hundred years standing, nor before ruined. On the left
fide forward in the corner, on a rising ground, stood a woman by the trough of a
fountain, astonisned and crying out, who seemed as if she were going away, ; lift-
ing up one hand on high, and holding out the other to a young girl, who came
running in confusion. A child, held by another girl sitting on the side of the,
trough, was looking down on the ground on an overturned pot of milk. This
fountain stood against a large pyramid, which run towards the point of sight.
Several ordinary dressed people, men, women, and children, came running in
groups three or four together from behind the pyramid ; others were returning






from thence. The young girl, who came running in confuston, had a fhort coat,
and was barefooted and her hair very meanly tied behind. These people and
objects with the pyramid, filled up almost a fourth part of the piece. A row of
low houses, like an hamlet, ran by the pyramid towards the point of sight, and
above theni arose some pines, cypresses and other trees.
This piece was lighted from the right side, yet a little fronting. The capitol
gave a large ground shade over the steps beyond the two arms-bearers, and con-
tinued beyond Horatius, over two or three men, who stood behind him, against
whom he was strongly set off. The side walls, with the gate, reached half the
height of the building, the same receiving strong reflexions from the ground, and
having ground shades which were not too sharp. The pyramid, with the women
and children, was kept somewhat darkisn, by reason of a cloud, except the top of
the pyramid, which received a clear light. The sky was full of clouds, especially
in the middle, and on the left side of the point of sight, behind the houses.
The Romans in those days, except people of the first rank, wore little or no va-
riety in the colours of their cloaths; they were mostly white, or else light grey
woollen. For this reason, as l conjecture, the designer of thefe pictures had made
the principal persons to excel, for I perceived that the people were mostly in grey
or white; some a little russet, others inclining to green. Few among them, ex-
oept aged people, had long gowns or garments. Horatius’s coat of armour fhewed
golden, the straps under it, and on the arms. were elegantly embroidered on a
fillemot ground ; his mantle was yellowish white, with violet reflexion. The
scabbard of his sword was dark blue, finely wrought, the hilt represented an eagle’s
head: his bufkins tied with vhite strings, but quite fouled, as l judged, by
sand and dust; were purple. His sister’s upper garment was light blue, her breast
garment light yellow, with. violet reflexion, almost like that of her brother.
u
The
aged woman beneath. her was swarthy skinned; her garment greenifh blue and
plain. The lionesses were dark porphiry, and the pyramid of a rocky stone.
Having sufficiently viewed this picture, and exactly learnt all the circumstances
of it, I took infinite delight in seeing how naturally the occurrence was expressed,
and that nothing was supersluoussy intreduced, though the story does not
make mention of all the persons who were brought into this representation.
I
thought, it is truly of great moment that the principal parts of a story be well ex-
pressed; and herein a good master has work enough to give each person his due
paffion, to the end the matter must speak for itself: but it becomes still more ex-
cellent by the addition of all other necessary circumstances (though not to be found
in the historiant after such a manner that both appear natural.
On the right side of this piece, 1 saw a carved bafs relief in white marble, ex-
hibiting an emblem over the foregoing. This bass relief appeared in a niche run-
ning towards the point of fight. On some high steps, Roma was on her right knee,
and lifted up by Valour. Her breast was fronting, and her head turned a little
backwards towards the left shoulder, her right ari hung down, just touching the
steps with the tips of the fingers; her left elbow stood out towards the left side,
in the hand whereof she held an hanging slappet of her garment. The left foot,
far srom the fteps, rested on the toes, seeming, by the rise of the hip, and- the





knee keeping down against the steps to pufh her up. Valour was represented tur-
ning its upper parts fideways towards Roma, supporting her elbow with its right
hand, the arm whereof being faint in the ground. Its head was in profile and,
the left arm guarded with a shield, a little drawn back. It stood somewhat like
the known statue of Apollo, supported on its right leg, the left faintly uniting with
the ground. A little further, Albania was on her knees, quite bowing her body ;
she was decked as an heroine, with an helmet in the form of a town-wall, on her
head, and laid with the left hand a staff down on the ground, holding the other af
her breast; her left knee was upwards, with the foot drawn in, and she looked
down with a dejected countenance. Behind her stood Fate, yoking her shoulders,
and she at the same time pointed backwards with the-right hand at some trophies
which hung on pikes, and united faintly with the ground. This goddess of Fate
was dressed like an old matron; in her girdle stuck a pair of scifssors ; her under
parts were seen sideways, and the upper from behind, with her eyes fixed on Roma-
Under the aforesaid trophies the horned Tiber god lay with his left arm resting on
a large vafe, and holding in his right hand an oar behind his right side; he lay
on his left side, with the breast turned against the light; the left leg was stretched
out, yet faintly rising; the right hip upwards, and the thigh seen only to the
knee, rested on the other leg, the residue united with the ground. Behind his.
back the she wolf and parts of the two children were seen. Above him appeared
some columns, as of a portico, running towards the point of sight, which, as on
the other side, were half lost in the ground. Victory flying between Roma and Va-
lour, held in her right hand a crown of laurel over the head of the former, and
with the left-putting into her hand a scepter topped with a little globe; her gar-
ment was flying behind her, and her legs quite extended without any fore-shorten-
ing, faintly united with the ground, In the shield of Valour, was represented the
combat of Horatius with the Ceratii, and on her helmet, crowned with oak leaves,
was a lion’s head, and the same on her buskins. This work was inclosed between
two young palm trees not much leaved.
The triumph, on account of the mournful accident, so much affected me, that
I remained in suspence, not knowing, for fear of a miserable issue, whether I
might turn to the following piece: nevertheless, considering the bravery of Ho-
rattus’s exploit, whereon depended the power of Rome, I took heart, in hopes of
his preservation, which I found agreeable to the writer’s relation.
a
Horatius then was secured for the murder of his sister, and, according to law,
fentenced to be put to death : yet, in consideration of his heroic action pardoned,
on condition that his father paid, as a fine, a certain sum of money into the pub-

lic treafury. The picture, as 1 remember, was thus
Second Picture.
At the capitol, Justice, or the Roman law, sat in a raised chair, with the scales in-
her left, and a pole-ax in her right hand. In one scale lay a sword, and in the
other a crown of laurel with a palm branch.; this latter far over balancing the
other scale, as a token that the law is mitigated by mercy. The criminal stood
very







very dejected before her; with his hands ironed behind him. On her left fide,
the father on his knees, was offering a vessel of money at her feet :: on her right
stooil Mercy with-holding the hand wherein was the pole-ax, and with the other
pointing at a picture held by some children, representing the decayed Roman do-
minion restored by the valour of Horatias. Further were seen the arms of the
three slain brethren, planted there by himself round the statue of Roma, whereon
Justice had fixed her eyes. Another child crowned with laurel, was loosing the
fetters of the accused with one hand, and putting on his helmet, or setting up the
cap of liberty with the other. On each side of the throne was a bafs relief, and
over them two niches : in that on the right side was represented Numa Pompilius,
and in that on the left, Lycurgas, two of the most ancient legislators. The bafs
relief under Numa, exhibited the example of Charondas, who, to enforce his law,
stabbed himself in full senate, for having acted contrary to it: and under Lycurgus,
that of Seleucus, when, for his son’s sake, who by law had forfeited his eyes, he
caused one of his own to be put out. So strict were the ancient Romans in support
of their laws. Over the throne hung two tables, containing the Roman laws,
written in Greek letters of gold.
This unexpected event much rejoiced me; wherefore, full of desire, I went to
a third picture, in order to observe on what basis so great a work was built, and
found it as follows.
Jullus Hostilius, chosen by the Roman people for their third king, on account of
his great ability and merit, invaded the Alban territory, though a stout people, and
bearing much sway in ltaly. These, weakened by many battles at last agreed.
with the Romans toend the dispute by a combat between three brothers on each
side : those of the Romans were named Horatii, and of the Albans, Curatii. The
fight was glorious, yet doubtful, but at last fortunate for the Romans, for one of
the Horat, after having lost his two brothers, mistrusting his strength against
three such brave enemies, added policy to his courage, and by an artful sleight,
slew the three Curatii one after another, and thus got the victory.
Third Picture.
Here appeared the place of combat fenced in. On the right side was seen the
general of the Roman forces, and on the other, at a distance, he of the Albans,
both sitting somewhat high, with their bages of distinction. In the middle of
the piece, Horatius was represented turning tail to the last of the Curatii; but, re-
turning, he run his pursuer through the breast ; whereupon he fell backwards.
The second, a little from thence, was on his knees, with his face to the ground,
and all bloody, bearing up a little on his elbow : he lay about the middle of the
fence, against a post, whereon stood the figure of Fate, or Fortune in copper.
Just beyond this post lay the third stretched out on his back ’: and at the end of
the pailing were seen the two dead Horatii. Over the valiant heroe, Victory
shewed herself, with the left hand crowning him with laurel, and with the right,
holding





holding out a cap and staff to the chief of the Romans, who thereupon joyfully
came down from his seat, with the acclamations and clappings of the people.
Opposite, stood the chief of the contrary party astonished, and turning his back,
in order to go away : the people withdrew in tumult at the sound of the Romqu
trumpets, leaving the field-badges in the place. On the right side, behind the
Romans, appeared part of the town-wall, and on the other behind the Albans, up to
the wall, the field full of tents on a low ground. Over the Roman arbiter, or
umpire, was seen Romulus and Romus, cut in a large stone. The field-badge of
the Albans was a dragon or harpy. In the off-scape appeared the Tiber, and the
Alps always covered with snow.
Thus was the plan of this artful piece, which l thought no less wonderful
than the others in force and disposition, as well as naturalness. Every thing was
exactly observed, the paffions and motions so well expressed, the place so piainly
apparent, the quality of the by-works so proper, and the lights, shades, colours,

&c. so advantageoussy distributed, that l could scarce believe it a picture.
could not but admire the three remarkable divisions of this story : as first, the
beginning, happening without the town; secondly, the sequel, seen within the
town; and lastly, the end of the story, or, what was tranlacted in the capitol,
without any thing of moment intervening, from whence a painter could make
a picture. I speak, with respect to the different matter which opportunely offers
to the thoughts and execution of a, judicious master.
As the sense of the story is very particular, so the three pictures were as ex-
cellent from first to last. In the first, we perceive the lucky chance of arms, or
the valour of the heroe, whereby he gained the repute of a deliverer of his
country : in the second, we consider him as a murtherer, or, the accident as a
bloody triumph, and him elated with his success: and, in the third, we see him
a malefactor, condemned to be put to death, or one who had transgressed the laws.
Truly, those three events, may serve for instructive examples to all men. Do
we not see in them the common course of the world, and that too great success
and prosperity make many men proud and insolent; And what do not their
blind pafsions lead them to l certainly, unthankfulnefs to heaven is the prelude
to many disasters and errors, leading them into the greatest dangers: however,
all things are governed by Providence.
The middle of the cieling had a large oval piece, wherein Providence was,
in the greatest depth, represented sitting on a globe, drest in gold stuff with her
head crowned, and about it twelve glittering stars, having in her right hand
a sceptre, with an eye on top; on her breast, a sun, and on her knee holding
a looking glass with her left hand ; her look was full of majesty and authority :
she pointed downwards at Roma, who sat a little to the left side, on a cloud,
attended by Religion, Valour, and Concord. Long Life, Healih, and Prospe-
zily, came gently waving down towards her. Long Life, was a beautful virgin
in her prime, with a flame of fire on her head, and a serpent with the tail in
its mouth, in her hand. Health, was Asculapius, holding a staff, about which
twined a serpent. Prosperity, appeared a naked vouth, crowned with laurel, with
a cornucopiae, full of fruit under his arm. Retigion, or Piety, was. drest like a
vestal







vestal, holding, in her right hand, a cup emitting a slame, and looking up
at Providence. Valour was represented like an Hercules, with his club and lion’s
skin. Concord looked somewhat more composed than Piety, having in her arms,
a bundle of rods, which a Cupid tied with a red ribbon. Roma, drest in white
or light blue, under a purple robe embroidered with gold, held in her right
hand a pike, and in the left, a laurel branch; on her head she had an helmet,
and buskins on her legs.
Now, we ought to weigh the meanings of these things. Providence is to
be considered as the chies ruler of worldlv affairs, debasing and raifing empires
as she pleafes. The three gifts of long Life, Health and Prosperity, are bleffings
flowing from her. The corporeal virtues are the effects of might, whenee they
proceed: the first is Religion, the second Valour, and the third Concord;
these established Roma, in her power, and increased it. In relation to art, let
us observe, with what ingenuity and uncommonnefs the master has executed
those pictures : I say uncommonness, since I never saw them handled by any
other after such a manner. First, Providence is in the greatest depth, and,
according to guefs, thrice as big as the life. The three gifts, which sne sends
down, being somewhat. lower, are not half so big; and the undermost, to wit,
Roma, and the characters accompanying her, are still smaller, yet somewhat
larger than the life-
Providence has no bounds, always maintaining her uncontrolled power with-
out diminution; and though the three gifts, which slow from her, are but small
parts, yet, with respect to the undermost figures, they are much bigger, and
keep among them their own forms, as reigning over them. The three others
on the undermost clouds being but corporeal virtues, are therefore much smal-
ler than the preceeding, and appeared with less majesty : nevertheless Roma
excels, and shews herself bigger; intimating thereby her growth and improve-
ment. Her sitting on clouds implies, in my opinion, her rising above all
other powers of the world.
This would be a monstrous design, if art, with respect to perspective, were
not duly observed: but, by this means, the piece looked so perfect, that I
judged it could not otherwise be good ; for the undermost group, as quite low,
was very strong ; the middlemost, according to its distance, somewhat fainter;
and the uppermost, very faint, and almost imperceptible.
This emblem bears a mysterious interpretation, and may, in general, be
applied to all the governments in the world, provided the figure of Roma be
altered, and another substituted, as things require. Instead of Asculapius we may
represent health, by the figure of a woman, and in the place of Hercules, the
fame; taking for Valour an heroine, holding. an oaken branch in her right
hand, with a lion on her fhield.
In treating formerly of this sort of fables, we have called them emblema-
tical, carrying a mystic sense, whether they be mundane or spiritual ; however,
as a distinction between boch, and to shew that this is mundane and historical,
we must observe, that it is not intermixed with any emblematic figures, which
have a spiritual
sense, except those of Asculapius and Hercules, which therefore
in this work 1 reject as unfit, and only-proper for poetic and fabulous sub-
jects;






jects; as if, instead of Roma, were introduced Troja or Aging, which are do-
minions no where now subsisting but in the poetic writings; we find that this
emblem, like its subject, is not only mundane and heathenisn, as the story
of Horatius proves, but that therein is also exprest the force or mysterious sense
by those heathenisn figures.
Now, if it be afked, why this cieling piece does not allude to the person of
Horatius, as that in the tenth chapter to Hercules: my opinion is, that the con-
clusion of the story, so far as it respects him, is contained in the second picture :
for here we cannot expect any deification, nor do the gods interfere in the
matter : they regard only those who are reckoned in their number, such as
AEneas, Hercules, Memnon, and others of godly race.
CH AP. XIII. The Fable of Calisto, adapted to the Corinthian
Order, in the Upper-story.
AM delighted to relate here, in four pieces, the wonderfully embellished
story of Calisto, and her deification; as not unworthy, in my judgment, to
adorn so fine an apartment as this last, which was of the Crinthian Order, and
very magnificent, as well with respect to the extraordinary thoughts as their
artful turn; the conclusion whereof renders this work most perfect.
The first piece was as follows.
Calisto, tired with hunting, went to repose in the shade of the trees ; Jupiter
enamoured with her, came to delude her in the shape of Diana, and gratified
his paffion, notwithstanding all her efforts to the contrary.
There, on the right side of the piece, on an eminence, the innocent creature
was sitting under the trees, not at rest, but full of concern, shame, and dread,
melted into tears, with her hand on the edge of a fountain; her tresses, half
loosed, hung carelesly over her naked shoulders; her chaste bosom was above
half bare, and her legs uncovered to unseemliness, sufficiently shewed her sor-
rowful fate. Jupiter, the author of it, was seen a little off, next the middle of
the piece, above the horizon, not as a disguised or pretended Diana, but the
chief of the gods, shining with majesty, with his diadem on his head, and in
his purple robe; not as a thunderer, with lightnings and tempests, but only
attended by his eagle. The cruel and degenerate lover seemed to deride her
forrow, having his left hand up at his breast, as if he meant, that he had got
his will; wherefore, penetrating the clouds, he advanced through the air, for-
saking the miserable woman. The unmerciful incendiary, Cpid, was extin-
guishinghis torch in the fountain, looking at Jupiter, who, with his pointing
sceptre, commanded him to do so. Diana was seen in the off-scape, in a valley,
with her retinpe of nymphs. The landscape was delightful and woody : here
and there appeared some river gods. Behind Calisto, among the trees, stood a
term of Priapus in shades. I attentively viewed the aforesaid three figures, and
reflected to myself, how well they acted their parts ; clearly opening the matter,
even to thé very term, which, though it might be placed there accidentally, yet
Second









The unhappy Calisto, bemoaning her misfortune, and full of shame and fear,
and discarded by her mistress, was seeking shelter in solitudes : yet the jealous
Juno spyed and found her there.
On the left side of the piece, appeared the superior goddess of heaven,
glittering, coifed with peacock’s feathers, instead of a diadem, or royal head
ornament, and seeming to turn about, as she was stepping on a eloud in or-
der to go upwards : she was dressed in her blue garment, and held her sceptre
in her right hand, on the right hip, charging Hellish Rage, or Revenge, which
attended and was at her back, to punisn the innocent Calisto; and lifted up
her left arm, and the fingers streight up, she with a severe and envious look,
reproached the oppressed creature, with lying with her confort. Revenge was
beating with serpents and adders, besides her smoaking pitch-torch, the mi-
serable Calisto; who now had no more of her former shape, except her cloaths,
which fell a prey to the hellisn fury; there lay the quiver, here the bow,
yonder the girdle; as l conceived, it was a she-bear who shook off those cloaths,
and was taken to flight. Being now metamorposed into so frightful a monster,
by the immoveable jealousy of Juno; she, in her flight, looked up to heaven,
feeming, by her bellow, to move Jupiter to piety. This landscape was also a
dark wood, filled here and there with sleeping river-gods : among the trees ap-
peared some wild beasts running about, and a lion in a bottom on the right side
near a rock, drinking at a river : up and down arose some palm and other trees.
After this piece, another presented, the subject whereof was this.
Arcas son of the deluded and now metamorphosed Calisto, was fifteen years of
age, when, according to his custom, going a hunting, he met with a frightful sne-
bear which came towards him, not to hurt him, as he thought, but, if poffible,
to make herself known to him; vet ignorant that she was his mother, stoutly pre-
pared to shoot her.
Jupiter, from heaven, seeing this in pity hindred the
matricide.
Third Picture.
Here, on the right side of the piece, Arcas appeared gently stepping forth from
behind some trees, and putting an arrow into his bow, in order to shoot his
mother, unknown to him in that shape. But Mercury, slying down suddenly,
with-held his arm; at whom he therefore looked back. The celestial messenger
staring behind at the she-bear, which was on the second ground, intimating with
his staff in his left hand, that she should take to flight, which she seemed to do;
fhie stood upright, with her under-parts towards him, and the upper turned to
the left, swaying towards the road. The way she took was apparent, beginning
from her feet like dust, or thin vapours, altering, by degrees, into clouds, which
ran winding about her, and at last mixed with the air, wherein Jupiter appeared,
yet very faint, and almost imperceptible. In the clouds by him, on his right
sicle, but somewhat lower and more forward, sat the three Fatal sisters, of whom
Clothe






Cotho was spinning the thread, Lachests winding it on the reel, and Atropos ready to
cut it, which Jupiter observing, laid his left hand on the scifsors, holding up his
sceptre in the other, with his mouth a little open ; she, surprised at this, turned
towards him. Arcas stood astride, with his breast projecting. Behind him, on
and near a stone lay some game, as an hind, fox, hare, &c. together with a gar-
ment, which l judged to be his. Low against the said stone lay a river-god, with
his vase. This landscape was woody like the others. The she bear, about the
middle of the piece, appeared in the shade against the light off-scape. On the
left side on the second ground, or at the extremity of the first, was a ruined tomb,
with some cypresses; and behind, on a further ground, arose a large rock.
After this, I was curious to view diligently the cieling-piece, as the concllusion
of this artful work, and I found it thus :
Jupiter affected with the sorrowful fate of Calisto, does, notwithstanding Juno’s.
hatred, glorify her with the radiant brightness of the North-star, which among the
constelations, is named the Great Bear, and is followed by the Little Bear, into.
which her son Arcas was transformed.
Fourth Picture.
Underneath in the piece, the youth was seen flying upwards, pursuing his mo-
ther with a bow and arrow, and supported by some Cupids : he appeared back-
wards, without any fore-shortening, with his right arm, with the arrow extended
and the other with the bow behind, having a quiver by his fide. Jupiter some-
what above him on the right side, sitting on a cloud, and large-fized, was, with
an erect sceptre, shewing him the zodiac, wherein a particular bright star appearedt
very ghittering. The bear was seen rifing a little beyond the said star, looking
back upwards, and being encompassed with a great shining light in the shape of a
star, which enlightened the whole piece ; her hind paws rested on the clouds,
which, beside her, from Jupiter, off to the left fide rose under her. Quite on
the left side sat Juno on the rainbow, looking envioussy at Artas ; she leaned her-
head on her left hand, with the elbow on the rainbow, and lay half turned to the-
right, her under parts inclining towards Arcas, and the upper fromhim : her right
arm and sceptre crossed her body. At her feet, on the clouds, lay some water-
gods and goddesses, as sub-directors of the clouds and dew. Behind her stood her-
peacock, with its tail so spread as seemingly to serve for a diadem. lris appearedt
looking upwards behind her with an hand over her eyes to shade them from the-
beams of the star. Diana and Apollo sat behind her. Juno and those sitting be-
neath her were shaded by the driving clouds above. Diana, Apollo, and otners,
looked smilling. Jupiter appeared directly in the light, of equal height with the-
Juno was-a little lower, and the river-gods and Arcas beneath. her: he was.
bear.
a youth of small size, receiving his light from the star above.
Thus the work concluded with the deification of the unhappy Calisto, a second.
time metamorphosed. It would be troublesome to rslate all the particulars of it,
and.






and needlefs to the knowing': wherefore, Ishall only subjoin the general dispofi¬
tion ofthe lights and shaded parts. Japiter and Arcas were strongly.lighted against
the blue of the sky on the right side. Juno contrarily, on the left side where the
star was dark. The foremost water-god under Juno, received a little light from
above, holding his hand over his eyes.

Animadver sion.
This fable clearly stews how beautiful bodies are polluted by uncleannefs; for
in a fhort time after Calisto was delivered of her son Arcas, Juno transformed her,
as a punishment of her unchastity, into a she-bear, a beast so deformed, as to be
reckoned among monsters. The aforesaid evil has such direful effects, that the
fruit or children of unlawful love mortally hate their guilty parents ; foi-beauty
stained with unchastity; is of no account in the eyes of the virtuous, and what be-
fore created wonder, is now a mark of infamy. Ovid, in an elegant and artful
manner, assigns Calisto a notable place in the northern hemisphere, and shews Ju-
no’s intreating Thetis, that those stars (according to the belief of the heathens) might
never refresn themselves in the sea, in order to pourtray wonderfully her eternal
shame, as surpassing the other capital stars, and having such a station near the
Northern Pole, that, as this pole or point of the axis is above our horizon, this
star, whatever course it takes, can never be out of our sight, and therefore her
crime be as little out of our memories.
But a more christian-like inference may be, that the polluted soul abhorring her
crime, by true repentance gained a most glorious and shining aspect, besides a
fixed station in the heavens ; setting an example to others like Mary Mugdalen,
whofe crimes, through repentance, were not only expiated, but, by an incorrup-
table glory intirely blotted out.
The truth of this story, taking off the poetic mafk, is, that Arcas, son of Jupiter
and the nymph Calisto, taught the Arcadians (who pretended to be the most ancient
people of the earth, nay, older than the moon, as Plurarch intimates in his 76th
and gzd Roman questions, boasting to be sprung from the earth, and therefore
made great account of the oak and beech-trees and their fruit, after king Pelasgus
had taught them to make it their food, which before was only herbs and roots)
to till the ground and sow corn; which knowledge he learned of Triprolemus, son
of Cres; and afterwards to make bread of it : also how to weave woollen cloths
for covering their bodies; likewise inuring them to many civilities. In acknow-
ledgnent of which benefaction, and in honour to him, they named their country
Arcadia, which before was called Pelasgia, as Pausanias, in his Arcadia testifies.







CH AP. XIV. Description of the inward View of the Temple of
Apollo.
We hhave before, in treating of Painter-like beauty, described the outside of

this temple ; we shall now, according to promise, shew the inside of it,
Stepping into the portico, I saw over the door of the entrance a carved lyre;
whence L. inferred that this edisice was sacred to Apollo. Going into it, l was
transported with the sight of all the fine things so artfully worked and of such
rich materials.
In the middle stood the figure of the god on a high pedestal. At the four angles
of this pedestal sat the Four Seasons, each holding an horn silled with the particu-
lar fruits and flowers of the scasons. All these were of beautiful plain white
marble. The figure of Apollo was naked, crowned with laurel; and holding a
sceptre in its hand.
The floor was inlaid with variety of costly stones in the form of a terrestrial
globe, in the center whereof stood the aforesaid figure.
The arch-work was azure blue, but 1 could not certainly perceive it to be Mo-
faic ; it was adorned with the seven planets, and other constelations, all in gold.
Near the windows, between the two pilasters, were niches silled with figures, each
representing one of the months of the ycar; they had the form of young men, and
were cut in whitish marble.
The whole building consisted also of marble, but not so fine as that of the
figures ; for here and there under the niches in the mouldings, and about the
windows it was veiny. In a basement running round the temple, was carved a
continued bass relief; the figures ofit were about four feet high, and of fine white
stone. The other inside division was the same as we have already described it to
be without ; the undermost part being composed of the lonic Order, the middle-
most of the Roman, and the upper of the Corinthian.
Over the sirst cornices appeared terms, instead of pilasters; these represented the
hours, and with their heads supported. the cupola; they were inthe shape of young
virgins, to the number of twenty-four. It would be tedious to describe them,
and their badges of distinction singly; and the rather, since Caesar Ripa has so
handsomely done it.
Next, l took notice of the orderly disposition and proportion, which was ju-
dicioussy observed throughout the building ; for Apollo’s figure was, as I guessed,
eight feet high, and those about him seven feet and an half; the young men, re-
presenting the months, were seven feet, and the terms for the hours, six,or six and
half. This proportion not only seemed so large, but the imagined height really
appeared to me to be such, without abatement for distance, as seen from under-
neath. Reflecting on this neatness, Ithought it strange for people of sense, nay,
great






great masters, to agree, that a large window should come over a small one, or a
giant be set above a young child, and how such things should look becoming.
The undermost bafs reliefs consist of smaller figures than those in the upper work,
not without reason, for the walling wherein they stand, as well as that figure-
work, bear throughout the building; nevertheless, he, who duly considers the
matter, and such a sight, will soon alter his opinion ; for since Apollo, or the sun,
is the largest of all created things, and the chief of the universe, observed by the
heathens, by his quality among irrational creatures, as the father of the four sea-
sons, he is the biggest and principal figure. The four seasons, brought forth by
him, are somewhat less, and the months inferior to them in bigness, to which the
hours must give way again, because twenty-four of them make but one natural
day. We ought also to observe, that the four seasons are of a more composed
countenance : the months reprefent young men still growing, and the hours shew
nimble virgins.
Is not this division very elegant, with respect to architecture, since every thing
keeps its relation and property ; A good architect employs his thoughts about
all those particular objects, in the compartion ofhalls and apartments ; according
to which, a good master ought to accommodate himself in the painting of
buildings.







TH E
ArI of Painting
BOOK

IX.
Of the Painting of CIELINGS, or PLaFonds.

CHAP 1. Of Cieling-Painting in general.

AMONG all the parts of Painting, none is so difficult as that of





than an upright piece on a wall or over a chimney : this is owing to



ignorance, and an indifference in some people what their cielings

are daubed with, so as they be but quickly finished, dazzle the eye
and cost little. Formerly they were contented with foliage slightly painted, for
saving expence, and that in places of consequence only ; whereas now, according
to the present state of the painters and times, they can have other things for the
same price, and the painter making no great matter of it, they lay hold of the
opportunity, causing the whole cieling to be silled with histories and emblems,
whether they be suitable or not.
We sce that all things from small beginnings improve, and at last come to per-
fection, through the industry of judicious artists : even so it is in painting ; for I
remember to have seën many cielings with figures, landscapes, sea-fights, battles,
&c. without any fore-shortening, as if painted on an upright wall; and others
which were represented from underneath more or less, and yet withoJf fore-








shortening; as also some which fore-shortened, but had no point of sight : whence
it is evident, that without regard to perspective, such pieces cannot possibly be
brought to the aforesaid perfection. Now, for order sake, let us examine into
the name of this branch.
The word (Plafond) is French, and signifies a flat or level superficies, fit to be
covered with boards or cloth, whereon to paint or plaister such representations or
ornaments as we think proper, consisting mostly of histories with flying figures,
skies with birds, flowers, and many other things: but the true sense of the word
(Plafond) imports, A cieling of Halls, Apartments, Temples or Galleries, even
all that hangs over head and is parellel with the ground. Such pieces are called
Opticat, because they must be viewed from an assigned distance, without which,
they ainavoidably appear mis-shapen, as we shall hereafter shew.
In the matter itself we ought to consider the nature of a plafond, or cieling
painting, and wherein it differs from a wall painting; as first, in the fore-shorten-
ing of the objects, and secondly, in the colour; I speak with respect to the objects
contained in one and the other, such as buildings, balustrades, figures, and other
things occurring in ordonnances ; all which, in an hanging picture, retain their
perfect heights and breadths, shortening in thickness only ; whereas, in plafonds,
or cielings, neither height, measure nor proportion are to be observed; in a word,
every thing foresshortens, except the bafis and the cap or top : what is round re-
mains so, and what is square keeps its angles, whether in the middle, in profile,
high or low. As for the colours, they doubtless must also differ much from those
of hanging pictures, for they ought to appear more beautiful, not only in the
light, but affo in the fhades, I mean in a clear light, as we may eafily appre-
hend.
We ought moreover to know, that by means of optics or practical perspective,
we can make crooked things look strait, hollow or rising ones flat and even, and
cause them outwardly to appear what they really are not; as the famous F. Niceron
and others have plainly demonstrated. Wherefore, we need not wonder, that so
few painters excel in this branch of the art, since they are little conversant with
the practical part of perspective, though without it it is impossible to execute a
good cieling-piece. It is certain that many painters are rash enough to undertake
such a piece of work, and sometimes they happen to perform good things, (for
laboriousness and daily practice often contribute much) nevertneless they do not
inquire whether their methods be the shortest or longest, commonly chusing that
which first offers, drudging witheut certainty, and led by meer chance.
CHAP. II. Of the usual Difficulties in Cieling-Painting.
IRST, we are at a great stand, because we cannot use the life either in the
nudities or flving draperies, though they be the principal objects.
Secondly, Because we cannot, without great trouble, find the true and certain
places of the figures we introduce ; for which reason, they must mostly be done
by guess.


























































































































Thirdly, Because we cannot duly view the work as long as it is on the easel.
Whence,
Lastly, It follows, that the master is always in pain for the effect of the paint-
ing in being fixed in its place.
These difficulties are not a little vexatious, even to one who understands his
business; for it is otherwise with those who make more use of their hands than
careful than others. Paint as many cielings as you please, as long as you do not
believe that there are grounds and rules for it, and remain in this ignorance, you
will never surmount the aforesaid difficulties. The most skilful master is often at
a loss in this part of painting. Let us then in the first place learn perspective, and
what it shews us ; since thereby only we may arrive at this laudable study, which
otherwise is impossible.
CHAP. III. Of fore-sbortening Objects in Cielings.
VT is-obvious, that the off-scape in a common picture, is the part which retires
or goes off from us, leffens and grows faint, and that the horizon is an utmost
distance limiting our sight.
Contrary, in cielings, our off-scape and boundary of sight is the firmament or
starry sky ; whereby objects, the higher they are, lessen the more, even to insensi-
bility, not only in their proportions and neatness, but also in their colours.
Here we ought to observe, that all objects of what shape or form soever, keep
their due breadth, provided they are parallel with-the horizon: for instance, placc
a square stone so as to be viewed directly against it, or a figure in the same manner.
Here you see that the top and bottom
(In Plate LXI. we exhibit a square body. )
of the said stone keep their squares, and that the upper and under corners of it fall
perpendicularly from the point of sight; moreover, that, however the said square
is turned, thetop and body always make a right angle, and consequently the
hindermost extremity is parallel with the foremost. It is the same with figures of
other objects.
Place, for instance, a man on one or other side of the piece, standing up-
right, and the point of sight in the middle; let him be in profile, and have both
his shoulders of equal height, and you will then perceive that the shoulders, from
one to the other keep to their full breath, and their figure its full thickness from
top to toe. Thus we see evidently, that there is no other fore-shortening than in
the length ; or to say better, in the height; and the more the figures, or other
objects, rise and approach the point of sight, the shorter and more mis-shapen
they become; because in their breadth they retain their measure and proportion,
as before has been said. This is a principal rule, and ought alivays to be observed.








As for buildings, A. Bossé gives full precepts touching them, in the latter part
of his book of Perspective ; vet I have room to say, that when we would place
columns over columns for galleries, we ought to draw a rising line through their
centers, from the basis or ground to the point of sight, even through each balis-
ter, and thus find the due proportion of their heights as well as the breadths, by
the help of a gradation line.
This, with respect to proportion, must likewise be observed in designing figures
and other objects, as I shall hereafter shew by examples.
This fort of painting is not only the most artful but also the most difficult, as
I have before said ; because, although we understand the rules and practice of it,
it appears nevertheless disagrecable and deformed ; which no one can be à judge
of but the master himself, unless it be put up in its proper place, and seen at
the due distance.
d
CHAP. IV. Of the Sizes of Cieling Figures.
HE figures which we paint in cielings, ought not to exceed the common
size of a man, to wit, six feet and an half, when they are so low as to be
A
even with the cieling; but being higher, and sitting on clouds or flying, they
must lessen and go off, as perspective teaches. Yet we may represent the deities
as big aswe pleafe, provided they be not painted with more strength than other
figures; it even sometimes happens, that when they almost vanisn out of sight,
thev have yet human bigness.
Eun-shine is the most proper and agreeable in spiritual representations.
As for the glory of each deity in particular, they keep it when they appear to
men, but when they are represented in heaven it is a mixture of many smaller, pro-
ducing one great fhining. To do this artfully is not a matter of the least conse-
quence ; and he is a great master, who, instead of dark, thick and heavy clouds
like wool-sacks, places his figures on thin, transparent and almost inseniible va-
pours.
It will not be improper, in this chapter, to mention something of flying figures
in the air.
Though the air be seldom without a wind, and this may always be somewhat
perceived, it is nevertheless not advisable to make it appear in cielings; because,
if the wind were stirring, the sigures slying before it would seem to be motionless;
and contrarily, those which are sitting or standing shew as much violence as the
slying ones : for this reason no wind must come into the piece but what the ve-
locity of each sigure causes, that we may plainly see by what motion the drape-
ries are slung, as also the places the figures are going to or returning from, one
gently waving and the other nimble and swift.
The different stuffs are very proper to this on such occasions, and they very
much conduce to express the matter; as the ressexion of ruffling silks for waving
figures






figures and which are gently descending, thin and sleazy silk for swift and down-
flying figures, and the most pliant or thick silk or stuff for sitting, lying or stand-
ing ones. The secret and importance of a fine stirring cieling piece lies chiesly
herein.
As for the making of the coloured stuffs of flying figures, because they cannot
be put on the layman, and therefore not painted after the life, we cannot lay
down any rules about them ; nothing but a good conception and natural judg-
ment, joined to continual practice and observation, can bring the artist to per-
fori it. We must use these means, and be perfect in them; observing what
stuff is most proper to the occasion, as we have before intimated.
We ought also to take dare that the thin stuffs be warm and transparent against
that the flying figures never seem to be upright, as if standing, much less to be
standing; but always sitting, kneeling, lying or slying, unless in the case of peo¬
ple supposed to be on cielings or galleries, who then are either standing, stoop-
ing or kneeling, as the subject requires.
Let me say, that we ought sometimes to make some additions to the disposition
of the general and particular objects; but with as much caution as possible, that
the inability of the artist and the deficiency of the work may not appear.
CHAP. V. Method for viewing a Cieling-piece on the Easel, as if on
the Cieling.
7E have already observed the difficulties arising in cielings, with respect to

the use of the life, and in laying down rules subservient to it. Now,
had I my sight I should certainly find out some; but since this is impracticable
without figural demonstration, and l cannot possibly verbally do it, Ishall never-
theless shew some methods, which, though they may seem trifling, have always
been of service to me and of little trouble in their use.
After sketching my ordonnance upon paper, I fixed it against a low cieling;
then taking a looking glass and sitting under it, 1 with ease exactly considered
every thing, observing what was wanting in it, and thus I marked and corrected
faults as much as possibly l could. Next, 1 drew each figure, whether naked
or cloathed, after the life, in such manner as shall hereafter be shewn. Then I
dcad-coloured my piece with such light as l thought proper. After this l took
the looking glafs again and held it over my head, in order to view commodiously
the piece standing behind me, inclining a little backwards on the easel as if it were
against the cieling, and casting my eyes every where, first on the general design
and then on the particular parts; this examen 1 repeated, till, by several correc-
tions, I found that I had brought the piece to my fancy. Here be mindful not
to take too near a distance, to the end the glafs may take in the whole piece ;
for






for which reason I sometimes got with the looking glass on a chair or table, and
having my pallet and pencils in readiness, and brought my piece into such for-
wardness, I finished it without further looking back.
I will now, for the service of those who may find it useful and necessary, also
treat,
CHAP. VI. Of Designing after the Life, for the Use of Cieling
Painters.
TE must not flatter ourselves, that cieling painting can be performed with-
W out good knowledge in proportion, since, as has been said, we cannot
V
conveniently make use of the life ; for, how great soever your skill may be, you
will find difficulty enough, though the life were before you, to bring it on the
eloth. Nevertheless, to shew that it may be done, and that I have often used the
life, Ishall, for the service of those who are not sparing of pains, lay down my
manner of doing it.
After I had set the model, whether of man or woman, on an high place, ac-
cording to my sketch, I sat down on the floor with my back against the scaffold,
with a looking-glass between my legs, which I moved and turned about so long,
till the model appeared in it in such a manner as l wanted according to my point
of sight; and then designing it on drawing paper as correct as possible, I painted
after this design without any trouble.
As for the dresses l managed them in the same manner, casting the garment on
the layman accordirg to my sketch; I mean without slying, which is a thing im-
possible and depends only on imagination. I then placed the layman, thus dres-
sed, on an high tressel, and sat down against it in the manner aforesaid, and made
a design of the dress; if it was a flying or lying figure, I made shift with pack-
thread, wires, or such like means, as well as l could, sparing for no trouble, when
the matter was important and l had a mind to do something fine.
I used the same method in designing after all sorts of plaisters, as faces, vases,
urns, ornaments, capitals, festoons of flowers, &c. in order to have them from
underneath. Thus I mastered the greatest difficulties occurring in this study.
However, I did not this before my cloth was in readiness for it, that l might not
mistake; since, notwithstanding all our care in some things, especially upright
standing objects, we may easily be deceived.
As to the preparation of the cloths for our design, as likewise the dead-co-
louring, in order to sinish, and thereby refresn our memories, I shall now treat of
them.
First, I six the point of sight either within or without the piece, as my place
of standing directs; then I strike with a chalked thread, from the said point, as
many lines over my piece as l find necessary to serve all my upright standing ob-
jects, viz. balusters, columns, pilasters, figures, &c. which l suppose to be per-
pendicular :





























































































































































































































































pendicular : I also strike some diagonals, or slope lines, from that side of the piece
whence the light comes, either right or left, parallel and equidistant from each
other. These put me in mind how high or low the light falls on my objects: if
they run parallel with the base, the objects are lighted entirely from the side;
if oblique or sloping, as before is said, they lighten a little fronting; and if they
fall from on high from the point of sight, the light comes directly fronting, as is
visible in the examples, Numb. I, 2, 3, in Plate LXII.
Tthink myself obliged here to propose to the artist a small practice of my
own invention, and, in my opinion, of little trouble, but certain great advantage
to-cieling painters; fince we find that although there are certain rules, yet they
cannot be put in use without the greatest trouble, application, and loss of time,
unless aided by some practice or other, or by some artful instrument; like Astro-
nomy, which, how demonstrative soever, has its globe and astrolabe; Architec-
ture, its plan and level ; Geometry, the oval, triangle, square and compassés;
Mathematics, algebra, &c. But to return to my invention.
I first mould some wax puppets, as we have shewn in the ôth Chapter of Or-
wires, some long, others short, whereon to stick the puppets, and keep them
from bending, whether they be made standing, lying, slying, or sitting: this
being done, I take an oblong wooden trough, lined with tin, of what bigness I
I pleafe. Into the corners I put some pins or serews to fasten a cover of wood
or tin fitting the trough, and made full of little holes wherein to stick the afore-
faid wired puppets, and so as they may turn easily : then Ifill the trough with
clay or kneaded bran, and thus my machine is in readiness. Now when Imake
use of it I stick my puppets, bent and turned according to my design, on the
wires, and through the holes into the clay where l would have them, one high,
another low, one stooping forwards, another leaning back, &c. as the subject
requires, which will then stand immoveable.
My scheme being in this forwardness, I lean the whole machine back on a ta-
ble, be the light left or right, and then slightly design the figures in the manner
I have shewed with the lines. I can give the machine such a light as I desire,
either from afide, fronting, or from on high, a common, sun-shine, or candle-
light.
Now for perfecting this sketch and conveniently painting after it, I set my
layman, with such a dress as each figure requires, in the manner before laid.
down; and then, my cloth being ready, I proceed to painting.
I invented this machine in the vear 1668, and put it in use for about five years
with great advantage, and with such exact reflexion that l afterwards had no fur-
ther occasion for it, though I never used more than three or at most four pup-
pets.
Now the curious artist must also know what observations lmade in the use of
the machine.
First, as Plate LXIII. fhiews, I put one puppet coming directly down, quite
extended, namely, with the head and feet both on a. line, and then ob-
served






served that there was not the least fore-shortening, all the parts having their full
lengths.
A second puppet I set upright, standing in profile on one side of the point of
sight, and found it fore-shortened in all its parts.
A third l set stying upwards from behind forwards, and perceived that the
members fore-shortened somewhat more than those of the first and somewhat less
than those of the second.
A fourth I placed sitting with its upper parts upright, the thighs parallel, and
the legs like the upper parts, and observed, that when it was quite in profile, the
upper parts and legs fore-shortened and the thigh kept its full length, as it also
did when in al front position.
Having made a firm impression of these things in my thoughts, Ihad no fur-
ther occasion for that method.
We shall now say something,

CHAP. VII. Of the Colouring of slying Figures.
HEREIN we must observe, that in cieling-painting it is the same as in
landscapes. First, we rub in the greatest light of the fky, then all parts
I
about it; next the highest and most faint objects, and then the lower and more
near ones ; and in case a balustrade be represented, it must be the last: the reason
of this Ihave shewn in treating of the dead-colouring of histories and landscapes.
Moreover, as in a fine landscape the sky principally governs all things, and
without it no proper distance can be given to the picture, so it is the same in a
cieling-piece with figures slying through the air; for it is impossible to make
objects rise, unless they have some communication with the air. Nor is it enough
for objects going off higher and further from us, to be painted fainter and fainter,
as in a drawing or print, but the colour must also be shewn, and as the air is co-
loured so must the objects partake of it, Imean in their shades; for if the air be
blue, yellow, or red, the shades ought likewise to have a mixture of blue, yel-
low, or red.
As to the light of the objects, we must observe that of what colour soever it
be, it breaks and grows darker as it goes off; even were the air, as I may sav,
snow-white, it breaks by distance or air interposing; the red becomes violet, the
yellow greenisn, and the violet blue : as the objects go off from us and approach
the air, they are darkened ; white becomes darker, pale yellow the same, and so
on in other colours.
Something still remains to be remarked with respect to objects in the air, viz.
that since the air communicates light from all parts, the broad shades cannot
possibly be so dark as in a landscape or other parts; but contrarily, the dark
touches will be so much the stronger: all that is in shade ought to be lighter and
seen more plain, yet somewhat leis than in the light. It must be likewise known,
that





















































































































that round objects have no furface, especially on the shaded side, that is to say,
the out-line against the sky ought to unite and vanisn, not quite scumbled away,
but made somewhat lighter on the edge, as we have clearly demonstrated by the
example of a globular body, Book I. Chap. 6. implying, that such works in the
air differ from others, to wit, that the objects against the sky are more rounding
and going off.
CHAP. VIII. General Observations in painting the Cielings of Halls,
Galleries, &c.
HE first and principal observation on these occasions is, that the quality and
regularity of the architecture be firmly preserved in all its parts.
The second observation concerns the grandeur of the architecture, as being
the main matter. Painting in this case is only to be considered as an aid, to
accomplish it with less charges; wherefore such care must be taken, that the
painter’s designs do not mar those of the architect, but that both unite in such a
manner as to induce the eye to take every thing for truth itself.
By the first observation, that the architecture ought to preserve its regularity,
we give to understand, that the structure of the room must chiefly be regarded
by the painter in his cieling pieces, so as not to be hurt by making openings where
they ought not to be; for it is not allowable to make them every where, as big
or little as we please: the cieling must remain cieling. All that is without the
painting, as the summers, ought to have their proper thicknesses and be lasting,
For instance, let us suppose the cieling divided into three pannels lined with cloth;
one next to the windows, the second in the middle over the chimney, and the third
to be next the wall; that in the middle is between two summers one foot in, and
the two side ones lie almost flush with the under parts of those summers. Now
if the two side cloths be, like the middle one, adorned with sky, and the thicknefs
of the summer (which is one foot) not painted on the cloth, the cieling on those
sides is so much weakened, or at least seems to be so, and is heavier in the
middle, contrary to architecture : whereas to make it look natural and according
to order, the ponderosity must in this case be on the sides, and the middle part
lightest, that it may not seem to be falling on our heads. Moreover, we ought
to observe, that there must be but one opening, and that in the middle, since
there is but one point of sight and but one place of standing to view the work
to advantage. As for painting the thickness of the summer, 1 only faid it to
rectisy a mistake often committed when a cieling is made all over open, and in-
stead of a covering, nothing is left but a grate, which cannot be justified. Some
think it may pafs for a lantern, but they are mistaken, for a lantern rises and a
cieling lies flat; moreover the whole cieiing cannot serve for a lantern, because of
the








the windows in front. The principal or middle piece must predominate, and of
consequence be open and the others closed ; l mean not to have any sky or living
creatures, but bass-reliefs, foliage, compartments or flowers, all. of such a co-
lour as suits with the apartinent. This I judge to be the first and principal care
and study of a good cieling-painter, before he sets about the work ; for in the
division of a cieling it is as with a diamond, the largest and most valuable is set
in the middle, and round it the less and less.
As to the second observation, that the art of painting is aiding to architecture,
and enriches it at less expence, the point is plain ; wherefore I shall proceed to
shew the reason why the one may spoil the other.
In painting divisions, it often happens that the summers have not proper rests
to lie on, especially when the cieling is covered all over (and the summers hid)
with a single cloth, and left to the judgment of an ignorant painter, who then
without consideration divides it into three, four, six, eight, or more pannels, and
these parted by painted summers, which do not bear on any thing. Now to
prevent this, vou must let each summer rest on a discharger, pilaster, or car-
touche, as architecture teaches: for instance, were you to divide the two, pannels
next the windows and wall each into two parts, in order to have four pannels,
this would be improper and against architecture, because of the flatness over the
window, unless it were compass-headed, and then it would not do without a car-
touche.
If it be afked, whether the division be a painter’s business, I say, it is, so far
as he understands architecture, otherwise more proper for an architect; at least it
As to the work, where the painting may disorder or be contrary to architec-
ture, it lies in the designs, when they do not suit the building, nor perfectly
bear on foundations, or have their proper weight. By the foundation of the
painting. I mean the apartment; and by the weight of the design, that what the
painter intends to exhibit in his cieling piece be not too heavy, and seem to press
down the under parts. The better to clear my meaning, I will suppose a room
to be twenty feet square : now if a second depth, or upper room, were to be re-
presented, the piers, columns, doors and windows thereof must needs accord
with those of the under room and bear upon them;, and in the next place, the
course of orders ought exactly to be observed, as architecture teaches, that is to
say, the heaviest must be undermost : first the Tuscan, next the Doric, then the
Jonic, next the Romon, and lastly the Corinthian, and so upwards lighter and lighter,
which lthink is seldom observed; and the reason is, because the figures are some-
times represented bigger than the life, which necessitates the artist to proportion
his by-works accordingly : an unpardonable error, and not at any rate to be jus-
tified I But Ishall say more of this on another occasion, and now pursue our pur-
pose in cielings. A principal point is that the work rise, and that its force unite
with the life; that is, that the objects in the lower parts be not painted stronger
than the fixed work, as compartments, bass reliefs and other ornaments, which,
not being fore-shortened, receive their light through the windows. Now it may
be afked, whether, in case we were to represent an apartment above with the same
light






light as below, the force of light and shade must not be the same; And I say it
ought not, because of the great difference between them; as we may easily sup-
pose in two columns set over each other, receiving their lighr from one front, the
one from the undermost and the other from the uppermost windows : here the
upper base must have no more force than the under capital, for were it other-
wise, it would seem to be nearer; it would also not rise, and consequently over-
power the life. It is here, as in a fine landscape, where the fore-ground has the
greatest force, and the second and third are lefs and fainter in proportion as they
go off. It is the same with slying figures; for the light weakens by their rising,
and the shades become, as well as in a room by the surrounding air, weaker and
fainter; but the touches and shades keep their force.
We have observed what is necessary to the stability and regularity of the ar-
chitecture with respect to painting, so that both may seem to be one body ; as
we shall exemplify by the following fable out of Ovid, proposed here as a pain-
ter-like simile.
 I
Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, two accomplished and agreeable young people,
introduce, representing Architecture and Painting. Salmacis meeting Hermaphro-
ditus, and imagining her happiness lay in the possession of so beautiful an object,
falls in love with him; but finding a repulse, she invokes the aid of the gods,
and thereby obtains her earnest suit. The young man, not daring to resist the
will of heaven, gives up the cause, and is by Mercury (whom we must observe
here to be Optics) joined to her, and thus of two bodies is made one. Fur-
ther applications are needless, since the simile sufficiently explains itself.
Now to continue our subject, the following observations are, at the beginning
of the work, chiesly necessary.
First, The condition of thé place.
Secondly, The quality, office and inclination of the owner, and what subjects
are proper thereto, whether histories, fables, &c.
Thirdly, The disposition of the subjects.
Fourthly, How the subject is to be divided.
First, By the condition of the place I mean the light of the room, and in what
manner it takes the cieling; also into how many pannels the architect has di-
vided the cieling, and which is the principal, that we may adapt our thoughts
thereto in the disposition of the reprefentations, as well as in the execution of
them.
Secondly, By the quality, &c. of the owner, we must understand whether he be
a divine or lawyer, philosopher or artisan, and whether he incline to spiritual or
moral, general or particular representations ; that is, such as relate to him or
his family in particular, or generally to any one who may live in the house after
his decease ; according to which information we ought to chuse subjects suitable.
Thirdly, How the subjects ought to be disposed; namely, what must be placed
above in the air, wherein, as is said, lies the soul of a room-painting, and what
below, as touching the body of it: this we divide into spiritual and moral ; spi-
ritual, all that is governed by heaven, and moral, every thing that is directed
by our judgment.








Fourthly, How the subject is to be divided : Here the principal piece in the
middle, must shew either-the cause or rise of the story, or the effect of it; the
next to it must exhibit the matter itself; and that further off, an appendix to
or inference from it. But to make this point plainer, I shall give an example.
In the middle pannel I place Solomon, before the Ark of the Covenant, praying
to God for wisdom, and on each side I represent, surrounded with a glory, the
gifts which God bestows on him, as wisdom and riches flowing down; and in
the lesser pannels l exhibit, in bafs relief, the corporeal virtues. On this foot
we may handle any thing or subject whatsoever; and by having due regard to
the aforesaid four particulars, and well executing them, such a representation
will certainly please every one, even envy itself.
Hence we may sufficiently perceive how orderly we must manage; wherefore
it is no wonder that so few excel in cieling painting, though it has rules as well
as other studies, but if these be not duly observed, we cannot gain the point. He
that sets up for a good master, must shew that he understands his art.
If I am afked, whether l think Corregio, Cortona, Vovet, and others, who per-
formed wonders in this branch, have always so punctually followed the rules,
and so nicely regarded all the observations here laid down, according to my ap-
prehension , I answer, that it would have been better if they had done it; or else
what l say must, as I have shewed in a foregoing chapter, be owing to the ma¬
chine with puppets, which I made use of for four or five years, and afterwards
laid aside ; for we ought first to have a thorough knowledge of a thing, and then
demonstrate it. But 1 am further of opinion, that had the great masters per-
fectly known the prescribed rules, we should not find such great mistakes in
their works, as some now think there are. Nevertheless, it is most certain, that
none are qualified for this judgment, but those who have made it their practice;
for he who understands the rules, and retains them in memory, can always judge
whether they be observed or not, though not able to do it himself: yet they
who work only by guess, and know nothing of grounds and rules, are more
unpardonable than those who are acquainted with them and do not use them;
though both blameworthy, the one for his carelessness and neglect of learning,
and the other for his knowledge and neglect of using it.
I am very sensible that some will make little account of many things, by
me delivered as necessary; but 1 am in no pain for that, if I can but give
satisfaction to a curious reader.
I must own, that in my juvenile years l daubed some cielings, but never flat-
tered myself that I understood the art so as l ought, because l was then igno-
rant that there were any certain grounds and rules; nevertheless l afterwards at-
tained them, by sometimes hearing others discourse about them, and by the
rules of perspective, and by my own indefatigable application to so noble a study;
insomuch, that at last l could sketch a large and grand composition with more
certainty and less trouble than formerly a little one. I must, on this occasion,
relate what course l took.
I had in my room a little jutty closet, and when I was to make an ordon-
nance, I pinned my paper against the upper part of it; and, having a candle
in






in one hand and a crayon in- the other, I laid myself on my back, and scratched
my thoughts on the paper. This l found to be a good method for preventing
mistakes, I mean in the sketch. Now for the painting it, 1 also did it against
the cieling, yet not after such a slight scratch; for, having made my sketch, I
took out of the prints of Vovet and others, such actions and postures as were pro-
per; altering them either in the faces, hands, or folds of draperies, more or less,
by guess as well as l could. Thus I made shift, yet all was done against the
cieling; whereby you may judge what trouble I had, as well in finding things
as afterwards in executing them, which really was double work: but when bet-
ter informed, 1 sat commodiously at my easel. He who proceeds with certainty
has a great advantage above others.
CHAP. IX. Method for Drawing fore-sbortened Buildings, Figures,
Trees, &c. after the Life.
INCE it commonly happens, on Nature’s denying her favourable affistance,
 that we have recourse to our wits for means to supply the defect; it was even

my case in cieling painting. After having given myself much trouble to no pur-
pose, and taken useless pains in order to design every thing after the life, lat last
found out the following method, which has made me full amends. It is very
profitable in all places with low horizons, as you will perceive in the use.
I suppose then, for instance, that l am to make a design of the Stadt-house
at Amsterdam (it is no matter if it were thrice its present height) and this without
looking up. I chuse a station or distance of eight feet, more or less, from the
building, as occasion requires. Then I take a convex looking glass of about a
foot diameter (to be bought at the Nuremberg toy-shops) and place it against the
inside of my drawing-board or port-folio : I contrive it in such a manner, that it
may either stand upright or leaning back, according as l would see things either
from beneath or higher. Thus l approach with the open port-folio, and my
back towards the object, till the building, tree, &c. appear as l would have it,
and then design it from the looking glass on blue or white paper.
This method is very convenient for drawing all sorts of large works in nar-
row places or streets, even a view of twenty or thirty houses. It is also useful to
landicape painters in their country views ; they may take whole tracts of land,
with towns and villages, waters, woods, hills and sea, from East to West, with-
out moving cither head or eyes : it is likewise proper for those who are ignorant
of perspective.
We must here also shew a method for representing all sorts of fore-shortened
flat-faced ordonnances, whether pictures, hangings or bafs reliefs, against walls,
cielings or any where else, either standing, hanging or lying, and that with cer-
tainty according to perspective. These are things which painters ofteen meet
with in exhibiting rooms, galleries, gardens, and other places; and the method
for






for doing it, though not attended with difficulty, yet sometimes puzzles those
who neglect it.
I have therefore chosen the example in Plate LXIV. which is the foundation
of all fore-shortenings, as well of apartments as cielings, and the performance
is as follows. Having made the scheme of a room in perspective, I divide the
height and width of the side wall (where l would have hangings or representa-
tions of pictures) into a certain number of diminishing feet, fetching the crofs
lines from the point of sight, and the perpendiculars from the plan or scale.
Now in this example we perceive four principal fore-shortenings; for A is
the cieling, B a side wall, C the floor, Da loose picture hanging forwards, all
four proceeding, after one and the same manner, from the point of sight, as the
middle part E shews, which is divided into squares. To say more would be use-
less, and tedious to those who are in the least conversant with this art.
CHAP. X. Of the Harmony and Union of Colours in Cieling Pieces.
LTHOUGH in the chapter touching the deities and their qualities,
we shall treat of the colours proper to them, we must, on this occasion,
A
say something previous, and shew how the colours ought to be placed and han-
dled, in order to create a perfect harmony.
You must not herein by any means be known by flaring, strong, and glitter-
ing colours. I am of opinion, that on this occasion nothing suits better than
the union of the colours ; because it is agreeable to the eye, causes a fine relief,
and contains something uncommon, even supernatural. And when I pretend
here, that in cieling pieces you ought to use tender and weak colours (even were
they mostly fetched from white ) l do not contradict my asfertion in a former chap-
ter, to wit, that particular colours are assigned to the deities, according to the
nature and meaning of each, as red, purple, yellow, blue, green, &c. and even
to be known by them without their usual tokens of distinction, as Phabus with
sun, Diana with the moon, Mercury with his caduceus, Ceres with her ears of
corn, Jupiter with the eagle, Juno with the peacock, Momus with his fool’s cap
and bauble, &c. They who can give their pieces such an exprefsion are
principally commendable, and- the, painting must look well. Nevertheless
I do not hereby confine the lightness and darkness of the colours, whether they
differ little or much from each other, or whether they ought to be almost
all white or light, since the colours- may be beautiful, be they ever so light.
Even were a cieling piece to consist only of white and black; light and shade,
it would have no less decorum, nor be less valuable. I think it, in this case, to
be much like a print, which, though consisting only of white and black, has
yet its harmony and decorum, when light and shade are well disposed against
each




















































































































































































each other; and still more with the addition of proper colours, and those thinly
and transparently managed, whereby it gets the property of a picture.
As the principal goodnefs of a cieling piece lies in an artful disposition of the
figures above each other, so it is of no lefs consequence that the colours be
well adapted thereto.
I will now give an instance in two pieces, differing from each other in light
undermost depth strongly set off in colour against the second, which is a little
dark, and the third is light against the dark blue of the sky. In the latter
(which I think the best on account of decorum) the uppermost group is dark
against a light blue sky, and the undermost, by the force of light, set off against
the uppermost. Even were we thus to dispose three or more grounds or groups
over each other, it would look very decorous; and each deity would nevertheless
keep its proper colours, yet less in force, in proportion to the distance ; for when
the uppermost group is set off against the light sky, it causes a wonderful go-
off, and the reason proceeds from the sky’s seeming to be infinitely higher, which
contrariwise cannot be effected.
If it be objected, that supposing one of the principal figures in the uppermost
group, ought, according to its dignity and the reasons laid down in the suiting of
colours, to have a white drefs, and therefore the aforesaid position will be over-
thrown : ldeny it; for it will be helped by disposing some dark clouds behind,
which will preserve that garment in its force, and make it have a pleafing har-
behind each other, we have more largely handled this point, and shewed its truth
and decorum : for dark against light cannot advance with so much force as the
light may against the dark, because the light has greater strength in itself. How-
ever, to put an end to a point of so great latitude, which by discourse cannot be
fully demonstrated, I shall conclude it with the great Junius, who, in his third
book of the Art of Painting, says,
ee Thus we see that artists, in their works, ereate shades or depths, to the end
that the parts to come out may approach with more force, and seem to meet the
eye of the beholder, even without the picture. Let two parallel lines, says Lon-
ginusk be drawn upon a cloth, with light and dark colours ; the brightnefs of
the light will soonest strike the eye, and seem to be nearest. And a little fur-
ther, quoting Johannes Grammaticus, he says f, ee lf we paint a board with white
and black, the white will always seem to be nearer, and the black further off.
Therefore,’’ continues the same Author, in his observation on this point, ee the
painters also make use of blackisn or darkish-brown colours, when they are to
represent the deep hollow of a well, cistern, ditch, bottomless pit, or the like.
But when, on the contrary, they will make any thing come out, as the breasts
of a woman, an hand held out, or the feet of a leaping or running horse, they
lay on both the sides, a sufficient shade of black and brown colours, in order that
these parts may, by the neighbouring darkness, be flung off from the picture. with
a lively force.









CHAP. XI. Of the Deities in sacred and profane History, and Fables;
and, first, of the Difference between a facred and profane Representation.
AVING done with treating of cieling pieces, I thought it improper to
Aend this book, and make a new one of the following chapters; because
the matter has such a connexion, that we can scarce think of the one, without
falling presently on the other.
It is certain, that in common pictures the deities, ghosts, demi-gods, angels,
virtues, and other powers may likewise be introduced, nay are even inseparable
adjuncts; but into cieling pieces, where the upper part is the sky, they must of
necessity come ; because the major part of such representations relate either to
their persons, qualities, or virtues.
Now, duly to execute this representation of the deities, the artist ought chiefly
to be acquainted with the sacred and profane stories, as well as with the poeti-
cal fictions, that he may learn from them the particular occcurrences and pro-
perties peculiar to each person and rank of the deities or upper powers, and re-
present them accordingly ; for although imagination must, in this point, lend
great assistance, yet it is not safe for every man to rely eatirely thereon, lest he
should be deceived; like the man, whose neighbour dreaming that in a cer-
tain place was hidden great treafure, and awaking and going thither found it by
digging, and carried it home; he, on this good luck, laid himself down on an
heap of poppies, in hopes of the fame happinefs, but, after a long sleep, he
awaked without any advantageous intimation from his dream; contrarily, found
his pocket picked, and thus at once was bereft of his hopes and the money he
before had in possession. This simile is too plain to need nearer application.
A judicious master must certainly be well exercised in the knowledge of the
true conditions of the things he is to handle, that he may not be thought an ig-
norant ; for the truth cannot be hidden with respect to the inventor. Where-
fore you ought to take heed of mixing this truth with salse things, especially
in sacred stories, or spiritual representations ; since there is so great a contrariety
between them, that they cannot be joined, unless to shew the disagreement:
say, they cannot possibly be joined in order to express a single meaning, but will
rather serve to confound, weaken and mistake it; except they be separately dis-
posed, the spiritual above, in heaven, and the worldly below, on the earth.
I
speak with respect to emblems; for there is a great disparity between Pallas and
the Wisdom of God, since the latter cannot be attributed to any person, and much
less represented on the earth. The same may be said of Janus and Providence.
The heavenly and civil justice are also very unlike. We must therefore note,
that the whole lconology, or science of the heathenisn figures, though formerly
accounted heavenly, has now no relation to the soul, but to the moral virtues and
merits of men.






Let us then enquire, with reverence, what are Chriftian emblems, and what
profane or heathenisn; using in spiritual. representations nothing but what is pure
and heavenly, and in the worldlv, all that is proper to them, in order to gain the
esteem both of religious and worldly persons.
A passage in scripture mentions the driving Lucifer and his companions out of
heaven ; whence we may plainly conclude, that those monsters afterwards fell to the
share of the heathen, as no longer pertaining tothe faints. But we do not find after
that time, any more such unruly spirits were expelled heaven, wherefore we are
not allowed to represent more such iiistances. But in the case of men seen to
battle the true faith, things may be accompanied and represented with heathenisn
emblems, because, as is faid, the heathens gave themselves up to the devil; the
better by that means to express their error and shew the truth, thus also driving
them out of heaven.
It is, upon occasion, likewise not improper or disagreeing with the pharisees
or hypocrites ; but has a greater weight in fictitious stories or parables. Nor
can we, without offence, introduce other emblems than Christian-like, when they
only tend to incite to salvation. In which case we may represent angels or spi-
rits, to keep those hypocrites out of heaven.
In true profane histories, as the Roman, Grecian and others, this management
would be improper, but we may lawfully use hieroglyphic and other characters,
of which there is an infinity ; for instance, by a religious person, a white garment,
or an offering cup; by a cruel one, a tyger’s skin, or dragon, either on his helmet
or shield. It would be preposterous to place a vestal virgin by Numa Pompilius, in
order to shew his religiousness, or Achiiles by Alexander to express his valour, or
an Hercules by Milo; and still more ridiculous to set an Herrules by Hercules to
pourtray strength, or a fool by Momas to exhibit solly. It would, l fay, be very
ridiculous to explain Ovid by emblems, sceing he gives us nothing but emblems.
This would be a sceking light with light, or enlightening darkness with dark
clouds. We want not another sun for expressing the’ sun’s light. But these re-
presentations and by-works must only tend to the exhibiting invisible things by
visible objects.
The more noble and lofty the things we are to represent, the more valuable
ought to be the emblems we chuse for them; for instance, in expressing the na-
ture and quality of the deities, we use young and chaste virginity, à state in all
ages accounted the most rare and valuable; but in representing the paffions of
men, we make use of beasts; or else inaniinate characters and objects; for being
of a lower rank than the deities, they must also bear lesser objects.
If now it should be objected, because I represent Eternity by a serpent, and the
Purity of the deities by a Lamb, that this is contradictory to my own position; I
believe, with respect to the former, that any person will be of my mind, on a fair
consultation of the most ancient heathenisn representation of it; : and as to the
latter, scripture, and chiesly the Revelation of St. JJohin,: in niany passages exhi-
bits the person of Christ in the form of a lamb, and as the Lamb of God. Now
since all this. has an hieroglyphic meaning, why. should- not l. be allowed to fetch
my emblematical thoughts from so pure and rich a fountain of wisdom; Thus E









deport myself with-respect to. other fuch objects which represent some quality of
the doity ; bur those of later inxention, I endeavour, in ’this cafe, to avoid a8
much as possible.
Moreover, scripture, in many places, delivers itself in hieroglyphic terms;
comparing Anger to a bear bereft of its cubs, Meeknefs to a lamb, Innocence to
9. dove, Subtilty to a serpent, &c.
CHAP. XII. Disquisition touching the Representation of the Trinity.
TANY will think this fubject beyond the reach of what we have hitherto
W handled, and inconsistent with art ; but l am of a contrary opinion : for
a tender-hearted artist has, on account of the many differences among Christians,
reason to be in concern for this point, since so many occurrences offer in scrip-
ture, where the Aliighty is either acting in some form about mankind, or is
passing by as a glory, to make his presence known.
The greatest part of Christendom (Holland, England, and a part of Germauy ex-
cepted) allow, with one accord, the representation of the persons in the Trinity;
as first, God the Father, in the fhiape of an old man, with a long grey beard and
hair : secondly, Jesus Christ, as he appeared in his humanity; and thirdly, God
the Holy Ghost, in the shape of a dove, in which shape he descended on Jesas
Cbrist at the time of his baptism.
Now if, according to the letter of scripture, I were to represent Adam and Eve,
I find it necessary to exhibit the Creator of the world, and Maker of Adam, in
a vifible shape, fince it is written, That he made Adam of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into him the breath of life- Now, he who is to make some-
thing, or breathe into something, must, humanly speaking, have both hands and
mouth.
As scripture also commonly shews us an apprehenfive quality of- the Almighty,
why should I be more culpable for representing him under the same, than under
that of a triangle surrounded with a glory, and containing some Hebrew letters à
Yet our divines are of opinion that this last is allowable, but not the former.
Is not then the one a figure as well as the other à Or do the Jewifh characters,
or the inanimate shape of a triangle, make any alteration )
Besides thefe reasons, Does not a picture tend as well to inftruction as a well-
digested speech, wherein the orator, in order to. be understood, is obliged to use
a figural way of expreffion by parables; Or as a writing, wherein we find the
same method for understanding it ) Since the aim of both is, by the perception
of the hearers, to make their difcourses have an impreffion on their minds. Even
the writing containing the matter, Does it not confist of letter-figures, which, by
a certain method of uaderstanding, we comprehend; For it is not the Matter
itself.







I think, that the learned world and artists represent the first person of the
Trinity rather in the shape of a man, than of any other creature, on good reasons;
for we learn from scripture, that God created and made man in his own image;
and from the aucient fathers, that man is an epitome of. all that God created ;
who is therefore called the little world : fome even call man the master-piece of
God. We ought therefore, if we will take some likeness from the creatures, to
express the Almighty by the most perfect idea to be found, in order to exhibit
his perfection, and thus to make the copy, in the best manner, like the original :
and the more, as scripture, in feveral’ places, makes mention of the head, eyes,
ears, mouth, lips, armis, feet, hands, and other members of God : which things
must not be understood in a carnal and literal sense (according to the opinions of
some ignorant people, who imagine God, in-his nature, to be like a man; that
he sits in heaven on a throne, according to a passage in Isaiah, e The heaven is
my throne, and the earth is my foot-stool. And as-in another place the same pro-
phet says ee l saw the Lord sitting on an high throne, and lifted up) but in-a figural
and spiritual sense : l think then, that a painter has no nearer expreffions, in such
representations where God himself is acting, than to exhibit his figure in an
human shape, as best agreeing with those likenesses. We paint him aged, in
order to shew his majesty and wisdom, which are more to be found in old age
than youth; and with a sceptre and globe, and a circle of stars about his head,
to shew his omnipotence both in heaven and on earth. But Roman-catholics
daily make additions.
If- the scripture represent his godly person under a mysterious sense, why may
not the artist be allowed to do the same; Do we not read in the Revelation what is.
mentioned of God in an human shape, Is it not plain enough p Or must it be ob-
jected, that this description is apocryphal; But granting it the relation, neverthe-
less, is not accounted heathenish. Any doubt, which might arise from it, does-
not affect the point with réspect to shapes. In anôther place we find, that the
High-priest hid himself, that he might not behold the Lord : but the Lord put-
a finger on his eyes, till he was past by. How can I represent that paffage, with
out a body; or is it no fact: The prophet Isaiah says, ee Behold the name of the
fire.7 Now, to make this known to a person who cannot read, and is deaf, Is it
not more easy to do it by a representation, than by signs ; Are we to make only a
mouth sending forth a flame ; ls this so proper for such a nian’s apprehension, as
a whole figure; Moreover, is not a mouth a likeness and a figure, as well as a
whole image, What then are they pretending, who allow one part of the crime,
and not the whole) lf it be a crime, let it be intirely forbidden; and if good,
or at least sufferable, intirely allowed, and performed. Nevertheless, we must not
how before these things, mnch less worship them, but the true God only, who
is thereby meant. Can we observe a. facrifice otherwise; ls not that a mysterious
representation, or, in better terms, a figural demonstration, when it is said,
ce The facrifice was burning upon the altar, and the children of God were bow-
ing before it, praying, beseeching, and giving thanks in all submission,
Scripture,







Scripture, in several places, speaks of the appearing of God to men, either
really by the ministry of angels, or in a vision by dreams, or by extafies. There
is so sine a description of God, under the shape of an old man, in the seventh
chapter of Daniel, that no artist can better represent it. The same scripture also
mentions several appearances of angels in human shapes: for which reason, the
church, in the second council of Nice, made no difficulty in allowing artists to do
it; and chiefly painters, to represent God the Father as a kind, loving old man,
and the angels in an human shape.
It seems also, that a Painter has the privilege to paint and represent inanimate
things as living, according to the ideas which scripture affords him : and the
spectator must not be offended, when, in some pictures, he finds sacred subjects
attended with poetical fictions, for their better explanation; on a supposition the
latter be impious. Are not the Psalms of David, Solomon’s Song, the Book of Job,
and the revelation of St. John the Divine, all delivered under poetic figures,
not to speak of the parables besides, mentioned in scripture.
Painters therefore are not blame-worthy, for bringing in something that is
heathenisn, in order to clear the matter; and especially if the fact happened in an
heathenisn country. Thus the great Raphael, in his passage of the Children of
lsrael over Jordan, has represented the river under an human shape, violently turn-
ing the water back towards its source.
As scripture often lays down such and the like things under some figural de-
scriptions, it gives painters full liberty to do the same; fince, in order to accom-
modate itself to the weak apprehenfions of men, it usually delivers many of the
greatest mysteries under figures and parables ; as it speaks of the rivers, in
Psalm xeviii. 8.
Poussin also made no scruple, in his picture of the finding of Moses, to exhibit
the river Nile, by an human figure. But there were calumniators in his time as
well as as there are now. He was charged with atheism, for mixing truth with
lies, and having no more regard for either, than to treat them alike. Yet, if we
look nearer into this matter, we shall be convinced, that the learned painter
was not in the least tinctured with atheism. Did it not happen in heathenisn
Agypt s Was not Pharaoh’s daughter present' Did she believe the truth, which was
only manifested to Israel ? Certainly she did not. Since therefore the fact lay in
an heathenisn country, and was done in the presence of but two Hebrezo women,
the others being Ethnicks, this great artist has not trespassed either against the
Christian Faith, or against the art.
And although, at the first view, a well-grounded objection may be, that with
things which relate to religion, no false gods or deities, worshipped by the hea-
thens, ought to be mixed, and that it is sufficient for a painter to represent a river
in its natural course, and not in an human forin : yet the objection is easily an-
swered ; for scripture reprefents the waters, and the noise of rivers, under an
human form, as in Psalm xeviii. where it is faid, That they. clapped their hands
and were joyful. Moreover, the Agyptians never worshipped the rivers, but the
crocodiles living in them, and Isis under the shape of a cow, as Ovid and other
writers testisy.







Since then scripture makes use of allegorical speeches, a painter may also ex-
hibit his subject under symbolical and perceptible likenesses, in order to be the
more intelligible to the spectator, without fear that his work will mislead faithful
Christians, or strengthen heathenisn superstition; for a painter, who has no other
language to express himself by but figures, ought to make use of them, if he
would be understood.
Rubens, who of all the painters handled those symbolical figures, in the most
agreeable and learned manner (as we may particularly observe in the Cardinal
Infant’s entry into Anizverp, and in the paintings of the Luxemburgh gallery) is
taxed by some with mixing, in those compofitions, truth with fictions; but
how easily is this judgment to be refuted, by shewing the use that judicious artist
made thereof : for fiction is here not at all mingled with truth, but only tends
to make truth clear to sight and apprehension, and thus more plainly to express
it by the fictitious characters and emblems.
I pray observe, in his birth of the French King, Lewis XIII. how that ex-
cellent artist has exhibited Castor with an artful sway, on distant clouds, sitting
on his winged horse, and opposite to him Apollo, who, in his radiant chariot, is
driving upwards, in order to shew that this prince was happily born in the
morning. Hereby it is evident, that this ingenious master had no thoughts of
representing deitics as deities, but only to denote, by Castor (as accounted an
happy constellation) the king’s fortunate birth, and by Apollo the time of the
day, which was in the morning, appearing by his chariot’s mounting up from
the horizon.
But, further to clear my thoughts touching the representation of God the
Father, I shall, before I end this chapter, subjoin the following observation.
The Prophet Ezekiel, in his first chapter, mentions, that he saw the Almighty
from the appearance of his loins even upwards, and from the appearance of his
loins even downwards, as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness
round about. Wherefore, by this and other instances of scripture, we suppose,
that this sacred figure ought never to be represented without a glittering or glory
from head to foot ; even in such manner, that, bigger or less, according to the
place, occafion and decorum, and spreading around gradually thinner and fainter,
like a clear and transparent vapour, it at last insensibly unites with the by-works,
and disappears.
Now, to reduce this to a painting, we ought first to design the figure of the
Almighty, whether sitting or standing, in heaven or on carth, in the most per-
fect form and countenance, yet much bigger than any heavenly or earthly
creature. This you must colour with a single tint or ground, a little darker
than the glorv, and afterwards heighten with light. Then, with a large brush, soften
the figure, so that neither its out-line, nor any edginess or sharpness of the parts
of the face, hands, or feet (which ought to be touched very gentle and faint)
be perceived; just as if it were viewed through a silk gause, steamed glafs, or
thin mist: in short, like things seen in a Camera Obscura, observing that the
figure do not receive any light either from on high, or from afide, or from be-
hind, but in front only and about the most relievede parts, although the whole
piece






piece have another light; it must moreover have no other shades. than in, the
deepest cavities, and those very faint.
We have before cursorily shewed, why we represeat the Almighty as a vene-
rable old man; and shall now further insist on the point, though without re-
ference to all the paffages in scripture which might serve our purpose. In Daniel,
chap. vii. 9. it is written, The hair of his head was like pure wool, and his gar-
ment white as snow. The reason whereof, says Gregorius Nazianzenus, is to shew
thereby, as by an infallible token, his clean and undefiled Being. Wherefore
the wise Euscherus is also of opinion, that, for the same reason, the choir and
multitude of angels are represented in white. Others compare it to the human
shapc, and would thercby allude to. infinite duration, since nothing is so eternal
as the Godhead ; which I remark here;, because some scrupulous persons are of
opinion, that we ought not to represent God the Father in such. a shape, actorned
with white garments and grey hair.
And on this account all nations have, by an universal consent, thought proper,
to perform divine service in white garments and ornaments. The white has also
been at all times appropriated to the holy service, wherefore the poet Persius says,
He is worshipped in white.
But what is Persius’s saying to us, since the raiment of Jesus Christ, when he
manifested his glory to his disciples, appeared as white as snow; Cicero, Lib. 2.
Legum, says, The white looks best in all stuffs, but especially in the woven ones,
in order to exhibit what is holy and godly.
It is therefore necessary to represent the Almighty in a white garment; how-
ever it is not improper, to make it look more natural, that you keep it a little
yellowisn, as lighted by a sun, or like the glory which surrounds the figure.
But in all this a painter must be very discreet, and not abuse the licence al-
n
lowed him by scripture and the consent of the fathers, or, by his art, pervert
the sacred truths or slight them.
a
CHAP. XIII. Of the Glories proper to Angels and heathenish
Deities.
VAVING shewed in what manner, and on what terms, according to my
Ljudgment, to represent the Almighty ; let us now inquire how the angels,
in their power, ought to be exhibited.
Gregorius Nazianzenus says, that the true property of the angels, when they ap-
pear in a bodily shape, is to have a bright glory and glittering garments. We

sind the angels thus described in Mait. XXviii. 3. in Mark xvi-5. in Acts i. 10.
and many other places of scripture.
This glittering light of the angels ought therefore by all means to be observed
in most of their appearances ; as for instance in those to Abraham, and in the de-
livering






livering Lot out of Sodom, where they smote the lustful people with blindnefs;
for it is ceitain they had something more than human, since Abraham salutes them
as lords. It is not likely that this honour proceeded from their costly dress,
jewels and other precious things about them, but from some heavenly or uncom-
mon addition.
A further proof of this glory of the angels, is the sore pressing of the Sodomites
upon Lot, and their not coveting either him or his daughters, or any other strangers
probably living among them, but only these two young men to be brought out in
order to know them; and, perhaps, because of their more than human form and
charming brightnefs. If now this glory had shone too strong, they would have¬
perceived some deity, and forbore their wickedness; for it cannot be imagined,
that any man should daringly and knowingly strive against the Almighty.
But before we proceed further, Imust here deliver my opinion touching the per-
son of Jesus Christ; which is, that in his humanity, and before his resurrection, he
ought to be represented without the least shining or glory ; since he was made
in the likeness of men, and would be like his bretfiren in all things except sin,
as scripture testifies: but after his resurrection, he should be shewn with a glory
(as we read. he appeared to his disciples on Mount Tabor and in other places) as
having then put off his humanity in its principal purpose. Now to proceed.
We have further instances of the appearance of angels, as in those who came
to Manoah, Gideon and Tobit, and him who smote the people of Jerusalem for Da-
vid’s sin, &c. Of the first, scripture exprefsly says, that he, foretelling Ma-
noah the birth of Samson, ascended in the flame of the altar; possibly in an aug-
mentation of glory, uniting with the slame of the offering, by which doubling
brightnefs the parents of Samson were strengthened in their faith and hope of the
birth to come.
If this glory now be painted too strong and like lightning, it blinds our mor-
tal eves, and thus the patriarch Abraham could have viewed it no more than the
prophet and leader of lsfrael, Moses, when God appeared to him and passed before
The blind heathens had glimmerings of this truth; for when Semele presump-
tuously defired, that Jupiter might once embrace her in the same majesty as he
did Juno in heaven, and insisted on it, notwithstanding his dissuasion to the con-
trary, she was, on the requeft granted, intirely consumed by the attending glory
of the god, insomuch that with difficulty he saved the child he had by her-
Whence it is plain, that the glory, even in exhibiting the heathenisn deities,
ought to be observed; since in their appearance to men, either by night or day,
to bless or punisn them, they retained tneir full force, glory and majesty; and
this being weighed, they must also be represented glittering, beautiful in aspect
and shape, and in raiment of an elegant colour, as much as possible and the
nature and use of the picture will permit; as we haye before hinted in the hand-
ling of colours in cieling pieces.
But when the deities appear among men, as men, then they ought to be like
them, and not eafily distinguishable, otherwise than by their mein; as, for in-
stance, in the story of Jupiter with Calisto, Apollo with Dophne, Jupiter with Lycaon,
Mercury









Mercury with Argus, and the like : in such cases, and that they might the better
play their parts, they transformed themselves intirely into men and were perfectly
like them, laying aside all god-like glory and shape; as if, according to the opi¬
nion of the heathens, they meant that there can be no union of the divine with
human nature.
As to the motions of the heathenisn deities, many represent them appearing in
active postures, as walking, running, and other motions ; but it is as contrary
to my own opinion, as that of the great bishop of Hippo, Heliodorus. This learned
man, and great searcher into heathenisn antiquities, will not allow them to go or
walk, when seen in their majesty, but only to wave, or seem in some measure
to walk, yet gliding like a fhip moved gently along by the wind, without per-
ceptible motion : they ought always to be set out with thin clouds, of which
such as are nearest them receive a greater and stronger light.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Representations of Angels and heathenisb
Genii.
yHE Almighty in the beginning created an infinite number of angels or
heavenly spirits, who in scripture are distinguished by names, as seraphins,
cherubins, thrones, powers, arch-angels, angels, &c.
The first, as being nearest to the glory of the Almighty, are always represented
young and harmless, and with six wings, according to lsaiah ch. vi.
The second are exhibited only for the sake of motion, and to denote the
efficacy of eternal happiness; which their undefiled purity and childish form give
to understand.
The third, who continually attend God’s justice (as Dionysius Arcopagita, St.
Paul’s disciple, writes) are somewhat older, and more full-grown, and of an
agreeable sway and motion ; causing, by their appearances, no fear or fright, but
joy and gladness in people’s minds.
The fourth are appointed to execute divine vengeance, in the punishment of
fins and wickedness; of these one was so strong, that, with the Almighty’s per-
mission, he smote in the camp of the Assyrians 1850o0 men, z Kings xix. 2 Cron.
xXxii. Isaiah xxxvii. These are represented bigger than the former, having stern
countenances and violent motions ; are seldom or ever naked, but in coats of
armour, and with a flaming sword or thunder in their hands, or else a shield on
theiz arms, with the name of God glittering thereon. By their unexpected ap-
pearance they cause not only fear and fright in the wicked, but a continual re-
morse without repentance.
The fifth manage great and courtly affairs, as- guardians leading men to the
knowledge of God; they are of a perfect form and modest countenance.
The





The last protect us from all hurt, and are particularly ordained to excite us
to virtue, and dissuade us from evil, Acts xii. These, according to Dionysius,
as being the eldest in the lowest choir or hierarchy, are represented of a large size,
majestic and quick in motion.
There is still another kind, called evil spirits, or damones, or devils: Plato
calls them cacodæmones, or knowing and crafty. These afflict the wicked, and
induce them to all manner of sin, as blasphemy, unchasteness, gluttony, drun-
kenness, lying, defrauding, murder, &c. Their shapes are various, even as.
many as there are sins; and although they endeavour sometimes to mislead men
under beautiful appearances, yet they are always represented by some token
whereby to know them, either on their heads, backs, hands or feet, such as fins,
bats wings, vultures or eagles claws, bears paws, dragons tails, &c. also hold-
ing lighted torches, pitchforks, purses, murdering weapons, crowns, fetters,
yokes, serpents and adders, and with flames issuing out of their mouths; in a
word, any thing that betokens evil.
As to the angels before-mentioned, who in all ages have been represented
with wings, scripture allows us the liberty so to exhibit them; for the Al-
mighty himself shewed Moses the pattern of the Ark of the Covenant, and the
cherubins in this manner upon it. Can any example be more perfect than his ,
More instances in scripture may be found in the prophecies of Daniel, ch. ix. 21.
Isaiah vi. Rev. IV. Ezekiel x. &c.
Having thus far treated of the representation of angels, we shall now shew the
opinion of the heathens, not ill agreeing with the same meaning.
Plutarch tells us, that the ancient Romans had also their tutelar guardians, by
them stiled genii, or birth-gods; but they were not represented as angels, or sit-
ting upon clouds, or with wings or glories, but as well-shaped young men be-
tween sixteen and twenty years of age, and without beards, having long light
hair, composed countenances and easy motions, and a dog’s skin over their up-
per parts.
The reason of this cloathing was, as Chrysippus says, that they, as good spirits,
attend us from our nativities, being guardians of our actions, in reproving vice
and revenging transgrefsions, as often as we prefer brutality before humanity,
which the genii abhorred, pursuing and barking at us, in order to awake the
conscience. Of which opinion is Censorinus, and several others whom he quotes ;
adding, that these spirits watch so narrowly, that they never leave us, inciting
us to virtue, in proportion as we forsake vice and covet felicity. But why need
we these examples, Our Saviour affirms, that the angels have charge over us,
to conduct and preserve us, as we have before said ; wherefore the heathens, by
this emblem, have also rightly stiled their genii, guardians.
Censorinus likewise testifies, that the ancients considered their genii as gods of
procreation, either that, as we have said, they took care of us, or were born
with us ; for which reason, they believed there were as many genii as men, and
that each had his own : or else that there were twice as many, and that each man
had a good one and an evil one, the former persuading to virtue and the latter
to vice, agreeable to what Christians say of their guardian angels and the devil;












this last not failing to afflict mankind, though not born with us, as the heathens
believed of their genii. Hence it is, that some represent the genii in the shape
of a serpent, others as children or young men, or else as grey-headed old men,
conformable to the philosopher Cebes in his hieroglyphical table.
Zoroaster and the ancient philosophers have made a distinction between the ani-
mals consecrated to the good and evil genii ; according to them, dogs, fowls,
and the tortoise are proper to the good, and water animals peculiar to the evil.
The ancients often exhibited the genii crowned with garlands of horehound,
the leaves whereof much resemble those of the vine, or else with chaplets of di-
vers forts of flowers ; as Tibullus in a certain place says, ee The genius is adorned
with a beautiful chaplet of flowers, when his name and festival are celebrated to
his honour. 
Each person worshipped his genius without knowing it, in celebrating his
birth-day, and those of. princes were especially kept by every body with great
splendor ; wherefore he who falsly swore by the genius of his prince (which was
accounted a very great oath) was an immediate delinquent.
Since, as is said, the ancients had two kinds of genii, a good one and an
evil one, according to the Socratic Euclid, as Censorinus relates, we shall now con-
sider how the evil were represented.
T do not find the ancients had any statues or resemblances of them, but we
read, as writers testify, that they appeared to many.
Plutarch, Appianus, Florus, and others report, that as Bruius one night (accord-
ing to his custom) had betaken himself, with a light, to his apartment for medita-
tion he saw before him the likeness of a man, but very frightful, black and cloathed
in a wolf’s skin ; who being afked, who he was ; answered, I am thy evil ge-
nius, Brutus l Valerius Maximus also writes, that the evil genius appeared to Cassius,
of the cursed tribe of Marcus Antonius, a little besore Caesar caused him to be be-
headed. This genius appeared as a large black man, about fifty or sixty years
of age, having long hair and a dirty matted beard, and was covered with a wolf’s
skin down half way the thighs.
The Temesians, formerly inhabitants of Abruzzo, a country in Iraly, had also a
very evil genius, of a black colour and frighful look, and cloathed in a wolf’s
skin, doing that people much damage; as Paufanias and Suidas testify.
CHAP. XV. Of sacred Emblems.
THE defign of a well-composed sacred emblem is principally to edify, and
to incite to virtue; representing it to us as a looking glass, not so much
for the regulation of our bodies as our souls, and by such means to bring us to
happiness.
These emblems are either general or particular : general, when they suit any
person whatsoever; and particular, when they relate te one only. When their
subject






subject is piety or virtue; learning, liberty, peace of mind, and such like, they-
are general, and applicable to every person who possesses or endeavours to pol-
sefs those qualities: but when a particular person is their subject, as the Vir-
gin Mary, an Apostle, or other virtuous man, who excelled in some particular
gift, in such case they are particular or singular. We ought, therefore, in the
former fort, to observe, that the main matter is spiritual, and in the latter, cor-
poral : the one exhibits learning itself, and the other a learned man or philoso-
pher; one shews Peace, and the other a peaceable man; one represents Piety,
and the other a pious man, &c. The one is the matter itself, and the other he
who possesses it. However, a judicious master will make a distinction be-
tween spiritual and corporal virtues, between natural inclinations and heavenly
gifts. The corporal, as Strength, Prudence, Equity, and the like, proceed
from us, or, in better terms, are peculiar to us, walk, stand, and act with us;
and the spiritual and heavenly, and which consequently have no relation with
the body are as without us ; wherefore they must be represented either sitting
or lying on clouds, and the nearer they approach beatitude, the more glitter-
ing, nimble, faint and waving they are to be exhibited.
am of opinion that we ought to adapt particular sorts of stuffs to the afore-
3
said virtues and qualities, according to their ranks and dignities; as, to cloath
the earthly in stuffs and cloth, and in thick silk; and those still higher, in
gause scarfs, or else to let them remain naked.
We must further remark on the last of these, that the characters called the
qualities of God, Imean figural characters, such as the eye, implying Dominion;
the circled serpent, Eternity ; the sun, Glory; and such like, ought always to
appear in the uppermost glory, as pertaining to the Deity, and are represented
by lovely waving children. Yet let it be observed, that those things only re-
spect the blessings of heaven; for when the Almighty is provoked, and is to
inflict punishiments, we must introduce other qualities, such as his wrath, justice,
&c. also represented by angels, with thunder, siery swords, scales, &c. but these
ought to be stronger and like young men; as we find it in scripture, in the
story of Lot, where they struck the Sodomites with blindness; and in that of Sen-
zacherib, where an angel of the Lord in one night smote so many thousands, and
more such cases.
I shall illustrate what I have before said by further examples, in such manner
as I apprehend the point; and for that purpose have chosen an uncommon sub-
ject, to serve for a particular
Emblem and stately Monument of her Majesty, Mary Stuart, late Queen of Great Bri-
tain, France and Ireland, Princess of Orange.
Here a tomb is standing on the left side of the piece, on a basement whereon
is carved the river-god of the Thames. In the middle of the piece, on the se-
cond ground, a princess is sitting in grandeur on a throne, representing Englans
with its proper badges. She leans her head on her left hand, and with het
right opens the royal robe of the deceased, which is lined with ermin, and witl-








the sceptre and crown lies in her lap, whereon she casts a forrowful look ; she is
covered with a black gause weed, which darkens the glitter of the seat and coat
of arms. Policy on her left side, quite dejected, is beholding the tomb, ac-
companied by Sorrow. On the other side appears the Protestant Church, lan-
guishing, supported by Hope, who points at the tomb, whereon stands a large
beautiful antique vase, out of which is growing a rose-twig having but one bud,
whereon Providence, sitting on clouds, dispenses some moisture out of a small
crystal phial, and with her sceptre points upwards at the celestial light, to
which Wisdom, Piety and Stedfastnefs are seen flying, supporting, or rather
carrying a beautiful young virgin along with them. This virgin is drest in
white and crowned with roses, having a bright star over her head ; her hands
are crofs her breast, and she is looking upwards with a joyful countenance.
On high appears God’s Love or Tendernefs, waiting for her with open arms,
having in its lap a pelican feeding its young with its own blood. The other
characters of divine Happinefs before-mentioned are also seen, and especially
heavenly or perfect Joy or Harmony, represented by spirits singing and playing
on instruments. On the vase is a medal, wherein is carved a phoenix arising out
of its afhies. Under it, on a black table, is written in gold letters, either in
Latin or Englissi, TDIE IN ORDERTO LIVE. The tomb is hung with fes-
toons of cypress, intermixed with roses. On the right side of the tomb stands
Fate, having in the left hand a rose close to the vase, and in the right a pair of
scissors, as if she had cut off the rose with them. On the left side of the tomb
stands Nature, dejectedly holding a handkerchief before her eyes, and with the
left hand at her breast. Envy, to the right forwards, is taking to flight, biting
an heart, and looking either at Providence or at the beatified soul ascending.
About the throne stand Scotland, France and lreland, in. mourning.
A Second Example-
Here we may represent Majesty on a raised throne, sitting in full splendor;
Clemency and Authority standing behind her, and holding over her head a crown
topped with a glittering star. On her side may sit Religion, and on a step be-
low Policy taking shelter under her garment. Quiet, Plenty, and Success by
land and sea, may be placed as coming in; and, on the other side, Peace ac-
companied by Art and Science. Above, in an open heaven, fits Providence
pouring down divine Blessing. Over the throne, on a cloud, should be Wisdom,
Religiousness and Stedfastnets.
This Majesty may be here the subject of this emblem, and, if it have no par-
ticular characters, suit any kingdom, power or commonwealth in Oristendom;
but if it have any arms, device, or motto, as SUFFICIT UNUS, or a Flower-
de-luce for France; PLUS ULTRA for Spain; HONI SOIT QUI MALY
PENSE for England; then this Majesty ought to be like that which it is to re-
present.







It would not be improper to see the glory filled with Divine Love or Kind-
nefs as before-mentioned, and Prosperity flowing from it. Fright and Fear tak-
ing to flight, and Envy, Fraud and Heresy under Majesty’s feet.
The active Virtues I represent by figures, which hold the crown over Ma-
jesty’s head, and those sitting on clouds, &c.
A Third Example.
The subject of this shall be Innocence murdered.
Here Innocence is prostrate, murdered by raging Impiety. She lies near an
extinguished altar, stretched out on the ground, cloathed in a clean white gar-
ment, betokening an upright undefiled heart. The cruel executioner forcibly
tears her innocent child from her breast, and at the same time the brutish mur-
derer is stepping from the eminence whereon he sat, in order to go off; he is
stained with innocent blood, and, sheathing his bloody sword, tramples under
foot a pelican with its young. Rage attending him, and firing them with her
torch, is looking back in great consternation at Heaven, which darts many
thunders at her. There Divine Justice is descending, with scales in one hand
and thunders in the other. Piety, bowing before her at the altar, is praying.
and shewing her the innocent corpse; whereupon she doubles her speed to exe-
cute revenge. Now see the wrath of God expressed, not with bright sun-beams.
from on high, but with fiery and bloody ones.
Here Justice, or divine Wrath, has a flaming red garment or veil. Impiety
is cloathed in a rusty copper-coloured drapery. The Executioner, who misuses.
the child, has a cruel aspect, and is reddish. Over Innocence a little angel is.
ascending to heaven with a bright star, to which a long ray seems to proceed
out of her mouth; he has a palm-branch in his hand, to fignify her happiness.
The following. is a fhort sketch of the actions.
The head of the corpse lies on the middle of the piece on the fore-ground,
a little up, as if there were still some life left. Behind the altar Piety kneels
the second ground, is with her upper parts directly over the point of sight, and
her feet somewhat fore-shortened towards the right side, from whence sne is-
coming. On the left side, on the same ground, a little more forward, Impiety
and Rage take to flight. Rage is half-shaded by dark clouds, over which hea-
ven opens. The fore-ground has a right light; but Justice receives-her light
from behind. On the left side of the piece is a dark off-scape.
Now, as the former emblem represented the reward of virtue, so this repre-
sents the punishment of evil; in that appeared the love of God, in this his
wrath.
Thus are my thoughts an these subjects, not presuming to have handled them.
with the utmost accuracy ; I am far from giving them out as perfect emblems,
since that is the work of great judgment, vast knowledge, and mature consi-
deration : nevertheless, rough as the plan is, it is sufficient for explaining my
sentiments.






sentiments. And as we always stick either more or less to art, and hardly keep
so much within the-bounds of curiosity, as not to take some liberties in the dis-
position of things, so I have represented him who is taking away the child, as an
cxccutioner, naked, his hair tied with a cloth, and with a dagger lying by him,
and Impiousitess, as a prince, with a bloody diadem about his head and a staff in his
hand ; though these figures ought rather to be women ; moreover, the execur
tioner might have been left out.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Penates, Lares, and Cupids.
NCIENT Historics relate, that most nations which lived under laws and
policy, especially the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, -but mostly these last
Fad certain figures of gold, silver, copper, or wood, which they stiled Dii Pe-
nates, in Engiisa, Houshold-gods. These they kept as holy, and took such par-
ticulat care of, that in case they happened to be lost, either through carlessness,
violence, or other accidents, they thought it foreboded some imminent disaster
or bad luck to befall them ; and accordingly believed, when any such were at
hand, that those gods were either removing, or vanished.
The historian Timæus writes, that they were represented like two beautiful young
men in a warlike dress, each with a javelin in his hand, and by or near them an
earthén fire-pan, over which lay two long iron bars crofs-ways, turned at the ends
like the hazel wands which Augures held in their hands at the time of
officiating.
Cicero, treating of the Penates, says, They were certain Gods brought forth in
the houses of particular men, and worshipped in the most concealed and private
places of them. And in this sense Demophoon and Terence spake, when they said,
e
They would go home and hide their household Gods, before they betook to their
business and callings.
In scripture also we have the Teraphims, or household Gods, which Rachel stole
from her father Laban, when he went to sheer his sheep ; as the Rabbi Eliezer, in
the 36th Chapter of his Discourses, largely treats, speaking of Laban, and the
preparing of the Teraphims.
We have before said, that the Penates were in great esteem among the Romans,
which Dionysius Halicarnassus affirins, saying, They were worshipped at Rome, un-
der the shape of two sitting young men, in very ancient and warlike dresses, and
having javelins in, their hands; with this subscription, Dii Penates, as we find it
still in ancient medals. Nigidius was of opinion, that they were Apollo and Neptune,
and the rather, as by Apollo is meant heat and drought, and by Neptune, cold and
moistness; judging the worship to owe its origin to these cffects: wherefore, Virgil
in the Eighth Book of his Aneids, stiles them the Great Gods, meaning the Pe-
nates. Others think that Jupiter and Juno are signisied by them, because their
chief






chief businefs was to give men help and asfistance, and therefore they both derive
from the Latin word Juvare, signifying to help or assist. Others again imagine
them to be Castor and Pollux, because they, with the Penates or household gods,
were also according to the ancient poets and historians, in very great esteem, and
the Raman worshiyy asfigned them the first places in their temples.
It will here be proper to deduce something touching these gods from antiquity,
the better to illustrate the point.
We read, that when the daughter of Pallantes was married to Dardanus, she
brought in dower the gifts which Pallas had made her a present of, being an ob-
long shield, dropt from heaven (which she stiled Palladium) and the figures of the
Penates, or great Gods. Afterwards on a rebellion breaking out in Peloponnesus,
where Dardanus and his wife lived, he with many of the Arcadians fled from thence,
taking shipping for Samothracia, where, in consideration of those gifts, brought as
a portion, he built a temple, instituting private solemnities for their religious
worship, keeping them srom the common people in a vault under the ground ;.
and soon after, on his departure for Asia, took them with him and placed them in
Dardania, so called from his. name. His son llus being employed in building
llium, or Troy, transplanted those gods thither. AEneas afterwards having saved
them out of the slames of that city, carried them to Italy, placing them in the city
of Lavinium. Ascaniushis son, removed them to the city of Alba, where he dedi-
cated a large and magnificent temple to their honour. But they say, the Gods of
themselves, without human assistance, returned the next night to Taviniam, though
the gates were fast, and the town-wall and roof of the temple found intire and
without any breaches. Which miracle very much surprising Ascanius, he sent to
Livinium six hundred men, called Curatores, of whom Egestus was chief, to guard
the Gods. At last, being carried to Rome, they remained without any alteration,
and the Roman people committing to them the care and protection of their city,
and growing empire, placed them, in imitation of Cardanus (that they might not
be stolen either by fraud or violence) in a vault or temple under ground, wherein,
after consecration, they offered sacrifices to them, not allowing any person to spit
in this temple because the Gods, like Vesta, were worshipped with fire.
They were represented as young men, and sitting with javelins in their hands,
to signify their being adored as maintainers and protectors ; for the sitting hiero-
glyphically expresses, stedfastness in what we design to do: the javelins imply that
they preserve from harm and disaster; and the youthfulness denotes the increase of
The Lares were much like the Penates, at least in the guard and care of cities.
They also are said to have hid, or kept themselves secret in the houses, as well as
the Penates ; which Tibullus affirms, saying, That they have not only the care of
particular houses, but also of the whole town.
The ancients used to place dogs to watch their idols, called Lares ; as being a.
creature kind and fawning on the family, and fierce and frightf ul to stranger.
They had the same opinion- of their Lares, or houshold Gods, committing to
them the intire care and safeguard of their families. For this reason, says Plutarch,
the Romans represented them as brisk young men, dressed in dog-skins. Ovid
affirms,






affrins, they were sonietimes exhibited in short garments, gathered up on the left
shoulder, and coming down under the right, in order to be more sree and loose in
their motion, because, says he, Their business was like that of the genii (men-
tioned before) to inquire narrowly into mens actions for the punishment of the
wicked. The philosopher Jamblichus relates, that they were often worshipped on
the roads, and had froin time to timne offerings of wine and frankincense.
We shall now treat of the shape of children, distinguishing them into heavenly
and earthly.
Poussin exhibited them too squab and full for flying, and those of Raphael are
gencrally, chiesly in the borders of the histories of Psyche, too hard and masculous;
wherefore, to find a good form, we must keep a medium between both. But
Cupids ought not to be represented so heavy as earthly children, yet as young as
you please. The earthly contrarily, must have understanding, in order to handle
something, and their bodies to be enlarged according to what they are to do or
carry. But in representing a Cupid, who is to deliver a message, I think it is
proper to give him age and bulk enough to do the business punctually, and the
better to express truth and nature. As to their wings, they must not be made in
proportion to the weight of their bodies like birds, for their bodies wave of them-
selves, and the bigness of the wings often creates deformity, unless they are to re-
present a Fame, when they ought to be larger.
As to the Loves or Cupids themselves, they, according to my apprehension,
differ as much in size as action. The one is by the poets called Capid, and the
other Anteros. The former creates love and desire for voluptiousness, and the
latter leads to virtues, arts and sciences. They have both a like beautiful and
agreeable aspect according to their ages. Cupid is represented about six or eight
years old, and quite naked, armed with a bow and arrows, and sometimes holding
a burning torch. Anteros, contrarily, has a purple garment, with bare arms
and legs only, a crown of laurel about his head, a burning torch in his hand,
sandals on his feet, and he is about twelve or fourteen years of age. Cupid is wild
and frolicksome, Anteros sedate and contemplative.
There is another less kind of Cupids somewhat younger and more simple than
the former.
These increase love, incite the pleasures of voluptuousness, or
more stronger delude the senses. To them, in order to shew their simplicity, are
ascribed childish and idle actions, such as dancing, skipping about, running,
rolling, flying, slinging apples at each other, &c. They must not have quivers,
bows, arrows, or torches, but baskets of fruit and flowers, or chaplets, a look-
ing glass, or any thing tending to the pleafures of Venus.
Alexander Propertius, Philoftratus, Claudianus, Silius stalicus, Apulcius, and others
relate, that the different Loves and Cupids do not only respect the charms and
service of Venus, but also imply the desires and tendencies of the heart ; since
all men do not affect the same object, but each chuses for himself.
We represent Cupid or Love in the form of a little child, because it is sot-
tisn to betake to venerv; for the actions and speeches of those in love, are as
imperfect as those of little children, as Virgil shews in Dido,-She begins to
speak, and stops in the middle of her talk. He is exhibited with wings, to
signify






fignify the inconstancy of lovers, who change with every wind, as we see in
Dido, who was to put to death the person whom fhe before so dearly loved.
He
has arrows in his hand, because they are also very light and do not always hit
the mark, as we have said of lovers, who are whimsical and fickle when they
cannot gratify their wishies; and as the arrows are sharp and piercing, so the sins
of concupiscence no less wound the conscience. The arrows are likewise an
emblem of love, which like thunder seizes the heart ; for many have experi-
mented the sorrowful isfue of being captivated by the amorous glances of a beau-
tiful woman, and through their fiery paffions been led into great troubles; for
which reason Cupid is sometimes represented with thunder in his hand.
CHAP. XVII. Devotional Actions of Nations.
Of all the perfections of human nature, Religion is the most excellent and

 most universal ; wherefore all nations partake of it in their manner of liv¬
ing and service. And as reason principally distinguishes man from beasts, so we
any where see, that the use of it binds men to some religious duties, as attend-
ing human understanding, and according to Jamblichus, a Platonic sectary, ex-
citing it by a natural desire and-propensity to do good and shun evil. To which
some allude by the celestial fire in the fable of Prometheus, with which he ani-
mated the first man; thereby signifying, that as the soul is governed by religion,
so our actions must chiefly tend to implore a blessing on them, and our eyes and
hands be lifted up to heaven, knowing that all good proceeds from the invisible
Giver of all things, and we ought thankfully to receive it to his honour and
glory. We shall therefore, in order to be both delightful and useful, shew from
antiquity, how and in what manner divers nations, not enlightened by the Gos-
pel, have dedicated their worship under fictions and fables to the invisible Being,
and begin with the Egyptians.
The custom of these people was, when any person prayed to the gods, that
he must, as the most decent action, do it standing and with lifted up hands ;
which posture was also strictly observed by the Romans in their religious worship,
as Martial and Horace testify. Virgil likewise shewe, that standing with hands
lifted up signifies worship, when he introduces Anchises (at the miraculous sight
of Julus’s head, encompassed with a shining light and yet his hair unhurt by the
flame) joyfully turning his eyes to heaven, and lifting his hands in prayer to
Jupiter; and, in confirmation of the acceptablenefs thereof, a loud thunder was
soon after heard, and a star appeared in the heavens when dark, which, like a
torch, with a long clear tail, descending towards the house, glid along, and at last
hid in the wood of Mount lda, leaving behind a long stripe which emitted a sul-
gods
phurous vapour and smoke ; whereupon Anchise, standing up, invokes the
and









and sacred stars. Philo says, that the erect standing posture denotes an humble
heart, wholly devoting itself to heaven. Authors unanimoussy agree, that the
ancients offered their sacrifices, vows and prayers to Jupiter in a standing posture,
but to the goddess Ops in a sitting one, signifying thereby that she was the mo-
ther of the earth. Eythagoras enjoins those who pray, to do it sitting; yet Plu-
tarch says that Numa Pompilius was the author of that custom, thereby teaching,
that vows and prayers ought to be certain and constant.
As tothe posture of praying standing, St. Paul seems to exhort thereto in his
epistles. We find likewise in the Old Testament, that the priests did in their
prayers, stretch out their hands to heaven. In the Book of Judges, Chap. vii.
we read, that in Gideon’s army, the men who bowed down on their knees to drink,
were by God’s command, sent away ; but those who drank standing, putting
their hands to their mouths, were chosen, and defeated the Midianites. In Exod.
Chap. xvii. it is written, That as long as Moses held up his hands Amalek was dis-
comfitted : which, as Adamantius says, signifies, that he offered up to God his
actions and enterprizes, not like creeping animals who cleave to the earth, but
as directing his heart and thoughts to heaven. On which grounds and examples
the council of Nice ordained prayer to be made standing.
Adoration, says Pliny, not only consists in lifting up the hands to heaven, but
also in their being open inside upwards, as if we gave them to kifs. They who
adore and supplicate, says Hieronymus, are used to kiss the hands : wherefore the
Hebrezes judged this manner of kissing to be very reverential, and strictly observed
it. Cicero and Catullus also confirm the signification of lifting up or stretching out
both the hands to heaven. Tertullian speaking of praying for the preservation
and prosperity of the emperor, says thus: The Christians bareheaded lift up
their hands, with their eyes to heaven in token of innocence ; signifying thereby
that they had no occasion to be afhamed, but heartily prayed for their emperor.
The Tuscans likewise in their prayers, used such a posture or stretching out the
hands; and, in adoring their gods, especially Jupiter, lifted up their hands to
heaven. Of which Virgil also makes mention in his Fourth Aneid, where he de-
scribes Jarbas among the statues and altars of the gods, lifting up his hands to
heaven, humbly and earnestly imploring Jupiter. We read further, that in the
Olympic games anciently celebrated at Smyrna, a ridiculous and ignorant actor was
reproved by the sophist Polemon, for his awkward motions with hands reversed ;
because when he was to say, Oh Jupiter/ he turned his hands downwards, and in
saying, Oh earth l he looked up to heaven. But these perverse gestures pro-
ceeding from ancient customs are still seen among the Romishi clergy, who as often
as they pronounce the word God or Lord, give the blessing to the congregation ;
and in praying for the prosperity of the people, stretch out their hands on high.
In the medal of Gordiauus Pius, we see a small figure with the arms thus extended
and the hands open, with a motto alluding to the matter Pietas August. But to
return to the ancient Agyplians :
They used to represent the Deity in an hieroglyphic manner by a circle : and
agrecable thereto, the philosopher Pythagoras enjoined a turning round in the ado-
ration of the Gods, Alcinous says also, that he gathered from the Greek writings,
that






that they had an ancient custom of running round the altars when they offered sa-
crifice, beginning from the left to the right side, according to the Zodiac, and
then running from right to left. Plutarch thinks this was done in imitation of the
heavenly motions in their continual rotation, which mortals ought to follow :
though others pretend, that thereby was meant the continual changes and insta-
bility of human actions. As for the continual motion and turning of the body in
prayer, we find it to have been the custom of divers nations ; and in this sense
the poet Propertius, in his First Book, accosts his mistress,—ecl have often turned
round before your door, aud offered up to you my soul and my prayers.1
which, there is a passage in Suetonius, when he speaks of the ancestors of Vitellius,
ce He had, says he, a particular address for flattery, and was the first who com-
manded divine worfhip to be paid to Caius Casar; and no person durst, after his
return from Syria appear in his presence without being covered, and turning se-
should turn several times round in prayer to heaven, and afterwards sit down,
thereby intimating that, in worldly affairs, mertals must expect nothing but ine
constancy and continual change, which they ought to bear with patience and re-
solution. Add to this what Pliny says; That the manner of turning round in
prayer was from the left to the right hand, in imitation of the earth ; which, ac-
us, that as Camillus in prayer turned round, according to the Roman custom, he
suddenly fell; by which accident the people (much addicted to superstition)
Marcellus being at war with the Transalpine Gauls, and come to a town called Capide
in order to charge them, his horse affrighted by the shouts of the enemy, went
backwards ; wherefore, to encourage his men, he turned him round as if he were
adoring the sun, according to the Roman custom before battle, and thus covered
the accident without the peoples perceiving it.
We shall now, for the reader’s greater satisfaction, treat of Piety and what re-
lates to it.
The ancients chiefly esteemed the altar as an hieroglyphic of Piety, offering,
being supposed a medium between heavenly and human things, they pretended
cé
it to be a mediator or messenget. Accordingly Virgil, in his 12th Aneid,
They
touch the altar, and call the fire upon it and the gods to witnefs, &c. 
urge further, that fire unites with material parts, and always rises upwards from
below ; as knowing all our earthly actions, and imparting them to the heavenly
spirits. Hence we see, that the manners of offering sacrifices are not without
some foundation in reason, because the laws of nature are always purely observed.
And since the world has been enlightened with the truth, fire is customarily
used in divine service, and no facrifice was thought acceptable without it. In-
deed, if earthly creatures can any way reconcile us to heaven, nothing has greater
affinity with the fire, as it lights and clears every thing. Wherefore they think
that they may represent the genii and angels, even the Dity itself by it.
As







As to the Altars and Piety, we see in the medal of the emperor T. Alius, 3
figure with open hands, which, as before observed, signifies Worship, and by it
an altar with these letters, PIETAS. In one of Hadrianus Augustus is the same
figure, between a stork and an altar adorned with ground-ivy, with this inscrip-
tion, PIETAS AUG. In one of Diva Augusta Faustina appears a woman, lift-
ing up her garment with the left hand and laying the offering on the burning
altar with the other, having the word PIETAS, In the medal of Lucilla we see
a figure standing behind the altar, with a cup in its hand as ready to offer, with
the word PIETAS. In that of Antoninus is the figure of Piety, opening the
right hand as a token of adoration, and with-the left ready to put the sacrifice
on the altar, with the same inscription. In the gold medal of L. Alius Caesar,
the right hand of the figure is in the same action and the left holds a gift, alsp
inscribed PIETAS.
We offer prayers and supplications, either in making vows or receiving fa-
vours in consequence of them. Hence proceed the various inscriptions on me-
dals, which neverthelefs do all allude to piety, whether in praying for help or
returning thanks. Accordingly we find in the medal of Jalia Pia Aug. a wo-
man tucking up her garment on the left-side and offering with the right, with
this inscription VOTA PUBLICA. But in one of Hadrianus are two figures,
one like the emperor, and the other holds in the left hand a palm-sprig, and
with the right offers him a cup, having this motto ADVENTUTI AUGUSTI.
In one of Domitian is a burning altar, inscribed PRINCEPS JUVENTUTIS.
The altars were anciently, as they are now-a-days, places of safety and pro-
tection. Wherefore Priamus, in Virgil, having lost all hope of preservation,
took sanctuary at the altar, of which his wife had said, This altar shall protect
us all. Cicero, speaking of the actor Roscius, says, We run into his, house as to
an altar. And Ovid, in his Triftib. says, The altar only is left me in my mis-
fortune.
The Athenians had a particular altar dedicated to Mercy and Compafsion, as
we gather from the poet Papinius and Lactantius Grammaticus, and from Apfinis in
his Rhetoric. Plutarch, treating of superstition, calls the altar abominable. Xe¬
zophon, in his second book of the state of Greece, takes Vesta for an emblem of
refuge to the altar: When Theramenes (says he) had heard the things, he took.
to Vesta for refuge. Pollux calls Vesta the altar of offering, especially that at the
Prytaneum k where the everlasting fire was kept. Dionysius Harlicarnassus says,.
That Romulus built a temple in honour of Vesta, and as a memorial of his hav¬
ing divided the Roman people into thirty wards. Suetonius writes almost the same
in the life of Tiberius.
In fine, the altars were set up for facrifices and prayer, to obtain divine favour
and blessing, though few have determined which of the various sacrifices was
best and most approved by the ancients, who offered to the Almighty only in
spirit
*The place in Athens, where the judges and magistrates sat, and where those who had done
any confiderable service to the common-wealth, were maintained at the public charge.






spirit and understanding, without uttering a word ; wherefore the MEgyptians ho-
noured the crocodile, as having no tongue, applying it to the divine silence-
They praised the spirits and souls of the ever-blessed, and offered to heavenly
things material ones, such-as had some affinity with them, viz. fire to the sun,
&c. But to the evil spirits or devils, they brought offerings that they might not
hurt or obstruct them, or that their uncleanness might not pollute the sacrifice
or the savour of the meat. The Agyptiansf always thought it abominable to
expiate with the blood of animals, and therefore offered only prayers and frank-
incense. The kings of the Ptolemaic line enjoined them sacrifices to Serapis and
Saturn, to whom they built temples without their towns, wherein to offer beasts
as usual; though in after-times, according to the inhuman custom of Busiris, on
his usurping the countries and places bordering on the Nile, they offered men.
But of offerings we shall treat further in the following chapter.




CHAP. XVIII. Of the different Offerings of Nations, and their
Rites.
AS from highest antiquity down to these times, different regards have been
had for many persons and places, and the knowledge thereof much con-

oerns an artist : so he ought diligently to inquire into the ancient manners and
customs relating thereto, both in general and with respect to particular
countries.
Scripture informs us; that the Athenians were very religious ; wherefore they
as well as the Romans, lestthey should forget a deity, would rather set up an altar
to an unknown god, and make offerings thereon, than be any ways negligent in
the duty of worship. From which altar St. Paul took occasion to preach so
powerful a sermon touching Christ and his gospel, as thereby to bring over many
souls to christanity.
We must conclude, that so many altars required many priests, who were as
different in drefs as the gods and manner of offering; those of Jupiier not at all
like Priapus’s, nor Diana’s those of Bacchus; as we shall shew in the sequel.
The great Laver of the Jews evidences, that their priests observed a perfect
cléanliness in their worship. Even the Almighty himself ordered Moses to put off
his-shoes,. when he appeared to him in the burning bush, and that any man or
beast who touched the Mount or its borders, so long as he was present; should
be shot or stoned.
It is not probable that the heathens were so nice in this- point ; nevertheless,
 the present custom induces us to believe that their ancestors no less observed this
decency







decenev in their worship, since, to this day, even Christians are not allowed to
enter the mosques of the Mahometans, though of all infidels they are the least ob-
servers of religious ceremonies.
I think it not amiss to deride the Agyptians in particular, for paying divine
honour to sonie beasts, because most nations especially the Greeks, (who excelled
in wisdom and knowledge) as likewise the strict Romans were infected with the
same superstition.
Marcrobius writes, that king Janus was the first who introduced and established
in ltaly the offerings to the gods, and that he himself was afterwards worshipped
as such, even so much, that the ancient Romans never sacrificed before they had
invoked him as the inventor and protector of the offerings ; for they believed he
always fat at the gates of heaven, and that the prayers of mortals could not reach
the Gods if he denied them entrance, nay, he must even lend them an hand to go
forward, because prayers, which Homer calls women, are lame and cripples.
The most ancient nations who brought offerings (of which the Agyotians were
doubtless the principal) did not make use of beasts, but herbs, flowers, trees and
plants, as likewise perfumes ; they therefore who anciently lived on beast’s flesh
did it, as reported, for want of fruits : and this on an opinion of Pythagoras, who
forbid the eating of meat or blood, as judging that the soul had its residence
therein : although Eusebius relates the ancient divines maintained, that no beasts,
even no meal, honey, fruits or flowers ought to be offered ; for, says he, God
knows them who fear him, and favourably accepts the poorest leaf they lay on the
altar, regarding their hearts and inclinations, and not what they offer with their
hands.
It is certain, that in old times, a detestable custom prevailed among almost all
nations, of butchering men for victims, as we learn from credible authors, was
practised to Diana Taurica. And not only the ancient Soyrhians, but also the Agyp-
tians and Romans were infected with this cruelty; the former offering such victims
in honour to Juno, and the latter to Jupiter, called Latialis, whom they esteemed
the protector of the Latins. Sicinnius Dentatus (or the toothed, as being so born)
very famous for martial exploits, was the first among the Romans who sacrificed
men to Mars. Athanasius relates, that divers other nations, after their return
from conquest, had a custom of dividing their prisoners into hundreds, and that
one out of each, as the unlucky lot fell, was sacrificed to Mars. Varro also testi-
fies, that the wandering Trojans, on their arrival at last in staly, offered, according
to the oracle, one man in ten to Pluio and Saturn. Anaeas, as Virgil informs us,
chose eight young gallants out of the prisoners he took of the enemy, to sacrifice
them to the gods of hell for the sake of Pallas deceased. Diodorus Siculus mentions,
that the people of Carthage sacrificed to an idol of metal, representing Sciurn,
holding out its arms bent, young men as a burnt-offering, by consuming them
alive in the flames of a red hot oven placed under this figure. Which offerings
were long retained among those people, till at last having them in abhorrence,
they put à live deer to the same usc. Yet, some time after the death of Alezander
the Great, on being visited with the plague. and the town closely besieged and re-
duced to famine by Agathocles king of Sicily, they, according to the common cus-
tom






tom of nations, had recourse to their imagined tutelar-gods, prayers, and old su-
perstitions, believing that Saturn, provoked by the change of offering, (which
their ancestors, with great devotion appropriated to him) had as a punshment,
caused this disaster and irreparable damage to befall them : which opinion so in-
fluenced on the minds of the citizens; that they barbaroussy in one day offered two
hundred, others say three hundred youths of noble birth to that idol, as an at-
tonement. the same writer adds, that the Phaenicians exceeded all other nations
in that unnatural practice, insomuch, that in a frantic extravagance, and to ap-
pease the imagined wrath of the idol Saturn, they sacrificed their own cnildren ;
and afterwards abating that cruelty, they made use of those of other men, whom
they secretly bought or stole-for this abominable purpose. But Plutarch, that
Gelon, king of Sicily, having vanquished the Carthaginians in the battle of Hymera,
forced them to promise never more to offer either ther own or other mens children
in such a manner. Quintius Currius testifies, that this cruel custom prevailed among
the people of Zyre, till the destruction of that city. And, according to St.
Augustin, the ancient Gauls, inhabitants of France, as now called, and several other
nations, were defiled with this abomination. Heliogabalus, one of the greatest
and most extravagant tyrants who ever sat on the Roman throne, caused all staly to
be searched for beautiful and noble youths, whose parents were still alive, barbar-
oussy, and to the greater sorrow of their families, to offer them as victims. The
Jews are also, not without reason, much censured by Aypion, Julian the apostate
and others, for having sacrificed men to idols ; abhorring the crueltv of Jephthah,
chief of the Gileadites, in delivering up his daughter for a burnt-offering. This
detestable superstition was not only prevalent among the heathens, but also among
the kings of Judad, the rulers of God’s chosen people, in making their children
pafs through the fire, offering them up to Moloch, as we read of Ahaz and Manasseh,
2 Kings xvi. and xxi. and as Josephus de Antig. lib. 2. says, after the manner of
the Canaanites. Cambyses, king of Persia, and Alexander the Great, after him, by
public and universal laws, prohibited their subjects these abominable offerings :
yet, not being long observed, the emperor, Hadrianus, under severe penalties in-
tirely supprest them. Hercules first abolished the killing of men for a sacrifice to
Suturn, offeringhim so many burning lights in their stead, and thereby reformed
the inhuman custom. This he did on his return from Spain; and assigned for
reason, that the Greek word oos, (which the oracle of Dodone had made use of
for the institution of that solemnity) signified light, as well as man, and that there-
fore they were to offer to Pluto æ baked figures of clay and burning torches of
candles instead of men : for which cause, they on the festivals of Saturn, called
Saturnalia, made presents to one another of little figures and burning wax-candles.
But Lycurgus, the Lacedemonian legislator ordained that pigs should be used for
victims instead of men.
The image of Dianna, mentioned before, which lphigenia and Orestes had
brought, bound up in a bundle of willow-branches, from Chersonesus Tauricia,
now called Grim, was worshipped by the Lacedemonians with great reverence.
They







They anciently offered it to men, who were chosen by casting the lot : This cru-
el custom Lycurgus altered thus ; they led youths to the altar of the idol and whiped
them so long till, according to their institution and the will of the oracle, it was
sprinkled with human blood : and this was done to encourage young people not
to fear the cuts and wounds they might receive from the enemy in battle.
Pltarch also relates, that anciently when the plague had made a sad havock at
Lacedemon, the people were informed by the oracle, that the infection would
cease if they offered yearly some noble virgins. The Lacedemonians obeyed. At
last it happened, that the lot fell on Helena; who being led for sacrifice, an
eagle descended and snatched the weapon out of the priest’s hand, carrying it over
a field, where he dropped on a heifer. Aristides, in his 19th Book of the Italian
state, mentions the same accident formerly happening at Rome to Valeria Lnperca.
The head, says Hesychius, bishop of ferusalem, as having of all that is created,
treason, is called understanding, and has planted its seat in the heart. God also
formerly commanded, that the head and liver, and all that belonged to it, should
be a burnt-offering tohim: for from the heart and the liver come forth the springs
and motions of our carnal appetites. And in this sense St. Paul blesses his con-
igregation, saying, ee The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep
vour hearts and minds, &c. The prophet lsaiah says likewise, ce The whole
head is fick, and the whole heart faint: from the sole of the foot even unto the
hcad there is no soundness in it.'
Herodotus writes, that the Stythians worshipp’d divers gods, but did not erect
teither temples, altars or images, other than to Mars, altho their manner of sacri-
fice was one and the same to all their gods; and which T think not improper to
mention here. The victim being brought to the appointed place, with its fore-
legs tied, the priest followed, striking it on the head; which causing it to sink,
they thereupon invoked the god to whom it was to be offered. Then he threw
a rope about its neck and strangled it, and pulling the skin and flesn from the
bones, heiput the same, if they had no wood, on the bones with other burning
mixtures, in order to boil it; and if they wanted the næcessary kettles, they put
the flesh into the skin again, and thus broiled it on the fire. This being done,
the priest offered the victim to the god they intended. But among all their vic-
tims the horse was the chief, which therefore they dedicated to Mars; whose
temple, when damaged and decayed by rains, dampness and a bad climate,
they retrieved in the following manner. They gathered many branches, twigs,
and chips of trees, piling them into a arge square heap, made perpendicular on
three sides, and slopinig on the fourth, so as conveniently to step on: in the
middle of this heap, they laid a large knife, not unlike the present Persian or
Turkissi scymitars; which they imagined to be the true image of Mars, whom
they worshiped and honoured with their offerings.
That the horse was anciently first sacrificed to Mars, the histories of the Grecks
and Romans plainly evince. The annals of the lattertestify,thatthey usedtooffery early
tohim, in the Campus Martius, on the 12th of December, an horse which had won the
prize in the race; thereby besceching the god to favour their warlike enterprizes
with success. Pausanias reports, that Jyndarus, father of Helena, who was ravish-






ed by Paris and carried to Troy, having determined the utmost revenge, asfembled
all the Grecian princes in conjunction with her consort Menelaus, vowing by the
facrifice of an horse, to revenge by sword the affront put upon him and his fa-
mily. Some also pretend, that the aforesaid festival, kept on the 12th of Decem-
ber, has been celebrated on the 12th of October, and that the name of October was
given to the horse appointed for those purposes. On which occasion, a great
contest one time arose at Rome about the sacrificed horse’s head; some insisting
to have it on the Capitol, and others on a tower of the city, called Manillia.
The solemnities of this rite were performed in the following manner. On the
12th of October, they led a fine horse, decked with garlands of greens, intermix-
ed with flowers and loaves of bread, through the streets and quarters of the town,
and being arrived at the Campus Martius, they there killed and offered him to
Mars, for obtaining prosperity and fruitfulness. This was done to beseech the
god to prevent ruinous war; in which, the cavalry causes the greatest damage
and destruction to the product of the field : for it would be absurd to think,
that the Romans, who pretended to be descended from the Trojans, should offer
the horse to Mars, after the Greek manner, and in conformity to the intention of
Jyndarus, in order to be revenged of their ancestors ; wherefore it was only for
the reason aforesaid. The Lacedemonians, as Festus affirms, had also a custom.
of offering a horse yearly on Mount Taygetus; burning him to afhies for the wind
to scatter into all their towns, villages and districts. And Pausanias mentions,
that the Macedonians sacrificed on the same Mount, an horse to the sun, in imi-
tation of the Persians. Xenophon asferts the same in his Memoirs, when he relates,
That they made Curio a present of an horse for that purpose; knowing it was
the custom of the Persians to honour the sun with such a victim. He says further
that the Sarmatans bred horses for sacrifice and sustenance. The Salenrines like-
wise offered horses, and afterwards burnt them, in honour to Jupiter. The
people of Rhodes offered to the sun a chariot with four beautiful horses, which
they drove into the sea to be swallowed up by the waves ; believing the sun ran
round the world equipped in that manner. We read in the Heroic Poems of Phi-
lostralus, that, in order to overcome their enemies, they were obliged to offer to
the sun a white foal who had never known the bridle or spur: this was done by
the advice of Palamedes, to buoy up and animate the Greeks, who, at the siege of
Troy, were struck with frights and fears at the sight of a sudden eclipse which
then happened.
Origines intimates, that the offering a bullock before the tabernacle, according
to the ancient Jewoissi rite, signified, that we must subdue all pride and haughti-
ness; and by a calf, the having overcome the weakness of the flesn.
The Baeotians had a custom of sacrificing to Neptune a bullock, called with
them Mucytes, or bellowing ; because his noise has some affinity with that of the
billows when violently agitated by the winds. The bullocks, which the priests
selected for that deity, ought to have dark or black hair, thereby to signify the dark
depths of the water. Wherefore many think, that the eagle is called by the
Latins, Aquilla, from the word Aqua, as having a dark and blackisn colour. For
the same reason, the sea-gods are usually represented with brown complexions,








bluish hair and garments, and with full chests and broad shoulders, like bul-
locks. A; to the Taurii Ludi, or bull-solemnities in use among the ancient

Romans, they were not instituted by them in honour to Neptune, but for the
infernal gods, whom they believed were thereby moved to compassion, when
under Tarquinus Superbus, the city was affficted with a plague, which carried off
abundance of women with child, and the people imputed the misfortune to the
eating the flesn of black bullocks.
The sacrifices which the Ronan censors used to offer every fifth year for their
purification, and called Solitaurilia, confisted of a boar, a ram, and a bull.
The offering a bullock, as we gather from history, was generally, especial-
ly among the Romans, a token of victory gained over the enemy : according-
ly, Juvenal says, They led to the Capitol a large black bullock marked with chalk.
But here it must be observed, that the Lacedemonians in some fort imitated the Ro¬
mans in several of their sacrifices of that nature; for when the latter got a victory
by slaughter and taking the enemy prisoners, they offered a bullock ; but when
without blood-shed, a sheep. The Lacedemonians, contrarily, sacrificed a bul-
lock, on obtaining a victory without cruelty or blood-shed; and a cock when it
was got in the open field, in a pitched battle, preferring enterprizes performed
with reason and conduct, to those effected by main force.
We read likewife, that anciently, especially among the Romans, the bullock
was so much regarded, that it was as capital to kill one as to murder a citizen.
Wherefore Erichthaeus, reigning at Athens, ordered, that at the yearly festival,
wherein a bullock was sacrifiiced, the popa, or priest (whose duty required him
to furnisn the cattle, and cut their throats when knocked down) should, after
the solemnity was over, and in maintainance of the law, forsake the town, first
leaving the ax at the foot of the altar.
The Thessalians were enjoined by the oracle of Apollo at Dodone, to offer sacri-
fice yearly on the tomb of Achilles; and to furnish the necessaries from their own
country; namely, two tame bulls, one black and the other white; the wood
from Mount Pelion; the fire out of Thessaly; and slower and water from the river
Sperchius. With these were to be used garlands and festoons of greens, inter-
mixed with amaranths, that, in case the ships, bringing the necessaries from
other éountries, should be kept back by contrary winds, at least such greens,
and flowers that never wither, might not be wanting to hang on the tomb.
Apollodorus and Athenaeus relate, that Hercules was so great an eater, as often to-
devour a whole bullock at a meal : for wlich reason, the ancients dedicated to
him the water-fowl, called by the Greeès Maoos, in Englissi Sea-mew ; because
this bird according to Suidas, is very voracious ; nay, on account of this excess-
in eating, they brought him offerings, whereby men were not allowed to use any
other expreffions than cursing and swearing: Lactantius and Apollodorus relate
the story thus; Hercules on a time travelling with some companions through
Rhodes, and being very hungry, met with a country-man at plough with a cou-
ple of oxen, which he desired to purchase for silling his belly; but the man re-
jecting the proffer, Hercules took the cattle by force, and with his companions






eat them up. The other enraged and frantic hereat, cursed and swore at Hercu-
les as he was eating ; who laughed and bantered him, saying he never eat a bet-
ter morsel, or with more gusto, in all his life. Wherefore the inhabitants of
that island erected an altar to him after his deification, whereon was carved a yoke
of oxen; offering thereon, at certain timcs, a couple of oxen : at which soleni-
nity the priests and people bustled about, and made a great noise, by cursing
swearing, and other impieties, which they thought would please the god, in re-
membrance of the adventure with the plough-man.
I must subjoin another sacrifice to the honour and memorv of the deified
Hercules, not less foolisn than ridiculous. Suidas relates, that the Baotians on a
certain time leading an ox for sacrisice, he broke loose and ran away. Where-
upon the mob, unwilling to pretermit the time for celebration, stuck an ap-
ple on four sticks, with two smaller on top, representing four legs and two horns;
offering this with great solemnity to Hercules. Others ascribe this apple sacrifice,
instead of an ox, to the Athenians: And Julius Pollux testifies, that it was long
in use among the Thebans. Yet Pausanias in his Memoirs reports, that as the ap-
ple-tree is sometimes accepted by the gods, in token of a propitious sacrifice,
so the Baotians, at the ox’s running away, offered to Hercules an apple-tree, ha-
ving but four branches instead of the four-legged beast; whence it became after-
wards customary to consecrate that. tree to this god. And Apollodorus affirms, ac-
cording to Zenodotus, that those offerings of the Baotians were instead of rams and
sheep.
The imploring help and favour by means of abullock, reminds me of a custom
of the ancient Scythians, now called Tariars, who killing and stripping a bullock,
the person who had received any injury from another, took the skin, spread it on
the ground, and sat upon it with his hands behind him; and those who in passing
by, promised to give their affistance, trod onthe skin with the right foot, thereby
signifying the means they proposed to use for the injured person’s satisfaction.
This custom is largely described by Lucianus treating of friendship under the
name of Toxaris. And, speaking of the Homolois, he says, That when they de-
ligned inviolably to engage themselves to each other, they killed an ox and cut
him intobits, to give to people as they passed by : which custom is still solemnly
observed by the Circassian Tartars inhabiting between the rivers Tanais and Phasis.
And all such passangers as get a piece of such an ox, think themselves so bound
in friendship, and so much obliged to the giver, as not to scruple hazarding either
goods or life in revenging the injury done to theirfriend.
The Athenians in thankful acknowledgment of the profitable labour of the ox,
stamped his image on their coin, called Didrachmum. Wherefore, we read in
Homer, and other writers, that they used to buy merchandizes by certain num-
bers of oxen : as in the second Book of his Iliads he has it, ce Every thing of
that kind is sold for a Hecatomb. i. e. an hundred oxen : or, in better terms, for
an hundred pieces of gold or silver coin with their impress.








Pindarus mentions, that the Hyperboreans performed their x Hecatombs, or
great facrifices, to Apollo with asfes : wherefore Callimachus says, That, that god
took delight in the killing a fat afs
But the Agyptians hated this creature, not only for his dulness and stupidity,
but also for his skin mixed with brown and white, which they accounted abomi-
nable and unfit to be offered to the gods. Accordingly, they abused him as
much as possible, flinging stones and clods of dirt and mud, and pricking him
with sharp-pointed sticks; and when in the pursuit they found him on a conve-
nient eminence they made him roll down it. Hence arose the comparative pro-
verb applied to contemptible persons, The afs of Agypt.
These people were not the only ones who paid honour to the hog: other nations
have ranked it with their gods : for this creature was formerly sacred in Candia,
where they believed that Jupiter at his birth, sucked a sow, which by her grunt-
ing, intirely drowned the cries of the child; though some will rather afcribe this
kindnefs to the goat of Amalthea.
The ancient stalian kings had a custom, to offer an hog in their nuptial solem-
nities : and the great, in their nuptial feasts, brought, according to the Tuscan
manner, an hog to the altar, consecrating it to the tutelar gods and presiders over
new married persons : which was the general custom of the Greeks as well as of
the Latins.
They of Argos celebrated the festival called Hysteries, by offering an hog in
honour to Venus ; of which Callimachus largely treats; though we find the Sicyonians
dedicated to her all kinds of beasts, as Aristophanes testifies, saying, They killed
an hog to offer to Venus.
They likewise offered an hog to the Goddess Maja, (by whom is meant the
carth, thus called, according to Cornelius Labeo, as signifying greatness) because
this creature makes great havock among the corn and grain, and is very prone to
tear up the ground, as Horace says, The hogs loves the mud; for these beasts
were facrificed to the gods, either on account of their likeness and agreement, or
dissimularity and aversion. Wherefore the poets mention, that the hog was first
offered to Ceres, for the great mischiefit did to the corn. Veranius says, They
also offered a sow to Ceres after a funeral, for purifying the family.
On making a peace, alliance, or truce, they offered an hog, as Virgil affirms,
He made the peace during the killing of a sow. Though Quintilian and Servius,
in their remarks, that Virgil means an hog, because in that solemnity was always
used an hog or boar. Suetonius, in the life of Claudius Caesar, reports, that he
made an alliance with the princes during the offering of a sow; though Tits Li-
vius speaks likewise of an hog.
The Mosait Law enjoined tne king or princes to offer for their sins an he goat;
and those who had no public employments, a she goat or lamb. Aaron was com-
manded to offer for himself and family, a calf, as harmless or righteous, and an
he goat for a sin offering. And we learn from Hesychius, bishop of Jerusalem, that
the
* A Greck word, signifying an offering of an hundred beasts.





the High-priest, after having offered an he goat for a burnt-offering, was allowed
to go into the Holy of Holies, cloathed in a white linen coat, with a girdle of the
same, and breeches and mitre of fine twined linen ; as signifying, that being re-
conciled to God, purified in body and soul, chaste, sober, and righteous, filled
with godly understanding, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit, he might enter into
that place.
The offering he goats and fheep under the law, implies a mortifying and rooting
out all impurities and carnal Justs, as Admantius explains it, and to which Cyril
agrees ; for Scripture hieroglyphically, commonly takes the he goat for men
plunged in stinking, impure, and all manner of extravagant desires; as also
plainly appears by our Saviour’s words, When, at the-last judgment, he will set
the sheep or elect, with all blessings on his right hand, and on the lest, those,
whoby stinking sin are unworthy of his pity, for eternal punishment. And after
such a manner the goat was brought to attone for fins, when the law commanded,
that he should be presented alive before the altar, and the priest laying his hands
on the head should confess over him all the iniquities of the people, and put
them on the head of this lascivious creature, and then by afit person, send him
away into the Wilderness. They add, for confirmation, that the thick and
rough hair of this beast is laid upon him as a stinking burthen of his lasci-
viousness.
The fables of the Greek poets tell us that Hercules was the first who tamed the
lascivious he goat; meaning, that he overcame the wanton desires of the flesh.
He likewise first offered this beast to Juno ; for, having vanquished Hippocoon,
and thereby irritated the goddess, he found no other victim at hand to appease
her with, as Paufanias relates in his third book. But the Lacedemonians sacrificed
to Diana, called the Corythalian in the fields, goats flesn only, no other beast being
allowed in that solemnity. Wherefore Xenephon in his Memoirs reports, that
when the Persians invested Achens with a mighty force, intending to ruin it intire-
ly, the Athenians mode a vow to Diana, to offer to her as niany goats as they should
defeat enemies, in case they beat them.
The poets likewise mention, that the goat was sacrificed to Bacchus, because,
he being the god of wine, could not be more acceptably honoured, than with the
death of a creature so noxious to vine-yards dedicated to him. Wherefore the
festivals called Ascolia, were also celebrated in his honour ; when they laid on the
ground at equal distances, sacks or bags of goats fkins silled with wind, which
being smeared with oil or grease, they merrily to win the prize, lcaped from one
upon the other, tumbling, by reason of the glibness over each other, to the no
small delight and applause of the people.
The Romanladies, on being delivered with twins, formerly offered to Juno (to
whom empires and riches were facred) certain sheep, which, according to Bebius
Macer, were tied between two pair of lambs on each side. But the Sicyonians cus-
tom was, to offer fat sheep, by them called Eumenides, to the gods of benevo-
lence and good hope, for the good luck and prosperity of theirfamilies. They
likewise sacrificed to Hercules, as god of riches and plenty, a fheep tied on feur
sticks instead of a bullock, who ran away as they were leading himn to the altar;
wherefore






wherefore he is called Melius, or Shepherd. But of this ridiculous offering lhave
said enough before.
We gather from the Greek and Roman histories and antiquities, that they sacri-
ficed dogs, the former to Prosorpina, and the latter to Genetia. At the festival
called Lupercalia, sacred to the Lycaan idol Pan, the Romans offered the same,
knowing that the constant nature of dogs is to pursue wolves. Others think that
this was done in honour and renrembrance of Romulus, who, they said, was in his
infancy laid in a wood, and brought up by a wolf. Some report, that Evander
first introduced and established those solemnities. The people of Argos offered
dogs to the goddess Cyonia, to whom they aicribed the power of giving women in
labour an happy delivery. The Lacedemonians consecrated those creatures to Mars
’for their eagernefs and alacrity in falling on deer. For, the young men in their
warlike exercises used to begin them with sacrificing a little dog to Mars, as the
strongest and most valiant of the gods, judging that creature to be the most ac-
ceptable of the tame and sociable animals. The Augures, a fort of priests among
the Romans, also often sacrificed a kind of red dogs before the town gate, called
from thence Catularia, or dogs-gate, that the heat of the dog-days in July and
August might not burn or spoil the trees and fruits of the earth,
The inhabitants of Methone annually offered a cock for the prosperity of the
vineyards, and for averting the violent South-east winds ; for when this wind
rises in the blossoming time of the vines; its malignity kill the young fhoots, and
frustrates the hope of a future vintage : wherefore the Augures of that tract of
land found it proper to order, that two young men, chosen for that purpose,
should at a certain place, take a white cock, and each holding a leg above the
spur, by parting pull him to pieces; and then with the piece of the cock in their
hands, running round the vineyards, one to the right, the other to the left, till
having as they thought made an atonement, they met again at the place where
the cock was torn to pieces, and there buried him. By blind luck, it sometimes
fell out that as long as they observed the solemnity, the issue of things answered
their desire.
The ancient Romans also used to sacrifice annually an hen to Asculapius, the
god of health.
The duck on account of its greedy and voracious nature, was by the Baeotians
sacred to Hercules (whom they judged the greatest eater and glutton) as the most
acceptable to him.
And, according to Zenodotus, the Phaenicians offered a quail to the same god, be-
cause it once saved his life.
The people of Crene ascribed great honour in husbandry to Saturn ; saying, he
was the inventor of planting, grafting, pruning and dunging: wherefore, in his
solemnities, they wore on their heads chaplets of fresh figs, as well on account
of their being food, as dainty taste.
The Agyptians offered annually on the i9th day of the first month, honey and
figs, in honour of Mercury, celebrating this feast with great noise, and crying,
Oh l how sweet and agreeable is truth.








The ancient Gauls worshipped Hercales as the god of prudence, and, as Lucia-
nus says, Eloquence, even more than Mercuzy ; because eloquence is accounted
more consummate in aged men (as Hercules is generally represented) than in the
young : wherefore, they offered to him, as tne Agyptians did to Mercury, honey
and figs : moreover, all who ministered held a fig-tree branch in their hands,
and they, as well as the priests, had their heads adorned with popular leaves.
Virgil likewise mentions, that Evander, offering to this god, had a chaplet of the
same leaves about his head, calling them Hercules leaves. And Macrobius says,
that the ancient solemnities to Saturn and Hercules were performed bare-headed ;.
but in those to other gods the priefts heads were covered.
The ancient Romans offered to the goddess Carna, to whom they ascribed the
support of the animal spirits in human bodies, bacon, and the greens of beans,
whereby men are made strong and hearty for labour. And it is certain that those
people called the first day of June Fabaria, or Bean’s-day, because that oblation:
was instituted by Junius Brutus, of whom this month has also borowed its name.
Festus Pompeius says, that the Romans annually offered to Vulcan in June, at the feast
called the Fishing-games, a fort of fisni, for the souls of men ; because the ancient
philosophers hieroglyphically represented the souls by fishes : and, as Philo says,
Because they consist of a pure element, and God created them. the first of all living.
creatures.
Vincent Cartarie relates another custom of the Romans, That, after a victory ob-
tained, they piled all the shields and other weapons of the enemy in an heap, and
burnt them as an oblation to Vuican. Which was done, says Servius, in imitation-
of Tarquinius Priscus, who having overcome the Sabines, burnt all their weapons
in honour of the same god; and as. Evander mentions in Virgil, he did when.
young and had gotten the victory at Praeneste.
The Agyptians offered to lsis loaves and apples. And the ancient Sicilians, acorns-
and flour to Ceres. The heathenisn priests offered to. the nymphs, or water and
field goddeffes, white fillies, on account of their purity. As Serapis is reputed.
by the Agyptians the god of riches, or the productions of the earth, being the in¬
ventor of sowing and tillage ; he is therefore by them represented with a basket
of fruits of the earth on his head. Even his offerings, whether of meat, bread,.
fruits, or flowers, were carried in baskets.
We see that the jug is commonly sacred to Ofiris, not only on account of his be¬
ing master and inventor of wine, but also of all moisture; wherefore he is called
Ocean, and isis, Thetis ; for it was the custom to carry ajug in the procession of the
offerings, thereby to shew their veneration for this god, keeping a large one in
particular esteem, to carry it covered with great solemnity to the temple ; where
being arrived, they kneeled down, and with lifted up hands, thanked the god
for his loving kindness to men ; as believing that all things were brought forth by.
moisture.
In a certain place in Greece they worshipped Myngrus god of the fties; when the
people offered to him all the flies retired from those parts. The Grenenses iii L. bia
al so honoured the god of flies, called Achor, making offerings to hiin sor stopping
the plague, which sometimes was occasioned by the multitude of those inseets.
Anciently







Anciently they offered red wine instead of blood. For Moses, in his Song in
Deureronomy; says, es And thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.1
David, in his Psalms, ee They have drank the blood of the grape.  Indeed, the
Aepyptim priests, some of whom were kings, intirely abstained from wine, but
always used it in their offerings, not as an acceptablenefs to heaven, but to signify
the blood and punissiment of those who rebelled against the gods, and thereby to
obtain favour and reconciliation, for the Agyptians firmly believed that wine sprang
from the blood of the discomfitted giants, which on their rising against the Gods,
and threatening to storm heaven, was spilt on the earth, and therefore made men
commit all manner of extravagancies : they also intimated by the wine-press, per-
fecution, adversity, vexation, and oppression.
The Romans, on the other hand, celebrated the feast of Mercury with milk only
to express thereby the sweetness of eloquence. Those rites were performed at
Rome, in the street called Sobrius, or Sober, because wine has many strange effects,
as, disclosing of secrets, running rashily into dangers, weakness of the legs,
faultering of the tongue, wandering senses, and other imperfections.
slaughter of beasts, but also with festoons and garlands of flowers, and with the
tinkling noise of copper and iron instruments, tabors, harmonious sounds, haut-
boys, pipes, &c.
To finisn this chapter, let me add, that anciently it was the custom of many
nations to make on the face of the altar, a circle or ring with the blood of the
victim, carefully and with great devotion savingit in a vessel for that purpose.
This solemnity they called by a word, which signifies, Making perfect, saying,
That the round was the most perfect of all figures.
v
CH AP. XIX. Of the Sacredotal Dresses, Vessels, and other Materials
pertaining to Offerings.
7Omake the preceding chapter more complete, l thought it necessary to say
something here of the sacredotal dresses, vessels, &c. believing it may be
of service to the curious artists, whose constant employments will not always al-
low them to peruse the authors treating of those matters.
When the Agyptian priests, for the sins of the people, put up prayers for avert-
ing the wrath of God, they were dressed in black, to signify that mortals pro-
ceeding from usual earth, besought and intreated that invisible Being, on a be-
lief that no other coloured dress was more proper.
It is likewise a general custom of the principal and most polite nations to dress
in black at times of humiliation, and those who mourn make use of the same co-
lour ; wherefore, Varro calls them Anthracini, or as black as coals.
The








The Arcadians also worshipped Ceres, Goddess of the fruits of the earth, in
black cloaths: and the priests of the idol Falacer, to whom they attributed the
care and inspection of the fruits of the trees, wore commonly black caps; but in
their solemnities all black. The black was also dedicated to Pluto, and in offering
to him the priests were in this colour, believing that it best suited the hellisn or
subterranean gods.
Herodotus, to shew that the heathens agree with the present opinion touching
the signification of cleanness, testifies, that the Agrptians did not allow the wear-
ing in their temples any cloaths made of wool, but they had white linen gar-
ments. Terfullian, speaking of our Saviour, therefore says, As he is dressed in the
garb of white linen, it is the same with that of Ofiris. And Plutarch treating of lsis
and Ofiris, takes this to be the reason why the priests make use only of white linen
garments, to signify that all clean and undefiled things best agree with the nature
of the Gods, whose pure and sacred Majesty, according to Plato, ought not to be
worshipped by things impure and filthy. And as linen is the clearest dress, and
can be very easily wafhed and made beautiful, so it was thought the most becom-
ing the sacredotal dignity and purity. And indeed, the Magii, or priests of the
ancient Perfians said, That God took delight in white garments: which assertion
seems to be borrowed from Solomon, who, in his exhortations to good and blame-
—Let your garments be always white;
less manners, and a pure conscience, says:
as if he meant,—Take heed, in all your actions, not to be defiled with evil and
uncleanness.,
The priestly vestment called Poderis, from the Greek word Podes in Englissi,
Feet, was of fine white linen, setting close to the body, and hanging down to the
feet. Ancient divines say, That thereby they signified the most holy and mysterious
doctrine. This was the undermost covering, as we find in Exod. xxxix. And
they made coats of fine weaved linen, and their garment called Hypodytes of
Hyacinth Colour, intimating heavenlynefs, and that men ought to raise their
minds, thoughts, and faculties thither, forsaking what is earthly. The priests
also wore under their coats, breeches of fine twined linen, covering their privities
and thighs, as an admonition to drefs and appear in chastity. They were likewise
enjoined by the offertorial law to be girt with a girdle embroidered with blue,
purple, and scarlet, hieroglyphically implying Fortitude, Strength, and Virtue.
The Romissi priests use, to this day, white linen garments in their service, as did
al so Apollonius Zyaneus, to whom they seemed more agreeable with cleannefs, than
others woven of foul and greasy wool.
The shoes of the Agyptian priests were not made of other matter than the bark
of trees ; so cautious were they in avbiding the least appearance of unchastity and
uncleanness. Accordinglv, and with respect to purity, it was a great crime
among the Roman prestesses, called Flaminica, to wear shoes of skins of beasts
which died natural deaths, superstitiously believing it to be abominable; but they
approved of such as were made of offered beasts skins- Our Saviour himself com-
manded his disciples not to wear shoes; that being with all speed to publisn ever-
lasting life, they might intierly forsake what is corruptible. Moses also leaving
the Agyptian bondage, wore shoes of beasts skins intimating his affinity with mor-
tality







tality ; but afterwards as he grew in strength and virtue, and was to serve. the Al-
mighty, he was commanded to pull them off.
The egyptian priests adorned their heads with hawk’s feathers, thinking to
owe this honour to that bird, because, as they say, he formerly brought the
priests of Thebes, in. Agypr, a book written in red letters, containing the manners
of worshipping the gods, and many of the principal rites to be observed in their
offerings; wherefore, the Latin poets, according to Martial, call those priests
copped or crested.
It would be needless to say more touching the sacred dresses, such as the mitre,
bonnet, ephod, and other ornaments, since they and every thing else relating to
the priest-hood are amply described by Goeree in his Jezoijhi antiquities. Where-
fore, after having touched on the hair of the priests, we shall only treat of the
ancient Roman priest-hood.
It was formerly the greatest scandal and indignity for a man to have his hair
cut off: and possibly Moses therefore commanded the priests not to have their
beards or hair taken off with a razor, but dlipped with scifsors, to distinguish
them from those of the Agyptians, who, after the death of Apis, deified and
worshipped by them, had not only their heads, but their whole bodies shaved,
that in their sacrifices they might be pure. . Moreover, according to Bede, in his
Church-history, by shaving the head is meant a renouncing superfluous riches
(which priests by their institution, are punctually to observe) and that hair is to
be accounted but as a superfluity of the body. And in this sense speaks Hierony-
mus, that as the priest hashis head shaved, so he ought also to cut and cast off
superfluous riches and earthly desires, and that by the little hair left is signified,
that they must be content with small provision for supporting their mortal bodies.
Others add, that the little hair left on their heads, in the form of a crown, de-
notes the crown of eternity, with which after their conssicts, they were to be
rewarded.
But as for the law commanding to cut the hair round and to shave the beard,
many think it proceeded from the abominable abuse of the heathens, who offered
their own hair, and that oftheir children to the devil.
On the other hand, divers councils decreed, that the priests, in imitation of
the Nazariies, should keep theirhair and beards, and let them grow, with inten-
tion that, by seeing and handling the same, they might always remember their
duties. Wherefore they did not shave, but dlip their hair with sciffors, that it
might not over-grow. But to return to the Romans.
Numa Pompilius, their second king and a priest, when he could no longer alone
bear the weight of the government, and discharge the duties of the priest-hood,
instituted three priests called Flamines; the sirst in honour to Jupiter Capitolinus;
the second to Mars ; and the third to Romulus Quirinus. Their drefs was much
like that of the present Romissi clergy in their service. On their heads they had a
white hat, with an olive sprig upon it, at the extremity whereof appeared a
tuft of wool taken from a facrificed sheep. This hat was called Albogolerus.
Afterwards Numa ordained twelve other priests, called Salii, in honour to Mars
the





the conqueror, protector, avenger, and peace maker. These were dressed in
long loose garments or coats, having a breast-piece of copper enriched with gold,
silver, and divers precious stones. The solemnities growing numerous, and at
length amounting to above thirty thousand, Numa increased the number of priests
accordingly. He created the Feciales, and Pater Patratus, who proclaimed war;
also the Epulones, or overseers of all sacred banquets, and Augures or soothsayers,
whose authority was so great, that the Senate could not assemble without their
consent. They had all particular garbs, except when they officiated, at which
time their drefs was alike, being a garment of white linen, very wide, and
reaching to their heels, girt with a girdle and buckle about their bodies. This
garment they called Gabinus.
And as Ficlelity ought to be close, that is, the matters we are intrustedwith
must be kept secret, pure, and inviolable.. Numa ordered that the high-priest, in
offering to Fidelity shouldkeephis right hand covered with a white garment, as Tertul-
lianobserves, to signify that Sincerity ought to be preserved simple and upright, and
that it is sacred to the right hand, since we are to assert it with alacrity. Virgil like-
wise intimates, that the firmness of Sincerity is signisied by the right hand, as a
pledge or asfurance : wherefore Dido in his fourth Aneid, complains, es Alas !
These are the gilded words and promises of the son, who, as is said, carries with
him sacred things and household gods. And in his third Aneid we read, ee Fa-
ther Anchises himself gives the dejected youth Achemenides the right hand,-as à token
of his sincerity to him. And in another place, Amata says to Latinus, e: Where
is your sincerity : Were the former care for your kindred, and your word and
hand so often given to your nephew Turnus p’s Virgil also calls Fidelity white
and grey ; meaning, according to Servius, that sincerity is most found in old
people who are grey and white. Horace complaining of the wickedness of his own
times, says, That Sincerity dressed in white is little worshipped : adding, that in
the offering toit, the High-priest keeps not only the right hand covered with the
white garment, but also his head and almost his whole body, to shew that the
heart and will ought to be pure and immaculate, and always to accompany sin-
cerity. Wherefore Aristo also says, Sincerity was formerly represented in a white
dress.
Petronius réports that Numa himself, for a badge of priesthood, wore a small
linen cap, like the priests and soothsayers in their services ; as did likewise the
wives and maid-servants of the Roman priests, called Flamines.
The hat also, among the ancient Romans, denoted the sacredotal dignity; for
the Flamines took their names from Pileus or hat, as if they would say, Pilea-
mines : though others are of opinion, their name is derived froin Flammeum, which
among them, was an head ornament; for the bishop-like caps, long coats and
garments were, as lhave said, peculiar to the priests. The authority and credit
of the illustrious Fabius Pictor iduces us to believe this, when he says, That the
priests, or Flamines, were not allowed to appear publicly without the hat or cap,
but that in their houses they were at their own liberty. A custom to this day
strictly observed in many places by the Romissi prelates.
Infula was a fine white linen garment, with which the priest and victim were
covered.







When the Vestal virgins offered, they were dressed in a long and wide vest-
ment of very fine white linen, called Susfibuium. Their heads were likewise
wound with a white garment, and over it was a vail of white linen hanging down
square, and coming over their cheeks, and fastened under the chin with a clasp
or buckle ; wherefore they were called Vestals, from the word Vestis. The Romissi
women wear to this day long vails, pretending to imitate the virtuous ancient
matrons, who covered their heads, necks and breasts with them, and kept them-
selves so chaste and reserved, as never to seperate from their husbands, nor giving
the least opportunity for evil.
Besides the before-mentioned dresses, the priests had divers implements, and
sacred vessels for offerings, viz.
Prafericulum, a vessel of brass, wide on top, and without an handle.
Patinu, or Patera, a dish or platter, whereon the priests saved the blood of the
victims.
Achana, another small vessel in the form of a cup, in which they saved the drop-
pings of the wine at the offerings.
Acerra, was a small box in which the perfume was kept.
Enclabris, was the table whereon lay the sacred things; whence the utensils and
other materials for the offerings, were called Enclabria. On this table they laid
the beast to be offered, cut open and stretched out, carefully turning with a knife,
and inspecting the entrals, to wit, heart, lungs, and liver, in order to prognosti-
cate future events to the common and silly people. Piusanias reports, that the
Greeès observed the same methods in their sacrifices.
Cecespita, so called, a Secando, from cutting, was a pretty long knife, having
a round ivory handle tipped with gold and silver, and studded with copper.
With this they cut the victim’s throat.
Struppi was a bundle of herbs, called Verbena, mixed with laurel, myrtle, and
olive sprigs. They were of opinion, that these presaged happiness and prosperity
in their offerings; they even used them in their purifications, silling also and
making pillows thereof for their imagined deities.
Aspergillum, or holy-water-sprinkle, was made of sprigs and leaves of hyssop,
which in a marble vessel, called Labrum, they placed at the entrance of their
temples (according to the present Romish custom) and with which they sprinkled
the by-standers and congregation.
They had divers other rites, which for brevity I shall pass over. What l have
said is only to let artists see how diligently they ought to consult history, that by
that means, they may in their productions follow antiquity in all its particulars,
and so duly order and represent things, that lovers may say, with applause, no-
thing is wanting. 








TH E

Ar1 of Painting
BOOK

Of STATUARY.
Emblem touching Statuary.

A YOUNG and sturdy maid, having an hard look, stands with her



right leg on a square plinth, and the left on a globular body.
tucked up behind. Before, she has a sheep's-fleece

garment is light grey, fastened above the knee with a button, and




waiste. Her sleeves are turned up above the elbows. On her left
arm she holds the figure of Decorum; and in that hand a chisel, pair of com-
passes, line, and square ; and in the other a mallet. Her locks and tresses are
tied behind with a broad fillet, which comes about the head, whereon appears a
small altar, and an eagle grasping thunder.
CHAP. 1. Of Statuary in general.
 REwe proceed to the qualities and operations of Statuary, we shall, as an
introduction, say somewhat of its antiquity.
Baedalus, as famous for architecture as statuary, was of royal extraction. Cad-
mus himself, to whom Thebes owes its rise, was a king’s son. As those sciences
then







then take their origin from the ancient Greeës, I shall not trace their inventors
down to the remains of the Ifraelites, nor to those who bestowed their art on the
costly and magnificent temple of Solomon, the cherubins, and ornaments of the
ark, or the vessels consecrated to worship : Scripture is so express in these things,
that we must be convinced, these arts were also in great use at that time.
The vast pains is knovn, which the Children of Seth took in engraving and
transmieting to posterity their inventions and skill in astronomy on two columns,
one made of baked clay, and the other of stone, in order that, that art, threaten-
ed with destruction by the flood and violent waters, might remain intire to future
ages ; and that after the flood, Prometheus, son of Japhet, was the first inventor
of images, which has given rise to all the fables and fictions of the poets.
The Assrrians and Chaideans had knowledge in statuary, as we gather from Laban’s
having houschold gods, which his daughter Rachel stole from him; and after-
wards from the Jezys making a golden calf in the Wildernefss, by Mount Sinai,
for worship.
The heathens applied themselves to inquiries into arts, with very good success.
Ninus son of Belus, in Scripture called Nimrod, the first king of Asspria, immortal-
ized his father’s memory by building to his honour, a temple embellished with
statues, and especially with the idol Baal, in order to be worshipped. The obe-
lisks or pyramids, brought to Rome by Augustus out of Agypt, are standing evi-
dences of the greatnefs of that people in their works.,
The ancient statuaries instruct us in a thousand pretty inventions and circum-
stances in history, which they unriddle ; teaching us the customs, worship, differ-
ent dresses, arms, &c. of the ancients : things very well worthy of our study.
It is likewise not for want of judgment that the antique statues are proposed to
us as the most perfect models of elegance and symmetry, because the age where-
in Alexander lived, was the most perfect we know of for carry ing arts and sciences,
through the emulation of that time, to the highest degree of perfection: in order
to which, they began with Painting and Statuary, framing some patterns, from
whence might be laid down certain and positive rules, not to be departed from,
without spoiling order and beauty. The famous statuaries of those times there-
fore employed their whole wits in prosecuting the work unanimoussy, and en-
deavoured to make exact inquiries into the beauty of nature, and what shape
and proportion the several parts of the body ought to have, in order to form
thereout an intire perfect and harmonious whole : yet it being impossible for
them to bring all the collected parts into one and the same object; they concluded
to chuse the principal and most beautiful parts out of several bodies, in order to
compose from them different perfect figures, to serve posterity for patterns and
models.






CHAP. II. Of the Execution of Statuary.
STATUARY is an imitation of Nature, performing its work by a strong mo-
tion of the body and dexterity of the hands. It consists in the symmetry or
exact division of the objects, according to the particular qualities, especially in
human figure (wherein it most excels) and next in quadrupeds ; all relieved and
conformable to the life.
Its other performance concerns the bafs relief, or half round work, according
to its different qualities, as we shall hereafter explain.
The materials for statuary are of five sorts, and each of a particular nature and
qaulity.
The first is clay.
The second, wax.
The third, wood.
The fourth, ivory.
The fifth, stone.
The two first are worked with wooden tools, and the rest with sharp irons; and
each material requires a particular handling. From the first, something is taken
off ; to the second, something is added ; in the third, is cutting; in the fourth,
scraping; and in the last, driving, or thrusting, according te the nature of the
matter, either soft or hard, solid, dry, or brittle.
In an human figure or other creature, statuary first sketches its thoughts on
paper, making choice of the most beautiful side, and then takes clay, and sets
those conceptions upright, and as like the design as possible. The figure being
now roughed out with the proper tools, or rather with the fingers, the life is set to
the same posture, in order to finisn after it; and being brought to this forward-
ness, the artist proceeds gradually round, till all sides are finished and nothing is
wanting. The work standing in this condition for some time to dry, is afterwards
baked in an oven, and then may serve as a model, for carving in marble or other
matter.
The esfence of this art lies in a beautiful form, and a neat or distinct represen-
tation of the things we would make, whether human figures, beasts or other ob-
jects; of which, the principal are figures and bafs reliefs.
The first considers man, woman and child, of all ages ; as likewise portraits
or busts.

The second respects the horse, camel; elephant, lion, and other beasts. And,
The last regards the peacock, eagle, raven, owl, and other such creatures oc-
curring in this art; all requiring an exact knowledge.
Seeing therefore that so many things are necessary to be understood, I think it
of the last consequence, that the artist before he begin sculpture, be well acquaint-
ed.







ed with the grounds of drawing, and for two reasons; first, in hopes of honour
and advantage; and secondly, for fear of prejudice and reproach. These two
considerations always attend the master, and one of them unavoidably depends on
his knowledge and performance. For as the work is of great consequence and
charge, as well in the materials as tools, and slow procefs, so if it succeed well,
it brings reputation and gain, otherwise, greater lofs and blame.
Atrue artist ought not to be without the following Works, viz. The Statues
of Perriea,-the lconology of Casar Ripa,--Oudaan’s Roman Might, and other
hooks of antiquities; also the principal histories, but chiessy, Les Characteres des
Passions, by Monsieur de la Chambre, and other authors on the same subject; together
with those of dresses, and of beasts and other animals. And for practice, he
ought to be furnished with plaister figures, bafs reliefs, medals, busts, hands and
feet, lions and lionesses, sphinxes, terms, and manv other things, which are to
be bought ; as likewise models of wax and clay, and on paper.
CHAP. III. Of Bafs Reliefs.
THAT I may proceed in an orderly manner, I shall begin with bafs reliefs,
of which there are three forts, viz. almost relief, halt relief, and faint, or

slat : and the difference of these ought to be well considered, as they have three
particular intentions in their proportions or divisions.
The first fort, or almost relief, is commonly used in deep niches, with figures
in full proportion, having three grounds behind one another; the foremost figures
are almost relief, the second half relief, and the third somewhat less.
The second fort, or half relief, is used in shallow square niches, frontispieces,
circular-headed upper doors, and niches.  This has two grounds or depths; the
first is half-relief, and the second somewhat fainter.
The third fort is proper for frizes, pedestals, balustrades,, and medals. This
has but one depth, or a single figure on one ground.
In their ordonnance, four things are to be observed.
I. That the principal figure of the work have its full relief, and those of the
least consequence most faint, and sticking to the ground.
2. That the greatest motion and action of the figures be always in profile, yet
without any fore-shortening of the members.
3. That the setting on of the projecting parts appear natural, not forced.
4. That the work be eqully divided and distributed every where alike, not too
full in one part, and too empty in another ; which is a point of great importance.
Although these bafs reliefs seem chiesly to concern statuaries, yet they as much
affect painting, on account of the particular relation the two arts have to each
other, in that, one cannot be perfect without the other. The statuary borrows
from the painter the ordonnance or disposition for the ground of his work, which
he






he afterwards put in practice : the painter on the other hand, learns of the statu-
ary the method of modelling, as necessarily serving for à foundation in the per-
formance of bass-relief. Wherefore I think a painter cannot possibly paint a
good one, unless he understand something of modelling ; nor a good statuary give
satisfaction, without having some skill in painting.
A judicious master ought to be exact in ordering these bafs-reliefs, that each re-
ceiving its proper light, all may appear distinct, and without the least alteration.
Sun-fhine or sharp shades make things look otherwise than they really are, by the
mis-shapen ground-shades which on these occafions are seen in nature; when the
work being much raised, has many deep hollows.
A large and universal light is most advantageous for the first fort, or al-
most relief.
A light somewhat more from the side is most proper for the second, or half
relief; because it has but few risings, and the work is therefore more free from
ground-shades. And,
A direct side light is best for the third or fainter sort, as giving it great deco-
rum and elegance, though it be almost without shade.

This doctrine touching the light, may possibly seem strange to some, viz.
that it ought to be governed by the bass-reliefs or pictures which are to stand or
hang in it, according as they are more or less relieved. But we must conceive,
that a proper light ought to be chosen for each sort of bass-relief, from this con-
sideration, that the light is not equally good every where : here suits a bass-relief
in a deep niche, there one less rising, and here again one that is quite flat; the
one being thus lighted from a-side, and the other fronting. Nevertheless, it must
not be thought, that according to the make of the room, the disposition of the
windows, and the places fixed for a niche on each side of the chimney, it is in our
choice to have in one of those a bass-relief of three grounds, and in the other
one of two grounds, or one ; because that which is nearest to the windows receives
a more fronting light than the other: Wherefore they ought to be alike hollow
and raised. By a proper light, we mean that the work must be so ordered, that
each part according to its light, get a good decorum. For instance, in the for-
mer niche where the figures are much raised, they cannot give such large ground-
shades, since the light falls on them a little fronting, but it may happen in the
other, where the light comes more from the side; unless you placed the figures
which in one niche are on the right side, in the other on the left, thereby to pre-
vent the superfluous shades, elegantly reconcile the difference of the lights.
The bass-reliefs in shallow niches with two grounds, require as nice an obser-
vation and the same conduct is necessary in frizes, pedestals, and medals.
Many err in placing bass-reliefs in frizes of chimneys, on pedestals and over
room-doors, even upon the breast-work of the chimney itself, setting there more
than half relieved, nay, whole relicved figures; as l once saw an almost relief on
a single ground in a chimney-frize. In my opinion, it is very- improper to in ake
figures of nine inches length so very distant from each other, and so little drape-
ried (sometimes a figure has scarce three or four folds) the work looking then,
(to speak in painter-like terms) more like a smooth dead-colouring, or rather old








and worn out than new made, and fhould by right be exeouted as faint and fine
again. I have observed that painters, in representing bass-reliefs in such places,
avoid all large shades as much as possible, especially in frizes, pedestals, and other
flats; it being in my opinion, very proper that those parts of architecture keep
their flatness; and as all ornaments, viz. capitals, foilage, modilions, triglyphs,
and the like, are in such case commonly performed neat and curious, so our
figures ought likewise to be perfectly finished.
Some keep too much to the great manner: but the smaller the things are, es-
pecally within doors and near, the neater they must be : for without-doors the
case is different, because they receive light from all sides, and are less set off, be
they ever so much raised. Wherefore statuary joined to architecture, in such
manner as it ought to be, is the business of a judicious artist, and for which no
one is qualified without great practice.
As this study concerns a painter as well as a statuary, Ishall shew the former in
how many different manners a bass-relief may be painted : and seeing the most ex-
peditious is always the beft, I snall lay down that which by experience I have
found to be the best.
First, I paint my cloth neat and even with such a colour as my bass-relief re-
quires, whether white, grey, red, yellow, &c. between light and shade, or in
second tint. Drawing my ordonnance on this ground, I correctly and strongly
trace it over with-black lead, and after rub it with a dry cloth that it may stick fast
and refist the varnisn without muddling. Then Ivarnish it all over and proceed to
painting; first the shade, and then the second tint against it, leaving the ground
for the light, and uniting the shade with the second tint airily, without softening
them with a fitch, I scumble the second tint, either with a finger or stif pencil in-
to the ground. Then I take another tint, as dark as my model directs, and
with it give a ground behind my figures, leaving the work on the right side with-
out the least relief. Being to finish, I rub the whole work, or as much as l can do at
once, with a lighter tint than the first ground, and so very thin and even, that
every thing may appear through it; observing here, that the white must be very
stiff, and thined only with turpentine. On this wet ground I clap my main lights,
which then as well as the shades, will gradually unite with it, without touching
each other.
The second and third sorts may be easily finished up at once (the re-touching ex-
cepted) as having neither ground-shades nor hollows; the method is this.
My
cloth being prepared as aforesaid, Ifirst heighten, scumbling the main light into
the wet ground, which by the running of the turpentine oil, is become somewhat
tacky : l do the same with the shade, leaving the ground in this condition for
the second tint. If the work is to be very neat, I rub it over with a good varnisn
mixed with some fat white oil, that it may not dry so soon, and that I may with
ease, and as long as I please paint upon it, heightening on the most relieved parts,
and giving dark rouches in the hollows, scumbling also here and there some smalt
with a soft fitch, and some yellow in the reflexions of the shades. If the back-
ground ought to be a little darker, now is the time for doing it, because then it
will no more go in.







The last sort needs no other ground than the first; and it ought to be neat and
clean ; because the light on one side, and the shade on the other, make the work
relieve and rise sufficiently : yet let us observe, that as often as we paint or re-touch,
it must be rubbed over with varnisn, or at least where necessary, to prevent it's
going in : for such is the nature of varnisn, that it will bear but one painting;
ôtherwise the work sinks presently.
We shall now shew what is to be observed in painting figures in dep niches; a
work not to be performed either with respect to the figures or ground-fhades,
without due knowledge in perspective, whatever applause ignorants may get from
those who do not understand it.
His blunder was great, who painting a figure in a niche with a stick in his
hand, shewed the ground shade of the stick very plainly on the hollow of the
niche, but gave none to the leg which supported the body, save a little on the
plinth next the foot. Most sad conductl Another simple young fellow, seeing
his master paint a grey figure in a niche, and being told that the ground shade
was of much importance, and ought also to correct, and being at the same time
shewn the model it was painted by, went immediately and got a niche made: but
for want of a figure he borrowed his master’s, and set in the niche, tracing there-
in the ground-shade with black lead ; agreeable to which he gave all his figures
in what action soever the same ground-shade.
Now it is certain, that things painted on firm places ought, that they may
look natural, to have their proper ground-shades according to the relief; well ob-
serving, 1. Whence they receive their light, fronting or sideways. 2. How far
they are from the light, in order to determine; as one somewhat short, sharp and
strong, as being near the light, and the others longer, fainter and more melting in
proportion as they go off from it.
As a furtherance to the artist, I shall treat somewhat ofthe painting on wood-
den vases, urns, cisterns and the like, or on other smooth objects.
As things painted on smooth objects, standing in large and wide places, can
have no relief or projecture on the sides when seen fronting; so rising and project-
ing ornaments, such as raised figures, lions-heads, festoons and the like, are ve-:
ry improper and unnatural on them, unless being fixed and immoveable, they
were seen but from one side; for then you may paint as strong and relieved
things upon them as you please, avoiding the side going off, since the smooth
roundneis of the figure does not admit it. The moveable objects which are
used, and seen from all sides, must have a fronting light, and be painted vey flat
or faint, and with no rising swells; and the ground of what colour soever it is, be
laid in such a manner that what is painted on it, whether figure or other object,
be set off by a dark tint in its out line, and this to be darker or lighter, as it
ought to be more or less rounding : yet the main light must be somewhat strong-
er than the ground.
As to the colours, there are many which agree well together ; Lapis Lazulli in-
laid with gold; also green serpentine with white, as marble or plaister; touch-
stone, porphpry, agate and others. On wood of any sort suits ivory-work, pro-
vided the former be not of too light a colour, like palm or olive-trec. In the
uile










use of gold, it ought to be laid on such a tint as you think fit, so as it may be
heightened with shel-gold on the most relieved parts, and afterwards varnished.
In these countries (Holland) statuary is of small account. Little advantage is to
be gained by marble or other stone : and though here and there in a garden or
other place, a figure or child is to be made in free-stone, yet that is too trivial for
a good master. But it is otherwise in Italy, where there are so many magnificent
buildings, and mostly enriched with carving and statuary. In fine, that country
is a land of promise to one who understands his business. He gets money and has
the esteem of the great. On this account à statuary in our country ought to be
somewhat acquainted with painting, as being obliged to make a virtue of neceffi-
ty. Iknew one who for this reason applied so much to painting, that he chang-
ed the stone into cloth, and his chisels into pallet and pencils : for, said he, Peo¬
ple here will scarce pay for cloth, much less lay out so much money for a block
of marble. It is certain they cannot always carry such heavy baggage along with
them ; I speak with respect to those who hang their houses, galleries, halls or
apartments with cloths, and cause them to be painted with statues and bass-reliefs,
which at any time, in case of removal, fire, or other acidents, they may roll up, and
hang in other rooms, which otherwise they could not do; at least it is better
than to paint every thing on the walls themselves, as was the former custom;
since this country is not like ltaly or France, where the painting in Fresco (as di-
vers palaces and churches of some hundred years standing can testify) sufficiently
pays for trouble and charges.
CHAP. IV. Of the Force, Property, and Management of Bass-reliefs.
THINK an artist ought never to be at a loss for matter in this point,
either for the pencil or chisel ; because it is to be furnished not only from
tne fables, emblems and bacchanals, but likewise from scripture.
I have formerly in the Book of Ordonnance, proposedthe story of Judah and Tha-
mar; which according to bass-relief management, is with little alteration, (as well
as many others) very improper for it, when you would represent two or three
grounds in the same piece, though that story require not so much depth: And how
sine would such a bass-relief become the hall either of a Jeip or Christian; And if
herein the servant and the country house were on a particular ground, how plain-
ly would the matter appear, if naturally expressed ; For though many imagine
that a bass-relief is in the same case with a medal, which tends only to commemo-
rate this or that occurrence, or remarkable story, Imust entirely deny it, since in
my opinion, the chief intention of the former is in an instructive manner, to serve
for adorning a building; and’the plainer; more artful and intelligible, the bet-
ter it is, especially when the choice of subject is our own, and we can go to the
expence of it. Yet painted bass-reliefs ought, as well as a good picture, to have
their







their property ; as the ancients (who brought this art to such perfection) have
sufficirntly shewn in their sine remains, which are our best models.
l agree with others, that without an exact observation and enquiry into antiqui-
ty, and the comments thereon, which some ingenious men have left us, we
ghould bealmost strangers to the hieroglyphic sense of the antique bass-reliefs;
or many of them are so foreign and dark that we can scarce apprehend what the
ancients would signify by them.
We shall therefore make some remarks onthe long and small, yet sine bass-relief
of Meleager killed by his mother, when she burnt the fatal wood. It is certain
that this story is faintly represented; but in my opinion, the master has omitted
the bustle and violent stir of Meleager’s body, in order to preserve the elegance of
the action. I find it also not strange, that few can understand this story without
some writing under it. We there see the Parcae, or three fatal sisters, but nothing
of the mother; and though we suppose Diana to be present and mourning, yet
that circumstance does not fully clear the meaning. Meleager should rather have
had his hunting equipage and dogs by him, in order to point out his person and
inclinations. And though the burning of the wood seem in some measure to ex-
press the matter, yet l think it too neatly cut and smooth, and should be more
like afire brand. But my greatest wonder is, at the absence of the mother Althea;
she who was a principal person, a great princess, and acted this tragedy out of
revenge, and seeing it is one of the greatest effects of a revengeful temper, to
triumph in the presence of those who are overcome. Moreover we see no active
passions rule in any part of the composition. Nor can I say who the woman sit-
ting by him is, whether his mother, Diana, Atalanta, or who else : I cannot be-
lieve she is his mother, because he seems to be as old as she. Moreover we do
not perceive in him any motion of a person in pain. Nor can l apprehend
the design of the face on the round board below on the ground, it not being a
medal for ornament, though doubtless placed there by the artist for some reason.
Some think it represents rage or trouble, or else fire, because the hair seems to be
flaming. But the matter might have been better expressed by a pressing of the
eyes, strugling of the arms and legs, contraction of the nofe, mouth, fingers,
and toes and the trouble and pain of the dying person ; whercas here we see no-
thing like it; but contrarily he seems to die very quietly, as his arms lying close
to his body at full length sufficiently shew. Besides it is against the rule of em-
blems to admit of any aid, where the fact can be performed by the person himself,
much less the addition of two or three figures to express the meaning, unless they
be statues; such as tyranny with Nero, ambition with Alexander, valour with Scipio,
and so forth.
It is true that painters used formerly, before they were acquainted with ex pres-
sing the pasfions in the face and gestures, to write them on scrolls proceeding from
the figures mouths, that they might thereby be understood; but as artists are now
more enlightened, it would certainly be very improper to set a cock or spur by a
man sitting or standing, in order to shew his industry, or a scul by another in order
to shew that he is dead, &c.








By these observations it is apparent that our Meleager should rather have been
known by a sine action and motion; since the chief end of a representation is to.
exprefs naturally, and with energy the nature of the matter; and this may as well
be done in bafs-relief as paintied, if the story require it. Nevertheless we must
observe, that there are some passions which do not work externally, and ought to
be expressed by additions, in order to make them intelligible ; such may be Cha¬
rity, Mercy, Piety, Liberality, and the like: but Anger, Madness, or Rage,
Pain, Smart, &c. (which disturb the body as well as the mind, by irritating the mem-
Lers) do not require emblematic figures or aditional explanations.
CHAP. V. Of the Draperies of Statues and Bass-reliefs.
MONG the Greck statues we find none, but what seem to be dressed in one fort
of stuff; and these are the models for a good statuary of painter to govern
himself by. But a portrait, which is likewise an ornamental image, must never be
like a statue or stone figure, though white and painted with a single colour; even
were Ovid with his train of metamorphoses present. No fine disposition of folds
is here the advantage: if the stuffs be not like those of the Greeès, they are not
proper for stone, and seem lefs congruous with antiquity.
Let us therefore not flatter ourselves, that we can make any improvements, by
seeking new stuffs for our figures; nor rely too much on the dexterity of our hands,
that how brittle soever the stones are, we can work them and perform any thing,
even folds as thin as paper, small flying draperics, loose hair-locks hanging on
2
thread, &c. But rather imitate the Greeks, in the thinnefs, pliableness,
and looseness of their draperies, that the beautiful sway of the moving
parts be not obstructed, but plainly perceived under them; unless, in the
case of old people, who because of their stiffness, may be dressed in coarse cloth;
and yet not as seeming to be a mere dress without a body, but sitting close to it,
so as to discover the principal parts, with the end hanging loosely down, not stick-
ing out.
Flying draperies have no place among statue, or bass-reliefs: and though the
latter represent histories, yet such draperies are not proper in them, unless on the
second or third grounds ; where then they may be fixed against the ground and
be no hindrance.
In a medal little relieved, or on urns or vases, where flying and running figures
can be represented in all sorts of histories, we may freely make as many of those
draperies as we please ; because as we said in the third chapter, the principal mo-
tion ought always to be in profile, either on a single or second ground.
I willingly allow the Greeès to be the inventors of loose draperies, as being the
most easy ; but that therfore we may not, now statuary is arrived at such perfec-
tion, make use of all sorts of stuffs (which is a thing possible) seems to me very
strange : for it is certain, that all things through long practice improve, and we
daily discover and sce what was formerly unknoyn. Besides there are few laws
which







which are not capable of amendment or enlargement; and though, as the proverb
says, Old people are seldom bettered by younger, yet it happens in some things, es-
pecially in this art. I speak here of laws only by way of comparison. Pray ob-
serve, how little the famous Bernini at Rome has tied himself up to the Greek an¬
tiquities. By the force of his judgment he has surpassed them; he has gone
such lengths, that it was indifferent what he met with, whether flying, running,
lying, standing, naked, or drest figures : he did every thing, not like the Greeks
in a stone like manner, but with-draperies slying, ruffling, and swinging, as if
they were à live people; and those not twisted like guts, but with beautiful and
broad folds, sometimes loose, at others set thick or thin, tenderly and agreeably
worked as art requires. But what am I saying ; we need not go abroad for examples :
What fine draperies has not the famous statuary Keyzer made , It is certain he did
not merely follow the antique; thinking it below his character to beat the com-
mon road : he sought the plas Ultra, in order to go beyond.
Add to these the great master Francisco Quënoy, whom l do not name as dis-
commending others, by passing them by in silence, but as an excellent pattern
for shewing us a way void of error and reproof: for by saying, that Bernini per-
formed what the Greeès never did, I mean that he dressed his figures in thick and
thin stuffs, in order to give them as it feeems more motion ; the draperies swing-
ing, flying, and ruffling, according to the liberty allowed to any master who
can perform it.
It may possibly seem to some, that l am trampling antique glory under foot ;
but I declare l have no such intention: though l know that if some persons had
the option, either to be a Praxiteles, or Phidias, or a Dutch Keyzer, or Roman Berni-
ni, they would chuse to be the last; and for this reason, that art has in these
later ages, met with improvements unknown to antiquity. But after all, I must
say in reference to the judgment I have made, that though it be in our choice
ro represent any stuff we can perform, yet as long as we find none more beauti-
ful, proper or fine than those which the Greeks have left us for examples, I think
we ought to follow them. As to what is slying, swinging, blowing, or
ruffling (which is very improper in statues, as we have said) I shall leave that
point to Bernini, and not follow either Keyzer or Quellin: but were l to do that
honour to any person, it would be to Francisco Quënoy.
But let me not by any means, persuade artists to imitate the particular manner
of this or that master; for every one has the liberty of chusing for himself, and I
preserve minc. What I have advanced is only a whet for the judicious, by mak-
ing further enquiries.
It is a great fault in artists to fix their thoughts on a single part of a figure, such
as an elegant neck, handsom shoulder, back finely muscled, or beautiful thigh which
they work with the greatest application and pleasure, in order to give it a softness;
and if that succeed well, they are perfectly charmed with it; insomuch that we
may often perceive in what part their greatest delight lay. Hence it frequently
happens, that the parts of the same figure are very unlike in goodness; and the
hands and feet, nay sometimes the face bungled for the sake of a well finished
back. It must be granted, that the principal parts are of the most importance ;
yet






yet we are not ignorant, how much the lesser can either set off or deform a beau-
tiful figure. What is a fine naked with poor hands and clumsy feet, Why was
Van Dyke so famous for his portraits, but for having as much regard to an hand as
a face, To an expert workman it is indifferent, whether he cut a block of mar-
ble, or make a model in clay ; save that the former requires more time.
But after all, this choice of handling and neatness is of no moment, if the
figure be not well set or designed, because the greatest perfection lies in a conjunc-
tion of both. Wherefore it is certain, that if Phidias and Praxiteles had been
masters of Bernini’s handling and elegance, and this last, the knowledge of the
Grecks, all three would have deserved the greater praise.
I as readily own as l take for granted, that art owes its defects to artists them-
selves, as well in painting and statuary, as architecture ; proceeding not only from
masters keeping their pupils ignorant of their principles, experiments, and secrets,
but also from obstructing their advances in the art : for though it were weak-
ness to think the ancients did not understand it, yet the decay must, as I imagine,
be principally imputed to the rcason I have given : from whence arose another
mischief, to wit, an indifference in pupils for further improvements, especially
Accordingly none will at this time seek the old path of his predeces-
in statuary.
fors ; it is now overgrown, and become so uncertain as hardly to be found ; eve-
ry man runs blind-fold over the heath, without knowing whether.
We observe, that the Greeès have commonly made more naked figures than
the Romans : which I can ascribe to no other cause, than a choice of objects a-
greeable to their inclinations, and a desire to display their skill in the compositi-
on and symetry of the parts of the human body. In their statues, they rather
chose to represent deities than men, and in their bass-reliefs, rather bacchanals
and sacrifices than histories. The Romans on the other hand, desirous by
their statues and bass-reliefs, to transmit the memories of their emperors to
posterity, found themselves obliged that they might not go against history, to
dress their figures in the mode of the times.
We shall now consider the necessary observations in painting statues and bass-
relicfs. It is certain, that they must be very neat and white, because such works
in stone being both hazardous, troublesome, and costlv, were never undertaken
before the artists had chosen fine blocks of marhle for that purpose. Wherefore
we ought to take notice of the stones, and their kinds.
Light marble is various, one fort entirely white, another bluish, a third flesh-
colour, &c. being thus either in nature, or changed through time. They are
all good when free from spots or eyes, and appear well against proper grounds.
For this reason we see, that the ancients represented the best and most remark-
able histories either in copper or white marble; as many remains on palaces,
temples, honorary arches, columns, pyramids, tombs, &c. can witnefs. single
white has also this advantage above the coloured paintings, that it does not soon
change, and when it fades, as marble itself is not free from it, it is all of a colour.
The use of it is certainly attended with much less trouble, and not less natural in
colours : moreover, we may sooner find ten masters for this sort of painting, than
three for colours ; because it is but a single part of the art, and remains always
the






the same and without alteration; whereas the case of colours is quite different.
The grey paintings represent only a wall, or piece of stone work, but the co-
loured ones shew the life itsels, seen as through a window : wherefore the grey
can neither recreate nor serve for particular pictures of delight ; nor can be of fur-
ther use than in the places where they are set for ornament, of which they make
but a small part; and were any thing else to be placed there, it would be but of
the nature of the stone, and not please like a coloured picture. It is even in the
the same case with a field in summer and winter. The north wind deadens and
greys it, and the summer revives and makes it look green again, feeding the ve-
ry soul with its variety of flowers.
The white marble has a particular colour and tenderness; as may be perceived
in the mixture of colours : wherefore it is of great moment to suit it well to its
ground.
Between grey stone it ought only to be tempered with white and black, and
softened with light or yellow oker; but between reddisn or porphiry stone, with
a little vermillion or Indian red, somewhat upon the flesn-colour, and this in
shade as well as in the second tint. If you learn this colour from the life, vour
work will have the utmost agreeableness.
CHAP. VI. Of the Attitudes of Statues.
DESIDES, the draperies of statues, something is to be observed touching their
sways and postures ; which is apoint of the greatest consequence : where-

fore we shall in the first place shew what statues are; next, whether they will admit
of any other variety than what the Greeès have assigned ; in the third placc,
whether those which since their times have been in use, are reckoned as good; and
lastly, whether it be not more adviseable to follow the antique and good ones,
than to seck after new and less good.
Amidst the infinity of motions incident to nature in general, it is observed, that
everv man has one particular to himself, and peculiar to his temper, one bustling,
another slow, and a third between both: and this distinction cannot but be ob-
vious, even to a man of small understanding, since from thence, and a propen¬
sity for company like ourselves, proceed either our love or aversion for this or that
person or their actions. And if this be granted, we may be assured that the an-
cient masters (especially the Greeks, who was so famous for wisdom) nicely ob-
served all those motions, as well the internal as external, and expressed
them in their several works. Wherefore it may then perhaps be inferred, that no-
thing in this particular remains for the improvements of after ages. But let me
ask, Why we should not as well make use of our abilities and judgments in or-
der to go forward; lthink we may, in other things especially; but passing by
what is already done, we shall proceed to inquire what a statue means and
signifies.








A statue represents an idol in human shape : an idol I say, with respect to its
origin and use, and (as far as statuary is concerned) formed after the best propor
tion, either in gold, silver or other metal, and dexterously worked by the hand
and judgment of the artist. The uses of these are to be set in temples, courts,
palaces and other public places, but especially to adorn architecture. We find
them as well in scripture as fables: for instance, in Mordecai, when royally ar-
rayed he was led on horseback by Haman through the city. Also in Christ, when
exposed by Pilate to public view.
We likewise find matter for statues in profane, even recent stories : as for in-
stance, in the late king William and queen Maty, of blessed memory, moulded
from the life, and set up in the temple of honour, and such like. None of
these pieces shew either active, passionate, or violent motions, but plain or grave,
and majestic, suitable to the dignities of the persons they represent, and which
we ought to consider as gentlemen or ladies, who standing at the doors or win-
dows to see and be seen by the people are serious and without motion. Whence
the proverb seems to arise, ec He stands like a stone figure, or block.’ or, like a
dumb and lifeless person.
We shall therefore consider two sorts of statues, the unactive and the moving-
The unactive are such as stand singly in niches and on frontispieces, and the mov¬
ing or bustling are those which are seen in groups of two or three, on pedestals,
triumphal arches, and fountains.
Now it is certain, that these two sorts of statues must needs have particular pur-
poses, and therefore particular places : for the former are seen from a single stand,
for which they are properly made, and the latter are to be viewed round about
from all sides. But of this we shall say more in the next chapter.
As to this latter fort of statues, they receive not their appellations from the
persons they represent, but from the actions they performed, or the misfortunes
they underwent : an hetein lies the main point, since without them the persons
singly of themselves would not be known; as in the stories of Seneca, Petus, Lao-
coon, Pyramus and others: and these occurrences or accidents must be but once,
and on one occasion attributed tothem. Suppose any ofthese persons were to berepre-
sented by a fingle statue, as Laocoon with a serpent, Pyramus with a sword, &c.
What difference would there be between one who once committed such an act,
or bore such a calamity, and one who in his life-time, had gone through a thou¬
sand accidents, as Hercules, Theseus, Achilles, Hector, and many others who are re-
presented by one statue , Wherefore we may easily conceive, that the ancients
have in every respect so firmly fixed and orderly disposed their postures, that
there is no room left either for alteration or addition. Besides we see that no ad-
ditions of the modern masters are like the antique, either in quality or goodness,
as is evident in the works of Quelin, Keyzer, Bernini, and many others, who
made no distinction between statues and statues.
IfI seem here to contradict myself, because having in the preceeding chapter
set forth those three great masters almost above antiquity, I now place them be-
low it, let it be observed, that I am speaking of statues, not of bass-reliefs; for
herein they have neither excelled nor been equalled to antiquity in the beauty,









The ancients in their statues, had in view thrèe principal conditions and natures
of men; the gay, the heavy, and the moderate : the gay are active, full of fire,
and slender like the Apollo; the second are melancholy, slow and listless, like the
Antinous; and the third sort is of a composed temper between both, as the
Mercurius radians, which recieves its light from below. All these were etched by
Perrier. We also commonly observe, that the active and airy are seldom long
without motion, now standing on one leg, then on the other : accordingly the
ancients represented such a person standing on one leg, resting little or nothing on
the other foot, but being to exhibit an indolent voluptuous melancholy one, like
Antinous, we may plainly discover how heavily he stands on one leg and yet rests
on the other foot, his belly sticking out, head hanging down, and hips excessive-
ly rising. The contrarities of these two figures are worthy of remark ; one seems
to fly, and the other to be sinking into the earth. As to the expression of the
chird figure. (which is a mean between the two forts aforesaid) he as a well tem-
pered person, is made standing firm on his legs, looking thoughtfully down with-
out any turn, not too fiery or easy, nor too much sunk ; one hip,swelling a little
more than that of Apollo, and somewhat less than that of Antinous, and though rest-
ing on one leg, yet appearing more firm than the one, and more airy than the
other,
Now as the ancients knew how to divide those three different bodies so very
nicely, according to their natures and action, so we need not question but they
handled all their other figures in the same manner: I speak in reference to their
qualities, as a still-standing Bacchus, Mars, Hercules, Saturn, &c. Even the wo-
men, goddesses, and nymphs not excepted; all which proceed either in a great-
er or less degree from the the three standards before mentioned : this truth is evi-
whether in models or prints. Let us then not imagine, that we are able to invent
new actions for our statues, or others than those which are already found, much
less that they should be better and more proper; but rather employ our thoughts
more advantageoussy on other things, and in the mean time implicitly follow the
ancients in a study so noble, and in which they took so much pains.
The main point lies in the beautiful sway of a statue, well expressed according
to the quality, condition, nature and intention of it. But hereby I mean not,
that we are obliged to imitate the actions and postures of the ancients, without
the least deviation; contrarily, every man has the liberty of excercising his inge-
nuity : I propose their works only as patterns which I have always followed, and
would have others do the same, without fear of being therefore called copyists, or
their works copies. Such a moderation I think even very commendable, since
the fable of lcaius teaches us, that high-flyers have often great falls; or, by avoid-
ing Scylla, they get into Charybdis.
There still remains a. necessary remark, touching the explanatory additaments
of statues; and to be brief, I shall shew their natures in three particular statues,
and chuse out of many, the stories and figures of Lucretia, Dido, and Thisbe, among
the women. Those of the men may on the same foot be easily apprehended.
I re-







I represent these three women with daggers in their hand, to denote that they
fell by those weapons.
Lucretia is grave and majestic.
Dido haughty and proud. And,
Thisbe very plain and city-like.
I exhibit Lucretia thus because she was a noble Roman lady, who being ravish-
ed by Sextus Tarquinius, in discontent stabbed herself with a dagger. Now to
make this known, a round shield or board, with the ravisher’s head thereon, is
standing or lying at her feet, and on her right side lies a dog to point out her
faithful love. On the pedestal appears the whole fact.
The second, a queen of great spirit, has likewise a dagger, because on being
deceived, she in spite and rage killed herself. The figure of Aneas I place near
her, and on the other side a sparrow as the emblem of wanton love.
But Thisbe, in honourable affection moved, or rather deceived, by Pyramus’s
imaginary death, stabbed herself for pure love and despair; as being unwilling to
survive her lover. Near her on one side stands the figure of Pyramus, and on the
other two turtles. Underneath these two latter appears the fact itself, as in the
first.
These I think sufficient examples for further representations ; as having shewed
the difference in three, which are almost conformable to each other.
CHAP. VII. Of the placing of Figures upon Pedestals, Frontispieces, in
Niches, and other Places.
YTis evident that statuary has a dependance on architecture, and is regulated
by it : and as figures adorn and give life to a landscape, so statuary embel-
sishes and makes architecture look grand. A good landscape painter know what
objects are most proper for an ordonnance, and what forms they must have, whe-
ther crooked, strait, standing, sitting, to the left or right, in order to produce
decorum, as we have shewed in the chapter touching irregular objects: and a fkil-
ful architect ought to be as well acquainted with the method of setting off his
work with figures, bass-reliefs and other ornaments according to rule, that it may
thereby become not only magnificient and elegant, but we may plainly perceive,
it must be so and not otherwise. He should also know, why some figures ought
to face, and others look from each other; why these must swell or rise outwardly,
those be upright or sitting, &c.
Upon this account, the statuary ought rightly to understand the architect’s in-
tention, ere he proceed to work ; as also what figures he is to make naked or
cloathed, be they of men, women or children, on what side they ought to rise or
swell, and how bent; and from what side seen, and whether they must stand
high or low, and so forth. Being apprised of these particulars, he is then to exe-



.













































































































































































































































cute his thoughts in finding, according to those sways, fine actions, graceful mo-
tions and elegant draperies, from whence may arise a general decorum. Thus
much as to these two active sisters.
In relation to the third, to wit, painting, which embraces them both, as
needing their aid, l niust say, that it makes the elegancies of architecture and
statuary, whether in history or landscape its chief study, so a judicious painter
ought, for adorning his architecture with figures, bafs reliefs, &c. to be tho-
roughly acquainted with them, that he may naturally exprefs them with shade and
colour; even so much as thereby to correct the inevitable mis-shapes still to be ob-
served in nature.
It is unaccountable, that among so many good architects, statuaries, and pain-
ters, so few have understood the right placing of statues : they sometimes hit it,
but not upon certain principles. Wherefore we shall endeavour to clear the point in
few words and three sketches, hoping that no offence will be taken at my adapting
the matter also to painting, since it has so near a corcern therein.
As there is nothing in nature without imperfection, so in the use of things we
ought to proceed with judgment, in order to chuse the best for the satisfaction of
our own eyes, as well as those of the knowing and lovers.
In the placing of statues in architecture, the same regard must be had wherever
they stand or sit. I speak not of painting alone, but what generally concerns both
the arts ; statuary in the first place and afterwards painting. See plates LXV.
and LXVI.
Behold the sketch in plate LXV. with attention, and my orderly disposition of
the statues in different places, sufficiently to evidence in the regularity of my
scheme to any one who has a mind to try the contrary.
Here you are only to observe the out-lines of couples or pairs of figures, and
their postures against each other; for a single figure acts for itself, but a pair or
couple of figures shews the result of both.
I have formerly asserted, what constitutes a beautiful action, namely, a good
turn of the members and motion of the head, arms, hands and feet.
The first example chiefly concerns statuaries, who, by observing that position,
will shew that they understand it, and are able to order and make large things as
well as small.
The second example respects painters, though it be the same as the former, in
reference to the out-line; but with respect. to shade, when we are confined to a
single and fixed light, we ought to chuse a proper and advantageous one, that the
out-line, as our principal purpose, may thereby maintain its force, and produce
the effect and decorum we desire, as you see here with its opposites.
We have formerly said, that the out-line without the shade is of no effect; and
that a beautiful action and out-line may lose their force, and the gracefulnefs be
spoiled by an improper light; which mis-shape is very visible in sharp and broad
lights, and more disagreeable than in stirring figures.
The third example concerns those who paint figures, bafs reliefs and other or-
naments, either in white, red, yellow or other coloured marble or stone. Here,
as in
observe not only the out-line, as in the first example, or the same shaded,







the second, but likewise the colour of the stone, as well in the shade as light: I
say, especially in the shade, because therein appears the greatest variety, either by
Another of our positions has been, that all objects retain their natural beauty in
the shade, unless they receive reflexions from ocher things; likewise that white is
the most susceptible of it, and by its cleanness, easily receives whatever colour it
meets with. Consider also the great difference between the closeness and solidity
of marble, and the thinness and transparency of linen. In the third example vou
will find that white marble, not without reason, produces yellow or russet shades;
wherefore you ought carefully to consult Nature, in order to imitate her with
knowledge.
But to return to the first example, let us observe how two opposing figures ap-
pear in their out-line. First, upon the frontispiece where these two figures swell
outwardly, the faces either regarding or turning from each other, and the arms
the same; and the middlemost strait, without swell and fronting; and those on the
outsides also with little or no turn, as being seen only forward : secondly, the
two figures on each side of the steps likewise swell outwardly, yet more turning
than the others, because being also seen sideways, they ought to be beautiful
from three sides: thirdly, the foremost figure may have as much turn and action
as you please, and be good quite round : fourthly, the figures in the niches are
fronting without the least turn or stir, and the greatest swell is forwards. It is
also very probable for the men to stand below and the women above ; because the
woman tapers upwards, and thefore is more disappearing and uniting with the air;
which in architecture has a fine effect. For this reason they formerly oftentimes
set small pyramids on the tops of houses, instead of figures.
The uppermost figures against the sky look best naked, because of their airi-
nefs; those in niches must be massy and drest, and those below on the balustrade
half drest. Thus much as to thefirst fketch.
The second example shews the method to be used when it happens, that the
shade causes a visible deformity on the swelling part of a figure, as to help it by
the disposition of an arm, bit of drapery or hand ; l mean, in a painting where
the light remains always the same, and to which statuaries are not tied, especially
in the open air, because the light continually alters, but in a painting not; for as
things are painted they stand. This remark is worth noth ing as well in stirring
as still figures.
In the third sketch, I exhibit àa standing figure in a nich, and between them a
bass viol, supposed to be of vellowish or russet wood ; which colour, because the
figure is of white marble, gives strong reflexions. On the side we see another
figure between the greens ; and a third lying on the ground surrounded with the
air: in all three l have one and the same intention, viz. to shew the cause of the
mixture of the shades, otherwise, the figures will sometimes seem to be made of
two forts of stuff, as the light parts white, and the shades of some other colour.
A due observation of this enables us to answer for what we do.
Although



































































































































































































































































































Although now by these pofitions about the stirring actions, I seem to contradict
former ones, namely, that in painting or carving statues, we ought to give them
but little turn, yet in fact l do not : I speak there only touching a single figure ;
whereas here are many in company, and those set upon pedestals, fountains, and
the like places, where they are seen from all sides, which creates a difference as
well in their natures as circumstances.
IfI am taxed with presumption for taking upon me to place figures, and set
naked ones and women above, and men with those which are dressed below. I an-
swer, that my conduct is founded on architecture, which intimates that the five
Orders are peculiar to five different conditions of men, as Polyphemus, or the giants
for the first order; Mars, as robust or masculous, for the second ; Apollo, for his
slendernefs, for the third; Diana, or Venus, as womanisn, for the fourth; and lris
or Cupid for the fith. This consideration will l think, as well embolden as
justify me,
To conclude this chapter, Ishall touch on heads, hands, and feet, because I
have found both here and in other parts, painters as well as statuaries very imper-
fect in them, as if of less consideration than bodies.
Some statuaries do not sufficiently vary their faces, making little difference be-
tween youth and age, giving also much into the modern way of affectation and
exaggeration, I mean a kind of fondness in artists for a particular manner ; as to
make the eye-lids of their figures too large, which causes an heavy look ; and to
cut the dimples on each side of the mouth and the hollows of the nose and neck,
too deep seemingly shewing the fatness of women : whereas, they ought rather to
be somewhat more expressive in the muscles; since, according to the turn of the
head, those rise more or less, especially in thin and aged people: I speak only
of giving a variety to the look and breasts : for, faces must not be always alike
grave and lofty; there must be wanton ones as well as modest, large featured as
well as tender, suitable to the bodies; the case is here the same with the neck and
breasts, some are growing, others full grown.
Much is to be observed about the make of the hands, and set of the feet, es-
pecially when naked and without sandals; but the matter lies most in ordering the
toes. The three foremost ought to be the longest, and close, turning out more or
less with the tread of the feet ; whereas some turn them in, the great one lying
strait with the foot, and the rest against it, which looks very uncomely. See the
examples in plate LXVII. and the difference between them, of which the two up-
permost shew the unseemliness, and the three others the elegance I speak of. And
though many have casts of beautiful womens hands for constant use, yet these
(as has been said of faces, breasts, &c. ) cannot upon all occasions serve for the
difference of the sexes ; for women have thicker and more tapering fingers, and
smaller nails than men, who, according to theirbuik and age have more rising
knuckles than women.








CHAP. VIII. Of the Usefulness of Modelling.
HAVING, in the second chapter touched upon modelling, which is a prac¬
I
tice of great concern to a curious artist, l shall here deliver my further
thoughts about it.
The making models, whether in clay, wax, or other soft matter, is both use-
ful, delightful, and necessary for a statuary as well as painter, indeed, for all
who endeavor at any perfection in the art; for by this practice (in reference to the
relief of things we are to represent, whereby it seems alvvays to have life itself)
we obtain a firmness, and at the same time a bold handling. It disburthens our
thoughts, and makes such lastings impreffions on the mind, that we need not be
at a loss about the lifc. We must be sensible of the great advantage arising from
it, because we can model in the aforesaid bodies, bais reliefs, foliage, and other
ornaments from the antiquities, on all sorts of objects, as altars, vases, difhes,
candlesticks, cisterns, &c. and then paint them with such colour as we please;
also gild or bronze them, according to the use we would put them to. By the
same means we may have store of elegant sword hilts and helmets, Greek as well as
Roman, to serve any occasion. In short, a good modeller can help himself out of
any difsiculties. Therefore, let me advise you to fall bodily to work, and make
bass reliefs, sphinxes, tombs, vafes, or any thing else necessary in the art. You
may likewise get small wooden dishes and pots of divers kinds turned, and prettily
adorn them with wax imagery of satyrs faces, playing children, dancing nymphs,
&c. Tliese things may be used in any manner of painting, whether the picce be
sun-shine, or moon or candle-lights. If you would go further, you can divert
yourself with modelling medeals in wax, and oblige a friend with a cast of -hem-
Many of the most famous masters have practised modelling, as sufficiently ap-
pears in their works. The truth is, we can make any thing we want, even what
no body else has, and is no where to be purchased, to paint after, as from the
lise itself.
I shall say little of the method for making models, because it is very common,
and every man has his own way : wherefore shall consine myself to flat bafs
reliefs.
Having sketched my design on paper, as large or small as l would model it,
and neatly worked it up with lights and shades, 1take a board painted with the
same colour and tint as my design, and with a point trace it thereon, and sill these
out-lines with wax or clay more or less raised, as occasion requires: then l work
the stufffirst with singers, afterwards with a toothed tool, and lastly with a wet
pencil in order to make it smooth and even ; which being done, and the board
placed in the same light as our pictures are tostand or hang in, it serves for a mo-
del to paint after. If now we are to introduce it in our pieces, whether in land-
scape, frizes, shallow niches, &c. it must be set either fronting or sloping, in
such a light and at such a height as the point of sight directs. But if it be a bass
relief,

































































































































































































































































relief, more raised, the point of sight is placed in the middle of the piece : and
though the raised parts on the extremities will then of course happen to jump over
the out-line, even sometimes over other figures, according to the lengths of the
pieces, as in a frize and such like. I, to prevent that inconvenience, make use
of more thanone point of sight.
CHAP. IX. Of the visual Decorum of a Statue, with its Pedestal, as
well within as without Doors : As also the suiting of Vases and Busts.
7E find that the grace of the posture and sway of a fine statue arises only from
W
a contrast in its outlines, from top to bottoni, affecting not only the
(
figure, but also the pedestal ; with this difference, notwithstanding, between na-
ked and cloathed figures, that an ornamented pedestal gives the former greater
elegance than a plain one Yet this latter fort likewise produces a fine effect, by
observing, that the swells or scrolls of mens pedestals ought to be at bottom, and
those of women on top, the course of which causes a contrast both in the forms and
sexes. Sce plate LXVIII.
If now it be afked, in the case of placing two naked figures together, viz.
a man aud a woman, as Diana and Apollo, Venus and Adonis, &c. whether the pe-
destals ought then to be represented so unlike ; My opinion is, that they must
not, as being contrary to rule and order. If both figures be men, the pedestals
ought to swell at bottom; if both women, on top, and if a man and a woman,
both ought to be plain. If there be a woman between two men, the side pedes-
tals must be plain, and the middle one particular to itself, and the contrary.
Plain pedestals, though bearing drest figures, vases or busts, suit not between
two columns or pilasters, at least they ought to hollow in, not swell out.
The height of a vase, placed between two figures, must not exceed three fourths
of that of the figures, inclusive of the pedestal, that is, up to the breasts,
and nohigher.
A bust, with its pedestal, should not rise above man’s height, the pedestal not
swelling out, but the contrary, as in the examples.
Where two vases and a bust are placed in a garden between two figures, the
outward pedestals ought to be of the same height with-the middlemost and plain ;
the two others must hollow in or swell out according to the course of the vases, and
be a third or half lower, yet retain the same breadth with the others.
A vase twice as high as broad, and running up straight, ought to have a
square swelling pedestal. The contrary will produce the same decorum.
If a bust stand between two vases, they must be level with the shoulders of the
figure. The contrary is also good, provided the pedestal be somewhat bigger,
and suited to the course of the vase.








CHAP. X. Of the Ornaments of the Frontispiece of Temples, Houses, &c.
 TOTHING can properly be done in statuary or painting, without due re-
flexion : I speak not only of the manner and handling, but also with re-
ficct to the circumstances of things. Even a good building may abate of its
lustre, by a bad choice in the outside ornaments. Wherefore, wé shall shew what
ought to be done in this point, by what follows.
The Ornament on the Temple of
Jupiter, should be an eagle grasping thunder.
Mars,- Some warlike instruments, as armour, helmet, shield, sword, arrows,
and standards.
Phaebus, -A sun in the center of the zodiac, with the twelve signs.
Pallas,Medusa’s shield, and an helmet adorned with a standing owl, or lying
spinx.
Diana,Dogs, bow and arrows, and above them a moon.
Ceres,- A plough, with ears of corn, and a fickle.
Bacchus,-Two tygers, a thyrsis twined with vine leaves, and bunches of
grapes.
Mercury,- A winged cap on a Caduceus.
Vulcan,An anvil, with hammer and pincers thereon.
Vesta,-An oblation bowl, out of which proceeds a flame in the middle of a
cireling serpent.
Cybele, -—A castle or key between two lions.
The Ornaments on the House of a
Senator, consul, or magistrate, should be, the Fasces, and in the middle,
thunder.
Learned man or philosopher,-A spinx with a burning torch, and also some
books.
General,-A shield, with a griffin represented thereon, likewise a club and lions
skin.
Merchant,—A bale of goods, a pair of scales, and a yard measure.
Phyfician,
—The figure of Asculapius, and a staff twined with a serpent.
Painter,A monkey with pallet and pencils.
Shepherd,-A crook, with a scrip and flute hanging to it.
Fisherman,--Some nets, ropes, rushies, and fishes.







The Ornament on an
Hospital, should be Charity or Compassion, with the founder’s or town’s armis.
Prison,All sorts of frightful instruments, as irons, chains, ropes, &c.
House of correction,-- Thefigure of Education, holding the bridle of a tamed
beast which goes before her.
All the Arts, as painting, arithmetic, architecture, &c. may be expressed by
figures.
It is certain, that the design of temples, built in honour of the gods, was to
place their figures in them for worship, either with prayers or sacrifices. Where-
fore it is a great fault in ignorants to place without, in frontispieces or niches,
what we ought to seek within those buildings, as may be seen in the temple of
Diana at Ephesus, Apollo at Dolphos, Jupiier at Dodone, and many others, where the
figures all stand without them.






TH E
Art of Painting
BOOK XI.
Of Still LiFe.
Emblem touching Still Life.


JUDGMENT and Prudence sit here at a table by whom are seen


some Cupids taking out of a large horn of plenty, all sorts of things,



as a sceptre, crown, necklaces, books, a shepherd’s staff, mufical



instruments, garlands, flowers, fruit, &c. serving for Still Life; and

presenting them to Judgment, who by the help of Prudence, lays them in heaps
on the table, disposing them orderly for representing ingenious ordonnances in that
part of the art.
CHAP. I. Of Still Life in general.
HAVING thus far treated of the power and dignity of the noble art of paint-
ing, together with the lustre and advantage accruing to those who tho-

roughly consider and put it in execution, we shall now for the sake of weak
capacities, proceed to Still Life, or immoveable and inanimate things ; such as
flowers, fruits, gold, silver, stone, musical instruments, dead fish, &c. and shew
which






which are the best and of most advantage. These may in their turns serve for ma¬
terials for a natural composition wherewith to please all sorts of men, the great
as well as the little, the learned as ignorant. Wherefore out of many, we shall
fix on the following olijects, as the most beautiful, elegant, and agreeable.
Flowers.
I.
2. Fruit,
3. Gold, silver, and other rich things.
4. Mufical instruments.
These four forts, artfully ordered and performed, may serve for the ornament
of halls and cabinets as well as the best paintings, provided they have a proper
light and hang together. But we must know in the first place, what constitutes a
good still life piece, since though it be naturally handled, nothing but a good
choice can charm the senses, and-bring fame to the master. It is weakneis to
think that faded flowers should please, much less in a picture : Or, who would
have a piece of ordinary unripe or rotten fruit in his best room, and among a
cabinet collection, seeing the life itself is so disagreeable ; Such rubbish I did for-
merly admire; but, as they only shew the deformities of nature, I have no ap-
petite to view them any more. But, to return to the subject.
My opinion is, that the beauty and goodness of a still life consists only in the
most choice objects : l’say the most choice; as among flowers, the most rare
and beautiful, and the same in fruits and other things. These will gain the maf-
ter credit, especially with the addition of some particular significations proper to
them. It is not probable that wealthy people should be delighted with old-
fafhiioned plate and furniture, when they can have every thing more beautiful and
elegant; and, as improbable, that judicious lovers of music should be pleased
with the modern lyre, dulcimer, or bag-pipe. As for cabages, carrots, and tur-
nips, as likewise cod-fisn, salmon, herrings, smelts, and such like, which are
poor and mean ornaments, and not worthy of any apartment; he who is pleased
with them may seek them in the markets. I as little approve of horse furniture
and hunting equipage; though these latter with wild boars, stags, hares, phea-
sants, partridges, and other fowls, depending on princes and noblemens fancies,
are more tollerable.
Having- thus in general touched on still life, let the judicious determine
which sort is best and most advantageous cither to the painter or purchaser.
As for me, l think eloquence very charming to the ear; but goodness alone
makes beauty aimable. What is a fine flower, apple, gold cup, or well tuned
violin, without good smell, delicate taste, proper use, and agreeable sound ?
Goodness I say, ought to be perfectly apparent : the smell, taste, hearing, or sound
cannot be painted; but may be in some measure expressed by occult fignifications,
either in bass-relief by fables, hieroglyphics, or emblematic, figures, or by ma¬
ny other things, if the will be not wanting.
As to the nature and property of the plices for still life, they are two-fold,
close and open; the one representing it as if hanging against a wall or wainscot,
and the other as lving on a bench or table, or on the ground.
We also suppose, that no objects used in still life ought to be represented less
than the life.






It is likewise improper, and against the nature of still life, to introduce, in any
of the before-mentioned choices, coloured back-works, or vistos, either close or
open; that is, landscape, architecture, or any kind of living créatures, which
would spoil the very name of a still life : moreover, it is difficult, if not im-
possible, for such a painter to hit every thing; and granting he can, I yet ques-
tion whether he would be pleased with the title of a still life painter. I say, then,
that the depth of the picture is only to be represented by an hanging curtain, or
a bass relief of wood or stone, of such a colour and tint, as best suits the general
decorum; thé one darkish, and the other somewhat lighter. With Flowers, a
dark grey back ground suits better than a white, yellow, or red one. With Fruit,
white and grey marble, but not yellow or red : yet, as a fine bass relief requires
more sxill than a flower or fruit, and such like, you may, instead thereof, in-
troduce a niche, with a god or goddess’s bust therein, proper to the subject;
as a Flora, Pomona, Bacchus, Apollo, Diana, or others, according to the intent
of your design, and as you would have it bear either a particular or general
meaning, which each of those sigures will supply in abundance. Flowers are
various, and, like fruits, may be divided into three sorts, to wit, the Spring,
Summer, and Autumn; and having different qualities, are fit for many fine and
uncommon designs, in conjunction with bafs reliefs or busts, as l have said, with
this caution, that with slowers suit no fruit, but ears of corn, as being airy and
pliable ; but among fruits may be some flowers, especially such as alude to
rest and mirth; as poppies and rofes. And yet these agree best with grapes,
either in garlands or festoons.
Let us now, for exercise and improvement in this point, observe what the
learned say. The white lilly is sacred to Juno; turnsol to Apolbo; the rose to
Venus ; Diana and Somnus claim the poppies; Ceres, the corn-flowers; Juno, the
pomegranates ; Bacchus, the fig-tree and vine; Ceres, or lsis, the peaches and
ears of corn ; Venus and Apollo, the apples; Ops, or Mother Earth, every thing
she produces throughout the year. Of instruments, the lyre is dedicated to
Apollo, Mercury, and the Muses; the flute, to Pan and Venus; the trumpet, to
Mars, &c.
CHAP. II. Designs for Bass Reliefs proper to Still Life.
TITH flowers fuit Zephyrus and Flora, or Venus and Adonis, in
N
courtship.
With fruits, Ceres and Pomona, or Pomona and Vertumnus. With grapes,
Bacchus and Ariadne and merry bacchanals; and if there be mulberries among
them, a sleeping Silenus, with the nymph Agle, is most agreeable.
With musical instruments, Apollo and the nine Muses ; Orpheus playing, or Arion
on the dolphin. With. a timbrel, cornet, and cymbal, a bacchanalian sacrifice,
feast, or dancing.









To the three seasons, as Spring, Summer, and Autumn, in one piece, we may
apply Venus, Ceres, and Bacchus sitting together, according to their ranks. I ex-
clude the Winter, as improper and disagreeable, and admitting of no other than
poor interpretations ; such as Hunger, Penury, &c. which tnis season brings
with it.
That these bafs reliefs may have due decorum, you must observe, that in gar-
lands they ought to be octangular; in festoons, round; and in groups, or
bunches, square, and parallel with the frame, especially when disposed hanging
above, below, and on the sides; but when in corners, a compartment suits better,
and this to be square above, and semi-circular at bottom and both sides. Thus
much as to close bafs reliefs in general. As for the relief, the slatter it is, thè
better, and without the least ground-shade, in order to prevent all mastery and
confusion.
Touching the other sort of still life, either standing or lying in deep niches,
or on benches or tables, we have before observed, that it ought not to be repre-
sented less than the life, and therefore must come quite forward in the piece, as
appearing then in its full force and quality ; even much better with a light com-
ing from without, than within; a front than side light.
There are three sorts of grounds, which elegantly set off fruits. Grapes, espe-
cially the blue, and cherries, blue plumbs, and all fruits inclinable to be dark,
require one of free-stone; but apples, peaches, and apricots, appear better on a
dark grey ground. There is a third sort, as pumpkins, melons, oranges, straw-
berries, and others, which best become a white ground, whether they be lying on
a bench or table, or in a deep niche.
I shall now describe some designs. which I hope will not be unacceptable to the
artist. The first contains the three blooming seafons.
Table, or Ordonnance-
This piece exhibits a compass-headed niche, square within, and its depth equal
to its diamcter: therein I place a beautiful vase, either of chrystal, copper, or
gold, with flowers, of which I set the shortest stalk in the middle, and the others
spreading on the sides : above, in the middle, on a ring, I hang two or three
bunches of the largest sort of grapes : to the ring l fasten a small ribbon, on
which loosely hang ears of corn, intermixed with corn-flowers, taken up and tied
in the upper corners of the piece, and hanging down the fides : below, round the
vase, lies sine and palatable fruit, of the largest and best fort; as melons, lemons,
fresh figs, pomegranates, walnuts, as well as apples, peaches, China oranges, &c.
This is the substance of the piece.
The disposition is thus. The festoons, in bunches of an hand’s length, are
parted with greens, and tied, which greens cover the stalks of corn, and being in-
termixed, as is said, with some blue flowers, produce an agreeable mixture, with-
out mastery. The jaums setting them off, are grey stone, and the ribbon, dark
violet. The grapes of the largest sort, tied to a copper ring, are, in the middle,
white, and thosc hanging on each side, blue, with a green leaf or two : this group
is






is well set off against the shade of the hollow of the niche, without drawing the
eye froi the principal. My intention is, to dispose the flowers into a large mafs
of beautiful and light ones; the strongest and fullest to be in the middle, consist-
ing of white, yellow and light red: the highest next the grapes to be a turnsol,
and on the sides, others of less force and colour, intermixed here and there, with
a beautiful blue one. And, because the vase, on account of the room which the
fruits lying about it, take up, cannot stand quite forward, the flowers spreading on
the sides must be in snade. The fruits I dispose contrary again; as the biggest on
the left side, and the smallest and most tender, such as peaches, apricots, and
plumbs, on the right: they should be ltalian fruits, especially the lemons, at least
two fists big, as being the chief of the group, and governing the rest. If, besides
the seasons, you would represent some other meanings, add a lyre, violin, or other
musical instrument, which may be set or hung against the light side of the aforesaid
hollow; and thus the piece is complete.
And now, curious still life paintersl view this example with attention, and con-
sider whether I propose to you any difficulty above your abilities. Ye flower
painters, Is it more troublesome and artful to imitate a grape, apple, or peach,
than a rose, lilly, or turnsol; And ye, who practice fruit only, What difficulty has
a flower more than fruits, a pomegranate or melon, inwardly or outwardly ; Any of
these may be set standing or lying before you, as long as you please; and so may
an harp, violin, lyre, or slute: these can store you, and are all in your power, and
vour eyes can determine the proportions, measures, and forms, of all that stands
still, hangs, or lies, and the soft pencil, skilfully handled, brings them naturally
and properly on the cloth. Why then, do ye so often obstinately build on a single
fort; A beautiful slower will certainly please the eye, but more, in conjunction
with some fine musical instruments. Your cloth may take in some of each, and
vet, ye most times do it with a single sort. If it be a flower-piece, your cloth must
however be filled, as it also must, when the subject is fruits and musical instru-
ments. When we say, JA man is a fine still life painter, we are to suppose, he
paints every thing, either standing still, lying, or hanging.
Second Ordonnance, being the reverse of the Former.
The chief object in this ordonnance, is a low or shallow basket of fruit, taking
up in breadth the major part of the opening. This basket is silled with all forts
of tender and palatable fruit. Instead of the grapes over it, I fasten to the ring
a bunch of slowers with elegant greens, tied up, as in the former, and against the
jaumbs of the niche, some musical instruments; as a slute, trumpet, bassoons, cor-
nets, hautboys, &c. On the right side of the basket, lies a Porcelain disn of straw-
berries; and behind it, somewhat deeper in the niche, a wide glass of mulberries,
&c. The hanging festoons, on each side of the bunch of slowers, consist mostly of
ears of corn and greens. The main light takes the basket of fruit, consisting
mostly of lightisn white, yellow, and somewhat red ones, and the shaded side, of
dark, black, or violet. The bunch of flowers over it, contrarily, is made up of
blue, purple, violet, and a little white and yellow. The musical instruments the
same.






same. The other things; encompaffing these, as the ears of corn, and greens, ex-
plain themselves.
This piece, thus disposed and artfully executed, is a proper matching picture
for the preceding.
We shall subjoin a third ordonnance of a music piece, (implying harmony) no
less elegant than the former.
I.
Third Ordonnance.
In the middle of the hollow of the niche, I place on a desk, a large book of
music, opening long-ways, on one side whereof is pricked the cantus, and on the
other, the bafs, either in church or chamber music. Over it, on the ring, Ifasten
an ivory lyre, adorned with gold, and between its horns hangs a crown of laurel,
with a small olive, or myrtle branch. All the wind-instruments, before-men-
tioned, together with the violin, must be disposed on the sides, and behind the
book, and forwards, some implements pertaining thereto, viz. a screw or two,
piece of colophony, box of strings, bassoon or hautboy-reed, &c. all encompassed
by a beautiful festoon of flowers, intermixed with ears of corn.
This piece fuits well between the two others.
As for the shape of all the three, they will be better, and look more noble, if
longer than wide.
There remains another sort of still life, which with the preceding, would yield
a great variety. It consists of all sorts of rich things, as gold, silver, crystal, and
other glasses, pearls, precious stones, and mother of pearl. Such pieces are com¬
monly called Vanitases. The famous Kalf has left many rare exaiples of these

things, which deserve the highest commendation.
Now, to shew that in this branch the artist has plentiful materials for bringing
him from a trade to an art; or, in better terms, for enriching the productions of
the hand with those of the head, whereby he may be reputed an artful master,
I
shall sketch a fourth ordonnance, taking for the subject, wisdom, riches and ho-
nour. Solomon only prayed for wisdom, and with it obtained riches, and honour.
Fourth Ordonnance,
I plâce in the middle of the piece, every thing that is costly, viz. gold, silver,
pots, tankards, salvers, cups of mother of pearl, crystal, candlesticks, heaps of
gold and silver coin, full purses, &c. On the ring above, I hang a small board,
with this motto in gold letters, Sapienria Nutrix; or, instead of the writing, I put
in a golden sun, on a fky-colour ground. On each side of it, I hang some books,
festoon-wise, intermixed with laurels, naval and moral crowns, garlands of palm,
laurel, myrtle, oak, &c. and fastened to the upper corners of the piece, proceeding
from the ring, and hanging down the sides. About them might be twined a small
streamer, with these words : Laboris merces, sapientia nutrix; or Præmia majora
iaboribus.








Now; to bring Wifdom, which fs the principal part of the piece, into the mid¬
dle, we may, in lieu of the sun and books, hang above, on the ring, the golden
ffeece, and exhibit below, à sphinx, with some books and peachès.
There are other sorts of still life, as dead fisni, cabbages, carrots, aamnips, &c.
which being too low and poor, and bearing no particular lignifications, I think
unworthy to range with those before-mentioned, how well soever they be exe-
cuted, much less to adorn the cabinets of great and wise men. But dead hares,
partridges, pheasants, and all sorts of hunting equipage, may, as I have sald, be
praise-worthy.


CHAP. III. Representations of Still Life, applioable to particular
Persons.
ALTHOUGH I have before said, that the famous Kaff excelled in still
life, yet he could give as little reason for what he did, as others before and
fince : he only exhibited what occurred to his thoughts-; as a Porcelain pot or
diss, gold cup, mum-glass, rummer of wine, with lemon-peel hanging on it,
clock, Horn of mother of pearl, gold’or silver footed, silver dish of peaches, or else
cut China, oranges or lemons, a carpet, and other ufual things, without any
thought of doing something of importance, which might carry some particulai
meaning, or be applicable to something. Neverthelefs, to shew that this may be
done as well in still life, as in other representations. I fhall give the following
sketches made applicable to particular persons.
Table, or Ordonnance, adapted to a triumphing Warrier,
Herein we exhibit some arms, viz. a steel breast-piece, an helmet, elegantly
wrought, shield and sword, with the hilt representing an eagle or lion’s head, a
pike or spear, bent bow and a quiver of arrows, also iome crowns of laurel, palm,
and olive. Above, on the frame, may be fastened on two rings, a gold chain, to
which hangs an heart, beset with precious stones, coming down to the breastapiece,
and over it may be the motto of the hero to whom we apply the subject. We
exhibit further, a gold crown, bracelets and rings, an hat with feathers, and a dia-
mond button, and a trumpet. Under these, fies an embroidered coat on the table,
with a sleeve hanging down from it. On the wall, or in a small table, may be
seen in bafs relief, Apollo having killed the dragon Python, or Perseus and Andro-
meda; or a man in a lion’s sxin, tearing open a tiger’s mouth, and near him,
a club.







Comment on the aforesaid Objects.
The breaft-piece was anciently taken for a mark of understanding and defence ;
for, as it guards the breast, it preserves life.
The helmet denotes an inclination for war, and a martial spirit.
The shield also, a token of defence, was so much regarded by the ancients, that
they made a prefent of it to conquerors, in consideration of their valour and con-
duct. Virgil, in his ninth Book, mentions Aneas’s ordering a fhield to be prought
to him, wherewith to reward the fidelity and valour of Nijus. The Argives had
eustom of marching young men (who had by notable exploits merited the hongur
with the shield of Enhippus carried before them triumphantly, through their towi
and territories. We also read, that the palladium, which the ancients believed
fell from heaven, was a shield, mysteriously representing the protection of the
Roman people and empire; and, according to Numa Pampilius’s explanation, the
shield implied success and prosperity, whereby he endeavoured to buoy and com-
fort the Roman people, on their being sorely visited, in his eighth year, with a pesti-
lence which threatened the destruction of all staly. The shields were moreover de-
dicated to those, who had saved the town and common-wealth from any great and
imminent danger; and to perpetuate such. a benefaction, and as a spur to virtue,
they caused the story to be engraved or carved on their shields. The shield and
pike also signify war, chiefly in retrieving the damages sustained by the enemy,
and in putting them to flight, and destroying them. Yet weapons are of little
advantage, if not used with wisdom and understanding : wherefore, we generally
see Pallas represented with a shield and pike; the latter signifying force, and quick-
ness of apprehension.
The pike, or-spear, also denotes the spreading of a glorious name; for which
reason, according to Plutarch, Lysippus adorned. the statue of Alexander with it, tho
others represented him with thunder in his hand, intending thereby to immor-
talize the atchievements of that hero. The pike or arrow also being thrown or
shot at a mark, hieroglyphically signifies the spreading of a glorious name : yet,
according to the ancients, the pike or spear not only implied royal grandeur and
authority, but was likewise the usual reward for those who had shewed their bra-
very in conquering the-enemy : as Pliny says, that Sicinnius Dentatus, for his ad-
mirable walour, was presented with twelve pikes. Festus Pompeius-thinks that ge-
nèrals received the pike or javelin, in token of their being intrusted with the prin-
cipal management of the war and empire; and, that therefore it was customary to
tsell the prisoners publicly, sub hasta, or under the pike or spear.
The sword, in reference to war, signifies fury, cruelty, fright, persecution and
threatening with death.
The bent bow is likewise a sign of war; and ithe arrows signify the people, or
the enlargement of power; also velocity and quick motions.
The crown-of laurel was the token of conquerors, and those who performed any
glerious-act, -as the-ancient remains sufficiently inform us. And we learn from








history, that the Roman generals and commanders used in their triumphs, to
present a crown of laurel to Jupiter Capitolinus.
The ancient Romans also used to bestow a palm on those who triumphed, as a
general token of victory. And the palm-tree, though pressed by à heavy weight,
will yet grow against it; wherefore in hot battles, it is esteemed a token of vic-
tory, which can only be got by a firm resolution to refist and despise dangers and
adversities.
The olive is likewise a mark of victory ; the ancients adorning their trophies
and warlike monuments with its branches, or decking the head, of the conqueror
with a crown of its leaves.
The gold chain was the Roman reward for valour and virtue; it not only re-
compensing merit, but serving for a badge of honour, glory and esteem. The
Roman history informs us, that the son of Tarquinius Priscus, though but fourteen
years of age, charged the enemies in the open field and conquered them; where-
fore to imortalize his valour, he was the first who was honoured with a gold chain :
though according to others, Hersilius the first born of the ravished Sabines at Rome,
first received that honour. We also read that Ricinnius Dentatus was sixty-three
times rewarded with à gold chain, and twenty-five times with other gold or gilt
presents.
The heart beset with- precious stones, hanging down to the breast on a gold
chain, signifies, that wholesome advice and deliberation spring from the innermost
of the heart ; wherefore those who triumphed were introduced with this gold
chain about their necks, in the utmost part whereof, or the heart hanging down
to the breast, they imagined were contained herbs and balm, which secured the
triumphers from malice and envy. Asconius particularly remarks, that the chil-
dren of the nobles or free citizens wore those chains; but the Liberti or freed-anen,
for distinction’s sake, had them only of silver and copper : to which Juvenal in his
Satyrs alludes, saying, The poor must be content with copper.
The gold crown and bracelets, which adorned both the shoulders and arms,
were likewise the rewards of great actions. These gifts were preserved for poste-
rity, as a spur for young people indefatigably to tread in the steps of their fore-fa-
thers. Titus Livius, in his tenth Book says, That after the victory obtained over
the Samnites near Aquilonia, Papirius on that occasion presented Sp. Nautius, his ne-
phew, Spurius Papirius. four captains and a troop of pikemen, with bracelets and
gold crowns ; giving the other captains, foot-soldiers and horsemen, bracelets
and ornaments of silver, which they called Crnicula, or little horns. And Decius :
the Tribune received a gold crown from Aulas Cornelius Cossus, for defending a
certain strong place belonging to the Romans, against the Samnites, and forcing
them to raise the siege.
The Romans also esteemed the rings as badges of honour and nobility : for ac-
cording to Titus Livius, in his third Book, treating of the second Punic war, on
Mago’s being dispatched by Hannibal to notify to the Carthagenians the bloody de-
feat of the Romans in the battle of Canna, he poured out before them an heap of
gold rings, taken as a booty from the slain; adding, to extol. the victory, that
among the Romans, none but the great and noble were allowed to wear them. And
towards






towards the close of his ninth Book, he relates, that on Flavius’s being, in a pub
lic asfembly, chosen Adilis, or superintendant of the public buildings, the no-
bility were so distinguisned, that several of them laid down their gold rings and
other tokens ofhonour and esteem. And the eloquent Ccero, in his fourth Ora-
tion against Verres, reproaches him for bestowing in a public asfembly of the
people, the tokens of honour, gold rings, on mean and unworthy people : with
whom agrees Asconius, saying, That the Fasces, civic crown and gold rings were
by the people looked on as badges of liberty and nobility, and always attended
with honour and profitable incomes.
The Greeks reputed the hat or cap as a token of noble extraction; wherefore
they represented the head of Ubsses covered with a hat or cap, as being noble both
by father and mother. For this reason, we commonly. see on ancient coins and
medals an hat or cap circumscribed LIBERTAS.
The diamond is indisputably the hardest, and for its sparkling the most beau-
tiful and perfect of all precious stones, and (which is most surprising and remark-
able) it resists the consuming fire, without losing any of its virtue or excellence.
Wherefore it is used as an hieroglyphic of immoveable firmness in prosperity
and adversity : accordingly, the ancients also attributed to it a supernatural qua-
lity of freeing the heart from vain fear and despair, and that it never left a man
either in his pressures or dangers, when principally he ought to be master of
himself.
The plume of feathers also signifies honour and nobility, and,
The trumpet, esteem and an immortal name.
The embroidered coat called Tunica Palmata, was an under garment commonly
worn by those who triumphed ; acording to Titus Livius in his tenth Book : and
Isidorus Hispalensis, in his Originum, lib. 19. says, That those who had conquer-
ed used to receive a gown called Toga Palmata or Toga Picta, from the victo-
ries and palm branches worked in it. And Macrobius, lib. 11. Saturnal, cap.
6. affirms that Tullus Hostilius first introduced this garment among the Romans.
The twofirst bass-reliefs explain themselves, and by the third we mean strength;
for the lion’s skin implies high understanding and resolution of mind, and the club,
conduct and intrepidity.
Second Ordonnance, relating to a Judge.
In this we reprefent a pair of scales, a sword, looking-glass, septre topped
with an eye, a board with a triangle thereon inclosing the number 1. and the
image of truth, an hazel wand and fasces, a scythe, rod, ax, gold chain, staff twined
with ivy, a large folio book, whereto is affixed the coat of arms of the common-
wealth; and on the wall, a fruitful palm-tree in bass-relief.
Explanation of these Objects.
The fcales commonly placed in the hand of Justice, signify that weighing all
mens









mens actions, sne affigns’to every one what God has decreed him; wherefore the
heathens also represented Astræa ascended to heaven, and seated there between the
lion and scales; intimating thereby, that a judge ought resolutely to punish trans-
greffions according to their merit, without respecting persons.
The sword likewise signifies justice and the severity of the law ; according to
the apostle, e: A ruler is the minister of God, and bears not the sword in vain, to
execute wrath on him that doth evil. 7
The looking-glass in the hand of Prudenoe denotes reforming of manners.
The ancient Agyprians, by the hieroglyphic figure of the sceptre with an open
&ye, fignified the absolute authority of equity and prudence ; which always watch-
ing and penetrating mens actions, justly reward each according to his deserts.
Platarch, in his doctrine of the Phythagoreans, intimates that the triangle is the
most perfect figure of justice. Some palce the number I. within it, because we
therein see the godly character of the Almighty.
The image of truth explains itself.
The hazel wand fignifies ecclesiastical, and the fasces, secular dignity; or re-
ligion and policy.
The fcythe is is'the hieroglyphic of chastisement; as we read in the prophet
Zechariah, that the scythe he saw in a vision, was going forth tocut off all thofe
who stole or swore.
The rod also implies punishment, for the support of good discipline and laws
according to equity and justice.
The Romans and some of the Greeks took the ax hieroglyphically for heavy
chastisement; we see in the medals and coins of Tenedos, mentioned by Pollux :
for the king of Tenedos, having published a law, that any person caught in adul-
tery should be put’to death with the ax, and in compliance therewith not spared
his own son, he commanded this story to be struck on the coins and medals, in
order to be thereby immortalized.
The Agyptians likewise applied the Bulla, or gold chain and heart to their
judges; intimating, that making pure truth their only aim, they ought to be
impartial, and give judgment without respect of persons.
The staff twined with ivy signifies, that justice ought to be protected-: for by
the staff is understood authority, and by the ivy protection, which should always
flourish.
The large folio book contains the statues and ordinances of the country.
The fruit of the palm-tree represented in bass-relief, being of equal’size with the
Jeaves, the ancients would thereby signify justice and equity. This tree also con¬
sisting of lasting matter, and not altering or decaying so soon as-others, serves for
a pattern of the- maintenance of justice without impediment or alteration : and as
it never drops its leaves as others do, and refists alla pressure and weight, thereby
is implied that judges ought not to be biassed, but withstand those who endea-
vour to draw them from their-duty by fair words, gifts or intrigues.







Ordornance relating to a Lawyer.
In this table we exhibit a plaister figure of Mercury winged at head and feet,
standing on a square stone pedestal, having in one hand his golden caduceus twined
with serpents, and in the other an olive branch. By him is a plaister sphinx.
Also a sword and fhield, a lyre or harp, a burning lamp, an ink-horn with pens
and a roll of paper, a sieve, some of the principal law books, and abible. In a
small vase or pot may be set an iris or two. Above on a ring hang three garlands,
one composed of laurel and ivy, another of cedar and myrtle, and the third of
oak leaves. On the wall, or in a small table, we see in bass-relief the fable of
Minerva brought forth out of Jupiter’s brain.
Explanation of the Objects.
Mercury implies the impreffion of words upon the mind, and the force of elo-
quence : wherefore the ancients believed, he was the messenger and the interpre-
ter of the gods.
The square stone whereon he ftands, fignifies the regard for and stability of the
laws and rules whereby to direct our speeches : for which reason Mercury is stiled
Tetragonus or square, that is firm and certain.
His staff or caduceus intimates, that obstinate tyrants must yield to the laws and
Huent charms of eloquence. By the serpents twined about the golden rod, the
ancients mean that eloquence, tempered with ingenuity and prudence, can easily
bring men’to reason. Some also would have the golden rod in the hand of Mer-
cury to’signify, the excellence and eminence of honourable offices due to those who
employ their eloquence (the gift of heaven) in their neighbours welfare and the
common good.
By the olive branch in Mercury’s hand is understood peace ; for the ancients be-
lieved it composed ’the differences of contending parties.
His wings at head and feet, were affigned him to signify the readinefs and force
of eloquence.
The sphinx shews, that nothing is so abstruse or occult that a lawyer’s penetra-
'ting judgment cannot clear.
We compare jurisprudence to’the sword and Thield : for as a warrior thereby
defends. himself and annoys his enemy, so a council gets his cause by dint of
cstrong arguments, and well grounded conclusions.
The ancient Romans signified by the lyre or harp, à man of great learning
and judgment; for that instrument is composed of divers strings and sounds, pro-
ducing fine harmony; like the lawyer when he reconciles the difference of things
to réason, in order to make contesting parties agree. By the harp or lyre we al-
so understand, that harmony arises from different and dissonant cords, and that
people of contrary sentiments meeting together, may by a good union, settle and
transmit to posterity, an excellent form of government. And as Plato in his
Timaeus, stiles the soul a concert or sweet harmony, so concord may be justly
called






called the soul of the state. The Greeès and Romans say, the lyre was partly in-
vented by Mercury, and partly by others.
The shape of the ancient lyre is this : it was bent like two horns joined to-
gether, having a swelling belly-and on top-a handle. It is said to have had but
three strings, and these could produce seven tunes, making a perfect harmony.
The three strings were assigned in imitation of the three seasons of the year known
to the Aguptians, viz. summer, winter and spring, each consisting of four months;
and they attributed the cantus to the summer, the bass to the winter and the tre-
to the spring. Others say that this application respects man; whose body con-
sisting of four elements, and the soul, in reference to its acts ofthree, thus makes
Wherefore the
Darkness flies the light of true knowledge and understanding.
lamp is sometimes taken for the works done by its light; for as the night through
its stilness is very proper for study, so the Greck poets also gave the night a name
which signified the producing understanding, wisdom and gladness; as the mind
is then apt for meditation. Accordingly the old proverb of the students is, Plas
olei quam vini ; He spent more in oil than wine; meaning more time in dili¬
gent labour of the mind to attain sciences, than in taking walks, feasting or other
diversions. Epicharmus used to say, That he who would study great things, must
not for the sake of ease, spare the nights.
The Agyptians understood by the ink-horn, pens, and roll of paper, all things
whereby arts and sciences might be represented.
by the sieve, the same people hieroglyphically meant, the fruitfulness of in-
struction in arts and sciences; also the writers of sacred and mysterious things :
foras the sieve separates the good from the bad, so their lawyers, who were also
stiled priests, knew how, through their prudence and wisdom, to distinguisn be-
tween things concerning life and death ; accordingly they made use of the word
sieve for expressing what is true and known. Others sav, that by that implement
is signisied a man of great knowledge and perfection, who can discourse of things
divine and human with equal penetration. Moreover, as the sieve separates the
slour from the bran, so experience fits us for discerning between good or bad,
right or wrong. Wherefore Virgil in the first Book of his Georgics, rightly
stiles it Mystica Vannus lacchi, the mystic fan, or sieve of lacchus. Some apply
to this point the saying of the philosopher Antisthenes; that it were great folly not
toknow how to distinguisn the corn from the chaff; meaning the learned and be-
neficial citizens from illiterate.
Next to the Bible, the chief authors for law are, viz. among the Greeks, Solon,
Lycurgus, Demosthenes, and Isocrates : among the Romans, Cato, Cicero, Hortenfius,
and Caesar; their Leges and Orationes, also the Corpus Byzantinum and Corpus
Juris or Justinianeum, compiled by Theophilus and Doretheus senators under the
emperor Justinian, from a feries of ancient law books : among the Spaniards, Di-
dacus Coverruvius, Francisco de Salgado, secretary to Phillip II. and Ferdinandes Vas-
quius : among che French, Jacobus Cujacius, and Marcus Antonius Muretus : among
the Germans, Fritchius and Carpzovius: and among the Duich, Hugo Grotius,
Groenewegan, &c.







The herb or flower lris is. an emblem of eloquence according to Haner, who to.
describe that of the Tnojan embassadors, represents them as having eaten the bloomr
ing lris; meaning their beingthoroughly szilled, in pleasing eloquence ; for that.
flower by its variety of colours, is not unlike the heavenly tris or rainbow, whor;
the ancients accounted the goddess of eloquence.
The garland or laurel intermixed with ivy leaves, signifiesthat. lawyers are, for
their excellent; labours. and parts.to be had in perpetual remembrance: for by the,
laurel, the ancients understood a natural force and fruitfulness of understanding,
and by the iyy, which though at first creeping along the ground, at last taps the
highest trees and buildings, the fkilkor experience which lawyers obtain by con-
tinual labour and practice.
It will not be disagreeable to that body of men, that for imortalizing
their names and memories, we add the garland of cedar and myrtle to the laurel
and ivy ; fince touchang great and, eloquent men, we may very well conclude
with Persius and. Horace, Cedro digna locuti, They have spoken things worthy to
be cut in cedar, or to be everlasting ; for the cedar is among the trees, the amblem.
of eternity, as never rotting or mouldering through age ; wherfore the Ark of the
Covenant was also made of it. The myrtle signifies a mind enriched wich, many-
endowments.
Among tkeiarowns; with which the Romans used to. adorn the heads of legifla-
tors and pleaders, that of oak-leayes was in great esteem, ag implyang the con-
servation of. the town, andicitizens. Several reasons, are assigned for this soft of
crouns, Some say, than originally the Arcadiaus were first-honoured with it fon
the antiquity of their oracles. Others think it proceeded from that tree being sa-
cred to Jupiter the patron of the Dodonaan oracle, and protector of towns; and
that therefore it was very reasonable to crown those who had saved a citizen either
by arms or law, with the leaves of that tree, dedicated to the tutelar god of all
towna. Others. are of opinion, that the oak was the first made of all trees, and
has been the first nourisher of mankind, and material for the oracles. We see tq
this. day acertain medal with this Darick inscription, EHEIPRTAN, representing
an eagle treading on thunder, and two oak branches bent garland-ways; which
was. doubtless. the coin of Epirus, alluding to the oak of Chaonia and the Dodoncan
oracle.
C
By Minerua. Broceeding from Jupiter’s brain, we represent the nature and acti-
vity of understanding and wisdom for gaining jurisprudence : she likewise implies
mature and wary deliberation. Wherefore some hold, that. Jupiter knew Metis,
or Counsel and Prudence, and then brought forth Minerva : for wisdom and un-
dersfanding, are only attainable by mature deliberation-and advice.
Table, or Ordonnance relating to a' Divine,
We exhiiht herein abible or scripture, a small altar, a buraing lamp, breast-
plate, sword, two arrows, a drum or timbrel, table. bell, harp, cistern and cen-
ser, fieve, measure, of corn, basket of laread, and à lump. of leaven, à salt-sellerwith
salt,











salt, a white linen girdie, bundle of flax, waggon-wheel, saphire ring, olive
branch, sheet of paper, whereon are three conjoined circles inclosed within a fourth,
and under them an equilateral triangle and a square. In a small picture is seen a
landscape exhibiting among other things a rock, a palm, a cedar-tree, and an hill
sending forth abundance of water. On the wall in a bass-relief is an elephant rear-
inghis trunk towards heaven, as also a stork and cock : but above all we must
not forget the fruitful mustard-seed, a sprig whereof we have set in a pot or vase
on the table with the other objects; an explanation whereof follows.
Adamantius and others tells us, that the powers of the universe must yeid to the
dictates of religion. A further explanation of the bible is unecessary, since it is
sufficiently known to every body.
The altar is accounted the hieroglyphic of piety, of whichl have treated in
Book IX. page. 493, 494.
Plutarch compares the lamp to the body, the habitation of the soul; and its
fhiining light to the faculty of understanding. But in scripture we often find,
that by the lamp are meant the doctors and teachers of arts, sciences, and mysteries,
who should be set on the candlestick, in order to expel darkness, and light those in
the house. In another passage it is said, That the light ought not to be hidden,
&c. And if the light according to Scholasticus in his Climax, come to be in dark-
jnefs, What will not the darkneis of nature, or men ignorant of God be guilty of ?
Some again understand by thelight, the gospel, others St. Joln tle Baptist, who is also
alled a burning lamp. The prophets were also lamps, but burning dim, as speaking
mysteriously: but St. John as with a finger has pointed out our- Saviout. Eucherius
observes, that by the lamp is sometimes meant good works; and therefore the gos-
pel says, ee Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, &c.  The light or fire sometimes likewise, hieroglyphically signifies devo¬
tion and. piety. If earthly things can in any ways unite us with the heavenly, no-
thing in nature has greater affinity with the mind and spirit than fire, because it
lights and clears every thing and makes us intimate with heaven.
The philosopher Antisthenes, speaking of the breast-plate, commonly said,
ie That virtue was a constant defence, because it could never be lost; for the arms
of wisdom and understanding are lasting to those who are rightly arrayed with
them.
 In which sense St. Paul exhorts his congregation ee To put on the ar-
mour of faith for quenching the fiery darts of the wicked, agreeable to Horace,
-Quipectus præceptis format amicis.
The apostle St. Paul fays, ce That the word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing afunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow Intimating, that though the
stone in the kidneys seem incurable, yet the word of God can convert and cure the
hard stone of our unbelief For by our Saviour’s coming on earth, we. have learnt
what the flesn and spirit incline to; and his doctrine has, like a two-edged
sword, divided the spirit from the flesh, that we might afterwards lead a spiritual
life






life, as being not in the flesh but in the spirit, esteeming the corruption of the
flesn a great gain, when through the spirit we obtain eternal life.
Encherias thinks that the words in Psalm cxxvii. e As arrows are in the hand of
a mighty man, so are the children of the youth, allude to the appostles and their
misfion into all countries ; because in their travels they pierced mens hearts with
the doctrine of Christ, as with a darting arrow and brought them from darkness to
light : for by the arrows in several places of scripture, is understood God’s word
penetrating the soul as with a two-edged sword.
We find in sacred writ that the Almighty is to be praised with drums or tim-
brels. And Gregory in the sixth Book of his Epistles to Athanasius, emblemati¬
cally shews by the drum kind remembrance; for says he, ce As the materials of
that instrument are long before prepared to fit it for sound, so a man should
piously endeavour to thank his Creator, and loudly praise him for his benefits.,
The bells hanging according to Moses’s command at the hem of the high-priest’s
garment, emblematically signified the publishing of God’s will; and his being
heard by their tingling, on entering into or coming forth of the Holy of Holies,
intimates that the ministry should always have the word and laws of God in their
mouths, for rebuking, exhorting or comforting, according to the weakness and
transgressions of men.
The harp formerly represented all kinds of arts and virtues: and Eusebius thinks
it takes its name from a Greck word, signifying as much as to instruct in excellent
sciences. And thus the songs of Orpneus and Proclus among the heathens, and
David among the Jews, have powerfully incited to good living.
By water and fire, or the cistern and censer, the Agyptian priests understood a
purgation from spots and filth; even from the darknefs of ignorance by means of
pure doctrine. Accordingly after funerals, the ancients purified themselves with
water and smoaking perfumes, the latter hieroglyphically representing prayers
and divine doctrine, as Hesychius bishop of Jerusalem writes.
The same people meant by the sieve the fruitfulnefs of instruction in arts and
sciences. Others the end of all things, as by often examining ourselves to learn
quietness of life, and by due reflexion on what is past, present and to come, to
make prosperity and adversity equal.
Doctrine and instruction those people called sBo, which being interpreted sig-
nifies plenty, or all that is necessary for life ; as if the study of sciences required
a good fortune. Aristotle says, ecThe rich should study philosophy. And Zecha-
riah a noted man among the Jews, et lf you have slour, you will learn the law:
 The lawv implying
if you have knowledge in the law you will want no flour. 
knowledge and sciences, and the slour every thing necessary for sustenance. But
Ithink according to Agyptian wisdom, that this doctrine rather respects the soul
than the body; for it is believed that the basket of unleavened bread, which
Aaron and his sons only were to offer, hieroglyphically signified the tongue or
word, or eternal and heavenly eloquence ; for as bread supports the body, so the
word of God nourishes to eternal life. And because bread by a general consent,
implies doctrine and instruction; to whom must we return our thanks, but tohimn
who by his doctrine has enlightened our understanding, and is the fountain of













plenty and perfection. In this sense ithie bread éalled the loavens or twbetenths of
fine flour, offered, as in Liviticus xxiii. for a’ meat offering, signified che law and
the gospel; but according to our Saviour, when under temptation, that, Ie A
man did not live by ’bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God.
In baking, the leaven has in seripture divers ’significations : among others, it
implies human sciencés. Now sciences are divided into human and divine, the
former subject to the diversity of words, but. the latter constant and everlasting;
for what is once truly perfect always remains so; and the fire which once warms
will always warm, as long as it is fire. Eternal providence and government of all
created beings are endiess; and thus nature, philosophy, ethics and theology are
very conformable to the Deity ; but grammar, rhetoric and dialeftita aré called hu-
man sciences: wherefore, says Origines, ee The leaven is not used in offerings. For
divines understand by it, human sciences, the matter and foree whereof fies onfy in
words, which nevertheless are aids ; because the purity of speech whichtgrammar
teaches, Thews the beauty and excellence of eloquence obtained by rhetoric, and
the method of. reasoning and opposition, gained by dialectica, is an help to many
other sciencès:
Philosophers say, that the products of the earth are owing to falt. Divinés
compare it to the gospel, alledging Leviticus, chap 2. ee With all thine offerings
thou shalt offer salt : Or, in all your doctrines you must be governed by those of
the apostles, who according to our Saviour, are the salt of the earth. The frank-
incense put on the twelve cakes, according to the Jezissit rite, the seventy interpre-
ters have rendered salt, to signify the apostolical doctrine.; for, as falt makes meat
palatable, so, according to Hesychius, instruction ald exhortation cause in us a
smell and taste of divine wisdom ; whereby our good works, às. faith, hope and
charity produce fruit acceptable to God.
The Jewissi priests were commanded to set the people a pattern of chastity, piety
and good behaviour, and to be always ready to walk in God’s paths, as appears by
the white linen girdle, signifying the most sacred and mysterious doctrine, by which
they ought to govern themselves and their congregations. Jerimiah’s girdle had
the same meaning, as Gril largely shews. As the girdle was white linen, we are
led to consider the first matter it was made of, to wit, flax.
The seed of flax comes up as green as grass in a fhort time after sowing; and
having blossomed and set its seed, it is then pulled, and rotted in water, and after-
wards laid to dry in the sun; and then being beaten to a softness, it is combed
and hatchelled, and spun into thread : after boiling in strong lye, it is made into
a web of linen, and whitened for a dress to appear in before God. The care ne-
necessary about this herb, which is an emblem of undefiled life, ought continually
to be had in view, that laying afide things vain and unprofitable, we may, by
means of science, render ourselves irreproveable, and through adverfity and temp-
tations obtain the white garment of glory. The quick and easy growth of flax,
shews how easily virtues and sciences are attainable, if we set readily about them.
Hesychius understands by the flax, the frail efforts of mortals, and the thread of the
Almighty’s will always remaining with us: wherefore it is the duty of the mini-
stry






stry By stheir constent labours, to given out the Pax swhereof ten prepare ’a garment
rf good works.

Many among the learned’emblematically fignify by the waggont wheel, divi-
hity ; because, the wheëfnever touching the ground but in one point, so the soul
lought to be elevated towards God. Thus divines are rightly compared to a wheel;
fhat by forsaking earthly thoughts, their conversation should always be in heaven.
The sapphire was always in great esteem, as emblematically representing sove-
reignty and priesthood. Some say, that this storie draws heavenly influences from
Jupiter and Saturn; and that those who wear it obtain all their desires ; as from
Jupiter dominlon and authority, and from Saturn, the priesthood : but, according
to the fathers; this’ftone represents the throne spoken of by Ezekiel, to wit, the séat
’af God, erernal, good and Almighty : and Eacherius understands by the make of
the hedvens, ’the sociéty of the pious and elect : wherefore, says Hesychius, The-
throne of sapphiresignifies’the tenth or empireal heaven ; for by the colour he un-
derstands purity, clearnefs and heavenly light, always instructing the church in un-
altérable and pure doctrines.
We learn from scribture, that the olive-tree was originally thé emblem of
-peace.; for no sooner did the waters abate, but the dove, which Noah fent, soon
after returnetl with an ofive-leaf, as a token that the wrath of heaven being ap-
peased, God took, compafsion on’the remains of human race, and other creatures
iin 'the ark; and therefore caused the waters to. rêtire into the bowels of the earth.
The olive-branch, is also in scripture, the emblem of a’ pious man; as we see in
the gospel, that the e Light ought’to burn pure on the candlestiek, whereby our
Saviour intimates, that both preachers and hearers should sill their Jamps with the
coil of christian virtues. The samé trée, ’for its continual verdure, is also taken for
ithe efblem of hope ; accordingly, Basilius wishied we might be like it, because
abounding with blossoms and fhining’greennefs, it always affords hope of what is
’to come; or ’the durable fruits of piety and mercy.
The wisest Agyptians and Grecks did, when mens understandings were fimple
tand void of sophistry, very properly calf the chain of certain sciences, Eneyclopa dia;
’as being by three circles, so linked together, that the center of the one is the be-
ginning of the other, and those inscribed within a larger, called theology : for the
inner circles signify human sciencés, which, getting root by means of custom, rea-
son and nature are perversely taken for infallible; but the circle inscribing them,
denotes divine sciences. We understand the same things emblematically of the
dress and ofnaments of the high-priest’among the Jezs; for his girdle implied ir-
reproveablé manuers; his priestly garb, truth; sound doctrine, and discourses, which
with their explanations, let men into the knowledge of things, or philosophy; and
his glittéring robe, signified pure divinity, having no other tendency but a correc-
ction of manners, and leading to virtue and heaven. Scripture teaches, that ee The
spirit of wisdom enters not into the heart of the wicked :’ accordingly, Moses de-
nied the unclean and sinful entrance into the tabernacle; thereby intimating, that
those who improve in virtue and the knowledge of God, ought by the use of the five
loaves(according to GriD) or the five tart books of the law, to prepare their hearts for
the two fishies, or the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles, and therein to pre-
serve.






ferve. Next to the science for the improvement of manners,- divines should en-
which the learned
deavour at distinctness, plainness and order in their speeches,
call dialectica; whose province is to determine controversies; and resolve doubts by
reasoning justly ; for although, like Moses, they practised moral duties, and were
received into the sanctuary, yet they touched not on sacred things, otherwise than
by means of their speeches. After this, they enquired into natural philosophy, or
physics, having for the subject, the universe, and all created beings; this science
cleared their doubts and scruples, and prepared them for contemplating the glori-
ous building of the heavens, in order to thank their Creator for the knowledge
received. Their last study was theology, which as we have said, comprehends all
sciences : this gives divines such a constant peace, as neither the regularity of hu-
man deportment, purest eloquence, or the most exact enquiries into nature, could
afford them. But this unchangeable peace and firm alliance with God, they ob-
tain by submitting their knowledge, inclinations, and carnal affections to the rules
prescribed by reason. This mutual friendship, which the Pythagoreans esteemed the
main point in philosophy, leads us into the most secret part of the sanctuary, in or-
der to view the glory of God, till at last, arriving at the highest degree of know-
ledge, we courageously defeat Ofiris, or the enemy of our souls.
Though the aforesaid instruction consists of four parts, yet Solomon, the wisest of
men divides it into three sciences, to wit, ethics, physics, and metaphysics, which
he has handled in his Proverbs, Ecclefiastes, and Song, or Canticum Canticoaum;
teaching in the Proverbs, moral obligations; in Ecclefiastes, the nature of things ;
and in his Song, the contemplation of things supernatural. This seems well to
agree with the mention in scripture of the God of Abraham, lsaac, and Jacob; for
Abraham’s obeying God in all things, shews an example of moral duties : lsaac’s
digging wells, and searching the depths of the earth, signifies physics, or natural
philosophy ; and Jacob’s dream of the ladder, and the ascent and descent of the
angels thereon, the contemplation of divine things. Both the Hebrez, Greck, and
Latin divines have largely handled this subject. Even the elements seem to in-
culcate this doctrine; for the earth, water, and air, by their wonderful conjunction,
represent the different degrees of the sciences; the earth and moisture, implying
the history of things, as a teacher of moral duties : the waters, disturbed by the
winds, shew the turmoils happening in human actions, which ethics serve to allay :
the air admonisnes, that, at length raising the whole force of our thoughts up-
wards, we ought continually to contemplate the divine nature, called by the Grecks,
Theologia, which is the top and limit of our understanding. We say nothing here
of dialecticu, because it is subservient to ethics, physics and theology, in order t9
discourse of those three sciences.
By the equilateral triangle we signify, the aim and purpose of an holy and inno-
cent life ; because, to make it both edifying and happy, three duties are necessary,
to wit, to give our neighbour wholesome advice, to judge justly, and to do well;
wherefore Pallas was, by the heathens called Tritonia, as naving the care of impar-
tial justice. The Agyptians and Greeks, who were chiefly famous for emblematic
learning, judicioussy understood by the triangle, the assiduity of human understand-
ing, in searching into things heavenly, earthly and subterranean. Others would
signify






fignify by it; mathematics, phyfics and metaphyfics, with which the opinion of
Socrates well agrees.
The square-implies constancy and immoveableness ; because, however turned,
it alway shews four lines, and as many angles; these, though mathematical obser-
vations, are very applicable to those who love piety and other christian virtues, since
they remain constantly with them, and embalm their memories to posterity. Ari-
stotle, in his first Book of Moral Duties, and third Book to Theodat, is of the same
opinion, believing that man, by comparison, may be called square, or perfect and
pious. This quadrates with the Latin proverb : Quadragonum in se perfectum, &
criminis expers ; i. e. The square is perfect, and not liable to censure. Ancient di-
vines teach, that Noal’s ark, which God commanded. to be built square, signified
the excellent pastors of the church, by whose instruction, notwithstanding any
snares or heresies, men were led to eternal happiness : for Adamantius exhorts to
build square libraries, nôt of stone or wood, but of the books of the prophets, apo-
stles and teachers, out of which may be abundantly learnt true wisdom and divine.
mysteries; and renouncing sin, to turn and adhere to the true and immutable cor-
ner-stone of salvation.
The ancient Agyptians hieroglyphically signified by the rock, firmnefs and con-
a.
stancy; wherefore David, speaking of God’s assistance, says, e Thou art my rock. ’s
And our Saviour, imitating the duration of the church, says, ec He will build it on
a rock :’ Agreeable whereto is the dream oof Nebuchadnezzar, in which he saw a
gede lalager whose head wat of gold, breast andarms of siver, bellpane duighoee
hands, which smote the image, and broke it in pieces, which the wind carried
away, so that no place was found’ for them; and the stone that smote the image
became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth-
The palm-tree, as having the lower part of its stem. thin and knotty, but higher
up becoming thick, and agreeable for its continual elegant and spreading verdure,
fignifies, that how abject soever the condition of the righteous may be in the begin-
ning, they at last gain wonderful beauty in virtues and good qualities. But let
me add the words of the pious and léarned Eucherius: ee The palm-tree,’ says he,
ce differs from all others, because they are thickest downwards, and run tapering up-
wards, and with more pointed branches; and these may be compared to worldlings,
who slighting the best things seek theit satisfaction only in the frail and momentary:
these men spare no labour or trouble in heaping riches; will even purchase tem-
poral honours at the hazard of their lives.; but stop at once when they are to be-
stow an hour’s service on their Creator, or to fuccour a distressed neighbour ;
whereas, the pious may be rightly compared to. the palm-tree, which by its tender
stem, despising earthly pleasures, exalts its virtue on high, that it may adhere to
and obey the will of the Creator : wherefore it is said, that the righteous shall groW
and blossom as the palm-tree. 
The cedar-tree, as yielding excellent and useful fruit, is the emblem of mercy
and piety ; two virtues best becoming the pillars of the ehurch, who are ee Conti-
nually to watch over the lost sheep of the house of. lsrael,’ and to practise works of
mercy on them, according to. St. Jamus: éesPure religion and undefiled before







God and’the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless: and widpure in their afffictions;.
and to keep himself unspotted from the world. 1
We read in the-Psalms, that et From the springing waters of lsrael comes forth
the praise of the Lord in the congregation of the saints:’ by whiclt, divines un-
derstand the books of the law and prophets, which as springs. of living waters,
supplied the Ifraelites with the knowledge of God, and being silled with his Spirit.
their holy men composed hymns. to the glory of his name. Several commenta-
tors on fcripture and illustrious instruments of the church, would signify, by thet
springing waters, the apostles and first/teachers; and Euthymius and the primitive
fathers, the preaching of the gospel. And David, in Ps. civ. says, ec He sends.
the springs into the valleys whioh run among the hills; they giye drink to everx
beast: of the field; thereby intimating, that. no place is so hilly or unattainable,
which God’s law cannot penetrate. 
Writers mention, that the elephant (who is. known to be the most docible of
quadrupedes, and by nature superior to other beasts) particularly loves charity and
piety ; for as soon as the new moon enlightens the earth, he purifies himself in a
clear river; and when fick, takes grafs and other herbage with his trunk, and
slings it towards heaven, as if-he thereby invoked’the divine affistance in his weak
condition.
Scripture, as remarkably speaking. of the stork, emblematically means a purified
understanding, and a mind exalted above earthly things; for this bird always builds
on the tops of the highest houses to. save himself from the wiles of beasts; and
after hatching his young, is at continual war with the snake, which always creep-
ing on the ground and into the- holes. thereof, is an emblem of viscious affec-
tions : wherefore, in imitation of the: ftork, men should exait theirminds and seek
a dwelling-place in heaven; where they will be freed from. all the wiles of the
flesn and the crafts of the devil.
The ancients understood by the emblem of the cock, the immortality and- divi¬
nity of the foul; and Pythagoras commanded his followers ta feed and nurse the
cock ; meaning that they should feed their souls with the knowledge of divine
things : wherefore Socrates when dying, full' of hope of a speedy-union of his im¬
mortal soul-with- the-deity, said he was bound in duty to offen a cock to Ascula-
pius, meaning the phyfician of the soul ; for, knowing his dissolution was at hand,
he believed he should now be cured of all his infirmities. Plato’s followers and
commentators say, that the offering a cock, implies the soul’s departure for hea-
ven, to publisn for ever the glory of Phaebus.
:
By the mustard-seed are signified things, which from small and mean begin-
nings, produce plenty of fruit : wherefore our- Saviqun fays, ee lf ye have faith a3
a grain of mastard-seed, &c. For though the seed of this-plant be small, vet,
being duly husbandedt in good ground, it yields a plant furpassing all others, which
in a fhort time becomes a tree for fowls of the air to build in : and such is the
fruitfulness of divinity, which proceeding from small seed, soon becomes a tree,
the expansion of wfiose branches shades the whole earth, and yields a place for the
fowls of the air to-lodge in;- or, according to. Hesychius, ee Men taken up with the
contemplacion ef divine-tkings7: Ocher:learned nien say, That this. seed implies








the wonderful power of God, which, as small and contemptible feed, lies hid in
the reading of scripture, and despised by many for its tartness; but on chewing,
strengthens and oleanses the stomach, corrects vapours and humidities disturbing
the brain, and refines the taste, in order to our more exact search into the writings
of wise men and divine mysteries : for, according to Horace,
Nemo ades ferus est, ut non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturæ patientem commodat aurem.
Or,
The breasts remaining wild we need not fear,
After good learning has admission there.
But waving Horacs; our Saviour charges us ee To search the scriptures;’’ which
some disciples, on a certain occafion, finding of too sharp and disagreeable a taste,
thought too hard, and not to be understood; but being prepared with this seed,
they will appear better to us than we at first expected; dispelling the darkness of
our understanding, and purging it of all earthly humidities and evil thoughts, till
with Hagar, we in any distress discover the fountain of living water in the wilder-
ness of this life, wherewith to refresh and strengthen our fainting souls : more-
over, the mustard-seed coming up green, and being with difficulty to be rooted
out after sowing, implies the constant rise and propagation of divine truths : and
those who have once tried the agreeable taste of the plant, will never be drawn
from ufing it: this sprig having got root in the heart, will grow and produce seed
which wild beasts cannot tread down, cold or heat wither, or persecutions extir-
pate. By the same seed is also signified, a bright and vigilant soul, and an high
understanding ; for they who are seized with the lethargy, have their heads, after
shaving, rubbed with it for their recovery : and thus our circumcised hearts are
likewise with the mustard-seed, cleansed from the lethargy of sin, for conversion.
Pythagoras once tasting a leaf of this plant, afterwards much admired it, and found
that its spirits flew upwards, as if alcending to heaven; for the virtue going up
the nose to the brain, purges it, and clears the understanding.
Democritus said,
that a few grains of it boiled with other greens made them soft and tender: let
us, in like manner, so mix the emblematie mustard-seed with our divine-thoughts,
that when become tender, they may send a steam and sweet savour up to heaven,
where our souls, united with God, can no more be affected with hunger, thirst
or drowsiness, but continually employed in praising the Almighty.
In this last ordonnance relating to a divine, we have crowded together a great
variety of objects, only to shew how fruitful this subject is in materials : for di-
vinity comprising philosophy, physics, dialectica, rhetoric, logic, &c. and each of
these affording plentiful matter, the ingenious artist may, by consulting good au-
thors, gain an inexhaustible treasure of things; and then as he thinxs proper,








more easily leave out some, than having too few, represent them lame and defec-
tive to the knowing.
CHAP. IV. Of the Origin, Nature and Quality of the Roman Tri-
umphal Crowns, and other Rewards of Honour.
WE learn from history, how noble the ancient Romans were in gratifving
 the virtue, valour and conduct of their citizens, soldiers and commanders,
besides their ordinary pay, with triumphal crowns, jewels and other presents, as an
example to others to tread in the same steps, for the good of their country : and
we judge this point very proper to be handled next to still life, as it will conduce
to make the emblematic sense of a good piece more perfect.
After a commander had gained either a great advantage or victory over the
enemy in a siege, battle or sea-fight, he according to custom, made an exact in-
quiry what persons had behaved with the greatest valour and resolution : and then
placing himself on a stage, raised for that purpose, and returning thanks to the
gods for the victory obtained, he commended the army in general for their steady
adherence, and each company in particular which had shewed the greatest courage :
then naming them one after another, he extolled their valour, stiling them friends
and lovers of their country, and telling them how highly they obliged the com-
monwealth by their loyalty and brave behaviour : and thereupon, in the name of
the senate, he distributed among them many rich presents, consisting of crowns
of gold and silver, girdles, gold chains, bracelets, rings for ears and fingers, ar-
mour, shields, pikes, swords, javelins, standards, sine horse furniture, and other
elegantly wrought warlike instruments ; which none durst use or wear, but those
who had purchased them in the manner aforesaid. The Roman story abounds
with such occurrences, but especially Titus Livius, who relates that the consul Pa-
irius Cursor bestowed gold bracelets among four hundred men, and afterwards
magnificently rewarded a whole legion. He tells us the same things of Scipio
when he waged war with Spain and other countries : and we read, Lucius Antontus,
son of Lucius Fubius Quadratus, was twice dignified by the emperor of Tiberius, with
gold ornaments for the neck and arms.
But besides the native valour and military discipline for which the ancient Ro-
mans were particularly famous, we learn from Pliny and Salinus, that oftentimes a
single person by his virtue and valour obtained all the aforesaid ornaments; as we
see in Marcus Sergius, who received almost oll those tokens of honour, and even in
the battles of Thrasimenus and Trebir, and the bloody one at Canna, (in all which
the Romans were defeated by Hanibal) he obtained a civic crown. It is related of
this Sergius, that having in battle lost his right hand, and fixed an iron one in its
place, he so managed with his left, as one day to slay four armed men one after
another; and that in fights and skirmishies he had received twenty-three wounds
in the fore-parts of his body : and yet this man is inferior to Lucius Sicinnius Den-
tatæs,






tatus, overseer of the city of Rome ; of whom Pliny, Solinus, Valerius Maximus, and
Aulus Gillius unanimoussy report that his great merit had gained him from the se-
nate, above three hundred and twenty honorary presents of all forts, and that he
nine times made his entrance in triumph with the generals, whom by his valour
and conduct, he had assisted in their conquests; and that he could shew a great
number of lances and pikes unironed, which as so many tokens of honour fell to
his share ; as also eighteen gold and eighty-three silver neck-ornaments, twenty-
five costly horse-furnitures, an hundred and forty bracelets, fourteen civic crowns,
eight castrenses, three murals, one obsidional, and l know not how many naval
or rostral crowns: he had received forty-five wounds, and those in his fore-parts
only; disarmed the enemy thirty-four times, and fought one hundred and twenty
battles : in a word, he was stiled the Roman Achilles.
The crowns bestowed on men of particular merit, had degrees of dignity, and
particular names suiting the nature of the victories; as, corana obsidionalis, cixica,
triumphalis. ovalis, muralis, navalis and castrensis.
The corona obsidionalis, or obsidional crown, was the most excellent of all ; for
when a Roman town or camp, besieged and reduced to extremity, was relieved by
a Roman captain, the commonwealth rewarded the action in the most noble man¬
ner, viz. This crown, though made of grass, was accounted of more worth than
if of gold and enriched with precious stones: the grass was pulled up in the field
of battle, wherefore this crown is said to be sacred to Mars, which Boccatius seems
to affirm) possibly because the grafs grows mostly in open places and fields of en-
campment. The great Quintus Fabius was, in reward of his merit, by the general.
consent of the senate and Roman people honoured with this crown, when in the
second Punic war he delivered the city from the approaching ruin and extremity
which Hannibal had brought it to. Amilius Scipio had the same gift in Africa, for
rescuing the consul Manlius and his forces out of the power of the enemy. Calpur-
nius obtained the same honour in Sicily ; as did also the incomparable Lucius Sicin-
nius Dentatus.
The corona-civica, or civic crown, was given to him who hrd preserved a Roman
citizen from imminent danger, or released from captivity : this crown was made
of oak sprigs and leaves with the fruit hanging at it, and by the general’s order,
who gave it to the person set at liberty, put on the deliverer’s head : but though a
person had saved a king or other great ally of the Romans from falling into the
enemies hands, yet he got not this crown which was only due to him who had freed
a Roman citizen from death or slavery. Pliny says, this crown was also presented
to him who slew the first of the enemy besieging a Roman town. It was next in
dignity to the corona obsidionalis, and worn on several occasions, especially on the
great festivals and solemnities; and in the plays and other public sports, those
who were honoured withit sat next to the senate, and at their entrance were re-
ceived by them with all the marks of respect. These persons, with their fathers
and grandfathers, were entirely exempted from all charges and taxes, as having
begot sons so beneficial to the commonwealth; they were also at liberty to accept
or refuse public offices. Several Romans obtained this honour, especially the afore-
said valiant Lucius Sicinnius Dentatus who fourteen times gloried in it; as Capitolinus
did







did six. The brave Marcas Sergius likewise received it from the senate, and in a
word, all those who in an extraordinary manner had benefited the city or country.
The famous Cicero was fo erowned by a partieular decree of thè senate, for having
happily delivered the city from the imminent danger of the Catiline conspiracy.
Thefe crowns though seemingly simple, as being made of grafs and sprigs of trees,
were yet of greater account than thofe of gold and jewels: they were of oak, be-
cause the acorn was the most ancient food, and because that tree was sacred to Ju-
piter the tutelar god. The victors in the Capitoline games, instituted by Domitian,
as also stage-players muficians and poets, were likewise crowned with oak-
leaves.
The corona triumphalis, or triumphal crown was given to the general, who hav¬
ing overthrown the enemy in a pitched battle, had thereby either saved a Roman
ally, or annexed some dominion to the commonwealth ; wherefore he was also in¬
troduced inta the city in triumph riding in a gilt chariot drawn by four, or accor-
ding to some, six white horses : this crown was made of laurel, faered to Apodlo for
its greennefs and red berries, and signified that the victory is attended with much
trouble, danger and bloodfhed. Sextus relates that the soldiers used to follow the
chariot of the conqueror, also crouned with laurel, to purify them on entering the
city from the blood of the slain. By the fuffiage of the fenate, the victors in the
wrestling games were honoured with the same crown : and it was anciently given
oo men eminent for heroic poetry and eloquence : wherefore Hefiod says, ee The
musea had crouned him with a sceptre and erown of laurel. 7
The Roman priests
and footh-sayers. likewise crowned themselves with laurel; even those who followed
the army wore a sprig of it on their helmet, instead of a feather, because the tree
was accounted and oakled by them a foretelling one.
The coronz ovalis, (given to a genenal or other prime person, who had beat the
enemy with little refistance, or having undertook the war without the exprefs com-
mand of the senate had gined some considerable fortress, town or place) was made
of myrtle-leaves, a tree facred to Venus. This crown denoted that the war was car-
ried on without great bloodshed ; and therefore public rejoicings were made for it,
but without much triumpb. When a victory was gained over slaves or pirates
and robbers, the victors had the same sort of crowns, because such enemies were
judged unworthy of feeling the Roman valour. The principal generals who ob-
tained this, and the triumphal crowns aforesaid, I fhall mention among the
triumphs.
The coroua muralis, or mural crown, was the reward of a soldier or officer, who
in asfaulting a town of the enemy, first advanced a ladder, and valiantly mounted
the walls and made way for conquest. This: crown was of gold, reprefenting
the battlements of the town-wall they had conquered; or else being like that
which the poets afcribe to Cybele, the mother of the gods or Mother Earth ; round
it were engraven lions, the emblems. of valour and generosity. Suetonius relates,
that common soldiers received it as well as captains and generals, on a public
testimony from others, that they first gained the top of the enemies walls. Manhus
Capitolinus was, according to Pliny, first honoured with this crown : and &ipio gave
it









it to 2. Trebellius and Sextus Digitus, on their jointly first mounting the enemies
walls.
The caroua navalis, or naval crown, was given to him who in a sea-engagement,
first entered into an enemy’s ship, and made himself master of it. This crown
was also of gold, and its circie set round with ships prows, Marcus Varro disdained
not to receive it at the hands of Pompey the Great, for subduing the sea-rovers.
Augustus presented it to Marcus Agrippa, on his gaining the upper hand in the sea-
sight off Scily, as he also did to Sylla, and several others. The senate gave it, to-
gether with a gold shield and other honourable gifts to the emperor Claudius, for
having soon after he obtained the imperial dignity, vanquished three hundred thou-
fand barbarians, in rebellion, against the empire, and sunk two thousand of the ene-
mies ships.
The same crown was the present of the ancient Athenians to those who fitted out
ships of war for the public service, or first. landed and intrenched on the enemies
ground.
The Romans in process of time, placed an hedge-hog on the circle of this crown,
because that creature’s defence lying in his sxin wherein he rolls himself up, he
was esteemed the emblem of a sea-fight. This crown is ascribed to Diana, or the
moon, as she inffuences the sea and its floods.
The corona castrensis, was given by the chief commander, to him who in battle
first entered the enemies camp. This crown was a gold circle, to which were af-
fixed palisades of the same metal. They also had it who first destroyed the pali-
sades of the enemy, and thèreby opened a door for victory. This crown was
the reward of a great number of Romans in those times of valour.
Besides these degrees of honour, the Romans bestowed several privileges on those
who excelled in warlike atchievements, causing them in the public pleadings, to
fit in the sella cuyulis, or the pretor’s ivory chair, as we read of the great Scipie; and
it often happened since all things centered in the voice and consent of the people,
that some of the soldiery were invested with greater power and privileges. All
generals who by conquest had enlarged the empire, were allowed to set up their
statues in the consular dress. Augustus, to eternize the memories of all such gene¬
rals as had augmented the state, ordamed, that next to the gods, the first veneration
should be paid to them ; and for that purpose built a gallery in his palace, wherein
to set 'their statues with all their honorary titles, notifying by proclamation, that
he did this for bimself and succeslors, as an example to posterity to imitate the
virtues and valour of such illustrious personages. Moreover it was a laudable and
constant custom of the senate, to affign the children of fuch as fell in battle, the
liberal enjoyment of the pay of their deceafed parents ; and to the old and maimed
soldiers, as many lands in the provinces they conquered, as would comfortably
support them and their families for the remainder of their lives. On this footing,
the city of Seville in Spain and the fruitful country round it, were made a Roman
colony by Julius Casar, and Corduba and several other places in divers parts of the
world were applied to the same purpose. In a word, Roman services never missed
a reward ; and for this reason the commonwealth produced more brave men than
any other nation whatsoever ;. every one exerting himself to attain all the degrees
of






of honour by the strictest virtue. But on the other hand, the vicious and coward-
ly were in proportion to their offences, as severely punissied, either by depriva-
tion of their honourable offices and future hopes, or else by being whipped with
rods till the blood came, or loaden with irons and madt slaves. Titus Livius re-
lates, that a troop of Appius Claudius, cowardly deserting a certain post which they
were set to guard, was rigoroussy punished, by every tenth man’s being put to
death according to lot, without respect of persons. Julius Frontinus writes, that
Marcus Antonius caused a certain troop who had not dulv defended a town-wall
and fortification, to undergo the same fate. There were many other methods for
punishing the disobedience of the Roman soldiery, which I shall pafs by, and con-
clude with Horace.
adsit
Regula peccatis qua panas eroget æquas.
That is,
Crimes do require the penalties of the laws,
And strictest justice greatest reverance draws.
CHAP. V. Of the Solemnities of the Roman Triumphs.
TWO motives generally incite a man to do great things, either in times of
peace or war; to wit, honour and immortal fame, or riches and profit.
Generous souls always aspire at the former, and reject the latter, as below them.
The Roman governinent knew perfectly well how to make its advantage of these in-
ducements, in the encouragements given to its subjects; and we shall begin with
the triumphs, by which they honoured and rouzed the valiour of their heros.
The triumph was an entrance and welcome of a general, by decree of the se-
nate after an happy expedition and the conclusion of a war, whereby, in the
most solemn and pompous manner they shewed him their great esteem. On
the day of entry, the inhabitants of all the towns flocked to Rome, and the whole
citv, temples, streets, gates, houses and windows were hung with all sorts of
costly stuffs, in gold, silver, and silk, and beautifully decked with great variety of
green branches and flowers. In a word, nothing was wanting to shew either the
power, magnificence or joy of the Romans on this occasion. The senate, clergy,
nobility and most eminent citizens (and therefore the greatest part of Rome) richly
dressed, met the conqueror without the town gates. He sat in an ivory chair,
called sedes curulis, in a gold chariot sparkling with precious stones, and drawn
cither by four or six white horses magnificiently equipped, and was dressed in a
garment of purple and gold, called toga palmata, crowned with laurel and the staff
of






of command in his hand, or else a winged image of Victory holding a crown of
laurel or a palm branch.
Sometimes this figure was placed behind him, holding
in its right hand a crown of laurel over his head, as we see it both ways in the
ancient bass reliefs and medals. The prisoners of war dressed like slaves, and
with shorn heads, and the king or general, with the most eminent of the van-
quishied were led in fettered couples before the chariot, which the Roman legions-
followed in troops or companies, on foot and horse-back in their order, richly
armed, and with their pikes and lances twined with laurel, as a token of general
joy ; but they who had most singulized themselves in valour, marched on each
side of the chariot with crowns of laurel on their heads, and palm branches in
their hands. Before the conqueror went likewise some carriages laden with the
arms, banners, gold and silver vases, jewels, gold and silver coin, taken as booty
from the eneniy, together with the gifts and presents he had received from the
friends and allies of the Romans. Next came some castles and towers of wood, ele-
gantly carved, resembling the towns and fortresses gained of the enemy. In their
passage the army feigned some battles, in so lively a manner as thereby to affect
the spectators with all sorts of paffions, as forrow, joy, and fright. The variety
of those sights was so great and excessive as to spin out the cavalcade for three or
four days; and being arrived at the capital, all the arms. and booty, called Ma-
nubiae, taken from the enemy, were hung up and deposited in the temple of Ju-
piter, as an eternal memorial of the virtue of the conquerers. Here the senate re-
turned them thanks for the service done to their country, and commonly chusing
the victor as a coajutor in the government, the joy concluded with a magnificent
entertainment. But for forming a better idea of these triumphs, and the order
therein observed, Ishall, as far as my memory will permit, give some examples
of them out of the Roman histories.
Plutarch describes the triumph voted to Paulus Amilias, for his victory over the
great Perseus, king of Macedonia, in this manner.
First, the people of Rome and the neighbouring towns magnificiently dressed,
appeared at the doors and windows in the balconies, garrets and on tops of
houses in great multitudes, as spectators of the solemnity. All the temples in
Rome richly adorned, were set open. The houses and streets were wonderfully
garnished with all sorts of costly hangings and filled with greens, flowers, choice
perfumes, and a thousand other fine and delightful things. And as the concourse
of people was very great, men with staves were appointed to make and preseve a
lane or passage through them, for the march of the triumphers. The first day
was spent in the procession of the banners, standards, ensigns, statutes, colosses,
pictures, and figures, all placed on carriages elegantly painted, and slowly driven.
The second day was taken up with the passage of the bright armour of the van-
quishied king and Macedonians, placed on neat chariots or carriages made for that
purpose. To these succeeded three thousand men, partly carrying the gold and
silver coin in three hundred and fifty large silver dishes and vases, each weighing
three talents, and carried by four men. The remainder of these men bore
fountains and stately vases of filver, artfully wrought. On the third day appeared
the first company, preceded by a great number of pipers, drums, hautboys and
trumpets,






trumpets, making a warlike mufic, as if preparing for an onset. These were
followed by a hundred and twenty cows, decked with gilt horns and sacred linen
coverings, and all sorts of green garlands wreathed with flowers, led for victims,
by beautiful voung men richly dressed, and succeeded by a company of children,
carrying gold and silver dissies for the use of the sacrifice. After these came the
bearers of the gold vases with gold coin, in numberseventy-two, followed by several
great officers of the retinue of Antigonus and Seleucus, late kings of Mucedonia, and
even of Perseus himself,carry ing the excessive large gold vessel, weigh ing ten talents,
and enriched with all sorts of precious stones and diamonds, which was made
by Amilius’s express order. Next to these appeared the body-chariot of the con-
quered king, and therein his coat of arms, diadem, or royal head-band, crown
and ceptre. Then followed the children of the unhappy prince, attended by a
great numnber of his courtiers, as stewards, secretaries, and other such domestics,
weeping and lamenting their slavery in such a manner, as, considering the vicitude
of human affairs, to raise compassion in the spectators; especially the sight of the
three innocent children, two sons and a daughter, who by reason of their tender
age, were insensible of their unhappy condition. After these appeared the father
dressed in black, according to the custom of his country, and walking full of
terror and concern on this occasion. Next to him came his friends, favourites,
and confidents, who fixing their eyes onhim, and bitterly weeping, moved many
of the Romans themselves with tears in their eyes to pity both their and the king’s
forrowful condition. To these fucceeded the gold crowns which the ancient free
cities had presented to the conquerer, as a gratulation for his victory : and then
came Amilius himself, sitting on a gold triumphal chariot, dressed in a purple
garment richly wrought with gold, with a larurel branch in his hand, and a
crown of the same on his head. He was followed by the army, horse and foot,
orderly marshalled under their proper ensigns, having garlands of laurel and palm
branches in their hands, and singing hymns in praise of the victor and victory.
Thus Paulus Amilius made his triumphal entrance into the famous city of Romt,
where he offered the booty in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and returned the
god thanks for his victory and triumph.
All other triumphs were managed much in the same manner, with abatement
of some circumstances, according to the pleasure of the general who was honoured
with them.
And, though we find the solemnities regulated by laws, precisely directing in
what manner, at what time, and through what gates and streets the cavalcade
was to pafs ; yet, as for the plays, shews, and other less appertenances, they were
lessened or augmented at the will of the victor, with a liberty to chuse the chariot.
History tells us, that the chariot was commonly drawn by four white horses; but
we also find bulls used for the same purpose. Pompy the Great, having subdued
Africa, made his entry on a chariot drawn by elephants. Suctonius relates, that
Julus Caesar triumphed in one with forty elephants. The emperor, Gordianus
triumphed in the same manner. Caius Marius having subjected Afiica and extend-
ed the Roman jurisdiction into Agypt, was drawn by the same kind of beasts. Sci-
po Agricanus triumphed with-elephants for the same reafon. The emperor Augustas
on






on his victorious return from the East, and ending the war with Anthony, was, by
the confent of the senate and people of Rome drawn by four elephants. The em-
peror Vespasian had the same honour on finishing several great wars in the East;
the elephants denoting the. conquest of countries, where those creatures breed.
Flavius, in his histories, tells us, that the emperor Aurelian, who was king of the
Goths, made his entrance on a chariot drawn by stags. But, Marcus Antonius made
use of tame lions, intimating, that in the civil wars, he would make the most va-
liant submit to his commands : which Cicero in his Orations, called Philippicae,
objects him, saying, That his triumphal chariot with lions, implied an arbitrary
man aiming at monarchy.
The Roman generals when they triumphed, had also a custom of carrying one
or more young children in their chariots ; as we gather from Cicero’s speech before
Murena. Some used to be attended with a great number of strange wild beasts,
as lions, bears, tigers, rhinoceroses, panthers, dromedaries, and such like ; as
Josephus, in his histories of the Vespasians, mentions. Others had vocal and instru-
mental music and other diversions. Among these triumphs, those of Pompy the
Great, Casar, the two Scipio’s, brothers, and several emperors had something
singular, as Blondus in his Treatise, intitled Rome Triumphant, largely discourses.
The triumphing conquerors were likewise allowed to set up their statues in temples
and public places, and to erect columns and costly structures of marble, called
Arcus Triumphales, whereon were carved in bass relief their battles and victories
for eternal monuments to posterity ; remains whereof we see to this day at Rome
and elsewhere. Herein the Romans imitated the ancient Greeks, who, for a memo-
rial of great actions, set up trophies, made in the following manner.
In the place of victory, they fixed the highest tree to be found in the neigh-
bourhood, and then chopping of the branches, they, in honour to the victor,
hung on the remaining limbs, the arms of the vanquished, calling that tree, Tro-
phaeum, from the Greek word Tropi, which signifies overthrow, slight and giving
way, because the enemies were in that place put to flight. The Romans afterwards
made use of them for the same purpose; for Sallustius in his Memoirs relates that
Pompey having conquered the Spaniards, planted his trophies on the tops of the
highest Pyrenees. And this custom afterwards grew into such esteem, that they
were made of stone. 1 But according to scripture, the usuage was very ancient
among other nations ; for it appears in chap. 15. of 1. Sam. that Saul having
vanquished Agag, king of the Amalelites, and being come to Mount Carmel, set up
an Arcus Triumphalis, or Place. In a word, the honour of triumphing was ac-
counted by the Romans as a token of the highest esteem ; and therefore, to obtain
it, their generals spared for no toils or dangers in warlike atchievements. Add to
this, the riches commonly arising from such glory, by the presents made them
by the allies and the booty of the enemy.
In my opinion, historians have described the matter so circumstantially, on
purpose to put princes and governors in mind of rewarding the deserts of their
generals, soldiers and men of merit, and that the uuskilful, cowardly, and unfit
for command iight not be ranged with those who willingly sacrificed their for-
tunes, capacities and bodily labours to the benefit of their country. Accordingly
to







to Paulus Orofiris three hundred and twenty persons have been honoured with the
Roman triumph, of whom the emperor Probut, in whose feign the fabric of the
Roman monarchy began to decay, was the last.
Let us here subjoin a Grecian triump. Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, or the il-
lustrious king of Sria, having heard of the aforesaid glorious triumph of Paalus
Amilius, was so puffed up with ambition, that he resolved to make a fort of one
furpassing it in magnificence. To which end he caused proclamation to be made
throughout his kingdom, that at a certain time, he would at Daphnes hold a grand
and uncommon tournament : which curiofity drew out of Greece and the neigh-
bouring countries a great concourse of people ; and the cavalcade was in the
following manner.
First, marched five thousand Grecian young men armed Roman like, followed
by as many Mysians finely habited after their fafhion. Next appeared three
thousand Thracians and five thousand Galatians, followed by a vast number of other
nations, called, for their silver shields, Argyraspides. After these came two hun-
dred and fifty ranks of sword-players, called by the Romans, gladiators ; and then
a thousand knights, with chaplets of gold about their heads, and their horses
costly equipped with gold embroidered housings, and gold and silver bridles.
These were followed by a thousand other knights, called companions, afsociated
with some of the king’s friends and confidents. Then appeared a thousand
noblemen on foot, and after them a thousand other knights, called the king’s
troops. Next came one thousand five hundred knights in gold armour over
which they had coats of armour richly embroidered with gold and silver, and art-
fully adorned with all sorts of animals. To these succeeded an hundred chariots,
each drawn by fix horses, followed by forty others, each with four. After these
appeared a chariot with elephants, followed by thirty-six of the same kind of
creatures, and those by eight hundred boys, having garlands aud crowns orna-
mented with gold in their hands. Next came a thousand fat oxen with eight
hundred Indian elephants teeth. After these were carried an infinite number of
idols and figures of deceased persons who had been famous for arts and sciences,
dressed in gold and silver stuffs adorned with precious stones, with their names,
dignities, and actions written on the pedestals. Then came slaves bearing idols,
representing night and morning, mid-day and evening, and an infinite number
of gold and silver vessels of great value. Next appeared six hundred of the king’s
pages dressed in gold stuffs, followed by two hundred ladies carrying gold boxes,
silled with all manner of rich perfumes and ordoriferious balm, and these by forty
sedans of massy silver, carrying as many ladies, and those by eighty gold sedans
with ladies dressed in gold, silver and jewels. The streets abounded with all sorts
of rich oils, balms and perfumes. This cavalcade lasted thirty days successively,
attended with plays, tournaments and shews ; during which time every person,
after perfuming himself, was allowed to fit at the royal tables, one thousand five
hundred in number, and to feast at the, king’s expence. To proceed to the
Romans.











Another solemnity obtained among them, cafled ovatio ; which was inferior
to the triumph in fome of its requisites: for instance, if the victor was not of
consular or proconsular dignity, or had met with little resistence from the enemy,
or gained the victory without great blood-shed, or had overcome people of fmal
worth, or, as we faid, speaking of the corona ovalis, when the war was under-
taken without the express command of the senate, &c. in such cases, the victorg
were solemnly welcomed with the ovatio, in the following manner.
The general entered the city on horse-back, or as anciently, on foot, crowned
with myrtle, (a tree facred to Venus) because the victory was gained not in a
martial manner, but in a manner becoming that goddess and women, as Aulus
Gellius says; and the troops in their possession appeared not in arms, and instead
of druins, trumpets, and other warlike instruments, their music was flutes and
other soft founds. The general entered with the booty in an orderly manner,
followed by his army, and the senate solemnly received him without the city-gates
highly commending his actions. Histories tells us, that several great generals
sued for and accepted this honour. The first was Posthumius Libertus, on his having
subdued the Sabines, and next Marcus Marcellus after the conquest of Svracuse. Sue-
tonius telates, that Augustus, after the battle of Philippi, and on finilhing the war
in Sicily, obtained that honour. And Pliny says, that several generals denied by
the senate the honour of the great triumph, were decreed the ovatio ; which was
so called, from the general’s offering a fheep, in Latin ovis, when he came to the
is derived from the shouts of the people, who used to cry, Oel or else Ove l
Whatever the truth is, this solemn entrance was always called by the Romans,
ovatio.
Other triumphs of these people Ishall for brevity omit speaking of. He who
wants further information may read Appianus Alexandrinus and Ammiannus Marcellinus,
the former describing the triumph of Scipio Africanus, and the latter that of the
emperor Constantius.
CHAP. VI. Of the Manner of the four principal and public
Grecian Games, and to whose honour instituted.
HHE antiquity and manners of the Grecian games being somewhat unknown
to many curious artists, Ithink it will be acceptable to give a fhort descrip-
tion, as well as l can, of the four principal games so highly and so often extolled
by the Greek and Roman writers.
The first and principal were called the Obympic games, held near the city of
Obmpia, in the province of Elis, and instituted in honour of Jupiter Olympius, by
the Idan Hercules and his four brothers, Pœoneus, Idas, Jasius and Epimedes, meet-
ing together from Mount lda in Candia, and being five brethren, they were stiled
the







ldaan dactyls. These games being celebrated every five years with great solem-
nity, the ancients therefore reckoned their time by Obympiads, thereby under-
standing a period of five years. They consisted of five sorts of exercifes, viz.
running, wrestling, boxing, throwing the coit, and leaping. The place of exer-
cise was fenced in with pales, and no spectator was suffered to come
within it.
Some pretend these games were instituted by Jupiter, after he had destroyed the
giants who attempted to storm heaven ; and that Apollo had got the preference in
out-running Mercury ; that Mars bore away the prize in wrestling, boxing, &c.
Others prove, that each of the aforesaid bretheren invented his game and ex-
ercise, and that being five in number, they were from the five fingers named
dactyls, Dactylos in Greek signifying a finger.
The Greeks called these five exercises Pentathlon, and the Lattins Quinquertium.
Two of them had a dependence on the legs, viz. running and leaping; two on the
arms, as coits and boxing, and the wrestling respected both arms and legs. The
victor in all the five exercises was by the Greeks called Pancratiastes ; a word com-
pounded of Pan and Kratos, signifying a bestowing a whole force of the body.
prize was adjudged to him who gained his point most dextrouslsy. Accordingly,
they struck with fists and elbows, kicked, bit, scratched, and sprained the
fingers, hands and other parts of the body. They even endeavoured to thrust out
each others eyes with their thumbs. In short, no artifice was omitted for gaining
the victory.
We shall briefly relate in what manner the aforesaid five excercises were
performed.
The circus, wherein they run on foot was originally a stadium, or six hundred
geomitrical feet in length : but in the fourth Olympiad they doubled it. This
race was at first on foot, and in alight dress; but afterwards on horse-back and in
armour. men called runners on foot, were also admitted armed srom top to
toe ; this excercise being judged very proper for the bodies of warriors. The
first victor herein was Demaratus of Herea : and the hymns sung in their honour,
sufficiently testify their running in armour. But the first who got the prize in run-
ning without armour, was Chorabus of Elis, after a long contest with him about
it. Arrachion of Phigalia obtained the prize in the second and third excercifes; and
Polycrates of Messene a man of noble extraction, got much honour and glory in
the fourth wherein he was victor.
The wrestling was undertaken after the body had been thoroughly anointed
in order to prevent a gripe, and then daubed with fine dust to dry the sweat.
Thus prepared, the wrestlers entered the lists, and began with seizing the hands,
then the arms and body under the short ribs, &c. Thus endeavouring by va-
rious methods of strength and dexterity in kicking, pufhing, and othet tricks to
fling one another on their backs ; for a fall on the belly went for nothing. Be¬
fore they entered the ring they caused their parts to be soundly rubbed, to make
them more supple and agile.
Boxing







Boxing and fighting with flings were the most dangerous exercifes. The for-
mer was anciently performed with ox-leather thongs tied about the hands, by
But
which with wonderful activity they dealt each other with very hard blows.
the slings consisted of small leather straps, armed at the ends with little leaden balls,
the blow whereof when it happened on the head, laid the adversary dead.
The coit was a flat, round, heavy piece of stone or lead, to try the force of
armsand hands, and to see who could sling highest and furthest : an excercise still
in use in many places to this day ; but with this difference, that the ancients with
a leg lifted up, threw the coit at a mark set up on a small pyramid, and resembling
a pine-apple.
The fifth excercise was lefs perilous, as consisting only of divers manners of
leaping.
The ancient garlands or crowns given as a prize to the victor on these occasions,
were made of olive leaves, but they varied according to the times; for they
were afterwards composed of couch grass, willow, laurel, myrtle, oak, palm
and wild parsley leaves ; as Plutarch in the life of Cato Uticensis relates. But when
made of olive leaves, they chose a select kind called Calistephancs, i. e. beauti-
ful crown, having hanging branches like the myrtle, very proper for twisting
garlands. The leaves of such garland differed much from others, in that being
white without, the green when twisted was inward ; whereas the others were
white within, and appeared green without. Hercules and his bretheren first
brought this plant into Greece from the northern countries, as Pausanias in his
Olympus tells us.
The Phythian games were instituted long before the lsthmian, yet after the Olym-
pic, and celebrated in honour of Apollo for his victory over the frightful serpent
Python. Some think they were so called from Pythos, the place of celebra-
tion, or else from the Greek word Pythestai, to consult ; because they there con-
sulted the oracle, in order to know the events of things to come. The exercifes
in these games only differed in the Olympic in this, that the Phythian were performed
under the sound of all sorts of vocal and instrumental music. These games from
time to time, had several alterations in form and solemnity, after the institution of
the Pancratium or Quinquertiam: and it is related, that in the first à Pythiades,
wherein the most illustrious heroes and gods of the ancients, entered the lists for
the sake of the prize; Castor prevailed in the horse-race, Pollux in boxing, Callais
in running on foot, Zethees in running in compleat armour, Peleus in throwing.
the coit, Telamon in wrestling, and Hercules in the Pancratium, or all the games.
In each of these games and exercifes the victors were crowned with laurel,
which in particular was consecrated to them; because the ancients believed, by
what they have feigned of Peneus’s daughter, with whom Apollo was so much en-
amoured, and who was metamorphosed into that tree, that the god took a singu-
lar delight in it. But others will have the institution of the Phythian games to
be long before Apollo’s amour with the beautiful Daphne: and before the laurel
4. Pythiades signifies a certain number of years in the Pythian games.
bore






bore that distinction, both the triumphal and victors crowns and garlands were
made of palm or oak-leaves ; as Ovia in his first Book of Metamorphofis teftifies.
Plutarch and Pausanias relate, that Theseus on his return from Creia, adorned the
victors in the games instituted in honour of Apollo with garlands of palm, 2a
tokens of praise and renown ; for the laurel was not known till after the Phythin
games were settled, and when known it gave rise to the aforesaid fable of Daphne;
and both the tree and leaves being found of so. extraordinary a make and nature,
illustrious victors and men of learning were commonly crowned with it. Some
again say, that Apollo affected the leaves and blossoms of the apple-tree, before he
chose the laurel, and therefore the victors in running, wrestling, &c. ought to be
crowned with that; as the poet Archias in his Mytholog. lib. 5. cap. 4. relates,
But Lucianus afferts, that though in the Phythian games, the garlands of laurel be-
gan to prevail, yet they were intermixed with sine yellow apples Some writers
even affirm, that the laurel of Delphos bore such large berries or fruit, as almoft
to gain’the name of apples. But the true reason of this difference proceeded
from the several alterations made both in the prizes and times of holding those
games ; for originally they were celebrated every ninth year (from the number of
nymphs feigned by the ancients, to come from Mount Parnassus, to offer to Apcllo
on his having overcome the Delphic monster Python) and afterwards every
fifth.
The Nemaan games were kept in a wood of that name, situate between Phliuns
and Cleona, two cities of Achia, in honour and memory of Archemorus, otherwise
called Opheltes son of Lycurgus, on account of his being killed by a serpent in this
wood. Which accident some relate thus : Oedepus having through mistake mar-
ried his own mother, the widow of Laus king of Thebes, begat on her two fons,
Eteocles and Polynice to whom he resigned the royal dignity, on condition they
governed by turns: but Eteocles as the eldest, having obtained the first year’s admi¬
Fistration, refused to admit his brother as a partner to govern the second year ;
who thereupon in discontent, soliciting the aid of Adrastus king of Argos, whose
daughter, called Argia, he married; the king in conjunction with his other son-in-
law zydeus, raised a great army, in order to wage war with the Thebans and bring
them to reafon. The issue of-this war was the death of the two b’others in a
duel; and their bodies according to custom, being laid on a large pile of wood
to be burnt, the flames happened to divide and seperate, as if they bore witness
of their immortal hatred of the two bretheren in their life-times, which ceased not
with their deaths. Now in the army which Adrastus sent to Polynices’s assistance
were seven commanders, who being arrived in the island Lemnos, pertaining to
Thracia, and seized with an extreme thirst, met Hypsipyle, carying in her arms
the child Opheltes, son of Lycurgus. (priest of Jupiter) and Euridice, whom being
a native of that country, they intreated to shew them where to get some water.
Whereupon she in haste, vet fearful of laying the child on the ground, as for-
bidden by the oracle, before he could walk, set him naked on the grafs by a bed
of wild parsley near a fountain, where a serpent lying perdue, suddenly wound it-
self about the childs neck and throttled him, while she was gone to draw water.
The commanders being apprised of this accident, killed the serpent, and to solace
the






the father, instituted in honour of his son so suddenly lost the aforesaid games, to
beheld every third year: wherefore originally only soldiers and their descendants
were admitted to them, though in procefs oftime they were free for every person.
Theagnes in his Memoirs of Agina, Book 4. chap. 13. relates, that Hypsipyle fled from
Lemnes to Nemda, on account of a combination among the women to kill the men,
only out of jealousy, because by the instigation of Venus, highly ineensed against
them, they had to do with other women. Accordingly they all put their de-
sign in practice, except Hypsipyle, who endeavoured to save her father’s life by
hiding him in a baker’s trough. (This happened soon after the departure of the
Argonaats, and their arrival in this island. ) But being discovered, they flung him
with the trough into the sea and condemned Hypsipyle to die for not agreeing to
their general resolution. She hearing this made her escape, but in her flight,
was taken by pirates and sold for a slave to Lycurgus, whose wife Euridice, de-
firing fhe might be put to death for the misfortune of her child, she hid herself in
a remote and solitary place ; where being discovered by the sooth-sayer Amphiaraus,
to the two sons of Euridice, Thoas and Eunoenus, who made diligent search after
her, she was through their intercession, and the commanders testimony of her
innocence, pardoned and re-admitted into favour. Others will have it that Her-
cules instituted these games, on having killed in the wood Nemaa a terrible lion,
who devoured all before him and laid the country waste. Some say they were set
up in honour and memory of Archemorus; but that Hercules after having slain the
Nemaan lion, with whose skin he covered his head and body, broughth them un-
der à regulation, and dedicated them to Jupiter ; appointing their solemnization
to be every three years, on the 12th day of the month. called by the Corinthians,
Panemos, and by the Athenians Boedromibs answering to our month of August: and
the rather, as Theseus had in that month happily vanquished the Amazons. But
othèrs are of opinion that it was done in memory of Opheltes, who by his own death
presaged the fate of the Lacedemonians, at war with the Thebans. Yet some think
that 'this was another Opheltes, son of Euphetas and Geusa, who being laid on the
ground by his nurse, while she went to shiew some commanders a fountain, was
killed by a serpent.
The Nemaan games were therefore instituted in memory and consolation of
Lycurgus, Etridice, and Opheltes, and the judges who determined the prizes, were
dressed in black and mourning garments. For Opheltes was afterwards called Ar-
chemorus, because Amphiaraus had at his birth presaged him an early and untime-
ly death. Archo signifying in Greek begining, and Moros death; as if they said
ee Dying shortly after his birth:, in which sense speaks the poet,
ee Naseentes morimur, finisque ab origine pendet ,'
That is, ee We begin dying from our births, and our beginnings and ends have
an inseparable union.
The excercises in these games were the same as in others: but the victors
were crowned with green parsley, mostly used in funerals, to perpetuate the me-
end
mory of Archemorus. Whether the Greek Selinon, with us common parsley
the






the petroselinon, or stone parsley be the same, let the botanists determine. Originally
the victors were crowned with garlands of olives; but after the defeat of the
Medes they began to be presented with one of wild parsley, in memory of those
who were slain in that bloody battle : and afrer this regulation, the said herb, in-
stead of crouning the head on occasions of joyful meetings, served only in times
of sorrow and mourning. For, according to the Greek saying, this herb is very
earthy, as spreading a long time over the ground, and often bearing to be dug up
in order to get à deeeper root. The seed or it also on sowing, is longer than others
in coming up; wherefore it was necessary, that the mortal Greek Ophelies, after-
wards (as we have said) called Art hemorus, should be crowned with earthly honour.
For of the four principal games which we handle in this chapter, two according
to the poet Archias, are sacred to mortals, and the others to deities: the mortals
are Archemorus and Meliceria, whois also called Palamon; and the gods are Jupi-
ter and Apollo. The wild parsley is not without reason appropriated to these
ganies; because some think it sprung from the blood of the child, killed by the
serpent; yet this contradicts these who say, that Hypsipyle laid the child on this
plant ; which therefore was alreedy known at that time. We shall now proceed
to the Isthmian games.
This solemnity was performed at night in the Isthmus of Corinth, parting Morea
from the continent of Greece ; and had rather the face of a facrifice and its mysteries
than of a festival. It was instituted by Sisyphas son of Aolus, on his finding there-
on the ground, the dead body of his kinsman Melcerta.
Plutarch writes, that Theseus, after having killed the bull of Minos, and performed.
other great exploits, errected a pillar in the lsthnius of Peloponnesus, where in imi-
tation of Hercules, who consecrated the Olympic games to Jupiter, he instituted
the Isthmian in honour of Neptune.
Yet according to Pausanias and others, these games were not set up for that
reason, but in remembrance of Melicerta’s dead body found there unburied ;
touching which there goes this story : Learchus and Meliceria were the sons of
Alhamas and Ino. Athamas made raging mad by Tifiphone at Juno’s command,
attempted to kill his wife instead of a wild beast, tearing the young Learches out
of her arms, beat out his brains against the stones. Ino affrighted hereat, either
through sorrow, or the insluence of Tisiphone’s poisoned serpents, betook herself
with the other child Melicerta to the mountains Geranes, situated between Megara
and Corinth. But she sinally also yeilding to rage, cast herself with the child
from the rock Moluris into the sea; where she was metamorphosed into a sea
nymph, and called Leucotha, and he into a sea god, under the name of Palamon
The dead body of Melicerta being afterwards brought on shore by a dolphin,
Sisiphas king of Crinth, who was bis uncle, commanded him to be buried in the
isthmus, and a circus to be there erected for the celebration of the aforesaid
games.
But the poet Aachias says, that on Ino’s slinging herself with Meliceria into the
sea, a dolphin landed their bodies on the ’chaenuntian shore, where Amphimuchus
and Lonacinus took them up and brougnt them to Sispphus king of Corinth; and
then-







then they were deified, she by the name of Lezrothea, which in Greek signifies the
white goddess, and he by that of Palaemon.
Leucotha, called by the Latins Matuta, is day-break ; and Palamon, or Portunus,
the vehemence of storms and billows ; for pallein, in Greek, signifies to toss, move,
and pusn violently against each other ; whence comes the name of Palamon : he
was the son of Matuta, or Morning ; because the winds commonly begin to arise
with day-break.
Others tell us, that Melicerta’s dead body being cast on the shore of the Isthmus,
and lying unburied, it caused a great plague; and that, on consulting the oracle,
touching the cause of the infection, answer was made, that Melicerta ought to have
° a magnificent funeral, and solemn races and games should be appointed to his ho¬
nour and memory. The Corinthians obeyed, and the body was accordingly taken
up by Amphimacus and Donacinus, and in an honourable manner buried in the place
aforesaid; and the games and funeral rites being instituted, the plague ceased ;
but afterwards it broke out afresn on their omiffion of the solemnity; wnerefore, in
this their utmost distress, the people, re-consulting the oracle, were told they must
for ever celebrate the games they had begun in memory of Meliceria, and distri-
bute the rewards to the victors. But Musaeus, describing these games, says, that
the custom was to perform, every five years, two forts of games and races in the
Isthmus; one in honour of Neptune, near his temple; and the other in memory of
Melicerta.
The prize in the Isthmian games, was originally a crown of parsléy, elegantly
wreathed; but afterwards, a garland of pine-leaves, on account of their neigh-
bourhood and agreement with the seas. Besides these crowns, the victors were
usually presented on their return, with a palm-branch, as Pausanias says. More-
over, the conquerors at such times were so much honoured, as to be met by their
fellow-citizens, and brought some milés upon their shoulders. They made not
their entrance through the common gates, like other people, but triumphantly
over a stately bridge or passage, made over the walls for that purpose, and their
names were cut on pillars set up in the public places of the town, to perpetuate
their memories.
We shall, to conclude this chapter, subjoin a fhort description of some particu-
lar garlands or crowns, sacred to the heathenisn deities.
The Phaonicians, as Euscbius testifies, honoured and worshipped the herbs and
plants. The Grecès in imitation of them, rendered almost the same duties, not
only to trees, but also to herbs and flowers: these maintained that the Charities, or
Three Graces were the very crowners of Pandora. Pherecydes says, that Saturn was
crowned before any others : yet, according to Diodorus, Jupiter claims this honour
for his conquest over the giants : but, not to pretermit the Agyptian monuments,
Isis first crowned herself with green sprigs and ears of corn; of which, according
to the Agyptian writer, Leon, she was the inventor.
The oak and its fruit, as Apollodorus writes, were sacred to the goddess Rhea,
otherwise called the Earth, that mortals who proceed from it, might wear the
badges of their universal mother: the same tree was also peculiar to Jupiter, the
tutelar god.








The pine and its fruit were consecrated to the goddess Cbele, whom the an-
cients believed to be the mother of all things; because she, carefully containing the
seed originally given her, does by the warmth of the sun yearly bring forth new
shoots. The pine-apple in its shape, also resembles a rising flame, and keeps its
seed in small and separate cells, which by the earth’s heat, in time springs up and
grows. We likewise see a certain medal, with the head of Gbele on one side, and
a small garland of pine-twigs on the other, and inscribed EMTPNAIAN, i. e.
those of Smyrna. The Arcadians believing Pan to be the god of the universe, de-
dicated the pine-apple to him also.
Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo and Asculapius were crowned with laurel ; Saturn as the
god of triumphs; Jupiter, for his victory over the giants ; Apollo, for the love of
Daphne, metamorphosed into that tree ; though before, the palm was sacred to
him, on his killing the Delphic dragon; but Asculapius wears it for no other rea-
son, than that it is useful for several remedies.
The ancient Romans, on their nona capretinae, or festivals kept monthly, in honour
of Juno, crowned that goddess with fig-leaves, as a memorial of the city of Rome
(reduced to the utmoss extremity by the Gauls, who demanded of the senate seve-
ral noble virgins as hostages) regaining its freëdom by the contrivance of the vir-
gin Philoris, who shewing the Romans how to slide down from the walls, by the
branches of a fig-tree growing thercon, and sacred to Juno, gave them an oppor-
tunity of falling on the enemy when drunk and asleep (which sne had cunningly
inticed them to) and by a great slaughter, to obtain a compleat victory over them.
The pomegranate was consecrated to Juno, by the people of Mycena. The white
lilly is alfo sacred to her, and therefore called Flos Junonius, or, according to some,
flos regalis; not so much out of respect to the queen or goddess, but because that
slower almost surpasses all others in height.
Minerva who is said to be a virgin, rightfully laid claim to the olive-tree, which
affects purity and chastity, as well as she.
I find no trees particularly sacred to Mars; but it is notorious that the herb
commonly called dog’s grass is appropriated to him.
They who are conversant with poets, know that the myrtle-tree signifies delight
and a mind richly endowed. The ancients say that tree surpasses all others in ten-
der and beautiful leaves, and their continual greenness and smell, which recom-
mends it to Venus, the most beautiful, most tender, and most perfect of the god-
desses. In- old times, men on festival days used to put into each others hands
branches of this tree as tokens of joy, and that they should join in chorus : and
Horace says that in Lent-time, when the earth by her variety of flowers seems to
rejoice, we ought to adorn our heads with wreaths of myrtle. The apple-tree sig-
nifying love, is also sacred to Venus; and the ears of corn to Ceres.
The ivy dedicated to Bacchus, was in great esteem among the Agyptians for being
always green and not shedding
its leaves till after harvest: they mostly used it in
garlands, and the kind bearing
black-berries was especially consecrated to Bacchus,
who by that people is called Ofiris, and from whence this green also borrows its
nanie ; for they called it Cenofiris, i. e. the plant of Ofiris : and Dionysius, which is
likewise the name of Bacchus) having carried his victories into India, built there
Nsa,















Nysa, a large town, and planted it round with ivy to perpetuate his memory : this
plant is facred to Bacchus, either because he as well as Phaebus is always represented
youthful; or that the tongue and spirits of father Liber are tied. up, as the ivy
catches hold of any thing that it comes at : for though Horace says, ee That the
drunkard is in his cups free from all care, even the greatest poverty,’’ yet it is as
true, that the liquor captivates the senses, taking away all power of judging. The
same plant is likewife an emblem of age, not only for its growing mostly
near old trees, buildings and ruins, but also as wine which is old and. worked off,
is highly esteemed : wherefore Pindarus as well as Horace mostly extols it. The
vine was also sacred to Bacchus ; accordingly he is often represented crowned with
the twigs thereof: though after his conquest of India, he likewise wore laurel ; for
he, as well as Saturn, is accounted the god of triumphs. The vine was also pecu-
liar to Rhea : and the crown of its twigs which adorns the head of Hecate, implies
only the subtilties and snares which father Faunus, by the operations of wine (lead-
in men to extravagance) laid for his daughter.
i he cypress is sacred to Pluto, god of hell, and of the sprigs and leaves of it the
ancients made garlands. It is reckoned a mournful tree and proper for places of
burial, because, when once cut, it fhoots no more. Its branches, set in the ground
near tombs, or carved on them, signify that the deceased endeavoured by prayers,
to be reconciled to the infernal gods : wherefore Horace says, ee Men are attended
to hell by no other tree than the unhappy and hateful cypress. Pluto’s crown is
also composed of the herb adianthum, otherwise called capilli veneris. Some have
crowned him with Narcissus flowers and their leaves; a flower proper for deceased
persons, on account of the unhappy end of the youth who was transformed into it :
wherefore Phurnutus says, that the hellisn furies, Alecto, Tisiphone and Megara, hed
garlands of the same flower about their heads, as servants and executioners of the
commands of Pluto. The pine-tree has much agreement with the cypress,it being
also the emblem of death; for, when once cut, like the cypress, it never shoots
out again ; wherefore, and for its bitterness and sharpness, the pine-apple, both
in ancient and modern acceptation, signifies death.
The double-coloured poplar was sacred to Hercules; because naturalists, by this
hero and the two colours of that tree, imply the two different times which su-
perintend and govern all things ; for one of the colours being white, signifies the
day, and the other which is dark, the night. Some have also ranked the poplar
in the number of unhappy trees ; for, in the isse of Rhodes, the funeral games in
honcur of Tlepolemus were celebrated, and the performers of them crowned.
with it.
The peach-tree was sacred to lsis and to Harpocrates; the plane-tree to the
Genii; and a garland of flowers to Ariadne. The bacchanals, in celebrating tke
vine-fcast of Bacchus, were coifed with greens.
If the curious reader desires further information in this point, he may consult
the histories of Claudius Saturninus, wherein he will find the origin, causes, qualities,
and every thing else relating thereto, in such manner as to observe, that there are
no beautiful flowers, green branches, leaves, roots, &c. but what are peculiar to
the head of some person or other.








CHAP. VII. Of the Military Dresses and Arms of several Nations,
particularly of the Greeks and Romans.
HE distinction of nations cannot be well represented without due regard to
their warlike accoutrements, dresses and manners.
It is certain, that many
painters have been herein very deficient, as appears by their works, who on better
consideration and greater experience, have afterwards corrected their errors. But
I mean not, by exposing the mistakes of other men to palliate my own; I have
had my faults as well, and perhaps greater than they; l am sensible, that even
in my very best time, l was not free from some great blunders, which to this day
I am concerned for, and which, though I might conceal, I nevertheless lay open in
the course of this work : and since I am speaking of mistakes, I shall here ob-
serve some, as necessary to this chapter.
Testa, in a print of the dragging of Hector’s body, represents Achilles, though a
Greek, with a Roman head-piece, which he posfibly did to keep the light together
and to preserve the face : he also exhibits both those heroes naked ; and Achilles
without arms : the sword in his hand makes him look more like a gladiator, than
a general, and the scabbard by his side has no tie or girdle about his body. How
can he use the sword, when with one hand he holds the reins of the horfes?
These things are very improper and unnatural : but perhaps his inducement was,
that he might shew the beautiful body of the hero with greater advantage. In
the last place, the town walls appear so low as to be easily reached over.
Poussin likewise, in the print of the death of Germanicus, has intermixed Greek
with Roman helmets. Let it not be thought, that we are unjust to the merits op
such great masters, by so nice an examen of their performances, fince my purpofe
herein is only by shewing other mens faults, to correct our own. But l am as wil-
ling to shew mine, as they occur to my memory : witness, my Anens receiving the
aris of Venus, where I have also made a Roman helmet : and my father, in his re-
presentation of Seneca, introduces one of Nero’s captains standing by him, with a
Greek head-piece. Now, art allows not such liberties either in military furniture
or any thing else. Each nation has its particular dress, manners and customs.
How ean we exhibit an Agyptian prospect, without shewing some tokens of that
country ; as palm-trees, pyramids and people dressed in the Agyprian mode 3
Wherefore let me recommend care to every person, and that they do not build too
much on other mens works. It is better to be nice than negligent. Let us un-
derstand a thing never fo well, we may yet err through hafte or careleffness.
Thinking it presumptuous to enumerate all the particulars of the military or-
der of the ancients. as being largely handled by several authors ; we shall therefore,
according to our small ability, and for the service of curious artists, only touch
brieffy







briefly on some of the principal matters relating to their arms, believing the re-
sidue will follow in the course of their practice. I shall begin with the Greeks.
The Greek foot were divided into two forts, pikemen or heavy-armed, and
archers or light-armed. The pikemen used a buckler, a fort of boots, a pike
twenty or twenty-four feet in length, and a sword: the stoutest had for defence, a
Macedonian round shield of four feet diameter. The archers bore bucklers of
wicker, bows, short pikes and flings : they wore long hair and beards, and hel-
mets or head-pieces somewhat projecting over the face, handsomely wrought with
imagery or foliage, set off with plumes and other elegant ornaments : their military
dresses always excelled in variety and elegance : their coats of armour reached
down to the knees, cut out on the shoulders and below, into straps which were
often adorned with lions-heads : some instead of straps, had twisted fringes. The
generals and nobility wore buskins of young lions or tigers-skins; or else neat
fandals : but the inferior sort had plain sandals with strings: their swords hung by
by their left side by a sinall hook on the girdle, and on their right side was a
dagger.
In the Roman military order, the young men between seventeen and twenty-five
years of age were appointed. for velites, or swift footmen or light-armed; the
hastati, for darters or pikemen ; such as were in their prime, for principes; and the
aged, for triarii.
The Velites wore a small buckler of a foot and a half long, an head-piece, a
sword and a lance three feet long, and a thumb thick, armed with a sharp trian-
gular pointed steel or head, of a foot in length: some carried slings; others,
bows-
The hastati and principes wore a fhort coat of armour, that they might be the
fitter for march and the management of all forts of arms; they had long breeches,
reaching half-way the legs, and close at the knees, and helmet, and a large oval
buckler two feet and an half in the transverse, and four or five feet in the conjugate
diameter : they were girt with swords on both sides; that on the left much longer
than the other, which, like a dagger, was but a span long. Their other weapors
were, two darts or wooden staves; one thia like an arrow, and three cubits long,
breadth of the hand, with a pointed iron head as long as the staff, and let half-
way into the wood, and beset with hooks : this iron next the wood, was a finger
and an half in thiknefs.
The triarii bore the same arms as the principes, except that instead of the darts,
they used pikes, formerly carried by the hastati, (and from whence they took their
name) who left them for the darts. The richest armed themselves with com-
modious body-coats instead of breast-pieces. The Romans generally wore short
hair, with shaved chins, but the hair growing on each side of their cheeks :
yet we must observe, that Scipio was the only person among them who had long
hair. The Roman helmets clofing with the forehead, were made either of dou-
ble leather, iron or brass, and crested on top, like the Greeks, but less sumptuous ;
except those of the generals and other commanders, which were plumed. Some
also had winged helmets, and on the crest, a snake or dragon or an eagle’s head.
We







We find likewise, that the ancient Romans, in their marches, carried a saw, a
basket, a spade, an axe, a bridle, a fickle, and provision for three days. The
Herculani of the old troops, and the Joviniani, or, according to Vegetius Jovi-
ani, were two select Roman legions consisting. of six thousand men each, and
serving in Selavonia, to whom the emperor Diocletianus, who caused himself to be
stiled Jupiter, and Maximinianus Hercules, after they had gained him the imperial
dignity, gave that name in preference to all other legions for their valour. These,
besides their large swords and oblong shields, had darts, the insides whereof were
run with lead, and called Manorbarbuli, which for their heaviness forwards,
swords, they so galled the enemy and their horses, as to gain the emperors several
great battles.
The Roman horse wore an helmet and breast-piece like the foot, had a cross-
shield by the horse’s side, a long sword on their right side, a javelin intheir hands,
and in their quivers three or more arrows broad-ironed, yet sharp pointed, and
not inferior to the javelins. The ensigns, both of foot and horse wore lions sxins
over their military dresses, and the trumpets the same, save. that the two fore-
paws of the skins were by these latter, tied under their chins, serving them also
for cloaks. These skins were not merely fleaed with the hair on, but also sitted for
service, and underneath either fringed or elegantly cut out.
The Numidians and Cretians under Roman command and aiding them on horse-
back, as need required, were armed with bows and arrows, and also with slings,
wherewith they dexterously flung stones. Pliny writes, that even the scorpio (a
machine of war) with which anciently they used to throw large stones and timbers,
was the invention of thé Crerians.
The Ligurians, who for a long time valiantly kept the Romans at bay, were well
disciplined soldies; armed with a breast-piece, an helmet, a fhield, and in a
close dress. They were also very expert in throwing the javelin.
The Scythians, a barbarous people and horsemen, wore crested helmets pointed
on top ; they carried bows, daggers and battle-axes.
The Scythian women, called Amazons, oftentimes appeared in a combat, as
Vincentius says, in antique silver helmets and breast-pieces, because their country
abounded with that metal. But according to the ancient memoirs, their military
dresses were only adorned with serpents skins wrought in silver. They had the
left breast bare, but the right, which was scared, that they might with greater
ease use the bow and cast the dart, covered like the rest of their bodies. Their
garment buttoned below, reached not quite to their knees. Their defence was a
target or large round shied cut holow at one of the extremities into the form of two
conjoined crescents, having a part in the middle for covering and guarding the
arm and hand. One of these cuts served for managing the lance and the other to
look through. They likewise carried axes and hammers.
The Goths, together with the great Attila, descended from the Scythians, were
armed with bows, arrows, long and strong spears or lances, shields and helmets.
The horsemen full armoured and carrying strong lances, hammers and clubs,
would leap on their horses without the help of the stirrup or other advantage, es-
pecially






pecially on smooth ice, or on snowy ground, where they generally fought their
greatest battles. Sometimes, as need required, and in the heat of battle they
would in full gallop throw themselves on another horse, turning and winding
with incredible swiftness, even catching up a lance from the ground, &c. An
evidence what great warriors these people-formerly were.
The Persians and Spartans were very much alike in dress, except in their head
ornaments. The former wore turbans, and the latter caps like a night-cap, yet
pointed on top and curling forwards; or else iron head-pieces, like the Romans,
but plain and without a crest. They had long hair and their beards almost hid
theirears. On the other hand, the Persians shaved both head and face. Their
vestment girt about the middle, reached below the knees: they wore also long
open breeches and wide stockings and shoes. They used scaled arms, round
shields, greaves or shin armour, scimitars hung on the right thigh, crofs the body
aud the dagger on the same side, but at the girdle. At their back was the
quiver.
Darius the last king of Persia, was commonly arrayed in a rich purple mantle
intermixed with white stripes, fastened on each shoulder with precious stones, and
before with a gold chain or hook. His coat of armour wrought with gold, was
embroidered on the breast with three golden eagles, having spread wings and
tails and bills turning towards each other, and between the wings and tails were
seen the following letters, NIKHTIKSTATON, signifying, Always Con-
queror. At his golden girdle, girt loosely and womanisn, hung a scimitar, the
scabbard whereof was beset with precious stones.
The Dacians wore gowns hanging down to the heels and open on the sides, and
over them a coat of mail which reached to the middle. Their helmets sat close
about the head and ran up to apoint. Their arms were bows and arrows, dag-
ger and javelins; and their horses wholly guarded, except the eyes, with scaled
coverings.
The Parthians, Medes and Assprians were guarded like the Persians, save that the
Parthians wore long coats of mail covering both man and horse, and the Assprians
brass head-pieces.
The Phrygians and Armedians used helmets, short spears, javelins and daggers,
wearing wide stockings and shoes like the Persians.
The Carthaginians were as elegant and magnificent in arms as the Persiuns.
The Macedonians and their neighbours differed little in their dress and arms from
the Greeks. And,
The Romans and Trojans the same.
The Lacedemonians first began to carry a shield, sword and axe.
The people of Caria were the first who served for pay, carried shields, bore
armour, and had plumes or feathers on their helmets.
The Thracians wore head-pieces of fox skins, coats of armour, party-coloured
dresses, and stockings of skins. Their weapons were darts, round shields and
daggers.







The Athiopean horse wers guarded with an helmet, coat of armour reaching
half way the thighs, powdered, with iron eyes and proof against cuts and pushes.
Their arms were a round shield, a lance, a scimitar, and clubs plated with iron.
Those who had no helmets wore long and hairy or woolly red caps, like the Ma-
malukes in Agypt. The foot to strike terror in their enemies, wore fkins of lions,
tigers, leopards, and other wild beasts; anil had for weapons large bows, pikes,
arrows, and slings. The emperor himself wore a costly silver diadem about his
head, and carried in his hand a silver crucifix. He was dressed in gold stuff full
pleated over a silk shirt with large ducal sleeves, and from his middle hung a
loose garment of silk and gold stuff. His body guards, covering their heads
and shoulders with beasts skins, carried a sword, a dagger, and a javelin.
The Indians were cloathed in wood, and had bows of reeds, and arrows a yard
and a half long tipped with iron.
The Arabians wore girt coats, and used crooked but handy bows.
The Lybians were dressed in leather, and had burnt javelins.
The Agyctians bore a shield and broad sword.
The inhabitants of the Baleares, now Majorca, Minorca, &c. had slings.
The Atolians, lances and javelins.
The Scoitzers from ancient times were good soldiers, as appears by their contests
with Julius Casar, used large and long shields for defence. Their arms were
strong spears, pikes, and clubs.
The Gauls carried large shields and long swords.
The people of the territory of Abruzzo, anciently called Samnites, were good
horse-men and darters.
The inhabitants of Marchia Anconitana, anciently stiled by the Romans, Ager
Picenus, or country of wood-peckers, were likewise good soldiers, and bore a
shield, a pike, an helmet and sword.
Thus I think to have made some provision for further enquiry, that artists
may not be at a loss. He who wants more information can read Virgil, Ammianas Mar-
cellinus, Vegetius, Polvbius, and Herodotus Hallicarnassus; which last, in the life of
Xerxes, lays down all the particulars relating to each people and all sorts of bar-
barians. Vitrueius also has written a treatise of the Roman military exercife.
Homer in his lliad speaking offights wherein some had gold, brafs, and steel ar-
mour says, ee He pussied him in the belly, but pierced not his armour'
And in
another passage, ee He dealt him such a blowon his steel-breast as to make it strike
sire and resound. Now ifit be afked what sort of armour this must have been,
of massy gold and other metal; and whether it could be possible for any person
to move, bend, and turn, in such armour as shewed the muscles and limbs sat
close to the body , l answer they could not, and that the notion of their having
been thus is wrong. I think those are also out of the way who suppose they are so
represented for the sake of decorum, and that this is reason enough, without con-
sidering whether it be posfible or not ; since other reasons may be assigned, which
can give better satisfaction without forcing nature. For my part, I believe that
the arms and their use were anciently as now, and the coats of armour were like
our buff coats, made of leather. They may possibly have been so contrived as to
shew









shew the muscling; but granting it, they must be much sitter for use than if of
steel or solid gold. Wherefore l cannot but think they were made of leather,
and of all sorts of colours, wrought or embroidered with silver or gold, even
covered over with gold like our gilt leather, and set off with scales, foilage, and
other such ornaments. I remember to have read in my youth, in a certain
ancient Latin treatise yet extant, dedicated to the emperors Theodosius and Valenti-
nian, and entitled, eeThe great Number of the Roman Forces ;’’ that the Roman ar-
mours, breast-pieces or military coats (as there called) were lined with wool,
and covered with the skins of wolves, lions, and other wild beasts of Libva. Ne-
vertheless, to support the opinion of the poets, l add, that they had gold, brass, and
steel breast and belly-pieces fastened with small hooks and buckles on the shoulders
and sides, to ward off blows ; but they were plain without muscling; and not put on
but in times of preparation for battle. Wherefore they are much to blame who
introduce such accoutrements on every occasion; as for instance, Scipio in his tent
with the young bride, and sitting in full armour; or Alexander with Roxana, Rinal-
do courting Armida; and other such occurrences.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Origin of the several Ensigns and Shields and
their Devices, for distinction of Nations and particular Persons.
Ttbeing in painting absolutely necessary, first to distinguish the nations, and
next the personages among them of high and lesser degree, by tokens either
devised by themselves, or appropriated by others ; I think proper to handle this
point largely, in order to shew the greatness of the Roman power, and the many
foreign troops entertained in their service : l say both painters and statuaries, es-
pecially the latter, ought to be acquainted with these things, that in representing
either a particular nation or hero, they may on their shields, exhibit the proper
badges of dictinction whereby to be presently known by persons conversant in an-
tiquities. This knowledge is as necessary for history painters, since histories fre-
quently make mention of a congrefs of several nations and their heroes in one
place, without describing their arms and banners; a point which cost me
much trouble to gain, but proved of greater advantage in the uses I made
thereof, and which I introduce here as having some relation to the preceding
chapter.
On consulting histories, I find the ancients instead of banners, made use of a
bundle of arrows or boughs and greens tied together, which they called mani-
pulus, or an handful, and the ensign bearers, manipularii. Titus Livius the
nice Roman historian and antiquary, tells us that Romulus, having by accident ap-
peased a tumult with few people, from that time represented it in the ensigns and
arms by a wisp of hay ; causing this token, as an happy one, to be born be-
fore him in the ensuing wars. The Romans afterwards painted on their ensigns
and







anc standards simall red flames, in. token of suecess; az in the battle with. the. Sa-
bines near Eretum, where the arms of the former appeared by night as if on fire,
without being damaged. Thus the standards and ensigns of the legions, by the
sight whereof the soldiers knew the wills of their generals, were from.time to time
augmented. They had also at different times, divers other tokens.; as open right
hands, the image of their emperors insilver or gold or gilt; and. sometimes there
hung under them a small pendant, having the general, or peoples motto,
S. P. QR. They likewise bore in their banners, the representation of
wolves, minotaurs, wild boars, horses, bulls, and dragons, till at last they fix-
ed on the eagle for the chief field standard. The Romans used the wolf, minotaur,
wild boar, horse, bull, and dragon, for the following reasons; the wolf, partly
as he was sacred to Mars the god of war, and partly because his penetratron is
so greât, that he can see as well by night as by day : whereby they meant that a
prudent general ought always to be on his guard, so as not to be surprised by
the stratagems of the enemy. By the minotaur says Vegetius, they signified, that
as this beast kept himself in the most hidden part of the labyrinth, so the designs
of a general ought to be kept secret. The wild boar, because no peace or cessa-
tion of arms was made without it. Vide our gth Book, page, 380. treating
of the offerings. The horse as being of great account among the Romans, and the
proper sign of war. Thé bull because the ancient Romans pretended, that the
word Italia was derived from stala, which now-a-days signifies a calf or bull. The
dragon they commonly painted on the baniiers of the foot, and each century had
one ; whence the bearer of it aceording. to. Vegetias, was called dragonarius. Am¬
mianus Mercellinus tells us the manner of carrying it. ee They tied, says he, to
the tops of their gilt pikes, which were gold fringed and beset with- peapls- and
precious ftones, dragons made of woven stuff and hollow within, which on
being advanced in the air, opened their frightful mouths, and made a grumbling
noise as if full of wrath and fury ; bending and moving their tails-with the wind.
Of which Claudianus speaks : ee Et cessante vento multi taucere dracones i. e. The
dragons were all sileat when the wind abated. This enfign according to Ammi¬
anus aforesaid, was of a reddishi purple. The eagle surpaffing all other birds in
courage and boldness, is not improperly called the Roman eagle ; for to what cor-
ner of the known world has he not extended the Roman dominion-; What resisting
nation has not felt the effect of their deliberations, and the valour wherewith
they put them in execution; And yet l know from history, that the eagle was in
use long before among the Persians : for Crus the founder of that monarchy, bore
according to- Xenophon, a golden eagle with- spread wings on a long pike, as if he
would sly over the universe ; which custom his sucessors retained as a royal token. By
a consent of the soothsayers, all nations anciently ascribed- to this bird, the honour of
belie ving he prognosticated good luck and happy success in any undertakings. In
which sense Justinus tells us that Hiero when young, who was of mean birth on his
mother’s side, making his first campaign, an eagle flew down and sat on his shield :
which was judged as a presage of his becoming in time an excellent general’and a
king; as afterwards came to pass. The poets even say that-this bird implies prosperity
assigned






assigned to any person by divine Providence. This opinioh bwes its rise to the
relation of Anacreon, the first writer of antiquities, that Jupiter intending to de-
stroy the giants who threatened té storm heaven, the powers of which he offered
to, was by the aecidental flight of an eagle, asfured of an happy and fuccefsful
victory ; which afterwards obtaining, he always bore a golden eagle in his arms and
banners, as à perpetual memorial thereef. From Jupiter the Getians asfumed that
bird and from them the Candiots. Aneas the Trojan introduced him among the Latines
and from them the Romans, in process of time camé to use him for their arms: though
Lipsius is of opinion, they assumed him after the example of the Perfians. The
Juscans beaten by the Romans in their last conflict near the city of Eretum, on the
borders of the Sabines, presented Tarquinius Priscas king of the Romans, their
king’s regalia, to wit, a gold crown, a purple garment, and mantie of various
colours, also an ivory chair, and an ivory sceptre with an eagle on top, which he
and his fuccessors always bore. After the banishment of the kings, the senate
took the eagle from their sceptres, and set them on their pikes, exalting him
above all their other arms, whether the wolf, minotaur, horse, wild boar, &c.
Marius when a child, happening to find an eagle’s nest with seven young, a pre-
sage of his two consulats, often placed the said number in his arms; and in his
second consulat asfigned the eagle to the Roman legions, using him only in battles
in order to spirit the soldiers and asfure them of victory. The other military
tokens were set on the tents, but Marius took them down; and from that time
no legion was without two eagles. But Josephus, in his fourth Book, gives
each legion one eagle ; and by the number of eagles they counted their legions ;
as Hirtius says that Pompey’s army conssisted of thirteen eagles. Dion also affigns
each legion an eagle. This eagle stood with extended wings, on a pilum or staff,
which according to Vegetius, was sive feet and a half in length, armed with a sharp
triangular iron of nine ounces. The bearers of it they called aquilifere. Thefe
eagles were but small, and of silver, and many had the thunder in their talons.
The Romans first used silver eagles, as did also Brutus; because silver is the
brightest metal and most like the day, and therefore most properest for a military
token : but afterwards they made them of gold, as more stately and surpassing
the silver. The: Romnns first used silver tokens as being originally frugal and
saving; but at length they yielded to none, even not to the Persians, in luxury
pomp and shew,
Julius Caesar so highly prized the Batavians, in Ronian pay, that he made them
his body-guards; intrusting them likewise in the sharpest engagements, with the
carriage of the first and chief standards of the Roman eagles.
The Herculeans of the old troops, mentioned in the preceding chapter, bare
on their ensign a blue eagle with spread wings, in a silver field cornered with
gold.
The young Herculeans carried in th eir standards, a golden eagle sitting on a
stem of, a tree, in a blue field bordered with gold.
The new Jovinians had in their enfigns a golden eagle, with a diadem or royal
fillet about the head. This éagle was either black or brown, in a gold field, and
the wings werelset off with red and blue, and had a small gold-shield on his breast-
But







But those of the old troops carried a purple eagle adorned with red and gold in
a blue field.
The legions called quartodecimani, stationed in Thracia for the defence of these
countries, bare a pale blue eagle, sitting on a globe of bright and deep
blue, in a silver field bordered and centered with gold.
The divitenses, a legion of the Gauls, carried an eagle of faint scarlet and a
golden bull in a silver field.
The banner of the first company of life guards of the emperor Theodosius, com-
manded by a colonel of the foot, had the figure of an half man with extended
arms, holding in the right hand a rope, and in the left an hat; thereby inti-
mating, that the stubborn and rebellious should be chastised, and the obedient
made free.
In the second banner was a golden bull on the jut of a red hill, with a Moor
or black down to the middle, holding a piece of thick rope in the right hand,
and a cap or hat in the left; shewing that they might make prisoners and slaves,
and set men at liberty.
The Thracians carried the idol Mars in their standards.
The people of Smyrna, the image of Fortune. And,
The Corinthians, a Neptune, or the horse Pegafus.
The regiment called the Old Argivi of the East, commanded by the general
of the foot, had two leaping horses of gold, in a blue field.
The regiment of foot called the second of Theodosus, first established in his
reign, carried in its ensigns a golden horse in a red field bordered with
gold.
Another foot legion set up in the emperor Constaus’s time, whence it was called
Constantia, had also a golden horse in a sky blue field, and above him, in the
middle, a red globe, against which he was rearing and throwing. himself out
with all his might.
The Athenians, Cephalenians, Thessalians and Syracusans, also carried an horse.
The Gauls and Saxons had a lion, and the latter sometines an horse.
The Cimbrians bare a bull, whose figure cast they likewise carried on a lance at
the head of their armies.
The Armenians carried a ram, or a crowned lion.
The Cissians had also a lion.
The Asiatics, a large whale guided by a child, sitting astride on his
back. And,
The Goihs, a she-bear.
The banner of the Salii had two half wolves rearing up against each other, and
fixing their eyes on a rose which was over their heads, in a gold field bordered with
purple. It is no wonder these people blazoned the wolf, seeing they claimed Mars
as their protector.
The regiment of foot caHled Jovianum, which had the fifth post of honour
among the Romans, bare in the emperor Diocletianus’s time, a red hog sitting up-
right on its hinder parts, in a blue field bordered with gold : and for this reason;
the






the poets have feigned that Jupiter when achild and lying in the wood was nursed
by a sow, and this regiment having the name of Jupiter, it therefore carried the
hog in its standards, in memory of that occurrence.
The foot regiment of guards established by the emperor Honorius, bare two
demi-red hogs rearing against each other, in a silver shield and gold field.
The Trojans likewise carried an hog, in a gold field.
1
The Phrygians had also an hog.
The regiment called Tertiodecimani, had. a leaping blue dog, in a silver field
centered with gold, and bordered with dark blue.
From the time of Constantine the Great down to those of Theodosius, Honorius,
and several successive emperors, the Romans had a foot regiment called Menapii,
whose device was a leaping red dog, in a silver field, centred with a small gold
shield, and under it another dog, lying on his back and flinging up his legs. This.
bodv was in high esteem for the honour it gained in vanquifhing the Thracians.
The Cynopolitans bare Anubis, in the fhape of a dog.
The Cortonenses devised a silver dragon, in a red field ; on the sides were two
rings, that on the left of avery deep red, and the other of silver.
The Lacedemonians had the Greek letter A, or a dragon.
The Indians bare the image of Hercules; but their horse according to Suidas,
carried dragons.
The Nervii, being the body-bowmen
of the emperors, had for device, two
demi-caducei or wands twined with serpents, in a purple field bordered with gold
and red. In the centre of the shield was a
gold ring on a sinall gold column,
round which the afore said serpents winding, their upper parts making a semi-cir-
cle, and their heads regarding each other.
The Saguntiuns had for device two red ferpents; and as Ammianus says, of purple,
crossing each other, like the Greek letter X, in a fky-blue field bordered with
red.
The company of Bienians, serving under the general of the foot in Sclavonia,
bare in their banners a deep blue serpent with a bent tail towards the ground,
with a man’s head looking backwards, in a blue silver-like sield bordered with
gold.
The Marcomani had a gold demi-serpent in a silver field, and between the
fiead and the under part was a gold half moon.
The Curians bare a gold serpent coiled up, in a grey field bordered with silver
and blue checkers.
The legion of foot, called the sixth Parthian, serving in the East, had, for de-
vice, a yellow caduceus, or Mercury’s wand, in a blue hield edged with purple and
silver.
The legion of the angrivarii, carried a red staff topped with a round ball, out of
which issued two serpents, bending to the middle of the shield as if kissing each-
other, in a pale blue field, with a double edging of purple and gold.
Among the ancient legions was a regiment, called Valentiani, establishied by the
emperor Valens on his waging war with the Thracians; these carried in their stan-
dards
  






dards, a small red column and two half-moons of the-same colour, over two gol-
den hares jumping against each other in a silver field.
The Libyans had three hares.
The ensign of the Roman legion, called Augusta, was an exact red cat, set off
with gold, in a silver field, and turning her head side-ways, as if going backwards.
The Apini had a blue cat walking upright, in a crimson field, set off with
gold.
The ancient Alani, Bugundiones and Suevi, also carried a cat; thereby intima-
ting, that they could bear the yoke of servitude with as little stomach as the cat
cared to be locked up.
The Agyptians carried a crocodile, or else a cat.
Not long before the decay of the Roman monarchy, they had a legion in pay,
called Cornuti, whose device was a red falcon in a gold field, set off with blue and
red.
The inhabitants of Peloponnesas bare a tortoise.
The Baotians, a sphinx.
The Loerenses, a locust. And
The Aslyrians, in memory of Semirami a dove.
The Arcadians, who set up for tbe most ancient people in the world, and to
be co-aval with the moon, therefore carried the moon in their ensigns; and
sometimes, the god Pan, who is the emblem of the whole earth.
The Parthians had a broad sword or scimitar in the hand of a winged arm.
The Greeks, commonly had two crowns.
The Medes, three crowns.
The Macedonians, Hercules’s club between two horns.
The Cappadocians, a cup.
The Soythians, a thunder. Andt
The Phanicians, a sun and moon.
The ensign of the foot, called braccati juniores, an illustrious title among the
ancient Romans, was of a dark blue colour, having a star with eight points in
the upper part, and in the middle, a circle embellished with gold.
The Træzenenses bare a trident.
The imperial standard of the emperor Theodosius had a crofs, in which sign he
put all his confidence.
Constantine, in the battie with Maxentius, had for his banner, a long staff
having on top a crofs-piece, both plated with gold, and above, a crown, beset
with precious stones, on which were engraved the two first letters of the name of
Christ in Greek, to wit, à P in the middle of an X: a name he likewise bore on
his helmet : to, the aforesaid crofs-piece hung a pendant, embroidered with gold
and pearls: under the aforefaid name and the standard of the cross, he obtained
a glorious victory over the tyrant Maxentins.
Lucianus writes, that the Pentagon is the emblem of an happy enterprize and
good success, proceeding from the following consideration. Antiochus the First,
sirnamed Soier, i. e. Saviour, waging war with the Galatians, and perceiving, by
the daily increase of new dangers and difficulties, that the issue would not be so
prosperous






prosperous as he could. wissi, dreamed, or so pretended, in order to spirit his. sol-
diers, that he had conversation with Alexander the Great, who advised him to take
for his emblem, the common word of falutation, in Greek TrEIA, or, I wifhi you
health and prosperity, and to give it to his commanders and soldiers for the ge-
neral watch-word, and have it carried on their arms, shields and banners, as be-
ing to ferve him for a token of victory : whereupon he described to them the
fffape of this emblem ; which was, three triangles drawn through each other with
five lines, constituting a quintangular. figure, and on each angle one of the said
letters. Antiochus, having done this, obtained a flgnal victory over the Galatians.
There are still extant several coins and medals of Antiochus, bearing the said pen¬
tagon or quintangular figure.
The Argonauts, or thofe of Argos, had the letter Ain their ensign, as being their
mitial letter ; yet they bare likewise afox or rat.
The Jews had the letter T, the token of salvation.
The painted and engraved shields (in-reference to which, many of the learned
would derive the Latin word stutum, a shield, from sculptura, because it was cus-
tomary to engrave or reprefent glorious actions and histories upon them) were
anciently a certain sign of the valour of those who carried them : and, lest the sol-
diers in the heat of battle, fhould mistake their comrades, each legion, according
to Vegetius, had particular marks on their fhields; and on the infide of which was
written cach soldier’s. name, and what company he belonged to.
The shields or targets were of different makes at the place where they guarded
the hand: as, those of the first Armenian order had two indentures cut out down the
fides; as we have said in the forégoing chapter touching the shields of the Ama-
zons. These shields were of a fky-blue colour, with a silver field. Those of the
second Armenian order were quite round, of a. purple colour with a sky-blue field,
bordered with gold.
The Vesontians bare shields with four small ones at the angles, making a square,
two whereof were of silver, and the others of sky-blue, double bordered.
The fhield of the Menapii had a silver field with a gold dog in full speed, as if
running to. the outside.
The Mantineans bare in their arms and shiields, the Trident, as a sign, according
Pindarus, of their being citizens of that town.
The Romans, after Adrian’s-time, carried in their crescen-tlike shields, in a silver
fleld, two gold demi-horses curvetting against against each other, and called
Mauriferoces, or stout and fearleis; whereby some alude to Italy.
The Spartans bare a dragon.
The Greeès, the god Neptune.


The Trojans, Minerva.
The Lacedemonians carried the Greek letter A, for their signification. And
The Messenians, formerly an excellent and valiant people, an M, for the same
reason.
The Athenians often bare an owl in their arms.
The






The Jecos affirm, they were,the first who made distinction between people of
high and low degree, by particular tokens : accordingly, those who were of emi-
nent or noble families, wore in their shoes a- waxing moon.
The Assprians, Egyptians, Persians and Greeksfor that reason used the same token :
whence it is probable the Turks, in process of time, took it for their standard.
The Romans likewise, in token of nobility, wore a waxing moon on their shoes;
which therefore they called lunulati calceei.
The Athenians expressed the antiquity of their descent, by a grafshopper; as
Thucydides relates in the beginning of his history, stiling them Porticigalæ, from
their custom of wearing gold grasshoppers in their head-ornaments and their ge-
nerals the same on their helmets) for distinction between the foreign and native
Ancient writers assure us, that most heroes bare some device or other on their
shields; some of which I shall here set down, without regard to dignity, or pri-
ority of time wherein they lived.
Ofiris, sirnamed Janus, bare in his ensign, a sceptre topped with an eye; and
sometimes, with the addition of an eagle, the sun, or such like object: and lsis
carried a moon.
Hercules, called by some, the great Ofiris, bare a lion with a battle-ax in his
paws; or else the seven headed serpent, Hydra.
Mars had a wolf, and on his helmet, a magpye.
Pallas carried the head of Medusa on her shield and breast piece; and on each
side of her helmet, a griffin; and on top either a sphinx or owl.
Theseus’s device was a minotaur with a club on his shoulders; and oftentimes,
an oX.
Cadmus bare a dragon.
Castor had a silver star, in a blue field : and
Pollux, the same, in a red one.
Nimrod, the first king of Babel, bare a ram : And
Ninus and Semiramus, a dove ; to which the latter added a leopard, because he
had overcome and killed one.
Hector carried a lion sitting in a purple chair, with a halberd in his paws.
Ulysses a fox, and on his helmet, a dolphin.
Pausanias, in his Greek history relates, that the Elisians carved on Agamemnon s
shield, a lion’s head, in order to afright his enemies; and thus subscribed, et Be-
hold the terror of the world. 3
But Homer is more elegant in this description.
Pyrrhus bare an eagle; or, according to some, the Nine Muses, with Apollo on
Mount Helicon.
Achilles had an oak-tree.
And
Paris, a golden head.
Alcibiades s shield was of ivory and gold, and thereon a Cupid embracing the
thunder.
Alexander the Great bare a lion, and oftentimes the image of Victory; or else,
the Bucephalus, or a wolf, or a ram.








Ofcus, king of Tyrrhenum, now Tuscany, carried in his arms and shield, a ser-
pent, which according to Servius the Roman writer, was also the device of the
kings of Agypt.
Judas Maccabeus had a Basilisk.
Scipio Africanus bare the pictures ofhis father and uncle in his shield; and his
head-piece resembled an elephant’s head.
Scevola carried in his shield the picture of his heroic ancestor Mutius Scavola.
Antiochus had a rod twined with a serpent.
Octavianus Augustus, a sphinx.
Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, the same.
Seleucus, a bull.
Lucius Papirius Cursor, the horse Pegasus.
Epaminondas, a dragon.
Pompey the Great, a lion with a sword in his paws : this was also the device
of his seal-ring, delivered after his death to Julius Caesar.
Julius Caesar, carried in his standard these
words, THE MOTHERVENUS; and
on his shield, a double-headed eagle.
And
Sylla’s device was ApoLlo oF DELPHOS.
Marius’s, the lares, or houshold gods.
Maecenas bare a frog. And
Vospasiamts, the head of Medusa.
He who would have a thorough account of the shields, targets, helmets, &c.
of the Greeks, Trojans, and other nations, may satisfy his curiosity in Homer and
Virgil, in their copious and elegant descriptions.
The End of the ELEVENTH BOOK.












TH E
ARI of Painting
XII.
BOOK
Of FLOWERS.
Emblem touching Flowers.
Youthfal Flora sits here attired in Blue, Tellow, and Red, attended by foar
Children representing the Four Seasons, each dressed in a Garment or
Drapery of the Coulour peculiar to him, and dancing with Flowers and
Fruits, which they present to her.
CHAP. I. Of Flowers in general.
XXX
THE spring being the most delightful seafon of the year, it is no


wonder that flowers have a particular charm above other ob-



jects; and this not only in nature, but also in a painting; which



though ever so indifferent, lovers often prefer before a fine piece of

hiftory or landscape.
It is remarkable, that amidst the various choices in the art of painting, none is
more feminine, or proper for women than this; and the reason is plain. Itis
also to be noted, that of those choices one is as- perfect as the other, with respect to
art were it ever so singular; and though this choice is but a small part of the whole,
yet







yet it is attended with as many excellencies : for as a bunch of grapes carries its per-
fection, so the least grain does the fame. But though both the parts as well as the
whole, fall under the fame rules, and one master understand his branch as well as the
ocher; yet he who has from his youth applied himself to this or that single choice, let
has progrefs therein be what it will, can perform nothing else that is good. We have
many instances of excellent mafters who departed from the general to particular
choices with applause,but of none who have done the contrary without discredit. I
reckon discredit as bad an exchange as copper for gold, or water for wine. Of the for-
mer fort are innumerable Italian and French as well as Looo Duich masters; but of the
latter few, among whom Vereist alone claims the laurel, to the wonder of those who
knew him when he painted flowers: for if ever a painter excelled in that branch, he
was the person : neither Mario da Fiori, father Segers, or de Heem came up to such
a pitch; and yet through a bad exchange, he at last fell from an agreeable spring
sons : first in confirmation of my asfertion, that he who can perform the most difficult
things, may easily, even without trouble attain those of less consideration; but
not the contrary without disadvantage and discredit. Secondly, because my de-
sign is to treat of flowers, as an effectual admonition to those who would bestow
their time with advantage on that single choice.
Flower painting is certainly a commendable study ; but as there are double and,
single slowers, so there are two forts of flower painters; the one singular and simple
and the other rich and ingenious; of which latter sort we have but few, and
of the former abundance. Three things are especially necessary in a good flower-
piece, first, choice and beautiful flowers : secondly good disposition and harmo-
ny : and lastly, neat and soft penciling. First, the flowers must not be poor or
lying or standing, they always keep their proper quality and shape, i. e. that
the round seem not by too extravagant a spread to be triangular, square or ob-
long, whereby to mistake one flower for another; that the most noble and beau-
tiful have the predominancy, and that by their placing they produce an agree-
able mixture of coulours, delighting and satisfying the eye; consisting in so
ordering the strong and striped with the faint ones, as to exhibit a lovely rain-
bow. Lastly, that each flower be well expressed according to its nature and
quality ; as one thin, another thick, this soft and limber, that set and stiff; one
shining, another dull and glossless.
We are in the next place to suppose, that it is impossible to be a master
without a firm and exact draught, and thorough acquaintance with perspective, to-
gether with good knowledge of the colours and  their bodies, and which will
stand best; and lastly, a due enquiry into the nature of slowers, that they may
be handled accordingly.
He who would follow this study in good earnest, ought to be master of a flow-
er garden, which he should carefully cultivate, that he may in the seasons, be
furnished with sine and choice flowers : for though modelling be a great affist-







ance in winter practice, when ’the life is not to be had, yet no perfection at--
He who is afirm and nimble draughtsman, and a good
tainable without the life.
manager of water colours has a double advantage, and may in time get a treafure
of beautiful modelled flowers, bearing good prices and great esteem among the
curious. After the flowers, the green leafing of them is of great importance,
through its various qualities and difference in texture and colour, causing a flow-
er piece to look natural and more decorous.
CHAP. II. Of painting Flowers in Halls, Apartments, Galleries,
but principally on Cielings for Ornament.
T is the business of a good flower painter principally to aim at what is praise-
worthy. What great things, what glorious occasions is there for a master’s
famel But this lies not always in the representations of garlands of slowers,
pots, glafs-bottles, butterflies, flying beetles, cobwebs, or drops of water,
any more than in neat penciling and bright colours, with which we think to
set the world in a gaze. Such trifles are too low, and the repetition too irksome,
for the taste of noble fouls. What opportunities do not daily happen in palaces,
gardens, galleries, and apartments, for shewing our skill and ingenuity ; Suppose
to yourself a lofty room built with white marble, and set out with fine pictures
and bass-reliefs, for the common recreation of young gentlemen and ladies:
this room may be embellished above, and on each side of the niches, with fine
and large festoons of flowers: between the pilasters and over the bass-reliefs
much green ; yet somewhat lefs in case any landscapes be there ; and on the
white marble may be all sorts of beautiful coloured flowers. On red marble con-
trarily, white and yellow ones, &c. according to the rules of art, and in large
parts : now light, then again dark leafing as the matter and ground require.
But of the several grounds and colours of flowers suitable to them, we shall here-
after treat particularly. On the cieling there may be thin branches of airy foil-
age, also intermixed with slowers, here festoon-ways, there in groups, sastened
with ribbons or rings, and having in some places loose sprigs and leaves project-
ing from the ground, and returning their proper shades thereon (which though
the life is not to be had, may by some such made things be performed) that
they may seem more naturaly to hang off. Such flowers and leaves ought to
be strongly and boldly handled, but yet so as to seem fastened to the work ; well
considering the colour and lightnefs or darkness of the ground, and chusing for it
flowers of such colours, that some may look as if sticking to it, and others
coming off. Now if many festoons be to hang in such a place or room, they
must needs have a like length, breadth, and fullness, and be placed equally
high or low. What difference is it to us, whether the proprietor desire to have
slowers or fruits, or a mixture of botht For the festoons may be filled with
peaches,







peaches, apricots, mulberries, plumbs, &c. hanging on their twigs. Over the
representation of a bacchanal some bunches of white and blue grapes, intermix-
ed with pine-apples look becoming. On the alcove may hang loosely over it
papavers of all sorts of colours, interspersed with poppies, tied here and there
with ribbons, as most proper for that place.
Why should not such sorts of ornament be agreeable when naturally dis-
posed and painted ; especially if well lighted, and the ground shades duly expres-
sed on the ground; The company before-mentioned may possibly raise mirth
enough among themselves; but so pleasant a sight must needs be a great
addition to it. Let us therefore take hold of every opportunity that offers, and
in the mean time exercise our talents in the attainment of a great handling. Let
us exchange our small cloaths for whole walls ; our pots and bottles for vases;
and a mudling for a beautiful manner. Let us enquire what flowers are painter-
like, and which the principal; conjoining their sense, application, and colour
together with their proper grounds.
CHAP. III. That a Flower-painter should understand Perspective :
Also the Mistake of representing Things improperly.
TE have already asferted, that a good flower painter must needs under-
stand perspective; and yet (which is to be lamented) few know any
thing of it; possibly, supposing they have no occasion for it, and that therefore
this branch is so much easier than history, or any thing else which cannot sub-
sist without perspective, as indisputably requiring more by-works, viz. archi-
tecture, landscape, or other object causing ground shades, which never hrppen in
their work’: and should they at any time be non-plus’d, they can get help from those
who are acquainted with perspective. If therefore they have but a point of sight,
they think that sufficient; and yet not for the sake of the flowers, but solely for the
corner of a marble table or slab whereon they set a flower glass, as if the light-
ing or shading of the flowers were a matter of indifference; this from a-side, that
fronting, one from below, another from above ; whence their pieces have usually
many points of sight, sometimes as many as there are flowers. But it cannot be
otherwise, since they often paint after models ; placing a slower on the left side,
which stood before on the right, and the contrary, or else below or above ; which
they imagine no-body will discover because they cannot see it themselves.
Another ridiculous custom of some flower painters, in my opinion is, that in
painting any glossy bodies, such as flower glasses, gold, silver, or copper, vases,
after the life, they fail not to shew therein the panes of the windows, and after-
wards to hang the pictures in halls and galleries which have none. Here let
me take notice of an extraordinary nice and finished piece of that nature, paint-
ed by a certain known gentlewoman, wherein not only some stalks of the slow-
ers






ers appeared naturally through the glafs, but afso her own picture in her posture
of painting, with such an air, as evidently shewed it was she who sat in it; nor
did she forget to represent also the windows and panes, sky and clouds. We need
not question, whether she endeavoured by the depth of her penetration, to sur-
pass her master in that piece of work. This case is a-kin to that of a certain
young artist, who painting a looking glass fronting, brought into it all that ap-
peared behind him : people could not be persuaded it was a looking-glafs, though
painted dark and dull, and it had a frame about it; and his protestations, that
every thing was taken from the life, stood him in little stead ; wherefore to salve
the matter as he thought, he painted himself in the looking-glass sitting at his
easel ; and to make it more perfect underwrit, ee This is a looking glass, and
that is-me.
CH AP. IV, Of Flowers on all Sorts of Grounds.
HAT white is set off by black, and the contrary, needs no demonstration;
and on the other hand, white on white, and black on black, causes a
sticking together; of which particular notice ought to be taken, that slowers
may have their due force and effect; so ordering them, that some seem to stick
to the ground, and others to come off from. it, The most proper grounds for
flowers are these.
The colour of blue tomb-stone-
Dark-olive or green serpentine.
Light-grey freestone.
White marble, but of a second tint.
This observation would rather spoil a good ordonnance than have the desired
effect, if we did not maturely weigh what uses we would put thefe grounds to,
as also where the flowers most properly ought to have the greatest strength, and
where the greatest weakness, in order that the principal (I mean, the fixed stone
and wood work) may not thereby be overpowered. T say strengh, with respect to
force and beauty ; but I mean not by weakness, that the colour, light or shade
should be weakened or sullied : however I shall in the sequel, explain what I mean
by that word.
Any colour suits on white; but the darkest most beautifully. Warm colours
are preferable to the broken ones, and the most weak ought to be on the extre-
mities; but sew white ones, and those with caution. What I now say concerns
the disposition; which I shall more plainly handle in treating of festoons and
groaps of flowers.
The black grounds, though quite different from the preceding with respect
to great force can give little reffexion, and therefore do not admit of light or







weak slowers ; but neverthelefs fall under the same rules and observations as flow-
ers on a white ground ; because the greens by their union, have a relation to the
ground and colour.
Red and yellow suit not but with dark grounds.
All flowers and greens look well on a grey ground.
All weak flowers, as violet, light purple, blue, apple-blossom and white,
agree with a warm ground.
Flowers have a particular decorum on a gold or silver ground; and still
greater on copper or bronze, by reason of their darkish lustre; since the colour of
gold is too strong, and that of silver too pale.
v

CHAP. V. Of the Disposition of Flowers and their Colours in
Festoons and Groups.
YYAVING hitherto treated of flowers in general, we shall now prooed to
their disposition in groups and festoons.
I
b. I shall compose each group of particular emblematic colours, as-yellow, red,
purple, violet, blue and white; which l consider as follows.
The first group yellow, having for its principal flower a turnsol, African or
marigold,, anemone, &c. which I stile upper power or eternity.
The second red, as peonies, papavers, roses, &c. signifying power or might,
The third, purple flowers, roles, papavers, tulips, &c. implying nobility.
The fourth, violet, as fritillaria or fritillary, &c. signifying inconstancy.
The fifth, blue as iris convolvolus or bind-weed, implying constancy.
The sixth, white, as the lilly or white rose, &c. signifying purity.
It must be observed, that though in these groups the capital flowers be of a
particular colour, yet they will admit of other small ones about them of vari-
ous eolours suiting therewith; as,
With the yellow, purple, violet and blue.
Red, light-yellow, apple-blossom, dark blue and white-
Purple, white, yellow and light blue.
Violet, fose-colour, orange, light red and afh-blue.
Blue, purple, orange, light yellow and white.
Two capital colours, as deep yellow, vermilion or blue must never be placed
or upon one another.
by
White suits any where, except on deep yellow or deep red.
Dark green agrees with all light flowers. And,
Pale green with dark flowers.
Under these groups, there should always be either a motto or verse.
As for festoons, they may be handled in the same manner, yet with less con-
finement : if the emblematic colour have but the middle place that is sufficient :
the other parts may be filled up with such colours as we please, provided they
have somewhat less brightness than the principal : for instance, let the mid-
die






die flowers be large and high coloured, as Africans or marigolds, yellow and
red ; on the right side may be purple, as rofest, anemones; and on the left blue,
as iris flos principius, hyacinths, &c. The purple side mixed with little white and
less yellow ; the blue side, with yellow and red; and the yellow in the middle,
with violet dark blue, little purple and white.
In a second festoon, white may possess the middle place, as white roses, lillies
and others; on the right side may be yellow, and on the left pale red. The yel-
low may be diversified with purple, violet and dark blue, the red with pale yel-
low, white, violet and dark blue ; and the white in the middle, with rose colour,
violet, purple and beauriful red.
In the middle of athird festoon, may be red, as papavers, anemones, &c. On
the right side, striped flowers of purple and yellow, violet, and pale yellow, di-
versisied with dark blue and beautiful red ; but on the other side, all plain
flowers.
The white may be intermixed with slowers of any colour, except light yellow.
The intermixture consists of small flowers : but the single coloured, whether in
the middle or largest, as also those on the sides require their particular small di-
versifying flowers, i. e. the single coloured with speckled or striped; and the
-contrary.
If either group or festoon, full or close flowers should always be placed in the
most relieved part. The open ones are mostly set on the sides in order to create
shade. For instance, let the middle part of a festoon have the largest, finest and
fullest slowers, such as red and white roses, papavers, &c. Between the middle
and the extremities, a lesser sort, as tulips, anemones, narcissuses or daffodils,
gilli-flowers, malva rosea, &c. Further towards the extremities, the more long
and smaller ones, as astragalus, ranunculus or crow-foot, convolvolus, flos
principis, borage, barbatum nigri, violets, &c.
On the relief of the festoon, between the largest and middle fort, may be a
mixture of the smallest flowers. If the middle flower be yellow, those further off
ought to be purple or red, and such as are towards the corners white and blue;
the longer the weaker, that the strongest colour may keep the middle. But if
white have the middle place, the other parts must not eclipse it with yellow and
red.
A complete festoon must have an orderly disposition, not only with respect to
the flowers themselves, whether large or small, but also in the placing of double
and single ones : as first, white roses and centifoliae, next single roses, and lastly
wild blossoms.
As for the colours, there are single and half coloured flowers : the single co-
loured are peonies, rofes, &c. and the others striped or speckled with two or
more colours ; as anemones with white and red, striped roses, tulips, &c. Which
ought to be so regularly ordered, as to raise in the eye a balancing mixture, and
to unite the strong and weak, that the one do not project too much, and the other
too little, and that at a distance, and at one view, the festoon may have its due
sway. Yet if here or there it be either too weak or too strong, you must recol-
lect






Wherefore observe, that yellow and red are strong
lect how it may be thelped.
colours; and contrarily, blue and violet weak. If too much yellow and red
come together, place somewhat blue or violet between ; and if too much blue or
violet, some yellow or red.
To begin a festoon well, you ought first to mark out its course as you will have
it, either thick or thin : next lay on the green with such leafing as you think
proper, but somewhat large and with due light and shade according to its light,
Being dry, lay in the flowers flat, first the principal, each in its place, with a
single colour, red, blue or yellow, of such atint as will best admit of painting
upon it, the light and shade after the life’ or models. The flowers between with
their leafing, are put in over the green, on finishing. The grounds, whether plain
or in bass relief or other ornament, ought to be neatly finished with the first green,
to save you the trouble afterwards of paring away something here and there.
CHAP. VI. Continuntion of the ordering and placing the Flowers..
ry-WO observations ef consequence in a festoon, group, or garland, still
rémain ; to wit, the ordering the flowers and their places of hanging.
Jt is easy to conceive, that many small things coming together, produce, at a
distance, only a confused mafs, and little affect the senses as having nothing in
them to make any impression, or is worth remark and though each flower have
it is particular name, shape, and colour, yet they are only considered in general,
under the name of flowers; because of their being placed either too high or too
distant. Such festoons or groups look well on paper and in hand, or on tea-tables,
toilets and the like, either in painting or needle-work. On the other hand, large
flowers may be seen distinctly at a distance, in their qualities, shapes and beauties.
Then each flower gets a name; this is a rose, that a papaver, &c. In a word,
festoons, groups or garlands, placed high, or to be viewed at some distance,
ought to be disposed in great maffes, and separate, with few speckled or striped
flowers, either large or small, as having no effect-but. when seen near. Where-
fore it is necessary to take, in their steads, others of single colours, in order to set
off the work with more force and distinction, and to give the eye satisfaction.
For this reason, when’seen in hand, they ought to, unite, and out of hand, to
look more seperate and distinct. But I shall explain this by some examples;
chusing two groups, one agreeably uniting so as to be viewed near, and the other
the contrary.









In the middle of the former is a white rose, and behind it a centifolia, behind
which is a purple, and behind that a peony. Now these four colours differ but
half a tint from each other, composing together an half ball gradually rounding.
The latter contrarily, though having also a white flower in the middle, has be¬
hind it a purple one, and behind that a dark violet, a colour darker than that of
the peony. And these will create a greater force than the former, as starting
more suddenly from each other, and differing a whole tint, as the others did but
an half-one. Whence it is evident, that the more distinct the tints are, the more
lively and strong they will appear.
For further satisfaction, Ishall subjoin five other examples of festoons, as full
again as those in the preceding chapter, since they sometimes happen to be of
different sizes, and therefore requiring more flowers. I divide them thus.
Thé First.
In the middle yellow, next white, then purple or violet ; and lastly, yellow.
a
The other side the same.
The Second.
In the middle white, next yellow, further blue, and the last yellowisn white.
The other side the same.
The Third.
In the middle red; next blue, then yellow, and lastly violet. The other side
the fame.
The Fourth.
111.. 2.21
The
yéllow, then blue, and lastly light red.
In the middle purple, next pale
other side the same.
The Fisth.
In the middle violet, next orange and other yellow, then blue, red and violet.
The same on the other side.
The three last ought to be intermixed with white, and the two first with variety
of colours, as it best suits, in order to- unite the parts with each other.
Three sorts of flowers are proper for intermixture, vizi yellow, red and blue,
all in their greatest beauty.
If the work consist mostly of red and yellow, it'ought to be intermixed with
blue; and if of blue, you must take yellow; but if of all three, you are to use
white, so distributing it as to refresh the eye. 
NoW, for proof of all that has beën. faid, I shall shew here two methods of
great use to a flower painter, though they may seem trifling.
Painting all sorts of flowers on cards or pasteboard, as rude as you please, even
but a single spot for each, and five or six of each colour, or as many as there are
tints,







tints, red, blue, purple, yellow, violet. Let these be capital flowers.
make smaller ones for intermixture, of red, blue, yellow, and white, as beautiful
as possible. Cut all these afunder, and lay each colour orderly by itself in a little
box. Then paint up a green festoon or group on pasteboard, and thereon place
such flowers as you please, shifting and changing them according to your design.
And thus you will perceive the truth of what has been before spoken.
The other method is this. Take à parcel of slowers of all sorts, made of paper
or filk, and with wired stalks, as they are sold by the tire-women. Now, if you
would make a group, festoon, or basket of flowers, or any such thing, order and
shift those flowers by and upon one another, as.- they suit best; and thus you may
exercise yourself in winter time, when you cannot have the life; because those
flowers never wither. Green festoons may also be furnished after the same man-
ner, and flowers hung on them according to your desire.
, E ;












Of ENGRAVInG.
Since neither Caesar Ripa nor any other Author gives us the Figure of the Art
of Engraving, with its Signification, I shall here make it preliminary:
and, in the Sequel, shew what Respect is- due to this Art by its Reflexions
and even relating Properties with that of Painting.
CHAP. I.


HIS beautiful virgin sitting at a table, has before her a copper-plate


lying on a sand-bag, and near it stands a little monkey,
placing a



 lighted lamp before her. She is attended by Prudence
and Dili-

gence ; and Practice is setting the tools on an oil-stone.
Her chair

is of ebony, adorned with figures of Sincerity and Assiduity, wrought
in ivory, and mutually embracing; behind which stands Judgment, shewing her
a little further Painting, accompanied by Apollo and Diana. He holding up his
torch in order to enlighten Sculpture, and she her’s, reversed, with purpose to
extinguishit. The genii, in the mean time, are every where busy in providing
necestary materials. The eldest offers her a drawing either redded or whitened on






the back, and a point or needle for tracing it on the plate. This drawing repre-
sents the design she is going about. Others in an inner apartment, aré employed
in heating a plate on a chafing-dish, and laying the ground even with- a feather.
Here one is etching, there another biting a plate; others taking and viewing
proofs with great attention and. pleasure, &c. while Fame, having a proof of a por-
trait in-her hand, with her trumpet sounds out at window the praises of masters
or engravers. Honour crowned with laurel and bearing a small pyramid is entering
the room, ufhiering in Aanona, or Prosperity, who has a cornu copiae or horn
filled with fruits. Round the room are set on pedestals, divers busts of famous
etchers and engravers ; as Marc Antony, Audran, Edelinck, Vander Meulen, and
several other ltalian and French as well as Duich and German masters. In the off-
scape, Europe, Asia and Africa appear standing in surprise at the sound of the
trumpet.
CHAP. II. Of the Art of Engraving in general.
THAT I may treat of this art in a methodical manner, I think proper to ob-
I. serve flrst, wherein its excellence consists ; secondly, its performance;
and lastly, the qualifications of an etcher and engraver.
The art of engraving is questionless noble and praise-worthy, because it re-
spects painting, as painting does nature : for, as the latter has nature for its mo-
del or object, which it faithfully imitates with the pencil ; so engraving likewise
copies painting, either with the needle or graver, in such manner as only to stand
in need of colours-; which when required, may be added to it. Painting con-
sists in a neat and good outline, proportion, light and snade : and these are also
the foundations of engraving. Painting distinguisnes between common light and
sunshine : engraving does, or can do the sanie. In. fine, whatever the one per-
forms with the pencil, the other can express with the needle or graver, and as
neatly, whether sluffs of all kinds, wool, silk, sattin, linen, glass, water, gold,
wood, stone, &c.
Its performances are to the sight, what fame is to the ear. Painting has but
one original, but engraving hundreds. Fame can tell the many wonders of paint-
ing in its absence; but engraving makes itself every where present ; slying over
the universe, as well as the sounding trumpet of fame. It keeps an eternal re-
gister of every thing that is praise-worthy : and as the intire welfare, even happi-
ness or unhappiness of a good painter, depends on the certainty or uncertainty of

the engraver, as Ishall shewin my remarks on prints after paintings or designs
so the latter ought to disengage himself from prejudice and inclination to this or
that particular manner, and exert his sxill in an exact imitation of what he is to
engrave or etch after any manner or any master, be it flat or rising, dark or light,
without addition or diminution, except with the licence of the painter or designer.







His work must be like a clear looking-glass, which exhibits all objects true and
without falsity. As to the manual operation, a fine handling is a great step to
grace ; and in order to it, the knowledge of three things is absolutely necessary,
to wit, the art of drawing, perspective, and the doctrine of light and shade :
these as principals, compose the theory of the whole work. He ought also to be
very diligent in hatching with the pen or red chalk, in order thereby to get a firm
handling: and it behoves him as well as the painter, to draw after the naked life
and dressed laymen. He should likewise be furnished with prints, both engraved
and etched, of the most famous masters.
CH AP. III. Of the general Elegance requisite in a good Print; and
of the Difference between Book and other Prints.
4a
HHE grace of a well-etched or engraved print confists first, in a bright light.
4
and dark shade ; by which I understand that the faint hatching on the
lighted parts be kept almost imperceptible, and the shady touches contrarily
strong and. dark. Secondly, that the naked, or carnations, be hatched fine and
somewhat dull, and the draperies courser and rougher, accordingto their qualities;
yet all without any outline, either on the light or shaded side, even so that the ex-
tremities be only formed by the tint of the grounds against which they come.
But to give the work the greatest perfection, and shew the judgment of the
master, the tints of the colours should also appear as much as possible : yet as a
print does not so intirely consist of fine ordonnance, beautiful figures, elegant
by-works, and neat cut or etched strokes, as in a good general harmony, so this
harmony ought to be principally studied.
The engraver will be commendable, sometimes to express in his work the co¬
lours, if the matter require it ; such as the white and black in the day and night,
good and bad angels or spirits, &c. These two observations are absolutely neces-
sary in a book-print: the others before-mentioned are only requisite in such as
represent a complete picture : for there is a great difference between book and
other prints : the former express the matter which is represented, even were it
designed in white marble, bafs relief, nay, in snow or sand; and the latter con-
sider only the master who painted it, and his art, together with that of the engraver
and his capacity. For this reason, book-prints stand in need of explanation, but
other prints not : for the colour is in the one, what the writing is in the other.










CHAP. I. of the Difference of Engraving and Etching.
ACCORDING to the general opinion, and not without reason, etching
is accounted more loose and designer-like than engraving, because

there is no difference between etching and drawing, as to the handling;
but the difference between drawing and engraving is very great. The
management of the needle is the same with that of chalk or the pen :
the plate lies flat and firm like the paper to draw upon. But wefind the contrary
in engraving ; wherein the graver is held almost parallel with the plate, and the
latter is moveable on a qushion or sand-bag. And as to force, there is also less
occasion forit in etching than engraving.
Now to prove that etching must needs be more designer-like than engraving,
let us only make our remarks on both in the course of their bufinefs, each having
a design before him; and then we shall find the reason to be, that in the one, both
the drawing and plate are fixed before the artist, and he only moves his hand ;
whereas the other cannot go forward without stirring, the plate being continually
turning, and both the hand and arm employed in directing the graver; by which
means, engravers are often hindered from perceiving the difference between their
work and the pattern, before a part, nay the whole be finished. Wherefore, in
my opinion, etching is superior to engraving in exactnefs and speed. I say speed,
because three or more plates may be etched before one can be engraved. Etching
is also most designer-like, because of its near affinity with drawing, as we daily
experiment; for where one painter or designer engraves for his pleasure, an hun-
dred take to etching, and make good progrefs therein ; because of the slow ad-
vances in engraving compared to etching, whether in figures or buildings, but
especially landscape. And since painters or designers care not to have their de-
signs censured and corrected by others, they chule rather to etch them themselves
than to set about engraving; an art not to be mastered without much expence of
time, in getting knowledge how to handle the tool, whereby it would become
rather labour than diversion.
Many engravers etch for pleasure, because of its easiness; but seldom any etcher
handles the graver, unless in case of necessity. Tothis perhapsit may be objected,
that as each painter or designer has a particular choice wherein he labours most,
as one in the ordonnance, another in nicety of draught, and a third in the neat
finishing of some particular things, therefore the title of designer-like in etching,
is not absolutely due to painters or designers. To which l answer, that undoubt-
edly the word must not be understnod to relate to modern designers, because it
was in, use before etching was brougt to its present perfection; as appears by
Caracci, Titian, Antonio Tempesta, &c. who excelled in design, andused the needle
with noother view than to give the world the designs, which they counted capital
and most praise-worthy, for the encouragement and consideration of the less
knowing.






knowing. Whereby we plainly perceive, that their intention was only to put
forth their own performances in such a manner as safely to be relied on ; accord-
ingly, we scarce see any more in them than an out-line : but this is so firm
and correct, that however slightly the other parts may be scratched, these works,
thus, of their own hands, are more valued than those of the best and most famous
engravers or etchers.
We have example in the print of the woman by the well, etched by Caraea
bimself, how much it differs from that done by Le Potre, and another by Bissop.
What a vast difference is there between. Perrier’s and Bissiop’s works; as
to the designer-likeness and looseness of-handling. And in landscapes, between
Titian’s and Perelle’s, 1 could, if need required, produce more proofs of the an-
tiquity of the word, designer-like; but shall wave them, and acquaint the read-
er how oddly I took to etching, and how strangely 1 drudged before I could
gain my point.
Having in mny youth an inclination for etching, but no knowledge of what
was good or bad. as seeing no other examples than the old and poorly en-
graved prints of Raphael, Michael Angelo, Paul Veronese, Tintoret, &c. which yet
were excellent for their fine out-line, and few etched ones; my slender at-
tempts may be easily guessed at. Indeed I cannot but still think of it
with wonder; for I began not with copper or steel, but a piece of pew-
ter and a nail about a finger’s length, which with great pains, I ground to
a point after my own way, first I tried only singie strokes, and then cross-
hatching, which looked strange enough. And instead of a rolling-press, I
rubbed the backsides of my proofs with the nail.. This however did not
abate my curiosity; which daily encreased, though my work appeared so
black as to be scarce intelligible. My father seeing this, could not forbear
laughing; and for humour sake, gave two or three of my proofs to Bartho-
let, and he again to Natalis the famous engraver, who bestowed on me some
little instruction and a small copper-plate to try on. But what drudgery
had I undergone before I scratched this beautiful plate l Bosse’s Book of etch-
ing happening to be publisned about that time, I left off plaguing myself,
and cheerfully set about splitting of wood, providing needles, boiling grounds,
cleaning plates, buying aqua-fortis, wax, &c. When before, I knew of no
better ground than thick and foul oil, out of the smushi-pot, boiled to a
blackneis; which gave me no little trouble to get off the plate again after it
was bit, and which therefore 1 was obliged to put into the fire till it was
soft as lead. Things so far succeding to my wishi, I happened to see some
prints of Vovet from France, which spurred my curiosity: and f should cer-
tainly have made early and good progress, had not my father Leen fearful I
might six my thoughts on this study to the neglect of painting. Wherefore
he dissuaded me from it, saying. it was too soon to enter on so difficult a
pastime; and instructing me in other things as delightful as advantageous.
Marrying some years after, I went to Holland, were 1 re-asumed this noble
art with great pleasure, and which 1 do not repent of; though some think
it the cause of my misfortune. The truth of this God knows : yet had I
saved









faved candle and ufed more day-light for it, perhaps my old age might
have proved more comfortable to me; but alasl those two noble sisters,
painting and etching, are now vanished with my sight.
Let the reader judge, whether he ever heard of a stranger way of etch-
However, 1 mention it here to shew, that a diligent man, getting
ing.
better instruction, may in time gain his point. It is certain, that few young
men would have had patience enough to drudge as l did, without instruction;
but that an industrious tyro, after leaving his master, may possibiy improve
through diligence and study is very natural; even so as to excel him in
neatness, smoothnefs and expedition, as well in etching as engraving, I mean
in the use of the graver and needle, but not in knowledge. By knowledge
I understand keeping the likeness of a beautiful face, hands, and feet, accord-
ing to what we say in the second chapter, that the knowledge consists in a
correct out-line, proportion; light and shade, and perspective : for we com-
monly see the greatest faults committed in the aforesaid parts, for want of know-
ledge, and not inuring themselve to draw by hand large things after small, and
the contrary, but accustoming themselves to squaring; a practice not difficult
to a swineherd’s boy, if he understood the division of squares and management
of chalk. But they may yet be eroneous in tracing their object on the plate,
though drawn upon squares; for missing the out-line in the least either inward-
ly or outwardly, it presently becomes too little or too big: but the tyro cannot
see this for want of due knowledge : and though he may be sensible, that here
or there he has a little missed the out-line, yet he passes it over as a matter
of no great moment; and if he propose to help it in etching or engraving, he
may possibly forget it before he come so far in the work : he commonly thinks
no further than what is already on the plate. Whence we may easily conclude,
that he who knows what constitutes beauty, can be as little sensible that a small
difference in a face, arm, or hand, is of any great consequence. Another diffi-
culty, no less than the former, is, that though the tyro have the out-line cor-
rectly drawn on the plate, yet he may run over it when he comes to shade or
hatch. And as this fréquently happens, I shall here give the reason of it.
In either engraving or etching anything, the off-work, whcther buildings,
landscape, or even grounds, ought always to be begun first, that by reserving
the principal things for the last, the hand may be prepared to handle them
with more boldness. Now the tyro being to engrave or etch a ground be-
hind his figure, be it naked or dressed, he will not only (especially in engraving )
end his hatching against the out-line, but sometimes exceed it ; whereby the
parts, whetiier arm, leg, or hand, must needs loose their truc proportion and
quality : gatthus the almost imperceptible and tender rising muscles, folds,
the work goes on; and when they come to sce the mistake, they scrape, burn-
isn and rub, to bring it right again; which I grant is well enough in case of
need. But alas l hoy seldom is it practised ; ff it be something of no great
consequence, it remains as it was without further inspection. This l know not
by hearsay but experience, Wherefore they who have an inclination for en-










graving, should apply to a painter for instruction in beautiful proportion, and
in drawing every thing by hand, whether prints, drawings, paintings, plaister-
figures, even the life itself. For painters first teach the theory, or knowledge of
proportion, and then the practice of colouring; whereas many engravers begin
with the practice or handling,
As for the scraping, burnishing, and rubbing out, before-mentioned, it is a
point which ought to be well understood, because it affects not either the too
great darkness or hardness of the hatching, but the out-line; as I shall shew by
the example of the faces in plate LXIX.
In the face A, the hatched ground runs over the out-line of the cheek ; where-
by it appears more sunk in, as in that of B, and thus the out-line is lost. Now
this face being to be finished, and the cheek brought right again, so much must
be scraped off within the line as to give the chcek the former swell; and if the
face be a fourth part less, the difference will be so much the greater, especially
in a portrait, and greater still if it be in profile ; as face C shiews, wherein we see
how little soever be taken off with the ground from the tip of the nose, mouth,
and chin, it will produce another aspect: whence it it is evident, what a vast
alteration this must cause in the likeness.
In this art as well as painting, it is a constant rule to be begin with the
painters : for when the principal figures are finished, the whole piece is reckoned
into the work ; here somewhat more strength, there more faintness, &c. But
what we now speak of, to wit, scraping, concerns engraving only ; whereas in
etching, nothing is done but stopping, unless things are already bit.
If it be afked, whether what is stopped up can be repaired -before
it is bit ; as in A, when the hatching, which takes away the swell from the
cheeks, is stopped up with stop-ground, Whether then the former roundness can-
not be fetched out with a fine needle on the same ground, that all may bite to-
gether , l answer, that this will make bad work : but if something be wanting,
it must be touched up with the graver. However, I shall shew another method :
make a burnissier pretty hot, and rub it gently and speedily over the part you
would have out, and then it will close up the hatching, so that you need neither
stop up nor bite. Now etch thereon what is necessary, and thus all may be bit
at once. These observations, especially that of not carelessly spoiling the out-line
as in the examples A and C, are very needful.
Let any person now consider, how little a fine ordonnance of a famous maf-
ter, when put out of hand in such a condition can be like the original. And
vet this is too often the case. However, l assert, that without the former know-
ledge it is impossible to become a good master. For he who makes a Blunder-
ing design, and perceives not the mistakes to be apparent and convincing, can-
not possibly mend them. Even great masters sometimes blunder; as we see in
Audran’s battles of Alexander after Le Brun, what poor hands and fingers he has
made in some places, as thin as pencil-sticks; especially those which are wide
open, as the captive Porus, and in Darius. I cannot too much wonder, that
in




















































































in so glorious a work, Audran did not correct such mistakes, since he was one of
the best engravers ever known. This indeed is but a small matter with respect
to so great a work ; nevertheless it makes the same imperfect and becomes a
charge upon Le Brun. But this work had less justice done it here in Holland in
the copies of Schoonebeek, who seems to have used his utmost endeavours to.
spoil it: for there is neither design nor keeping observed. All the postures,
which in the originals are fine and beautiful, he has turned into grimace ; every
thing is lame and crippled.
CHAP. V. Remarks on Hatching.
HE course of hatching yields great pleasure to the eye ; because it makes
I
every thing appear in its nature and quality, whether wood, silk, steel,
water, silver, wood, stone, sand, &c. each of which, in engraving and etching,
require a particular exprefsion : yet in etching it is more expeditious, especially
if you can somewhat handle the graver. The French artist Audran excelled herein.
The St. Bruno of Bartholet, engraved by Natalis, is admirable for the naturalnefs,
which, by particular hatchings and the utmost neatness, appears therein.
Now, when a great artist has shewn his utmost sxill in a plate, and all things
are worked accordiag to rule, yet we find it almost impossible to make people sen-
sible what true art is, and wherein the knowledge of a good print lies; most
men, now-a-days, being taken with sine strokes, without regard to ill order or bad
design. A sad reflexion for those who know better l
Again, an engraver or etcher is not so happy as a painter or designer; for
these last compose what they please, or at least what they can, and the engravers
must follow them, be they ever so indifferent. Yet this were no great matter, if
they might but etch and engrave with as much freedom as painters use with
their pencils or crayons : this would spirit them to produce finer things, as other
ingenious men have formerly done, who had their liberty, and did not tie them-
selves up to any person, as many now-a-days are obliged to do. How seldom
have they an opportunity to work after a fine picture or finished drawing: This
has often induced me to think, that many a good master understands more than
his works shew : happy are they, whose circumstances will permit them to exe-
cute even but a single plate, according to their skill and pleasure. But alas I
the times will not allow it in these our free and noted countries. Moreover, we
see many artists sigh and groan under the difficulties laid on them by some pain-
ters and designers, in sometimes sending them such rude drawings, that the
round can hardly be distinguished from tne square; the sharp from the blunt; or
wood from stone; even such as they themselves could not sunderstand, swere








they to receive them from others. If the engraver happens to hit the design, the
master claims honour; but on failure, the engraver is sure to bear the scandal :
for this reason, it were to be wishied, that engravers would, before they begin a
plate after such a drawing or sketch, consult the painter or designer, for a reso-
lution of all their doubts, and that they might proceed with certainty.
I also think it not only useful but necessary, that the designer be particular in
his expression of all the materials : for instance, that the basement-story of a
building shew to be of rough stones, the columns and pilasters with the imagery
and ornaments of marble, &c. that the engraver may exhibit the former rough
by broken strokes, and what is sinooth and polished, by neat and more curious
ones, with the graver; etching the by-works somewhat coarser again; the wood¬
work with long and broken strokes humouring the grain; the trees, according to
the course of the boughs and sway of the leafing; the grounds, serpentine, and
also broken. These observations ought to be heeded in general, as well as in
the particulars, together with the diminution of the off-scape; yet not in the man-
ner of some, by wide strokes, but by closing and making them fine. On this
footing, there would be lafs complaint of the designers, and these not think
themselves injured on seeing their designs so ill followed. Things thus worked
according to rule, would certainly prove fine. and the more, in a work of conse-
quence and bearing a price:: though to one who understands his business, this
management is no more trouble than the contrary.
I have seen drawings of Goltzius, wherein he had plainly expressed all the par-
ticular objects. The tender or smooth bodies were well washed, also neatly scum-
bled with red or black chalk. What was rough or coarse, he had handled boldly
with the pen or black chalk; by which means, the one appeared darker, and the
other lighter in the shade, as if it were a picture. But it is no wonder, that we
see not such things done now-a-days ; for Goltzius used to make his own pat-
terns : and as a good painter considers what ought to be ftone, wood, flesh,
white or black, before he colours, so Goltzius did the same, when he was to engrave
any thing. He would express every thing in his patterns, though he was ever so
certain of his art, in order to do his whole worst after a slight sketch, and that no-
thing might escape him; on a belief that we ought not to trust to our memories
in a matter of consequence : wherefore I shall illustrate this point by an example
in Plate LXX. wherein I introduce several different bodies : for, besides the icor-
rectness of draught, I have alfo expressed their different colours. The wall, A,
is rough stone;. the child, B, tenderly shaded; the vessel, C, of bright copper;
the vase, D, white polished marble; the pedestal or foot, E, of free-stone; the
wooden pale, F, (whereon hangs a cloth) veiny ; and the sky and off-scape, G,
as it goes off, the fainter and finer: by this method of expression, I have still
another advantage ; which is, that if liy accident I should leave my plate half
done, another hand, by this means, may understand my meaning, and finifh it.
Hereby, even a painter may direct another ; who, else, would rather chuse to
have the works, he might leave behind him unfinisned, rubbed out, than that
another, who did not rightly know his mind, should finish them.






















































CHAP. VI. Curious Remarks touching Stipping.
ANY imagine, they can represent the roundness against the main lights,
W by stipping; but they will find themselves mistaken, since it causes a great
fungriness; and therefore the method cannot be good : hatching looks better,
and has more affinity with the shades. Stipping is sometimes useful in case of
need, when we care not to cross-hatch on the light; and also, when the shades
are hatched too wide, in order to express the restexions somewhat the plainer, in-
stead of crossing them over again, especially again the light; though it is better
to go over them again with asine single stroke : and if you find this will not do,
then you may, with a finer needle, continue the same hatching somewhat far-
ther : but a better method would be, to lay it at once as far as it ought to be,
and then somewhat to stop up the ends or extremities: he who neglects this, is
obliged to make shift with stipping; yet that must not be too close. The best
way is, first, with a fine needle, to continue the hatching a little further, and
hatching, as was old Visscher’s way in his boors after Ostade, whereby he prettily
expressed the colour of a face, and fetched out the main light touches. Stip-
ping is very helpful, and also expeditious to one who has not got the firmness of
hatching; for the points thus lengthened answer the same purpose; and then you
can proceed with certainty, especially if vou use the same needle with which the
hatching is continued in the light, round the relief; the shades, again, ought
to be softened with the same necdle that made them; then the stipping of the
large needle in the shade will not be too visible : yet, would you work the last
stipping in the light with a smaller needle, you may ; but, because the shade ends
more suddenly than the relief in the light, I should use no others; for the stip-
ping is a nice point to him who will be curious. The stips ought also to be
equal, I say, equally distant, and not to come between the extremities of the
strokes. If it be afked, whether any thing hatched too wide, can be darkened
with stipping, instead of a third stroke ; My opinion is, that it may; and that
any slight thing can be performed in this manner: but the work is more tedious.
Things so touched up look very neat; for by strong strokes, fainter ones, more
faint and points, we can very commodioussy darken an object more or less at
pleasure. Boulanger has in my opinion, over-stipped his prints; which makes
them look rather like miniature, than any thing else ; wherefore l cannot much
com-






commend stipping; And why ) Because of the inequality and hungriness of the
points or stips, occasioned by touching one harder than another, whereby, in
biting, one penetrates the copper more than another, be the dot ever so small:
add to this, the impossibility of making the stips perfectly round : they will
always be more or lefs longifh; as may be easily proved by a magnisying
glass.
( have seen, in engraved prints of Goltzius, the faint tint upon the relief cross-
hatched, as well as in the shade; but this is only proper for engraving, espe¬
cially in high finishing; because in etching, the cross hatching expresses a com-
ing shade ; and then it may be very well effected by stipping, as broad-lighted
objects want not so much darkness in the light.
Now, if any thing should happen to be amiss, and you would beat it out and
mend it, take a proof and fasten it neatly behind your plate, and then beat out
what you would have away : this may be done even to an hair; and if you care
not to strike on the paper, you may mark the place with a sharp point on the
copper, so as to see it; which will do as well, though the spoiling a proof is
but à trisse : yet the proof, when once dry, is no more fit for this use; where-
fore the work must be done as soon as the proof comes from the prefs; for,
being wetted again, it will always be uncertain, and unlike the plate. In order
to find these little places or misbit spots with still greater ease, (a method which
many engravers make a secret of) take a fine thread or string, and put it cross-
wise about the plate, tying it on the edges, so that the center of the crofs
come exactly upon the misbit spot or place : then laying the plate backside up-
wards, on a smooth and hard stone, beat the place gently with a pointed ham-
mer; and then, with some stuff taken from the oil-stone, rub it out : thus you
may find all the places, how small soever, even to an hair, on the backside of the
plate.
DD
CHAP. VII. Of Etching Bass-Reliefs.
S we have asserted that each object requires almost a particular handling,
A so I think bafs reliefs call for it : for many who can etch well after a fine
picture or drawing, are at a loss when they come to imitate and represent a bass-
relief: they lay the strokes therein as in other objects; though in my opinion,
the difference be very great ; especially if we would not handle them in the man-
ner of Perrier and Pietro Santi, but according to rule; though the former under-
stood it the best of the two, since his works better preserve the stoniness and de-
sign; and yet he has added some things of his own : but the other has done it to
such






such excess, as thereby to render his works obscure : his folds indeed are fine,
yet superfluous and improper for stone, and more like gold, silver or bronze; ap-
pearing better in a print than in stone. In my opinion, Santi understood not the
naked proportion, muscling or motion ; wherefore I cannot by any means al-
low him the preference : the truth is, they are good for a drawing; but were
they to be compared with the life, we should discover a great difference. In the
next place, it is absurd to imagine, that so many bass reliefs as are found at
Rome and in other places, both under cover and exposed, in and upon the tri-
umphal arches, frizes, niches, pediments, pedestals, ancient walls, tombs, co-
lumns and vases, from whence these two artists made their collections, should all
stand in so precise à light, right and left, as they represent them in. Certainly,
some of them must have been lighted from above, from below, fronting, even
from all sides; and i cannot think they drew them by candle-light, but rather
shaded them as they thought fit.
I was once afked, whether, since the bafs reliefs stand in many different places,
moulds or models have not sometimes been taken from them by one or other,
from which they shadowed their drawings, disposing these models as usual, in
We
the left or right light, as they thought proper; which is not improbable.
might likewise light some from above, others from below, from a side, fronting
and from behind, in order to use them on any occasion ; which would be a great
help to those who know little or nothing of modelling.
We have said, that we think the bass-reliefs of Perrier better in design than
those of Pietro Santi, but much inferior in finishing; though the works of the
latter, for the reason before assigned, have no affinity with the stoniness: and
yet some think, that were the figures three or four feet high, they would have
another look ; for then the parts would appear more grand ; and those of Perrier,
on the other hand, too slim and dull; which l do not disown; nevertheless, it
must be agreed, that this observation is good, in order to shew the difference
between carving in stone, and chasing in gold or silver : but it is likewise true,
that had Perrier finished his drawings as well as Santi, they would have been
much finer and more useful; for it is easier to leave out superfluities than
make additions. It is not improbable, that Santi’s. intention, by his method of
management, was, that he might be of greater service to painters, statuaries and
chasers, than Perrier.
We have affirmed, that Pietro Santi has possibly added much of his own. Now,
it is also not unlikely, that Perrier drew his objects from a greater distance than
Santi, whereby he could not see all the minute parts; and I cannot but at the
same time think, that Santi designed most of his bass reliefs after undamaged
within-door work, in halls, chambers, and other inclosed places ; whereas Perrier
possibly took his from without-door work, fuch as pediments, frontispieces, frizes.
and the like, half eaten up by the weather. We might still subjoin, that
Perrier worked only to shew the world that such excellent things were at Rome,
and at the same time to display his light and firm manner of drawing ; whereas
Santi had not only a view to profit, but also to be generally useful to curious ar-
tists and others. How true this is let the virtuoso determine.
As






As to the right handling of bafs reliefs, I think it absolutely necessary, that
every thing be etched equally coarse or sine with one and the same needle, with-
out any difference with respect to stuffs ; as being the best method for represent-
ing the stone-work well; unless it were but a grey one with a fore-ground and
off-scape, when the strokes ought to diminish or grow faint, according to
perspective.
There is likewise little observation made about the lights of bass-reliefs,
for oftentimes, things painted sharp and in sun-shine, are exhibited in the plate
with a common light, through the roundness of the shades; and somerimes we see
the contrary : but these are liberties tihich neither etchers nor engravers ought
to take. He, whose province it is to imitate, let him exactly follow the beaten
path. In relation to etching bass reliefs, a sharp light or sun-shine is very im-
proper, and renders them disagreeable. But as for embellishments in sun-shine,
the matter is of less moment.
CHAP. VIII. Of Engraving; and the Management of the Strokes.
Tis to be wondered, that among the many arts and manual operations, en-
Igraving is so little, and etching so much treated of; the reason whereof is
past my apprehension. Many painters and lovers, for the encouragement of
those who would make it their business, or to shew their skill, have ear-
nestly strove to say something of it : but no engraver has, to my knowledge,
undertaken the tafk ; possibly, as not thinking themselves sufficient for it; or
else, because they would keep it as a secret from each other. But the most pro-
bable reason, as I think, is, the late appearance of this art; which is evident,
since the Romans till their latter times knew nothing of.
It is certain, that engraving as well as painting, is founded as much on
theory as practice, and that both depend on established and positive rules, which,
if orderly followed, will make a man a master: Why then, are they not made
public, for the information of the curious in what they want to know; Must
not he, who intends to go to a certain town or village, be first told where it
lies, and then the ways to it, chusing the nearest as beft,
It is not strange, that more engravers have applied to painting, than painters
to engraving ; because the latter have so many excellent books for their encou-
ragement, publisned by judicious masters; whereas, engravers have not one
touching their practice. But as every thing has its time, so we must hope for
it in this.





































































































































































Nam mora dat vires, teneras mora concoquit uvas,
Et validas segetes, quod fuit herba facit.
Or,
Perfecting time brings on the tender grape,
And gives the herby corn it’s ripening shape.
In the mean time I fhall boldly enter the lists, and, according to my small
ability, impart what l know of it; but the practice or handling, I shall not touch
upon, as not having the greatest skill therein : what, however, I mention of it,
as unavoidably necessary to what I purpose to say, I submit to those of better
knowledge; hoping my endeavours will not be taxed with presumption, since my
only aim is, thereby to rouze noble genius’s, and, by my small spark, to kindle
a greater fire ; according to the Latin proverb : Parva sape scintilla magnum excita-
We have before-mentioned, First, On what basis engraving is founded. Se-
condly, A good engraver’s qualifications. Lastly, What constitutes an agreeable
print : wherefore, we shall now discuss the management of the strokes in objects,
according to their natures and courses, with respect to perspective ; and as well in
etching as engraving, together with some examples for illustrating the point, and
preventing and correcting mistakes.
In Plate LXXI. is a wheel marked A, having eight spokes, or points ; as
also a staff, set upright in the ground, crossed by the horizon. This wheel shews,
that each spoke ought to have a particular course, according to its turn, and that
the strokes muff be governed by the extremity of each spoke, as may be here
seen. The foremost runs circular; the third, almost straight, &c. Compare
also the foremost spoke one, with the hinder one five, how much they differ in
force ; for one approaches, and five retires : which cannot be otherwise according
to perspective Again, the strokes drawn with a ruler, and running off towards
the point of sight, grow gradually finer and fainter. Now though the short
or cross-hatching ought, by established rule, to be more visible and strong than
the long, yet few are observed to make any distinction therein.
We have said before, that each object, whether flesh, stone, grounds, &c. re-
quires a particular stroke; and among others, that wood especially must be thick-
stroked along the grain, and consequently cross-hatched with a finer stroke : but
now we shew the contrary ; for the cross ones are stronger than those running
with the grain which here cannot be otherwise. If some say that i contradict my-
self, in making the crofs-strokes thus against the grain; Ishall, for their satisfac¬
tion, shew my reason for it. Observe, then, that any thing turned, has no other
grain than what the chisel makes; and as the turner works against the grain, and
the wood retains more or less marks of the tool, it must be expressed accordingly
in engraving. But a second question may be, Whether it would not do as well,
if both the hatchings were equally fine or coarse; l answer, It would, as to the





Book XIII
498
Of Engraving.
shade; but not with respect to the stuff: for it would be more proper to stonc,
copper, wax, and. such-like : nevertheless these observations are generally little
heeded, though also founded on certain rules of this art.
As for the staff, it shews, that the strokes, beginning round from below, grow
straiter as they approach the horizon; and above the horizon, the same, but in a
reversed manner.
Now let us consider the other example, in Plate LXXI. wherein the retiring
parapets shew the diminution or faintneis of the strokes, not only in such, but in
any other objects, according to their distance in going off; the one in a greater,
the ocher in a less degrec. Hertby we may plainly discover the perverse notion
of some men; namely, that diminution implies growing scanty or wider. See A,
with a single stroke from one end to the other. Now, although the off-strokes
scem neater than the near; yet they are not so in fact: but as the place dimi-
nisties, so the strokes close and thin in such manner, that they become neither
closer nor more fcanty. The diminution of the figures and the three vases bears
the same construction : neverthelefs, l am sensible that many, even old masters,
do otherwise in handling their retiring objects, figures, trees, off-scape and sky,
more coarsly behind than forwards. I have even observed, that they close-hatch
the nearest and darkest sky, and work wider and wider towards the horizon; but
this more in etching than engraving; possibly to save the trouble of using two or
more needles, or of stopping up, which is properly the point this example aims
at : for l do not afk here, whether it creates more troublé; but shew what may
possibly be thought of less moment than in fact it is : for instance, I place the
three figures, No. 1, 7, 3, ten or twelve steps apart; and at the same distance
on the parapet, three vases; also numbered 1, 2, 3; whereby may be plainly per-
ceived, how much the one differs from the other. But although in these figures
the meaning is sufficiently to be understood; to wit, that the finer they are, the
more fine and close the strokes become; yet I have added the vases to them, for
the sake of those who may be curious enough to count the strokes: when they
will find not a stroke more or less in the one than the other; which in the figures
would be tedious work. Observe, in the next place, the ground-shade of each fi-
gure against the parapet, each growing faint according to its distance, and with
what certainty the accurate tints of the figures may be perceived thereon ; even to
know how much they diminisn and grow finer; and at the same time, how much
the light differs. But let it not be thought sufficient, that the shades diminish or
grow faint, and the white remains all over the light; since we know that the
plan or ground cannot shew its level otherwise, than by means of light forwards,
going off darker and darker: for instance, were a white figure or white stone stand-
ing forwards, and you would place such another further in, where the ground is
darker, you must govern vourself by the ground where the first object stands, as
being subject to the same rule, if things be well finished. If the plan or ground
be finished, the figures ought to be so likewise. Are they airily handled and
broad-lighted, the ground must be the same: and though the ground in its co-
lour, be more or less dark, yet that is not regarded in this case; because we are
speaking only of the diminution of the tints, consisting of white and black.
Suppose
Dloitized by GOOgle











Suppose the floor were of white marble, and the figures the same, or in white
draperies ; the foremost would be broad lighted, and the more distant less and
less white, were it even in sun-shine; nay, if the light came from behind, or from
aside, the most distant would only keep an utmost heightening, and still less, were
the colours expressed in it; as they who understand perspective well know: nor
can it be otherwise ; as may be seen in the first example in the child’s hand hold-
ing the end of. the hindmost spoke, which plainlv appears to have little or no
whiteness : and as for the stuffs of the objects, as linen, cloth and such like, some
may rather think them possible to be so worked than the naked ; because, having
already engraved forwards as neat and fine as may be, we can therefore further
in, not express any thing finer or neater: but I say, that as things having the
utmost neatness, do not become neater by distance, nor alter in the eye, but dis-
appear : so, when the objects are very remote, neither silk, linen or woollen is to
be distinguished, so far as it concerns the hatching; but the coarse parts always
keep their forms : and this observation respects not only the three stuffs, but
also figures, stones, grounds, trees, &c. Here some perhaps may say, How can
the strokes possibly unite the light, when they, as they retire, ought to be closer
and closer, especially when the air, (which, on the horizon, is clear and bright
and free from clouds) unless they widen more and more towards the horizon,
were they never so faint: To which l answer, as experience will prove, that when
the strokes thus thin and grow faint in their going off, they certainly disappear
and die away ; nay, become at last invisible, and unite enough with the light,
even were it sun-shine, though they be ever so close: and such a length I think
the graver can go when skilfully managed. In etching, the needle can do the
same by stopping up.
However, I question not but my proposition will be taxed with impossibility
and puzzling novelty especially by such as are not thorough engravers, who may
blame me for thus disclosing the grounds of this noble art, and so plainly shewing
truth : but my answer in the first place, is, that I find myself obliged in duty to
do so, since all my wishies tend towards its arriving at the greatest perfection. Se-
condlv, because what I lay down is prescribed by certain rules of the mathematics;
though sew are senlible, that the art of engraving, in general flows therefrom, and
that different objects require different handlings; but rather believe, that a good
method of drawing will easily lead to engraving: a notion true enough in etch-
ing, though even therein the point lies most in the biting and stopping up.
As
to engraving, vou must certainly be conversant with the handling and force
 of
the graver; two points not to be attained without great experience : though
the beginning, it is better for an etcher to have no handling at all ; becaute he
may then gradually the better bring the graver to the needle, and in an uniformity
of strokes adapt the one to the other, and make them harmonious : whereas some,
relying too much on the graver, use it here and there in their slovenly works, with-
out any difference, and that with incredible carelessness; sometimes cutting a fore-
ground, stone or stem of a tree, neat and smooth, which ought to be rough and
knobby ; when at the same time they are working a face or marble figure with
the










the needle. This must be owing either to their carelessness, or desier of ease or
their ignorance ; since such doings are against reason and common instruction.
I could mention many such disorderly prints : among others there is one of the
raising of Lazarus, done by Berry, wherein the figure of Lazarus, with so much of
the linen as comes about his body is etched, and the rest of the linen lying on
the ground, neatly engraved, whereby one part looks like linen, and the other
like silk: the one is here and there stipped, and the other is not. But perhaps
the plate was not well bit. It also sometimes happens, that we are obliged to
rub out things, which makes good my affertion : for, if the fault lie in the plate,
the master ought, as much as possible, to help. it by his knowledge and judgment.
Could he handle the graver, Why did he not shew it and make things agree ; And
if he was not master of the graver, Why did he not better follow the strokes of
the needle ’ Had he insteed of cross-hatching, made the strokes somewhat finer and
triple hatched them, and used some stipping, then it would have been passable.
There is another print with an ornament round it, representing a sacrifice of
Flora, or the Spring, which is also wretchedly etched and engraved : for the fore-
most figures, as Charity, Piety and Time, and every thing else on the fore-ground
are neatly finished and mostly engraved ; but the figures on the second ground so
slight and poorly etched, as not to have any agreement with the others; the
strokes even look as if they were dabbed on and drawn with a shaking hand, in-
stead of growing fainter every where, which would make the work neat and in-
tire. This artist might have known, that he could not make the graver and the
needle agree.
I am sensible some will determine, that many things, such as water, silver,
gold and such like smooth and shining bodies, can be more conveniently express-
ed with the graver then the needle: but, in my opinion, a fkilful hand can
give every thing its naturalness.
It is very strange to me, in the old prints, that the masters have in nothing re-
prepsented the natural qualities, but etched every thing after one manner whether
nudities draperies, air, grounds, or stone ; except water, and yet not this with thin
and thick strokes, but only crofs parallels, and those very unlike, oftentimes close,
and then wide, as if they were scratched again, they have not expressed any
colour and always made the water dark and brown. Now, to create a difference
in shining bodies, my thoughts are, that you first lay the strokes strong and pa¬
rallel, and of a reasonable width from each other, and then close them by putting
thinner between ; I mean in water, black marble, polished steel and such like ; for
by this method we produce a certain stir shewing the smoothness and glitter.
If it be afked, Why in etching, the strokes which are close and thick sometimes
fly up, though the plate be in good condition, and the ground neither burnt nor
too hard ; l answer that I have found by experience that when the water is too
strong, and at first bites too sharp, we must then take our chance ; because the
plate being cold cannot grow warm so soon as the ground, which therefore is for-
cibly lifted from the plate and presently rises; and the sooner if the strokes be
close and thick ; which happens not so easily in the tender parts, whêre by the
thinness and width of the strokes, the water has not so much power to get under
them.









them. To prevent this, the water must be somewhat weakened and the ground
and plate gradually made warm in order to make them unite with each other;
especially in cold weather for in the warm months of June, July and August, it is
not necessary, because we then use harder grounds.
Now to kuow whether the ground be in good condition, I make a scratch or
two, with a large needle in a spare place of the plate; and if the ground come out
of the strokes like dust ; it is then too hard, but if in curls, it is in good temper,
especially if you can blow them off. If they cannot be wiped off with a soft fea-
ther, but stick to the ground, it is then too soft. This is a nice point. It fome-
times happened to me, that here and there they remained in the strokes.
Some etchers also frequently give themselves needless trouble when they put
out the out-lines, which are made too strong on the light side, with stop-ground,
which youknow, always flows more or less overthem especially if the place be hot:
but consider what trouble they must afterwards have, when the out line is gone;
for they are obliged to renew with the graver all the strokes running against it.
Wherefore, the best way is, to trace the drawing neatly on the plate, and mark
at first softly with a small point, the dark touches, as those of the eyes, nose and
mouth on the snaded side; yet not on the light. But to help them in stopping up
their too strong strokes, I shall assign a better method than that of the stop-
ground.
Take thick-ground white-lead, thinned with oil of turpentine, and spread it
with a small pencil over the out-line so as just to cover it and no further; but
be very careful not to do it over more then once, lest you take off the ground;
for the oil afterwards evaporates and in the biting, you must also not wipe over
it with the featiier. This is an invention of afriend of mine and though I never
experimented it, yet question not its success. I mention white-lead ; but you
CHAP. IX. Of the Black Art, or Mezzotinto
HOUGH no figure of this art is to be found in Caesar Ripa as having been
unknown to him, yet since in our times, through its foundation laid by
princes and the kind affistance of great men, it is arived at so great perfection ;
I hope the following figure will not be unacceptable to the profefsors and lovers
of it.
Figure of the Black Art, or Mezzotinto.
Here you see a young and plump virgin, of a frefh complexion and ami¬
able countenance, dressed in black velvet, lined and faced with sky-blue pow-
dered with gold glittering stars. She has a broad gold girdle embroidered
with black bats which diminisn towards the arms. Her head attire is wanton
and









and modish, adorned here and there with small flowers. About her neck is a
gold chain to which hangs a medal, exhibiting a burning altar, and these
words, MAGNAE BRITANNÆ. In her right hand is a small tool, like a
lancet, together with a feather ; and in the left a table, whereon is painted an
head on a black ground, representing Nature. She poises airily on one leg, as
if she were dancing.
Explanation.
The Art is represented young and plump, to fignyfy that she is still growing.
The black velvet gown and stars imply that, like the stars she is sprung from
dark night. The golden girdle and bats give us to understand, that though her
productions are not very lasting, yet she makes great gains. The chain with
the niedal and altar thereon, proclaims her lustre; and the words round it
allude to an offering of thanks to Great-Britain, to whom she owes her origin
and glory. The table, with the figure of Nature shews, that she excels therein.
The rest explains itself.
Why this beautiful figure bears the name of the Black Art I never heard,
though her practice sufficiently gives us the reason, to wit, that she proceeds from
black. And though the art of etching also seems to be derived from black,
yet it is done in quite a different manner; for the former comes forth from the
light, and the latter from the shade; the one heightens and the other
shadows.
We have already said that etching is in speed, superior to engraving; but
the black art is more expeditious then either of them; and in neatnefs has
not its fellow; it may even compair with a painting, how soft and sluent
seover, abating for the colours. Indeed in duration and wear it is the weakest;
but on the other hand its expeditiousness brings in more money.
This noble art preferable to any engraving in representing uncomon lights,
as candle, torch, lamp, fire, and the like: wherefore, I think it does not im¬
properly bear the name of the black art. It is remarkable not to be above
fifty ycars standing, and yet is ariyd at so great perfection ;
those other arts
have required more time. But England where the climate is healthful and
temperate, has contributed much, to its neatnefs and lustre. There it had
its birth and furtherance : for prince Rupert gave us the first example. Where
fore we may rightly stile it noble. The first print I saw of this prince was of an
old man’s head, with a cloth about it, taken, as far as l know, from an Italian
painting. It was designed so sine and great, and broad handled, as if washed with
the pencil by the best master : it even looked, by reason of the natural softness
or melting, not to be less than black art. The same prince also invented a cer-
ain metal bearing his name, which it will retain for ever,
l doubt not but this art will in time become a delightful diversion to painters,
for thrée reafons. One for its easiness in learning; two for its neatneis; and,
lastly, for its conveniency.




 





I. It is easily learned, by any one who is accustomed to draw on grounded or
blue paper; because there is no difference in operation between the scraping on the
plate and heightening on the grounded paper, beginning with the greatest light and
sparing the shade; as we have shewed in our drawing-book, touching the handling
of crayons or chalk pencils. Wherefore l affirm that it comes nearer to a paint-
ing than etching or engraving. And it is so easily apprehended, I mean in theo-
ry as to be learned in lefs than three days.
2 It is neat and free from soil and smell; as not requiring either a stop-ground,
grease or aquæ-fortis.
Lastly, the conveniency arising from it may be easily conjectured ; as it is more
expeditious then either etching or engraving.
But many are so eager in this art to learn neat scraping, as to neglect the princi¬
and when correct design is wanting in a plate or print, What judicious person will
approve it: Indeed we cannot manage here as in etching, where the out-line may
be traced on the plate with a needle for the white sometimes goes out, or is so faint
as scarce to be seen ; besides it is inconvenient to scrape figures against a light
ground; though artists generaly use to work the figure first, and then the off-scape
against it. Now to prevent this inconvenience, first scrape vour back-ground, and
spearthe neat out-line; rather keeping a little out from it tillthe figure be finished:
afterwards you may gently scrape nearer. Thus you will not so easily run over
the out-line as when vou begin with the figure.
painters and that of engravers ; for the former making it only their diversion, do
not finish things so very highly as the latter, who have been brought up therein,
and make it their constant bufiness. Painters are satisfied with shewing only good
design and general decorum, because when they were neatly to finissi one plate,
thay can work another.
This art is certainly easy to a person of good knowledge: but if the work be
not light enough at first, go over it a second time. Indeed you must not think to
finish up at once, because till a proof be taken, you cannot possibly know what con-
dition your plate is in. Do like the painters, first to dead-colour with broad
parts and then finisn. Now having a proof, you can give the work its main
heightness, and thus with patience finisn every part ; a point requiring neither
much time nor study, but a little observation. There is published a print of a
little satyr, which in an hour’s time I scraped loose in my hand, as l walked in a
garden; and, after a proof taken, finished in another hour. Few learn this art,
because, as Il think, they cannot be persuaded how easy it is, and with what few
circumstances attended. But should the lovers set about it, we may possibly in
time see it become too common, and etching and engraving neglected ; I mean in
objects pecular to theb lack art, such as portraits, night and candle-pieces, spectres
and inchantments, apparitions, flowers, fruits, silver, gold, china-ware, crystal, arms
and herbs. Who will be able to etch or engrave those things so perfect and nat-
tural







tural as thay can be scraped; but in figure, architecture, bass-reliefs and landsca pe,
the art is weak, and not at all so proper as engraving.
It is a great pity, that both this beautiful art and the artist have so bad a n ame
as if the one were witchcraft, and the other, a magician, though nothing but mere
art-works. 1 long to hear what name the Italians will give it. The French and
English, agreeable to the Dutch call it, the former, l'Art noire, and the latter the
black art. An improper and unnatural name, unless they mean first, that the
artist works the light out of the black ground; and in the next place, to distinguish
it from etching and engraving.





