55
2


THE
ART OF PAINTING

IN
C
1

RENDERED FAMILLAR TO EVERY CAPACITY.
EXTRACTED FROM
THE WORKS
OF THE
Bost Eminent Basters
OF THE
ITALIAN, FLEMISH, AND ENGLISHSCHOOLS.
To which is prefixed, The
METHOD OF MINING THE COLOURS
TO THE VARTOUS TEINTS

USED BOTH FOR
PORTRAITS, LANDSCAPES, ESc. E8c. E8c.








BY THE AUTHOR OF
THE ART OF DRAWING IN PERSPECTIVE.


-



t  
THE THIRD EDITION.




5

	608

Printed by J. Wright, No. 20, Denmark-Court, Strand, for
ROBERT LAURIE AND JAMES WHITTLE,
MAP, CHART, AND PRINT-SELLERS,
NO. 53. FlEET-STREET.
1800.

a
PRICE ONE SHILLINC.





S 



 ao 28 22028 0




PAGE.
Of the principal Colours uled in the Fleth, from
which all the teints are made
I
Of the principal teints that are abfolutely necelfary
5
for painting ffeth, all of which are made from the
Principal colours
5
2
Firft Painting
6
The colours and teints that are necellary for the firft
painting of the ffeth
6
The second part of the firft painting
8
5
Second Painting
10

The second Part of the second Painting
22
The Third , ainting, or finifhing
12

Of Back- Grounds
13.
Of the Firft Lay
16
2

On Copying
19
Of Painting Draperies
22
White Satin
25
3


:Blue satin

27
Scarlet and Crimion,

30
Fink Colour

38.
-

 tio

Fellow
32
3


Green;


33
Changeable



33

5


Black
-

34
Linen



6
3

Of Painting Landicapes


31
Principal Colours ufed in Landicapes,
37

Of Dead Colouring

40
F

2
t
Second Painting
55
AE
2

12

35
= Third and laft Painting

33
222

44.
F
38
98
2


25
38
8

35

-
272

29

35
.

1


5


TEE


3





F




1


tny o oon te s t  h  as
  h i    
 y
tn
INTRODUOTION.



TIIE elder Plinyhas obferved, that the ancients.
 painted with four colours only, and from thofe
compoted all their teints. Monl. de Piles was of
opinion, that of thefe four colours, they made their
first, or dead-colouring.
How it really was, time has put it out of our
power to determine; but, if we suppofe thofe four
principal colours in perfection, then I think it can
be no longer doubted, but that from thefe, judici-
oully varied, might be made all the colours in
nature. For my part; I cannot believe that the

four capital colours of the ancients would mix fo
that perfection we fee in the works of Titian and
Rubens. And if we have no certain knowledge.
2 of
A


ii )

of their method of colouring who lived in the laft
century, how should we understand their's who
lived near two thouland years ago ? And why the
method and practice of colouring, to well known
to Rubens and VVandyke, should not be continued
down to the prefent mafters, is to me furprifing.
It is plain, from the works of their pupils, that
they Knew their method, becaufe in their pictures
we fee the fame fort of colours and colouring;
and, from the liitle variety of capiral colours ufed
by them, it is not to be doubted, but that the
whole was comprited in a few principles, neither
difficult nor tedious.
All the mafters from Rembrandt funk gradually
below each other in the art of colouring, therefore
we may with cercainty date the decline of that art
from him.
I cannot attribure this gradual degeneracy in the
Knowledge of to charming an art to any thing, but
inability, or want of generofity, or both. Though
thefe gentlemen were not able to give us to perfect
an account as the great mafters, yet they might
have commanicared what they had learned from
them;



(iii
them; and if it was againtt their own private in-
tereft to have publifhed it whilft they practifed;
they should, out of general regard to men of tafte;
and to the art itfelf, have left it behind them, to
have given to pofterity an opportunity of reaping
the benefit of their studies.
I flatter myfelf, that the following theets con-
tain fomething that may be of confequence in
Htudying this noble art, and hope the practicable
method of colouring here laid down, which has
been the refult of much ftudy and long experience,
will be found both ufeful and agreeable.
De Piles fays, painters fpend many years in the
fearch of Knowledge, which they might have at-
tained in a little time, had they hit at firft upon the
right path. This truth I have experienced, and
confess that the works of Vandyke and Rembrandt
are the fureft guides to nature.
It is out of thefe moft excellent mafters, that I
have eftablifhed my method. It is from their pic-
cures I have found the firft lay of colours, and
from them I have learned the virgin teints and
A2
finishing


L IV
finishing fecrets, though I have always applied
them to practice from nature.
In the method of this work, I begin with a short
account of the principal colours ufed in fleth.
Next I follow with the principal teints, exc. under
the following heads:
THE FIRST PAINTING, OR DEAD COLOURING.
SECOND PAINTINC.
THIRD, OR LAST PAINTING.
OF PAINTING BACK CROUNDS.
SOME REMARKS ON COPTING.
OF PAINTING DRAPERTES.
OF LANDSCAPE PAINTING.
f Of the Principles of Perspective, vide a fimall

Treatife by the publithers of this work.
All thefe particulars I have endeavoured to make
familiar, clear, and instructive, without defign to
fatter or offend, and through the whole courfe of
this work; I have had the uimoft regard to truch.
The motive of my publifhing this little treatife,
is folely for the benefit of the art. Such as are
Dorn. with a hap
gentus, though deftiture of a
mafter




mafter or suide, may, from thefe instructions, ac-
quire a comperent knowledge of colouring almoft
without fludying. Here the lovers of painting,
who ftudy for their pleafure or amufement, may
be conducted cafily, step by step, to the secrets of
that art, which, of all the defigning ones, affords
the greateft pleafure to the mind.
It has been obferved, Titian and Rembrandr
prepared their firft lay, or grounds, very near alike;
and with colours that Kindly united, and were as
near to the life as poffible; on which they laid
their virgin temts, with light flrokes of the pencil;
and thus they imitated the force and frethness of
nature. They were convinced, that there were
certain colours which deftroyed each other, if they
were mixed to excels; and that they should be as
little shaken as poftible by the motion of the pencil;
It is certainly true, that the great mafters, both
ancient and modern, imitated nature in their firft
painting, or dead-colouring, to far as they could
without dirtying the colours, ommiiting only the
finishing touches and colours that should come laft;
which I defign to thew in the courfe of this work,
in


VI)
in the moft intelligible manner, and exactly to the
rules and methods of the beft practitioners.
Some painters imagine the great mafters had
CoLOwRs which we have no knowledge of, and
it is probable they might; yet, 1 confels, 1 fee
none of them in the pictures of Vandyke and
Rembrandr, but what are common to painters;
only fome of them are better than ours, which
would be remedied, if that art was more encouraged
by the painters. Thofe we have, I am convinced,
would appear much finer, if they were laid on
Droper grounds.


A painter should have as great a regard to his
firtt lay, as he has to the fucceeding parts of his
Work. Sir Godfrey Kneller, in Sir Peter Lely's
time, ftudied his manner, and prepared his grounds
and firft lay of colours, on fuch cloth as Lely ufed;
but after his death he foon fell into a flighter man-
er, which was more agreeable to his genius and
inclination, and invented the cold grey-coloured
cloths, on which he eftablifhed his flight expeditious
manner. Then was the time when the painters
expoted their underftanding, in neglecting the
Charming


vii
charming flyle of Vandyke, to follow Kneller,
But though colouring was not his talent, yer he
was, in his time, the beft face painter in Europe.
Nor has there been an artiff fince him, except the
late worthy prefident of the Royal Academy, Sir
Jofhna Reynolds, whofe heads can sland any com-
parifon with his. Reynolds's manner was certainly
peculiar to himfelf, and not eafily copied. The
fine character of his portraits, elegant turn of his
figures, and wonderful expreftion, added to a cer-
tainty of touch, rendered his pictures fuperior to
any thing fince Vandyke. And it may not be
amiss to add here, that, while living, he was eaty
of accels, extremely communicative, and ready to
lend his performances to young ftudents for their
improvement at home, at their leifure hours;
which, together with his elegant and instructive
lectures on painting, delivered at the Royal Aca-
demy, have left to his memory an everlafting

inopument.

y


3


following useful Drawing Books have lately been
260
reprinted by LAURIE and WHITTLE; No. 53,
Fleet-Street, London.
The ARTISTS ASSISTANT in drawing Perspective,
Etching, Engraving, Merzotinto-Scraping, Painting on
Glats, in Crayons, Water-Colours, and on Silk and
Satins with a Frontifpiece of Hogarth's Head; Octavo.
Price one Shilling.
The whole ART of PAINTING in WATER-CO.
LOURS, agreeable to the Practice of the mofteminent
Mafters, by the Author of the Artiff's Affiftant, Octavoy
with a Fronrispiece Head of the Oucen. Price one
Shilling.
TheARTofDRAWIKGinPERSPECTIVE; where-
in the Doctrine of PERSPECTIYE is clearly and con-
cifely treated of, upon Geometrical Principles; and 2
mechanical method of Perspective and Defigning, in-
vented for the Benefit of thofe who are Strangers to Ma-
thematies; illuffrated with a Variety of Examples, on
Copper -Plates. The second Edition, with confiderable
Improvements, Octavo, Price one Shilling.
The ART of DRAWING without a Mafter, from Mr.
Le Clerc, being familiar Outlines from the firft Stroke
of Drawing to the finithed Figure, 1s.
fult publifhed, The ART of PAINTINGin Miniature,
on lvory, in the manner at prefent practifed by the
moft eminent rtiffs in that Profeffion; comprifed
under the following heads, viz. The proper Colours
for Painting in Miniature, the Nature and Properties
of each, and Mlanner of preparing them; the Mode of
chooling Camel-hair Pencils; Inftructions relative to
the Choice of Ivory, bleaching and polifhing it prepa-
Tatory to beginning a Picture; Method of managing
the Colours at the different Sittings in taking a Picture
from Life, or in copying from another Picture. By
John Payne. To which is annexed, the ART of
BURNISHED GILDING on GLASS, in a Variety
of Branches, a Matter Known by very few, and at pre=
fent in high Eftimation, 7s.
773
The PAINTERS COMPANION, or a Treatife on
 Colours; being Practical Improvements on the Expe-

e
X
EIL DOVIC. 15. 1799.







THE
ART OF PAINTING
IN

IL.

OF THE PRINCIPAL COLOURS USED IN THE FLESH,
FROM WHICH ALL THE TEINTS ARE MADE.
I. FLAKE WHITE, or fine white, is the very bett
whies we have : This colour should be ground with the
finest poppy oil that can be made. At prefent our white
is bad, and apt to turn yellow; on account of the oil
which is moft genefally fold not being real poppy.
White is a friendly working colour, and comes forward
with yellows and reds; but retires with blues and greens.
It is the nature of all whites to fink into whatever
o
ground they are laid on; therefore they should be laid on
white grounds.
II. Ivory-black is the beft black: It is a colour which
Lympathizes, and mixes kindly with all the others. It is
2 true fhade for blue. Ivory-black, and a little Indian
red, make the beft general (hadow colour that can be
B
ufed


5
3


5


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OfL.
2
ufed. It is generally ground with linfeed oil; and ufed
with drying oil: Black is a cold retiring colour.
III. Thramarine is the finelt blue in the world: It is
a tender retiring colour, and never glares; and is a beau-
itful glazing colour: It is ufed with poppy oil.
+
IV. Pruffian is a very fine blue, and a Kind. working
colour: It is ground with linfeed oil, though I think,
nut oil is more proper. It should never be ufed in the
Heth, but in green teints and the eyes.
V. Ligbt Oker is a good mixing colour, and of great
ufe in the fleth: It is ufually ground with linfeed oil,
but nut oil is better. All yellows are ftrengthened with
red, and weakened with blues and greens.
VI. Light Red is nothing bur fine light oker burnt
T his and white, in mixing, produce the moft perfect fleth
colour that can be made. It is a beautiful, clean, Kind,
working colour; but too flrong for the white, and there-
fore will grow darker. It should be ground, and ufed
with put oil.
VII. No vermillion, but what is made of the true na-
tive cinnabar, should ever be ufed. It will not glaze;
but is a fine colour when it is glazed. It is ground with
linfeed oil, and should be ufed with drying oil.
7
III. Carmine is the moft beautiful crimfon that can
be: it is a middle colour, between lake and vermillion;
is a fine working colour, and glazes delightfully. It
should be ground with nut oil, and ufed with drying oil.
I. Lake is a tender fympathizing deep red, bur of
 no frong body; therefore it should be ftrengthened with
Indian red. It is the beft glazing colour that can be
ated; it is ground with linfeed oil, and ufed with drying
5il.
X. Indian


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
3
K. Indian Red is a ftrong pleafant working colour.
2
but will not glaze well; anl, when mixed with white,
falls a little into lead: it is ground and ufed as the lake.
XI. Brown Pink is a fine glazing colour, but of no
ftrong body. In the fieth it should never join or mix
with the lights; becaufe this colourand white antipathize,
and mix of a warm dirty hue, for which reafon their
joinings should be blended with a cold middle teint. In
glazing of fhadows, it should be laid before the other
colours that are to enrich it: it is one of the finithing
colours, and therefore should never be ufed in the firff
painting. It is firengthened with burnt umber, and
weakened with terraverte; ground with linfeed oil, and
ufed with drying oil.
XIl. Burnt Umber is a fine warm brown, and a good
working flrong colour it is of great ufe in the hair,
and mixes finely with the warm fhade.

-


OF THE PRINCIPAL TEINTS THAT ARE ABSOLUTE.
LY NECSSSARY FOR PAINTING FLESH; ALL OF
WHICH ARE MADE FRCM THE PRINCIPAL
COLOURS.
I. Light red teint is made of light red and white: it
is the moft kind and beft conditioned of all colours, for
the general ground of the ffeth. With this colour and
the fhade
teint, we should make out all the fieth;
w dsaon




like claro obfcuro or metzotinto., We should alfo re-
member, that this colour will grow darker; becaufe it is
in its nature too ftrong for the white; therefore we should
B2
improve


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
4
improve it, by mixing vermillion and white with it, in
proportion to the fairness of the complexion. and though
it is thus mixed, yet 1 shall call it the light red teint in
all the courfe of this work; becaufe I would not have the
vermillion teint confounded with it, as if there was no
difference.
1l. Vermillion feimt is only vermiltion and white mixed

to a middle teint: it. is the moft brilliant light red that
can be. It agrees beft with the white, light red, and
yellow teints.
III. Carmine teint is carmine and white only, mixed
to a middle teint: it is of all colours the moft beautiful
red that can be, for the cheeks and lips: it is one of the
finifhing colours, and should never be ufed in the firft
painting, but laid upon the finithing colours, without
mixing.
T
IV. Refe tent is made of the red shade and white,
mixed to a middle degree or lighter it is one of the
cleaneff and moft delicate teints that can be ufed in the
ffeth, for clearing up the heavy dirty colours, and there-
fore, in changing, will fympathize and mix Kindly.
V. Fellow teint is often made of Naples. yellow and
white, but it is as well to ufe light oker and white,
which is a good working colour. Remember the oker
is too frong for the white; therefore we should make 2
litile allowance in ufing it. It follows the light red teints
and yellows should always be laid before the blues. If
we lay too much of it, we may recover the ground it
was laid on with the light red teints.
VI. Blue teint is made of ultramarine and white,
:mixed to a lightith azure it is a pleafant working co-
lour; with it we should blend the gradations. It follows

the


5





2





THE A
5
the yellows, and with them it makes the greens; and
with the reds, it produces the purples. No colour is fo
proper for blending down, or foftening the lights into
keeping.
VIl. Lead teint is made of ivory black and fine white,.
mixed to a middle degree; it is a fine retiring colour;
and therefore is of great nfe in the gradations, and in
the eyes.
VIII. Green teint is made of Pruffian blue, lightoker;
and white. This colour will dirty the lights, and should
be laid (paringly in the middle tents. It is moft used in
the red fhadows, where they are too ftrong. It is of a
dirty antipathizing nature.
IK. Shadeteint is made of lake, Indian red, black, and
white, mixed to a beautiful murrey colour of a middle
teint. This is the beft colour for the general ground of
Ihadows; for which reafon I call it the shade teint. It.
mixes with the lights delightfully, and produces a pleafant
clean colour, a little inclined to the reddith pearl. As
all the four colours of its compofition are of a friendly
tympathizing nature, fo confequently this will be the
fame, and therefore may be eafily changed, by the ad-
dition of any other colours.
X. Red shade is nothing but lake, and a very litile
Indian red. It is a charming working colour, and a
good glazer it ffrengthens the shadows on the shade
teint, and receives, when it is wet, the green and blue
teints agreeably. It is a good ground for all dark tha-
dows.
XI. Warm shade is made of lake and brown pink,
mixed to a middle degree. It is a fine colour for ftrength-
ening the fhadows on the fhade teint, when they are wet
D.


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
6
or dry. We muft take care that it does not touch the
lights, becaufe they mix of a dirty fnuff-colour; and
therefore should be foftened with a tender cold teint.
XII. Dark shade is made of ivory black and a little
Indian redonly. T his celour mixes very kindly with the
red shade, and blends agreeably with the middle teints in
the dead colouring. It is a charming glazing colour for
the eye-brows, and darkeff fhadows. It is of all the
moff excellent thadow-colour, and one of the fineff
orking colours we have.

FIRST PAINTING
THE COLOURS AND TEINTS THAT ARE NECESSARY
FOR THE FIRST PAINTINC OF THE FLESH.
I. Fine white.
2. Light oker, and its two teints.
3. Light red, and its two teints.
4. Vermillion, and its teint.
. A teint made of lake, vermillion and white.
5

6. Rofe teint. 
7. Blue teint.
S. Lead teint.
9. Green teint.
10. Half shade teint is made of Indian red and white.
11. Shade teint. Jx I
12. Red thade.

72. Warm shade,
3


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
The finithing pallet for a complexion, requires fix
hore, viz. Carmine and its teint, lake, brown pink, ivory-
black, and Pruffian blue.
The layingon of dead colouring I divide into two parts-
3
the one 1 call the FiRsT lay, or ground; the other the
laying on virgin teints.
The firft lay of colours confifts of two parts; the one
is the work of the fhadows only; and the other that
of the lights.
The work of the hadows is to make out all the draw-
ing, very correctly, with the fhade teint, in the same
manner as if it was to be done with this colour only:
3
and remember to drive, or lay the colour (paringly.
The lights should be all laid in with the light red teint,
in different degrees, as we fee them in nature: Thefe
twocolours united produce a clean, tender, middle teint;
for mixing with the fhade-teint, they turn to a pearly
hue; and by flrengthening them with the light red, we
may work to a very good refemblance. In uniting the
lights and fhades; we should ufe a long foftener, about
the fixe of a large fwan quill; which will help to bring
the work into character, and leave the colouring more
delicate; then go over the darkeft fhadows with the red
of warm (hade, which will finith the firft lay:
The warm shade being laid on the shade teint, im-
proves it to a warmer hue; but if laid inflead of the
fhade teints, it will dirty, and fpoil the colours it mixes
with; and if the red thade be laid firft, inftead of the
shade teint, the fhadows would then appear too red and
bloody; therefore, notwithflanding thefe two colours are
the beft that can be for the fhadows, yet they are too
ftrong to be laid alone, which is a proof of the great ufe
and


8
THE ERT OF PAINTING IN OTE.
and merit of the fhads teint. Here we may obferve,
that the shade and light red teints are fo friendly and
delicate in their nature, that they will not dirty, though
we are continually changing them. How proper then, and
agreeable to our purpofe, are they, for making the moff
principal part of the likenets, when, in altering and
changing, they always produce a clean colour of the in-
viring pearly hue.
THESECOND PART OF THE FIRST PAINTING.

IN order to finish the firft painting, improve the reds
and yellows to the complexion, and after them the blues;
obferving, that the blues on the reds make the purple,
and on the yellows produce the green. The same me-
thod is to be underftood of the fhadows; but be fure to
leave them clean, and not too dark: Therefore allowance
should be made in the grounds with the light-red; becaufe
glazing them will make them darker. When the cloth is
of a dark, or bad colour, there muft be a ftrong body of
colour laid all over the fhadows, fuch as will not fink
into the ground; but appear warm, and a little lighter
than the life; to that it may be of the fame forwardness
To finith, as if it had been a light ground. Therefore
the bufinets of dead colouring is, that we leave it always
in the same order for finifhing, though the colour of the
cloth be quite the reverfe.
I am convinced, by experience, that the grounds of
Thadows, in what we call the dead-colouring, should be
fich


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTL.
fuch as will support the character of the finithing colours;
which ground muft be clean, and a little lighter than the
finifhing colours: I fay a little lighter, becaufe the finish-
ing of the fhadows is glazing; and no other method but
glazing can leave fuch brilliancy and beauty as they
ought to have For I find, that glazing the fhadows in
the firtt painting, is not fo proper as laying a body of
Shadow colours, that are very near to the life, though a
little lighter. Thefe may be glazed and touched upon,
whendry, with a great deal of eafe; but if we begin the
firft painting with glazing, we shall find it will fare, and
be of no ufe; and the folid colours, which are laid on it,
will look heavy and dull: therefore, all shadows and
colours that are to be glazed, should be done with
colours of a clean folid body; becaufe the glazing is more
lafting, and has the beft effect on fuch colours, Re-
member to leave no roughnels, I mean fuch as will ap-
pear rough, and interrupt or hurt the character of the
finifhing colours; which, by examining the work, whilft
it is wet, with a foft tool, or when it is dry, with a knife,
may be avoided, as it will eafily take off the Knots and
rougheft parts.
The light red and white improved is fuperior to all
other colours for the firft lay or ground; which should
be always done with a full pencil of a ffiff colour, made
brighter than the light, becaufe it will fink a little in
drying. The greater the body, and quantity of colour,
and the Hiffer it is laid, the lets it will fink. Every co-
lour in drying will fink, and partake, in proportion to its
body, of the colour it is laid on, therefore all the lights
of the fieth, if not laid on a light ground, muft confe-
quently change a little from the life, if there is no allow-
C
ance








THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OTL.
10
ance made. The fhade teint for the fhadows should
fall into the rofe teinr, as the complexion grows delicate;
all which should be ligntly united, with a foft long
pointed hog-tool, to the lights, making out the whole
357.
4he metzotinto. I believe the great mafters very feldom

TAB.T
Loucned or fzcerened the colours; but in uniting the firft
lay, they were very careful in preferving the brightnets
of their colours, and therefore did not work them below
the complexion: for to force, or keep up a brilliancy
grounds, can only be done with the whites, reds,
in the
and yellows; which method will make up for the defici-
ency of the white grounds; therefore the firft painting
should be left bright and bold, and the less the colours are
We should forbearulingany colours
broken the better.
that will produce them, and be contented to add what is
wanting in the next painting, where, if we fail, a clean
rag will resfore the firft ground.



SECOND PAINTING.

THE second painting begins with laying on the leaft
quantity that can be of poppy oil; then w:pe it almoft all
off, with 2 dry piece of a filk handkerchief.
The second painting is alfo divided into two parts
53
One I call the firr lay of the second painting; which is
scumbling the lights, and glazing the fhadows. The
other finishing the complexion with the virgin teints,
and improving the likenets, as far as we can without
Laubing.
Scumbling


T2
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
Scumbling, is going over the lights, where they are
to be changed with the lightred teints, or fome other of
their own colours, fuch as will always clear and im-
prove the complexion, with fhort ffiff pencils; but fuch
parts only as require it, otherwife the beauty of the firft
painting will be spoiled, and we make ourfelves double
WWork.
The light red teint improved, is the very best colour
that can be for fcumbling, and improving the complexion
in general. Where the thadows and drawing are to be
corrected; we should do it with the shade teint, by driving
the colour very ftiff and bare, that we may the eafier re-
touch and change it with the finithing teints. Some
parts of the shadows should be glazed with some of the
tranfparent thadow-colours, fuch as will improve and
come very near to the life; but be fure not to lay on too
much of it, for fear of loting the hue of the firtt paint-
ing, the ground of which should always appear through
the glazing: Be very careful in uniting the lights and
shades, that they do not mix dead and meally; for the
more the lights mix with the shades, the more meally
thofe fhades will appear. Thus far the complexion is
prepared and improved, in order to receive the virgin
teints and finithing touches.
C2
THE


12


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND
PAINTING

Is to go over the complexion with the virgin teints:
Thefe are the colours which improve the colouring to the
greatelt perfection, both in the lights and hadows.
This should be done in the fame manner as we laid
them, in the second part of the firft painting; that is,
with the reds, yellows, and blues, blending them with
delicate light touches of the tender middie teints without
fofening.
We should leave the teints and their grounds
clean and diffinet, and be content to leave off whilft the
Work is fafe and unfullied, leaving what is farther re-
quired for the next fitting; for in attempting the finithing
touches before the other is dry, we lofe the (pirit and
drawing, and dirty wherever we touch.
THE THIRD PAINTING, OR FINISHING.
I7 is to be fuppofed, the complexion now wants very
little more than a few light touches; therefore there will
be no occation for oiling.
Begin with correcting all the glazing; firft, where the
glazing ferves as a ground or under part, then we should
determine what should be done next, before we do it
8
To


13
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
to that we may be able to make the alteration on the
part with one flroke of the pencil. By this method,
we preferve both the glazing and the teints; but if it
happens, that we cannot lay fuch a variety of teints and
finithing colours as we intended, it is much better to leave
off while the work is fafe and in good order; becaute
thofe few touches, which would endanger the beauty of
the colouring, may eafily be done, if we have patience to
ftay till the colours are dry; and then, without oiling,
add thofe finithings with free light strokes of the pencil.
I believe that Rembrandt touched upon his beft pictures
a great many times, letting them dry between: It was
this method, moft certainly, which gave them that fur-
prifing force and spirit which is fo inimitable. I find it
much eafier to foften the over firong teints when they
are dry, than when they are wet; becaufe we may add
the very colours that are wanting, without endangering
the dry work. If any of the colours of the pallet want
to be a little changed to the life, when we are painting,
it is much better to do it with the knife on the pallet,
than with the pencil; becaufe the knife will mix and
leave it in good order for the pencil.


OF BACE GROUNDS

VANDYKE made out the keeping in his back-grounds,
more from the different opposition and harmony of the
colours, than from his knowledge of the claro obfcuro.
I confess I cannot find in his pictures that intelligence
of


THE ERT OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
14
of light and shade, which is to ftriking and beautiful is
Rembrandrs. Vandyke's general method was to be very
still and mellow, and to break the colours of the ground
with thofe of the drapery. This will certainly produce

Farmony, the principles of which method belong only to
the art of colouring; but it is the knowledge of light
and shade that gives that furprifing force and ftrength,
which, at firft fight, we find in Rembrandrs works. I
have feen a picture of a lady, where he has made the
ground light enough to thew her complexion and hair,
which was a dark brown, and in the greateft perfection.
The ground was a wall, which near to the face was
lighter than the thadows of the ffeth; and the light di-
minified to artfully in the gradations, that though the
part round the head was much darker, yet it appeared to
be of the fame colour with that near the fleth. I muft
own, I like this method of relieving the head from the
ground, better than Vandykes method, where he has
made the ground almoft of the fame colour with the
hair; and though I admire this way of breaking the
colours of the ground with thofe of the draperies, yet I
am not fo much pleated, where there appears too near a
famenets, as I have feen in fome of his pictures, where
he has carried this principle fo near, that it is almoft im-
perceptible. In Rembrandts pictures, at Farmouth, the
lights and fhades are as vifible as thofe in his prints, and
are remarkably broad, clear, and still; the fhadows are
very warm and thin, and look as if they were painted all
at once, with a plenty of colour, which appears tranf-
parent; which tranfparency was done by glazing the
dead colouring
To
The


AYWTENC IN OIL.
THE ART OE
15
The principal colours that are neceffary for painting
5
of back grounds in portraiture, as walls, buildings, or
the like, are white, black, Indian red, light and brown
oker, Pruffian, and burnt umber, from which the eight
principal teints are made, as follows:
2. Pearl is made of black, white, and a little Indian
red.
2. Lead, of black and white, mixed to a dark lead
colour.
2. Fellow, of brown oker and white.
4. Olive, of light oker, Pruffian and white.
5. Plesss, of Indian red and white, mixed to a middle
teint.
6. Murrey, of Indian red, white, and a little black,

mixed to a Kind of purple of a middle teint.

7. Stone, of whice, umber, black, and Indian red.
8. Dark shade, of black and Indianred only.
Here the lead teint ferves for the blues; the fiesh teint
mixes agreeably with the lead; and the murrey is a very

good blending colour, and of great ufe where the olive
is too ftrong.
The umber, white, and dark shade, will
produce a fine variety of ftone colours. The dark shade
and umber ufed plentifully with drying oil make a
chariming warm fhadow-colour. All the colours should
be laid with drying oil only, becaufe they mix and fer
the better with the foftner.
Where the marks of the trowel are fo ftrong in the
priming of the cloth, that one body, of colours will not
be fufficient to conceal it, we should lay a colour to pre-
vent it; which should be dry before we begin with thofe

parts we expect to finith at once painting.
The


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
16
The method of painting back grounds I divide into
two parts: The firtt part is the work of the firft lay;
the second is to follow on that with the finithing teints.
OF THE FIRST LAY.

WE should always begin from the fhadowed fide of
the head, and paint the lights firft; from them go into
the gradations and thadows, which should be done with
2 fiffith tool, very (paringly, with the dark shade and
white, a litle changed with the colours that will give it
more of the required hue, but very near. in regard to
tone and firength; leaving them like metzotinto.
The dark and warm thadows should be laid before the
colours that join them. This we should do with the dark
Shade and umber, drove with drying oil; I fay before
the colours that join them, becaufe, if thofe colours
were laid on firft, they would interrupt and spoil the
tranfparency, which is their greateft beauty. The more
the firft lay is drove, the eafier and better we may change
it with the finithing teints; therefore we may lay them
with the greater body.
The second part is to follow directly, whilft the firft
lay is wet, with thofe teints that we think are the moft
proper to harmonize and finith with.
Begin with the lights firft, and remember as we
heighten and finith them, we do it with warmer colours;
and let thofe be accompanied with fine tender cold teints.
The lighteft part of the ground is always neareft to the
thadowed


17
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTL.
Lhadowed fide of the head: This is the part which go-
verns all the reft, and should be painted with a variety
of light warm clear colours, which vanish, and lofe
their firength imperceptibly, in their gradations. Thefe
should be laid with a kind of cloudy touch, rather than
potted; and we muft take care that we do not cover
too much of the firft lay, but confider it as the principal
colour.
From the lights, we go to the gradations and fhadows;
for when the lights are well adapted to produce and
support the head, it is eaty, I think, to fall from them
into whatever Kind of Shadows we shall find moft proper
for our work; then foften and blend the whole with a
long large hog-tool: which, with the ftrength and body
of the drying oil, will mell and fweeten altogether, in
tuch a flattering manner, as will seem furprifingly finished.
Remember the teints will fink, and lofe a little of their
Rrength and beaury in drying. All the grounds, as
walls, exc. should be finished at once painting; but if
they want to be changed, we may glaze them with a
little of the dark fhade and drying oil drove very bare;
on which, with a few light touches of the colour that is
wanting, we may improve their hue. The dark (hadows
may alfo be ftrengthened and improved by glazing,
which should be done after the figures are nearly finithed,
for fear of making them too frong.
1 obferve Rembrandls grounds are rather brighter
in the lights, and have more variety of reints, than
any other painters: for he had obferved, and juftly
t00, that thofe teints diminith in proportion with the
lights; therefore his fhadows have but a faint appearance
ofteints. He underftood the gradations in perfection,
D
by


THE RRT OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
38
by mixing and breaking the firft lay of colours fo artfully,
that they fiatter us in regard to their real ftrength.
Frefnoy fays, let the field or ground of the picture be
pleatant, free, trantent, light, and well united with co-
jours, which are of a friendly nature to each other, and
of fich a mixture, as that there may be fomething in it
of every colour that compofes your work, as it were the
contents of your pallet.
9
De a lles alfo obferves, that a variety of teints, very
near of the fame tone, emploped in the fame figure, and
often upon the fame part, with moderation, contribute
much to the harmony.
Aill the curtains should be dead-coloured when we
Paint the ground; and should be done with clean colours;

of 2 near hue to the intended curtain, fuch as will fupport
the finithing colours : do it with a tender fort of Keep-
ing, and near in regard to their tone in the lights, but
much fofter in the fhadows. All which should be mixed
and broken with the colours of the ground; and, as

F.elnoy obferves, bodies that are biack in the ground,
should be painted with colours allied to thofe of the
ground itfelf. Ir will often happen, for want of the life,
or fome defign, teat we cannot make the iolds the firft
painting: we should then leave the maftes of light and
Thadow, in regard to the keeping of the picture broad and,
well unired together, tuch as may feem eaty to finith on.
The colours of the landicaps, in back-grounds, should be
broke and foftened allo with thofe of the parts which
jomthem. This method brings them into keeping, which
will make all the parts of the ground, as it were of one
2
piece, to that the diffcrent parts do not fiares nor cut at
251
CIr Extremities.
The


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OTL.
29
The sky should be broke with the lead and the ffeth
teints. The murrey teint is of great ufe in the grounds
of diftant objects; and the umber and dark fhades in the
near grounds. The greens should be more beautiful than
we intend them, becaufe they will fade and grow darker.
After all is painted, we should go over the whole very
lightly with the foftener, as we did the grounds, which
will make it look agreeably finithed.



5
is
ON COPYING.

THE author of the nalyfis of Beauty (the late Nir.
William Hogarth), has given his opinion of copying in
his true fpirit and genins; treating with ridicule one of
the moft ufeful parts of painting: but this I impute to
his purfuing an originality of ideas peculiar to himfelf,
which did not render it neceffary for him to have recourfe
toancient pictures; yet to him we are indebted for the
beft collection of moral and satirical subjects that have
graced the prefent century, among which are his fix
celebrated pictures of the Marriage a-la-Mode, lately fold
at Chriftic's, to John Julius Angerffein, Efq. and which
retain their original purity and fine colouring.
Is it reafonable to believe, that a painter who unders
flands the true merit of copying would treat that part of
the art with contempt, which the greateft mafters have
always practifed and effeemed? Men of common fenfe
Know, that artifts in all ages have copied and ftudied
each other in whatever they found moft for their purpofe,
22
and


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
20
and for the advancement of their art. Was it not for
this, the art itfelf would foon dwindle and decay; and I
with this has not been the cafe with us.
Rubens ftudied principally the works of Titian, Paul
Veronefe, and Tintoret; that is, he copied fuch of their
pictures as he thought moft worthy of his imitation, and
kept them for his own ufe.
Vandyke copied Titian, and all the Venetian fchools
or, in De Piless phrafe, skimmed their cream. Teniers is
celebrated for transforming himself into as many mafters
as he copied, which he aid fo exactly, that it is hard to
diftinguith the copies from the originals. Hanneman's
copies of Vandykes are taken for the originals of that
great mafter. I have feen copies by Stone, fold at great
2
prices for undou: ted originals, notwithflanding they were
divefted of that free penciling, and charming variety of
feints, which are fo apparent in Vandyke. Buckfhorn
was one of the laft good copiers we have had in England;
the reft that followed him, and his mafter Lely, foon
drindled to half artiffs. There is a copy of Buckthorn's
painting after Vandyke, which I like much better than
any of Stone's: I mean the picture of the Earl of Stafford
and his Secretary, in the late Marquis of Rockingham's
collection, which is well painted, and defervedly efteemed.
I believe every one that has heard of Andrea del Sarto's
copy of Leo the tenth, painted by Raphael and Julio
Romano, will be convinced of the great ufe and merit of
an art, to which is owing that great number of originals
how abounding in every country. By-originals, I mean
pictures impoted as fuch, by our ingenious and honeft
dealers, to adorn the cabinets of the virtuofi and con-
poiffcurs.
I


28
THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
It is furprifing that fince the age of thefe great mafters
we have not had a man able to make a fine copy from
any one of their pictures; and I believe, if such a genius
should hereafter arife, it is to be feared the deftroyers of
the art, if they are fuffered to go on, will fcour off the
remains of their beauties, fo that very little will be left
for him to ftudy; and by the end of this century, there
will be none fit for copying.
It is in vain for a man to think of making a fine
imitation of any of the great mafters, without being
thoroughly acquainted with the nature of colours, and of
colouring, and without being clearly convinced, at fight
of the picture he is going to copy, of the method and
principles on which it was painted. It is the want of
this knowledge and conviction which leads us into to.
mahy errors and miftakes.
A painter that has acquired any fort of manner, will
always tincture his copying with the fame. Now we
are apt to fall into a manner, before we underftand the
nature of colours; which is the cafe where fome pre-
dominant colour, or hue, appears in all the complexions
alike. For this reafon a painter, whole carnations are
too red, will certainly make his copies bluth; or if his
colouring and fhadows be heavy, they will of courfe fall
into the obfcuro. By the same rule, whatever teints in
feet his colouring, the fame will unavoidably taint his
copying; for which there is no cure, becaufe he himself is
infected.
It is very rare to change a bad manner in colouring
for a better. That Raphael, Michael Angelo, Lconardo
da Vinci, Julio Romano, and other great mafters, spent
their whole lives without truly underftanding good
colouring.


22
THE ART OF PAIRTING IN OIL.
colouring. nd though colouring is the principal ex-
cellence in copying, yer it is necelfary that every artiff
should avoid a particular manner, with his pencil, other-

wife it will certainly be feen in his work.
From whar has been faid on this subject, I apprehend
that it appears, that the art of copying, which was prac-
tifed by the great mafters, in order to catch each other s
excellencies and perfections, and by which their noble
works have been to often repeated, and as it were re-
newed, is fo far from deferving contempt, that it ought
to be enccuraged, as a thing highly ufeful and worthy of
Elteem.

OF PAINTING DRAPERIES.
IN order to underfland the nature and different degrees
of colours or teints ufed in painting draperies, 1 firff
determine how many divitions are abfolutely necelfary
to make the firtt lay of colours, and after that the reffec.
tions and finithing teints.
The right method of painting draperies, or fatins in-
general, is to make out the whole, or what I call the firft
with three colours only, viz. the lights, middle teint,
1a7.
and thade tent.
We should obferve, that the lights should rather in-
cline to a warmith hue; and the middle teint should be
made of friendly working colours, fuch as will always
mix of a clean, tender, coldith hue. The shade teint
should


23
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
should be made of the fame colours as the middle teint,
only with lets light; therefore this teint will allo mix of
a tender clean colour. It is with thefe three colours we
should make out the whole, like metzotinto; and we
should underftand, that all the beauty and character of
the folds, the shape, attitude, and principal lights and
Shades, are all to be confidered, and made with thefe
three colours only; which should be done to our fatis-
faction, before we add, any of the reffects, or finishing
teints.
The reflections of draperies and fatins are generally
productions of their own, and are always lighter than
the shadows on which they are found; and being pro-
duced by light, will confequently have a light warm
colour, mixed with the local colour that receives them.
Here it will be neceffary to obferve the general method
and secret in managing the colours of the firft lay, and
thofe of the refiections and finishing teints.
In the firft lay, the high lights should be laid with 2
plenty of ffiff colours, and then fhaped and foftened into
character with the middle teint very correctly. Where
the gradations of the lights are flow, as in the large parts,
it will be proper to lay the middle teint firft at their ex-
tremities, with a tool that will drive the colour, and
leave it fparingly; becaufe the lights will mix and lie
the better upon it. Next is to make out all the parts of
the fhadows with the thade teint drove bare. fter this
comes the middle teint, which fills up and ferves as the
second lights and gradations, and should be managed to-
gether very nicely, to character without touching any of
the high lights which finith the firft lay.
The


2


7
THE ART OF PAINTING IN Ofl:
24
The reffects, and finithing teints, are in general the
antipathies of the firft lay; they will, without great care,
poifon and dirty the colours on which they are laid; and
therefore should be laid with a delicate light touch with-
out foftening: If it is overdone, we muft endeavour to
recover it with the golour of the part on which it was
laid: This may be done directly, or when it is dry.
We should alfo obferve, whether the reffects proceed
from the same colour, or any other, that the method of
uing them is the fame.
Before I proceed to the particular colours, it will be
proper to make fome obtervations on their grounds.
It often happens, that the colour of the cloth is very
improper for the ground of the drapery; and when it is
1o, we should change it with thofe colours which we
think are moft proper to improve and fupport the finith-
ing colours. This method of dead colouring muft con-
sequently preferve them in the greateft luftre. In dead-
colouring, we should lay the lights and shades in a man-
ner fo as only to thew a faint idea of them, with regard
to the shape and roundings of the figure. If we have a
defign to work from, then it will be proper to make all
the large and principal parts in their places; which
should always be done with a colour that is clean, and
lighter than the intended drapery, though in general of
the fame hue: And let the fhadows be no darker than a
middle teint: Thefe should be mixed and broke in a ten-
der manner, and then foftened with a large tool, to that
nothing rough and uneven be left to interrupt or hurt
the character of the finithing colours.
WHITE





THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OTL:
25
WHITE SATIN.
ALL whites should be painted on white grounds, laid
with a good body of colour, by reafon this colour finks
more into the ground than any other.
There are four degrees of colours in the firft lay to
white fatin: The firft is the fine white for the lights; the
second is the firft teint, which is made of fine white and
a little ivory-black, mixed to an exact middle degree,
between the white and middle teint. This colour follows
the whire; and it is with this we should fhape the lights
into character before we lay on any other, and take care
that this firft teint appears diftinctly between the white and
the middle teint, otherwife the beauty and the character
of the fatin will be spoiled.
The middle teint should be made of white, black, and
2 little Indianred: Thefe three colouys are very friendly,
and mix to a beautiful clear colour of a pearly hue,
which has the true brightness and warmth of the general
hue of the fatin. Remember to allow for the red huc
changing a little to the lead. If there is occafion to
make any part in the middle teint lighter, we should do
it with the firft teint only. This colour should alfo be
laid paringly before the white, in all the little lights that
happen in the middle teinrs and fhadows; on which we
should lay the white with one light touch, and be fure
not to cover all the parts that were made with the firft
teint; if we do, it will fpoil the character, and look like
a spot, for want of the foftening edge or border, which
muft be between the white and the middle teint. The
Lhade teint should be made of the fame colour as the
middlg reint, but with lets white, to that it be dark
E
enough


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTE.
26
enough for thadows in general; with which we should
5
make out all the parts of the shadows nicely to character,
which is the work of the firft lay.

Had

Next follour the rencus and hrithing teints:

Drown oker, mixed with the colour of the lights, is
the molt afeful colour in general for all reffects in dra-
-peries, that are produced from their own colours. All
10
accidental reneyes are made with the colour of the parts
from which they are produced, and the local colours that
receive them. There are but two reflecting teints wanted
for draperies in general; 1 mean to any one particular
colour. One should be lighter than the middle teint, the
other darker; thefe colours may be a little changed on.
the pallet with the firft and middle teints, as occafion
requires, or lightly broken on the part that receives them.
But this laft method is not to fafe as the other. The teint
fufficient for blending the dark fhadows to the mellow
tender hue, is made with the fhade teint and a little brown
oker; which should be laid on very (paringly, with foft
light touches, for fear of making them dull and heavy;
if it should be over done, we may recover it with the
colour it was laid upon.
Weoften fee a little bine ufed in the firft teint of white

fatin. Van indecken, who was the beft drapery painter
we ever had in England, did fo; and fometimes, inftead
of the blue, he uied blue-black, till he found it to be a
pernicious colcur, and was therefore obliged to ufe blue,
becaufe his middle teint, wnich was only of black and
white, was to very coid, that no other colour but blue
would make a colder teint: yet he managed thefe cold
colours, in all the lights and middle teints, to agreeably,
and to light and eaty was his rouch, that we cannot help
2amiring


27
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTE.
admiring, and may learn fomething from him. Though
he was not fo lucky in his thadows, which were generally
of a heavy dirty hue; this was owing to the colours he
uted, and the method of uting them; which will always
have fuch an effect, when a warm or dirty colour is
mixed with a clean light one; for being mixed together,
they will form a dirty colour, that muft confequently ap-
pear fo in the work. Bur if his lead or thade teint had
been mixed with Indian red, inftead of the oker, and
then followed with a few light blending touches of the
oker teint, it would have left them clean and mellow. It
is the want of the red hue, which makes the white fatins.
appear fo often like pewter.
BLUE SATINNS
BLUE fatin is made of Pruffian blue and fine white.

The beft ground for blue is white for the lights; and
black and white for the shadows.
The firft lay of colours for blue is divided into three
degrees, or teints. We should firft make the middle teint
of a beautiful azure; then mix the colour for the lights
about a middle degree, between that and white. Make
the shade teint dark enough for the fhadows in general.
All the broad lights should be laid with a plenty of colour,
and shaped to character with the middle teint, before we
lay on any other colours. Remember, the lets colours
are mixed, the better they will appear and fland; for the
lights of blue should be managed with as much care as
thofe of white fatin. Next is to follow with the reft of
the middle teint, and then make out all the fhadows.
The more we drive the shade tent, the better it will
E.2
receive


THE ART OF P:
IL.
28
receive the reffects and finithing teints. The fhadows
should be firengthened and blended with ivory-black, and
tome of their own colour, which will mix with them
into a tender mellow hue.
The refiects are made as thofe of white fatin, that is,
with oker, and some of the lights; which should be per=
fecily done, as we inrend iI, at once painting. The
Thadows, when dry, may be a little improved, if there is
occafion to alter them, with the colours they were made
with. The Pruffian proper to pe ufed, is that which
looks of the moff beautiful azure before it is ground;
and the fooner it is ufed, after it is ground, the better it
will work and appear.
Velvet may be painted at once. The method is, to
make out the firft lay with the middle teint and thade
teint; on which we should lay the high lights, with light
touches, and finith the thadows as we did thofe of the
fatin. But the neareff imitation of velvet we can make,
is done by glazing; which is to prepare a ground, or
dead-colouring, with fuch colours as will, when dry,
bear out and fupport the glazing colour in its higheff
perfection. The nature of the glazing colour is to be
of a fine tranfparent quality, and ufed fimply with oil
only, fo that whatever ground it is laid on, the whole
may appear diffinctly through it. The beft ground for
blue is made with white and ivory-black: The white is
for the high lights, which, with the middle teint and
Ihade teint, makes out the firft lay like metzotinto. Re-

member to make the middle teint lighter in proportion to
the glazing, becaute that will make it the darker. It is
often necesfary to cover all but the high lights with 2
thin glazing: I do not mean with a plenty of oil in the
Coloury


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OTL.
29
colour, but laid with less quantity than if it was to he
done once only. If any of it touch the lights, we should
wipe it off with a clean ray. The very high lights
should be improved, and made of a fine white, and left
to dry. The glazing colour is Pruffian, ground very fine,
with nut oil; and should be laid with a large fiffith tool,
that will drive the colour as occafion requires. It is on
the laft glazing we should firengthen and finith the
Thadows.
The greateft fault in the colouring of draperies, is the
painting the thadows with flrong glaring colours, which,
deftroy the beauty of the lights. This is not only the
reverfe of art, but of nature, whofe beauty always di-
minifhes in proportion with the lights. For this reafon
we should take care to blend and foften the fhadows,
with fuch friendly colours as will agree with their local
character and obfcurity. Here we may obferve, that

glazing the middle teint, which is made of black and
White, will not produce a colour to blue as if it had
been prepared with Pruffian and white; yet this colour
will preferve the beauty of the lights in the higheff per-
fection, by reafon of its tender obfcure hue, when the
bluenets of the other would only diminith them. This
method of glazing
the blue is the general rule for all
glazing.
When we are glazing blue, the lights may be glazed
with ultramarine, though all the other parts are done
with Pruffian. This method faves a great quantity of
that valuable colour, and anfwers our purpofe as well as
if it had been done with ultramarine.
Though this general method of painting fatins, is to
make the firft lay of colours with three degrees of teints,
yet


THE ART OF PAINTINE IN OIL.
30
yet we should underftand, in afing them, that they pro-
duce two more; for the mixing of two different colours
together on the cloth, will make another of a middle teint
berween them. to it is with the lights and middle teints:
and with the middle and shade teint the firft antwers to
the firft teint in white fatin, and the laft will confequently
be a fort of gradating, or half shade.
If the lights and middle teint mix to a beautiful clean
colour, of a middle hue between both, there will be no
occation for a colour to go between them, as in blue fa-
tin: But if, in mixing, they produce a teint inclining to
a dirty warm hue, then there muft be another found, of a
Tympathizing nature, which should be laid between them,
in order to preferve the beauty of the lights, as the firft
reint in the white latin; for if it was not fo, the red, in
the middle teint, would certainly dirty and fpoil the white.
It is highly neceffary to understand thefe principles of
the firft lay of colours, in order to have a perfect know-
ledge of the general rule of colouring, on which the
principles of painting depend.
SCARLET AND CRIMSON.
A LIGHT yellow red, made of Light oker, light red,
and white, is the proper ground for fearlet; the shadows
are Indian red, and, in the darkeft parts, mixed with =
very little black.
The second painting should be a little lighter than we
intend the finithing colour; I mean in proportion to the
glzzing, which will make it darker.
The high lights are vermillion and white, for fain
and velvet, and vermillion for cloth, The middle teint
15


37
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
3
is vermillion, with a very little lake or Indian red: the
Ihade teint is made with indian red and lake, with the
addition of a little black in the darkeft fhadows. The
difference between fearlet and crimfon is, that the high
lights of crimfon are whiter, and the middle teint is made
darker. Their refiects are made with light red and ver-
million. The high lights should be laid and managed in
the fame manner as thofe of the blue, for fear of dirtying
them; and fometimes they require to be touched over the
second time, before we glaze them. The more the co-
lours of the second painting are drove, the eafier and
better they may be managed to character; but the high
lights should have a good body of colour, and be left
with a delicate light touch. After it is well dry, we
should finith with glazing the whole with fine lake, and
improve the reffects and fhadows. Remember that the
fearlet requires but a very thin glazing; and it is better
to glaze the crinfon twice over, than lay too much at
once painting.
PINE COLOUR.
THERE are two different methods of painting a pink
colour; one is by glazing, the other is done with a body
of colours, at one painting. The fame grounds do for
both, which should be a whitifh colour, inclining to a
yellow, for the lights, and Indian red, lake, and white,
for the thadows.
The second painting, for the glazing method, is done
with the fame colours, and a little vermillion and whice
for the high lights. When it is dry, glaze it with fine
lake, and then break and foften the colours into harmony
directly.
The


a


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
32
The other method is to make the high lights with
carmine and white; the middle teint with lake, white,
and a little carmine; and the fhadows with lake and In-
dian red, with a little vermillion for the reffections. But
remember the thadows will require to be broken with
some tender obicure teint.
TELLOw.
THE ground for yellow should be ayellowifh white for
the lights, and a mixture of the okers for the shadows.
There are the fame number of teints in the pellow, as
there are in the white fatin, and the method of ufing
them is the very fame. The lights are made with King's
yellow, ground with clean good drying oil. The firft
teint is lightoker, changed with a little of the pearl teint,
made with the dark shade and white, which should be laid
and managed as the firft teint in white fatin. The
middle teint is a mixture of the light and brown oker,
foftened with the pearl teint. The shade teint is made
with brown pink and brown oker; thefe belong to the
firftlay.
The reffects are light oker, and fometimes, in the
warmeff parts, mixed with a little light red: the sha-
dows are Rrengthened with brown pink and burnt
umber.
Thefe colours, well managed, will produce a yellow
very like Vandykes; but if we leave out the King's yel-
low, which is in the high lights only, then it will be one
of Sir Peter Lely's favourite yellows.
CREEPY


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
33
GREEN.
THE proper ground for green is a light yellow green,
which is made of light oker, a little white, and Pruffian
blue for the lights; and the oker, brown pink and Pruf
lian for the (hadows.
The fineft green we have for draperies is made of
King's yellow, Pruffian blue, and brown pink. The high
lights are King's yellow, and a very little Pruffian; the
middle tent should have more Pruffian; and the fhadow
teint is made with fome of the middle teint, brown pink,
and more Pruffian; but the darkeft fhadows are brown
pink and a little Pruffian. The lights and middle teint
should be managed in the fame manner as thofe of the
blues. The fhadow teint should be kept entirely from
the lights, becaute the brown pink that is in it will, in
mixing, dirty them, as the black does thofe of the blues.
Remember to allow for their drying a little darker; and
that the King's yellow muft be ground with good drying
oil; for the longer it is drying, the more it will change
and grow darker. And the fooner it is ufed, the better
it will fland. It is proper to have two forts of King's yel-
low; I mean one to be very light, which will do beft for
the high lights of velvet, should it be wanted.
CHANGEABLE.
CHANGEAELE colours are made with four principal
teints, viz. the high lights, middle teint, fhade teint, and
reflecting teint.
F
The


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
34
The greateff art lies in finding the exact colour of the
middle teint, becaufe it has more of the general hue of
the filk than any of the others. The shade teint is of
the fame hue with the middle teint, though it is dark
enough for the fhadows. The high lights, though often
very different from the middle teint, should be of a clean
friendly working colour, that will, in mixing with it,
produce a reint of a clean fympathizing hue.
The method of painting filks is to make out the folds
with the fnade teint, and then fill them up in the lights
with the middle teint. This is what I call the firtt lay,
which should be done to our fatisfaction before we add
any other colours; and the fiffer the middle teint is
ufed, the better the high lights may be laid upon it.
The reflecting teint fails generally upon the gradating
half shades, and should be laid with tender touches,
paringly, for fear of spoiling the firft lay.
This method of painting antwers for all the coloured
filks as well as changeable, with this difference only,
that the plain colours require not fo much art in match-
ing the teints as the changeable do. The laft part of
the work is the finithing and ffrengthening the fhadows
with an obfcure teint, a little inclining to a mellowith
hue; fuch as will not catch the eye, and interrupt the
Beaury of the lights.
BLACE.
THE beft ground for black, is light red for the lights,
and Indian red and a little black for the fhadows.
The finithing coloursare, for the lights, black, white,
and a little lake. The middle teint has lets white, and
more


35
THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
more lake and black. the shade teint is made of an
equal quantity of lake and brown pink, with a very little
black.
The method of painting black is very different from
that of other colours; for the principal thing in them is
to leave their lights clear and brilliant, fo in black, it is
to keep the fhadows clear and tranfparent. Therefore
we should begin with the fhade teint, and glaze over all
the fhadows with it. Next lay in the darkeft fhadows
with black, and a little of the shade teint very correctly.
After that fill up the whole breadth of lights with the
middle reint only. All which should be done exactly to
the character of the fatin, velvet, cloth, &cc. &cc. and
then finith with the high lights.
Here we may obferve, the ground beingred, will bear
out and fupport the reds, which are ufed in the finithing
colours: The lake in the lights takes off the cold hue,
and gives it a more beautiful colour. If the fhade teint
was of any other colour than a tranfparent warm hue,

the hadows would confequently be black and heavy
becaufe no other colours can preferve the warm brilliancy,
which is wanting in the fhadows of the black, like lake
and brown pink. Black is of a cold heavy nature, and
always too ftrong for any other colour; therefore we
should make an allowance in ufing it. There will be
a few reflects in fatin, which should be added as thofe
of other colours; but they should be made of firong
colours, fuch as burnt umber, or brown oker, mixed
with a little shade teint.
Though the grounds which I have mentioned for the
draperies are abfolutely neceffary for the principal and
peareft figures in a picture, fuch as a fingle portrait or
F2
the





THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
36
the like; yet I do not intend them fo for figures, which
are placed more into the picture.. Such as are behind
the principal or front figures, their grounds should always
be fainter in proportion to their local finithing colours.
LINEN.
THE colours ufed in linen are the fame as those in
white fatin, except the firft teint, which is made of white
and ultramarine athes, inflead of the black, and mixed
to a very light bluith teint.
In the dead colouring, we should take particular care,
that the grounds be laid very white and broad in the
lights. The fhadows are made with black, white, and
a little Indian red, like the middle teint of white fatin.
Thefe should be left very light and clean, in order to fup-
port the finithing colours.
The second painting begins with glazing all the lights,
with a ffiff pencil and fine white only, drove bare, without
ating any oil. The fhadows may be fcumbled with
poppy oil, and fome of the colour they were made of :
This is the firft lay on which we are to follow with the
finithing colours directly. The middle teint of white
fatin is the beft colour for the general hue of the fhadows.
With this and white, in different degrees, we should
make out all the parts to character, with free light
fouches, without foftening; then, with a large long-
pointed pencil and fine white, lay the high lights very
nicely with one ftroke. After this comes the fine light
bluith teint, which should be mixed eight, and laid in the
tender gradations, very paringly and lightly, without
filling them up.
Remember


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
37
Remember the firft lay should be left clear and distinct;
the more it appears the better. It is the overmixing and
joining all the colours together, which spoils the beauty
of the character; therefore it is better to let it dry before
we add the reffects and finithing teints.
The method of letting the beautiful clear colour dry,
before we add the warm reflects, and harmonizing teints,
prevents them from mixing and dirtying each other.
The principal blending colours ufed in the reffects, are
the yellow teint, green teint, and the rofe teint; which
laft is made of lake, Indian red, and white. I find
glazing the pearl and lead colour with white, though it
feems to anfwer our purpofe when it is done, will cer-
tainly fink and be loft in the grounds on which it is laid;
therefore we should make the dead colouring as white as
we intend the finithing colours, by reafon they will fink
a little in proportion to the colour of the cloth, which
the glazing with pure white only will recover.


n
OF PAINTING LANDSCAPES.

THE principal colours ufed in landicapes, are
T. Fine flake white.
2. White lead, or common white.
3. Fine light oker.

4. Brownoker.
. Brown pink:
3
6. Burnt


38.


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
6. Burnt umber.
7. Ivory black.
8. Pruffian blue.
9. Ultramarine.
10. Terreverte.
II. Lake.
12. Indian red.
13. Vermillion, or native cinnabar.
14. King's yellow.
+
The principal teints ufed in landicapes, are
1. Light oker and white.
2. Light oker, Pruffian blue and white.
2. Light oker and Pruffian blue.
4. The Jame darker.
5. Terreverte and Pruffian blue.
6. Brown pink and Pruffian blue.
7. Brown pink and brown oker.
S. Brown pink, oker, and Pruffian blue,
9. Indian red and white.
10. Ivory black, Indianred, and lake.
The colours neceffary for dead colouring are, common
white, light oker, brown oker, burnt umber, Indian red,
ivory black, and Pruffian blue.
The principal colours and teints for painting the sky
are fine white, ultramarine, Pruffign blue, light oker,
vermillion, lake, and Indian red.
The teints are, a fine azure, lighter azure, light oker
and white, vermillion and white, and a teint made of
white, a little vermillion, and fome of the light azure,
at your difcretion.
Lands


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
39
Landicapes should be painted on a fort of tanned
leather-colour canvas, which is prepared with brown
oker, white, and light red. This colour gives a warmth
to the fhadow colours, and is very agreeable and proper
forglazing: But canvafes and ftrerching frames are to be
purchafed ready prepared, in feveral different ways, ac-
cording to the modern practice, at the colour-fhops, in
Long Acre, St. Martin's Lane, Ec. alfo every other
material ufed in this delightful ftudy.
Sketcking, or rubbing in the defign, is the firft work
of the picture.
This should be done with burnt umber, drove with
drying oil, and a little oil of turpentine, in a faint, flight,
fcumbling, free manner, as we fhade with Indian ink
and water; leaving the colour of the cloth for the lights,
as we do that of the paper. Remember in doing it, we
leave no part of the fhadows fo dark as we intend the
firft lay, or dead colouring, which is to be lighter than
the finithing colours. And though the foliage of the
trees is only rubbed in with a faint fort of fcumbling,
yet the trunks and bodies should be in their proper fhapes
with their breadths of light and fhadow. All. ind of
buildings should be done in the fame manner, leaving the
colour of the cloth for their lights. The figures on the
fore-ground, if they are determined, should alfo be
Ketched in the fame manner, and then left to dry.
OF



THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTL.
45
OF DEADCOLOURING.

LEr the firft lay, or dead -colouring, be without any
bright, glaring, or ftrong dark colours: to that the effect
is made more to receive and preferve the finifhing colours,
than to thew them in their firft painting.
The ky should be done firft, then all the diftances;
and fo work downwards to the middle group, and from
that to the fore-ground, and neareft parts. Remember
all the parts of each group, as trees, buildings, or the
like, be all painted with the group they belong to.
The greateff secret in dead-colouring is, to find the
two colours which ferve for the ground of fhadows in
general, the thy excepted, and the method of uling them
with the lights; the firft of which is the dark shade with
a little lake in it the other colour is only burnt umber
Thefe should be a little changed to the natural hue of
the objects, and then laid, and drove with drying oil,
in the fame manner as we shade with Indian ink, which
is a fcumbling kind of glazing; and as fuch they should
be left; for otherwife they will be dark and heavy, and
therefore would be entirely fpoiled for the finithing
glazing. Both thefe colours mix and fympathize agree-
ably with all the lights, but should be laid before them.
When the landicape is defigned, begin with the sky,
which should be laid with a good body of colours, and
left with a faint refemblance of the principal clouds;
and this we should do more in the manner of claro ob-
fcuro, than with finithing colours: The whiter it is left,
the better it will bear out and fupport them; the diftances
should


42
THE ART OF PAINTING IN OTL.
should be made out faint and obicurely with the dark
shades, and fome of their lights in different degrees; and
laid fo as beft to find and thew their principal parts.
As we come more into the middle group, we fall by
degrees into the burnt umber in the shades: All the
grounds of the trees should be laid or rubbed in, enough
only to leave an idea of their shapes and (hadows faintly.
The ground of their fhadows muft be clean, and lighter
than their finithing colours, fuch as will fupport the
character, and feem eaty to finith orn.
In painting the lights, it is better to incline more to
the middle teint, than to the very high lights; and ob-
ferve to leave them with a fufficient body of clean colours,
which will preferve the finithing colours better: all
which may be done with a few teints. After this, go
over the whole with a fweetner very lightly, which will
foften and mix the colours agreeably for finifhing.
SECOND PAINTING.


BECIN with the Lky, and lay in all the azure, and
colours of the horizon; then foften them: After that
lay in the general teint of the clouds: and finith on it
with the high lights, and the other teints that are want-
ing, with light tender touches; then foften the whole
with a fweether very lightly. Remember, the finithing
of the fky should be done all at once painting, becaufe
the tender character of the clouds will not do to well
6
25





THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIE.
42
as when the whole is wet. Obferve, that the stiffer the
azure and colours of the horizon are laid, the better the
clouds may be painted upon them.
The greateft diffances are chieffy made with the colour
: of the fky; and as they grow nearer and darker, we
should glaze and fcumble the parts very thin, with fuch

glazing thadow-colours as come neareft to the general
hue of the group the objects are in: This glazing should
be underfiood of a darkith hue, and that the firft painting,
or dead colour, should be feen through it diftinctly. On
this lay, or ground, we should add the finithing colours.
Now fuppoting this glazed ground is properly adapted
to the object and place, I think then it will be eaty to
find the other colours, which are wanted for the lights
and finithings of the fame: But in laying them, we muft
take care that we do not fpoil the glazing; therefore we
should he very exact in making thofe colours on the
pallet, and then be fure to lay them with light, free
touches.
Before I proceed any farther, it will be proper to fay
fomething of the moft uteful glazing colours.
Lake, terreverts, Pruffian blue, and brown pink, are
the four principal.
The more we manage them like
1 Indian ink, and the more diffinctly we leave them, the
better their tranfparent beauty will fland and appear,

provided we do it with good drying oil. After thefe four
glazing colours, burnt umber is a very good glazing
warm brown, and of great ufe in the broken grounds
and neareft parts; but the moft agreeable colours for the
darkeff fhadows, is the dark fhade improved with lake.
It is a fine warm fhade, when it is drove with drying
oil: No colour in the world is to fweet and fympathizing

11


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OTL.
43
It mixes harmonioutly with all the lights, as well as the
hadows; and is a charming colour in the trunks and bo-
dies of trees, and in all kind of buildings.
We should make out all the ground of the objects with
tuch glazing fhadow-colours, as feen neareft to the na-
tural hue of the object in that fituation; but as the prin-
cipal glazing colours themfelves are often too ftrong and
glaring, they should therefore be a little changed, and
foftened with fuch colours as are of a near refemblance
to themfelves and the objects: Thus, if it is in the dif
tances, the terreverte and azure, which are the pricipal
glazing colours, may be improved and made lighter with
tome of the lky teints; and as the diftances come nearer,
with the purple. As we get more into the middle group,
the terreverte, and Prullian blue, may be changed with
some of the green teints; fuch as are made without white,
for white is the destruction of all glazing colours. As
we approach the firft group, there is lets occafion for
changing them; but the fore-ground and its objects, re-
quire all the ftrength and force of glazing, which the co-
lours are capable of producing.
After this glazing-ground, we should follow with
Rrengthening the fame in the fhadows and darkeft places,
in fuch manner as will feem eafy to finith; which is the

firft lay of the second painting.
The colours that come next for finithing, are in the
degree of middle teints:. Thefe should be carefully laid
over the greateft breadth of lights, in fuch manner as not
to (poil and cover too much of the glazing. Do it with
a good body of colour, as ftiff as the pencil can agreeably
manage to character. Remember, the colours of the
middle teint should be of a clean beautiful hue. Accord-
G2
ing


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
44
ing to thefe methods, I think it will be eaty to finith all
the second painting as we work down from the iky,
through the middle group. As we come to the firft
group, where all the objects should be perfectly finithed,
we should finith their under or moft diftant parts, before
we paint any of the other, which appear nearer. Obferve,
this method down to the laft and neareft objects of the
picture; and where it to happens, that painting one
free over another does not pleafe; forbear the fecond,
until the firft is dry.
Thin near trees of different co-
lours, will do better, if we let the under parts dry before
we add the finithing colours.
THE THIRD AND LAST PAINTING.

Ir oiling is neceffary, lay the leaft quantity that can
be; which should be done with a fiump-tool or pencil,
proportioned to the place that is to be oiled, to that we
may oil no more than is wanted: Then wipe the whole
place that is oiled, with a piece of filk handkerchief
By this method, we leave no more oil than is proper for
our purpofe.
When we are going to finith any objects, we should
remember to ufe a great variety of teints, very near of
the same colour; but moft of all when we are finifhng
frees: T his gives a richnets to the colouring, and pro-
duces harmony. I find, by experience, the greens will
fade,
-


THE ART OF PAINTINC IN OIL.
4
45
fade, and grow darker; therefore it is highly neceffary
to improve and force them, by exaggerating the lights,
and making an allowance in uling them to much the
lighter: For the same reafon, we should take great care
that we do not overcharge and fpoil the beauty of the
glazing; for if we do, it will be dull and heavy, and
therefore will confequently grow darker.
The merhod of painting near trees is, to make the
firft lay very near to nature, though not quite to dark,
but more in the degree of a middle teint, and follow it
with ttrengthening the fhadows: Then the middle teints.
and laft of all lay the high lights, and finithing colours.
But all this cannot be done as it should be at once paint-
ing; therefore the beft way is, to do no more than the
firft lay with the faint Lhadows, and leave it to dry.
Then begin with improving the middle teints and tha-
dows, and let them dry.
The third and laft work is, adding all the lights and
finifhing colours in the beft manner we are able. This
method of leaving the firft and second parts to dry fepa-
rately, not only makes the whole much eafier, and more
agreeable, but leaves the colours in the greateft perfection;
becaufe moft of the work may be done with fcumbling
and glazing, and some parts without oiling. The lights
alfo may be laid with a better body of colour, which
will not be mixed and fpoiled with the wet ground:
What I have faid of trees, anfwers the fame to all Kinds
of shrubs and buthes.
The figures in the landicape are the laft work of the
picture; thofe in the fore-ground should be done firft,
and thofe in the diftances should be done next: For after
the figures in the firft and farcheff group are painted, I
think


3


-


-


THE ART OF PAINTING IN OIL.
46
think it will be much eafier to find the proportions of
thofe in the middle parts of the picture. And we should
obferve, that the thadows of the figures should be of the
same hue, or colour, with thofe of the group, or place
they are in.
-
FINIS


Fust Bubingen,
As a Companion to this Work,
THE
LLYLLRD CUMLAIVIL.T
OR
A Treatife on Colours.
Shewing how to make the feveral Sorts from their
Proper Ingredients; together with the moft
ufeful for colouring
MAPS, PRINTS, Eec. Ecc. Eec.
The whole being Practical Improvements on the Ex-
periments of
THE HON. ROBERT BOTLE;
Very wfeful for Gentlemen and Ladies that amufe them-
felves with Painting in Water Colours, as well as
Deligners, Limners, &c. &c.
Printed by j. WRIGHT, Denmark-Court. Strand,
ForROBERT LAURIE & JAMES WHITTLE,
No. 53, Fleet-Street, Lordon.
Prics GeeSbilling.
t
2

2
2

55


 t
3
7
2
3
8
2

29E

2tS
5
F2
2
2
53
23
212



F

15
ITEE




