THE
ACADEMY or ARTS,
OF
Universal Drawing Master;
EXHIBITING THE
PRINCIPLES OF ART,

As practised by the GREATEST MASTERs,
In Subjects adapted to Youth of both Sexes;
CONTAINING
Designs, in the Manner of Chalk and of Indian Ink,
of Heads, Figures, Historical Compositions,
Landscapes Cattle, Horsess, Birsds, Flowers,
PERSPECTIVE, ARCHITECTURE, &c. &c.
With Instructions at large, and likewise at the Bottom of each Plate.
The Whole forming a complete System of the Arts of DRAWING,
PAINTING, ENGRAVING, &c. in their various Branches; calcu
lated to entertain the Mind, and improve TASTE and GENIUS.
London: Printed for C. TAYLOR, N° 8, Dyer’s Buildings, Holborn; I. TAYLOR
opposite Great Turnstile, Holborn; and W. Nicoll, St. Paul's Church-Yard.


M, DCC, LXXXIII.


To the Public.
THE Cultivation of the Arts has always been considered as
a Proof of the Learning and good Sense of the Times, it
has ever accompanied civilized Society and polished Manners;
Contributing largely to the Amusement and Delight of the Mind,
the Arts become Objects of Attention to every Person of Taste and
Leisure.
The Arts of Design are universally admitted to the most honor
able Station; as elegant and useful Attainments, they have consti
tuted a principal Part of accomplished Education in every polite
Country: Never were they so universally esteemed; never was the
Applause of the British Public so liberally bestowed as of late; but
perhaps the most striking Proof of Approbation is, the Assiduity
with which they are cultivated by almost every Lady and Gentleman.
Yet it must be acknowledged, that considerable Impediments pre¬
vent these desirable Acquisitions from being so general as might be
wished.—The Difficulty of procuring respectable Masters, together
with the Expence attending this Branch of polite Education, deprives
many young Persons (of both Sexes) of that Opportunity of Im
provement which their Talents deserve; such an Opportunity is pre
sented to them, at a very moderate Purchase, by this Publication:
Its copious Directions are calculated to supersede the Necessity of
any other Instructor, while as an Introduction to the Arts of Design
in general, it furnishes a truly elegant and rational Amusement, by
presenting an almost infinite Variety of Subjects, conducted with
strict Regard to Delicacy and Virtue.




The“ Human Face divine", as Milton expresses it, will be treated
wich ihe greatest Attention, from the first Principles to the most ex
pressive Countenance.
The Whole-length Figure, Attitudes, Draperies, and Composi
tion, will be justly and correctly explained.
Landscape will form a most entertaining Series; and its universal
Aflistant, Perspective, will be presented in its various Branches; as
well as Architecture and Ornament.
Flowers have ever been considered as a most delightful Part of
Natural History: To accommodate them more immediately to the
Intent of this Work, they will be coloured from Nature; which it is
hoped may not only recommend them to the Patronage of the La
dies (who have constantly adopted Flowers among the Ornaments
of Dress); but, by displaying the superior Elegance of our native
Productions, may banish those exotic Devices, which have too
much prevailed.
Nor are these the Limits of our Plan: The Art of Painting in
Oil, Crayons, and Water Colours (with che Manner of Composing
Colours, Crayons, Varnishes, &c.); Engraving in its various Branches,
and many other useful and amusing Sciences will be explained: To
which mar be added, a proper Dictionary of Terms of Art; Em
blematical Subjects; and Ancient Mythology, so far as connected
with the Arts.
Such are the Outlines of this Publication: Every Care and Atten
tion will be bestowed in its Execution, to render it honorable to the
Arts, and worthy the Patronage of the Public.
T H E









THE
ACADEMY oF ARTS, &c.

Is is true that Genius and Inclination will surmount great Dissi
culties; those which are insuperable to some, others may surpass
by severe Labor: Yet is is a grateful Task to remove Impediments
from the Pach to Knowledge; and the greater the Genius, the more
will the Obligation be felt and acknowledged; for Instruction
especially if clear and easy to follow) is most prized by those who
are most capable of prositing by it.
The ARTS of DESIGN embrace a great Variety of Subjects, and
need an equal Variety of Precepts; it is too diflicult for the Young
Adventurer to attend to many at once, we purpose, therefore, to
treat them separately.
The ART OF DRAWING, as the Foundation of all other Arts,
claims our first Attention: Not only umiversally admired as elegant
and ornamental, but it’s acknowledged Utility enhances it’s Value.
This Art lends Assistance to many Professions not confined to
Painters, Engravers, Embroiderers, &c. whose Employments evi
dently depend upon it; it is daily practised by the Mathematician,
Engineer, and Navigator.
To be able to Design on the Spot a striking Prospect; a noble
Building; a curious Production of Art, or an uncommon Appearance
of Nature; is not only a desirable Amusement, but a useful Ac




complishment. To preserve to remote Posterity the Resemblances
of illustrious Personages—to transmit Objects of Attention to foreign
Climes—is no inconsiderable Attainment: We are pleased with
the Genius and Abilities of distant Artists; in Return, our own Perf
formances command their Applause.
Hereby ihe Productions of
Nature or Art in all Parts of the Globe become familiar to us: We
contemplate without Danger the Inhabitants of the Poles, the Groen
lander in his Hut, the Siberian in his Cave; Mountains of Ice;
Monsters of the Deep; the Bite of the Rattle-Snake, the Sting of
the Scorpion, strike us with no Dread; nor are we exposed to In
conveniencies, though examining the Manners of the Chinese or the
Hottentot. No Wonder an Art so univerfally uleful fhould be ad¬
mired and distinguished as one of the highest Embellishments of
human Life.
DRAWING is the Art of representing the Appearances of Objects:
It expresses by Lines and Shades the Resemblance of any Thing
whatever; and even produces to the View of others the Conceptions
of the Mind.
The MATERIALS used in Drawing are Black Lead Pencils—
Chalks, black, white, and red—a T Square—a Parallel Ruler—
Compaffes—Pens—Camel’s-hair Pencils—Indian Ink, and Indian
Rubber. Various Sorts of Paper are used to work upon; for Indian
Ink, white and fine—for Chalk, more rough and coarse—for black
and white Chalk, blue or brown, &c. according to the Fancy of
the Designer.
The young Designer should by all Means draw his Studies large,
thereby avoiding that Confusion of Lines almost inseparable from
smaller Subjects; for, having once attained a strong and distinct Idea
of his Object, he will find much less Difficulty in reducing than in
enlarging it.
This premised, it is adviseable to commence the Study of this
noble Art by drawing first in Chalks, being beiter calculated
than Indian Ink, not only for the Size of the Design, but as they
contribute greatly to bold and free handling, which is a very desir
able Acquisition Ease and Facility not only expedite Business, but
give a certain Master-like Appearance, which elaborate Neatness
cannot equal.







To begin a Drawing in Chalks; first form a Sketch from the
Original with a Piece of Charcoal of convenient Thickness and
Length; this is the best Material to sketch with, as it admits of be
ing frequently rubbed out consequently the Outline of the Subject
may be rendered very correct before it is finished in Chalk: Ac
custom yourself to hold your Port Crayon or Pencil further from the
Point than in Writing, that it may not impede the free Motion of
your Hand.
It is not amiss to caution the young Designer against cutting his
Chalk to too sharp a Point, which does more Harm, by preventing
a proper Boldness, than it does Good in Respect of Neatness; Neat¬
ness should be the Result of Judgment as well as of Care and La
bour, or it will infallibly be stiff and awkward.
The Use of the Black Lead Pencil is to form an accurate Outline
of any Design intended to be finished in Indian Ink: The India
Rubber erases Black Lead Lines very neatly: The T Square, Ruler
and Compasses, are necessary in drawing Perspective, Architecture,
&c. but should never be applied to Figures: The Designer should
accustom himself to see correctly without such injurions Assistances
As a great Master expressed himself,
"The Compasses should be
in the Eye, not in the Hand."
Before you begin your Performance confider your Original wich
close Attention, divide it in your Mind into several Parts, observe
the Length, the Breadth, and Similitude of each Part; remark
their Proportion to each other and to the whole; their respective
Distances and Situations; more especially attend to those Objects or
Parts which fall immediately under others, and those which are
parallel to others; if this Rule is duly practised it will prevent any
material Error: As the Excellence of Drawing consists in its Accu
racy, endeavour to make vour Sketch as corrcct as possible; never
proceed to shadow or finish any Part of a Drawing till the Lines of
the Skeich have attained a close Resemblance to the Original; al
ways remembering to begin at the left Part of your Paper, that
what you are about may be continually visible; the right Side of
your Drawing is liable to be covered by your right Hand, and even
by your Arm if the Paper is large.





Some Persons are apt to lean their Stomach and Arms upon their
Drawing, or Table, which is a very unhealthy Custom, and even
injurions to the Performance; it is well worth while to remember
this, since the whole is Habit, and a good Posture may as readily
be obtained as a bad one; the more upright you sit the better: The
Distance of the Original from your Eye demands another Caution;
if too near, it not only prevents a proper View of the whole Subject
you copy, but is not free from Danger of rendering the Eyes short
fighted.
Supposing the young Designer with à good Original now be
fore him, and proper Materials in Hand, it remains (before we
procced to the next Part of our Subject) to remind him that RESO
LUTION is the very Life of his Undertaking; Difficulties will occur,
he must surmount them; others may present themselves, they like
wise must be overcome; having subdued the first he is more able
to combat the second; the same have presented themselves to the
greatest Masters; the Art will reward the Resolute, as fuch let him
expect Success.
OF THE HUMAN FIGURE.
THE Human Figure, considered not only as the most ex
pressive and beautiful, but also the most interesting Object,
claims our first Attention.
It is customary to divide the Figure into three Parts; the Head,
the Body, and the Members which move upon the Body: Dr.
HUNTER indeed considers the Head as a Member moving upon the
Body; but this Division is peculiar to himfelf.
To convey more readily a just ldea of the Excellence proper to
each Part, we shall treat of it under the Articles PROPORTION
CHARACTER, and EXPRESSION (corresponding to the Degrees of
Comparison in Grammar); in Reference to which we may call a
well-proportioned Head, Body, &c. good; one not only well pro
portioned, but exhibiting a certain natural Likeness or Character,
may be denominated better; and if to a well-proportioned Character
be



be superadded a happy and forcible Expression, it is the Summit of
Excellence in the Art and the Artist.
The general Proportions of the Figure we propose somewhat to
explain before we proceed to the separate Parts; as thereby may be
attained a more distinct Idea of the Method used in measuring those
Parts, as well as ihe Figure. The most regular Manner of measur
ing an Object, is to take for a Standard a Part whose Proportion is
usually most obvious and permanent: Therefore the Figure is con
sidered as containing in Height or Breadth fo many Measures of the
Head; (as the Head contains so many Measures of the Nose.)
The best antique Statues have seven Heads, seven and a half to
seven and three quarters in Height. The most eminent Artists
conform in their Works to this Standard. The Figures engraved
being marked by a Scale of Heads, sufficiently explain themselves:
To which may here be added, that the Arms of a Man, when ex
tended, are in Length equal to his Height; from one Side of the
Breasts to the other is one Head and half; from the Shoulder to the
Elbow, one and half; from the Elbow to the End of the little
Finger, one and half; the Hand exactly spans the Face; the Thumb
contains one Nose; the Sole of the Foot is onc sixth Part of the
Height of the Figure.
Dismissing for the present the Proportions of the Figure, we pro
cced to consider the Parts into which we have divided it.
OF THE HEAD,
WHICH, in the Language of Artists, often includes, besides the

Face, so much of the Neck as is Neccessary to give a proper
Air and Expression, but is here confidered as comprehending only
from the Chin upwards.
Nature has made the Countenance not only the Seat of great
Beauty, but of universal Expression; nor is there any Passion of the
Mlind, or Sensation of the Body, which does not discover itself in
the Movements of the Features. As the Head is the chief Seat of
Character (which differs in different Subjects, and implies a Vari
ation of Proportion), it is less bound by fixed Rules than any other





though ever so wanton and playful. Attention should be paid to
the natural Disposition of the Sexes: A Doll, which, as a Toy,
well enough becomes a Girl, is improper for a Boy; as manly Ex
ercises, Horses, or Arms, which are the Delight of Boys, are not
pleasing in the softer Sex.
The CHARACTER of the HEADS of ADULT PERSONS opens a
very extensive Field for Investigation; wherein we should consider,
not only the now very visible Distinction of Sexes, but also the Ef
fects of natural Inclination, of acquired Habit, and of various Rank
in Life; the Difference between the Natives of one Country and
another; and the Influence of those numerous Disorders to which
the human Frame is subject; all which arc clearly discernible to
those whose Attention has been employed upon the Subject.
The following Remarks are taken from the ingenious Author
quoted above, whose Expedients to mark the Characters in his Per
formances are singularly happy.
We have daily many Instances which confirm the common
received Opinion, that the Face is the Index of the Mind; and
this Maxim is so rooted in us, we can scarce help (if our Attention
be a little raised) forming fome particular Conception of the lPer
son's Mind whose Face we are observing, even before we receive
Information by any other Means. How often is it said, on the
slightest View, that such a one looks like a good-natured Man;
that he hath an honest, open Countenance; or looks like a cun
ning Rogue, a Man of Sense, or a Fool, &c. And how are our
Eyes rivetted to the Aspects of Kings and Heroes, Murderers
and Saints; and as we contemplate their Deeds, seldom fail mak
ing Application to their Looks. It is reasonable to believe that
Aspect to be a true and legible Representation of the Mind, which
gives every Spectator the same Idea at first Sight, and is after
wards confirmed in Fact; for Inftance, all concur in the same
Opinion at first Sight of a downright Idiot.
There is but little more to be seen by Children’s Faces, than
that they are lively or heavy; and scarcely that, unless they are
in Motion. Very handsome Faces, of almost any Age, will hide
a foolish or a wicked Mind, till they betray themselves by their
Actions or their Words; yet the frequent awkward Movements




of the Muscles of the Pool’s Face, though ever so handsome is
apt in Time to leave such Traces up and down it, as will distin
guish a Defect of Mind upon Examination; bur the bad Man,
he be an Hypocrite, may so manage his Muscles, by teaching
them to contradict his Heart, that little of his Mind can be ga
thered from his Countenance; so that the Character of an Hypo
crite is entirely out of the Power of the Pencil, withom some ad
joining Circumstance to discover him, as smiling and stabbing at
the fame Time, or the like.
It is by the natural and unaffected Movements of the Muscles,
caused by the Passions of the Mind, that every Man’s Character
would in some Measure be written in his Face, by that Time he
arrives at forty Years of Age, were it not for certain Accidents,
which often, though not always, prevent it: For the ill-natured
Man, by frequently frowning and pouting out the Muscles of his
Mouth, doth in Time bring those Parts to a constant State of the
Appearance of Ill-nature, which might have been prevented by
the constant Affectation of a Smile; and so of the other Passions;
though there are some which do not affect Muscles at all
(simply of themselves), as Love and Hope.
But, left I shou
be thought to lay too great a Stress on outward Show, it is ac
knowledged there are so many different Causes which produce
the same Kind of Movements and Appearances of the Features,
and so many Thwartings by accidental Shapes in the Make of
Faces, that the old Adage, Fronti nulla fides, will ever stand it's
Ground upon the whole; and, for very wise Reasons, Nature
hath thought fit it should.
But, on the other Hand, in many
particular Cases, we receive great Information from the Expres

sions of the Countenance.
After which Remarks, this attentive Observer proceeds to recom
mend the Expressions in LE BRUN’s Passions of the Mind; a com
plete Edition of which excellent Performance will be given in this
Work.
It is certain that we expect from Kings and Noblemen verv dif
ferent Demeanour and Address from that of Rustics and Clowns,
and to see in them an Air of Dignity and Grandeur, which we sup
pose distinguishes them from the Crowd. It is true, a Hero or a





King in not always tall or comely nor can the Mind be universally
traced in the Lineaments of the Commntenance; yet, as Design can
not represent the Mind but through the Medium of the Body,


a commendable Liberty to exhibit such Features as most immediately
characterize to the Spectator the Subject intended. Suppose a King
be represented at the Head of his Troops; we naturally look for
a more martial Air, and greater Gallanter, in the King than in
the Soldiers, who, though valiant, must yet shew a Valour less
elevated in Character than that of their Leader: Or if the Sub
ject be a Magistrate condemning a Thief; the Characters of both
must be so discriminated as to prevent Inquiry, which is thie Judge
and which che Culpri: If che Detign be an Exchange; amidst
all the Confusion occasioned by the crowding Multitude the Artist
must carefully attend to che Character proper to the Natives of each
Country, who may be transacting Business: A Group of Counte¬
nances resembling American Indians, would ill fuit ihe Turkish
Walk; nor would the saturnine Features of an Hollander agree
with the Dress (and expedted Levity) of a Frenchman: A Sailor
must be distinguished from the Merchant conversing with him; as
the Merchant himself must be from others around him. A little
Reflection upon these Hints is sufficient to demonstrate the Import
ance of this Principle, and the Necessity of treating it with Care
and Attention.
As the Intent of this Work is to assist the young Designer in the
Study of Nature, whose APPEARANCES are the Object of our pre
sent Attention, it would be beside our Purpose to enter into Mys
teries of PHYSIOGNOMY (a Science “ puzzled in Mazes and per
plexed wich Errors"), though many great Names have thought it
the Foundation of this Part of the Art, and an eminent Virtuoso of
Germany has lately supported it in all it’s Extremes: Yet perhaps
it
may not be totally useless to remark, that the animal Part of Man
is apparently governed by the same Laws as Animals in general;
and that when the human Countenance is similar in it's Parts to
those of certain Animals, the Man is supposed to have similar Dis
positions. Features of the Swine, the Ox, the Sheep, and even the
Lion, have been found in some Faces: SOCRATES is an indubitable
Instance of the first, and CROMWELL of ihe last; at the Sight of
whose



whose Portrait a Northern Potentate is said to have exclaimed.“ I
" protest he makes me tremble.
It may not be improper to insert some of those Differences which
have been observed to distinguish the human Species; for, notwith
standing there are Animals, void of Reason, whose Forms approach,
in Appearance, very near to that of Man, and the Features of some
Men resemble Parts of certain Animals, yet there are strong and
permanent Marks of Distinction: I. THE EYES of Man are placed
on a Line with the Auditory Nerve; those of Brute Animals are, on
the contrary, much lower and nearer to the Nose, according to their
natural Dispositions: II. Man is able to clevate the BALL of the
EYE, which Animals cannot do without lifting up the Nose; their
Eyeballs may turn fo far downwards, as to fliew a Portion of
White above ihe Iris, but are utterly incapable of turning upwards:
III. The EYEBROWS of Animals never meet, and always decline
at their Extremities; while those of the human Countenance ap
proach each other in the Middle of the Forehead, and elevate their
Terminations on the Sides of the Nose.
To return from this Digression: Dur Subject leads us to consider
that we have represented CHARACTER as a Variation of Proportion,
which, by adding to one Part, seems to diminish the rest. Those
Parts of the Face which chiefly contribute to Expression, are those
wherein Character is most clearly discerned; in Expression they
appear more powerful and active, as the Occasion is recent and
obvious; but the Cause of Character being remote and latent, it’s
Tokens, though abiding, are not equally strong.
As the Parts of
the Face will be examined under the Article EXPRESSION a few
Words upon each of them shall suffice here.
A Forehead, upon which the Hair grows very low, especially if
accompanied with Wrinkles, is usually a Sign of a gloomy Dispo
sition. Very thick Eyebrows seem to indicate Jealousy and Dislike.
The Eyes very much contribute to Character; when large and
fierce they express Courage and Fury; when soft and moderate,
Good-nature; but if too small, they mark Disingenuity and Cun
ning. The Nose is the Seat of Anger; and large Nostrils may be
thought to signify it; the Nose, when turned up, betokens Sensu
ality; and when ruddy, is well known as ihe Sign of a Drunkard.




The Mouth discovers whether a Person be churlish or benevolent;
if the former, the under Lip has contracted a Habit of Pouting, and
it’s Corners bend downwards; it the latter, the Corners of the
Mouth turn rather upwvards, as approaching to a Smile, especially
when about to speak. The Cheeks, in Persons of a complacent
Temper, are seldom found hollow and funk in; when plump, they
commonly represent Jollity and Mirth.
" The Form of the Nofe (says LEONARDO DA VINCI) may be
varied eight different Ways, exhibiting as many different Kinds of
Noses: either (1) uniformly straight, concave, or convex; or (2)
straight, concave, or convex, unequally; or (3) ihe Parts above
straight, those below concave; or (4) those above straight, those
below convex; or (g) concave above, and straight below; or (6)
concave above, and convex below; or (7) convex above, and
straight below; or (8) convex above, and concave below.
The
Insertion of the Nose to the Eyebrows admits but two different
Forms, concave or straight. The Forehead is capable of three dif
ferent Shapes, plain, concave, or convex: the plain is divided seve
ral Ways; either hollow towards the Top, or towards the Bottom,
or at both Top and Bottom; or it is uniformly plain and even. In
Order to retain the Air of any Man’s Face whom you chance to see,
apply yourself to the Study and Observation of the various Faces
which present themselves, always taking especial Notice of those
Parts which distinguish one Man from another, and which most
contribute to that infinite and amazing Variety observable in the
Species.
" Every Feature, however minute, affords something particu
lar for Observation, which, being regarded with proper Attention,
will contribute greatly to render the Ideas of the Student just and
permanent.
It is impossible to say, determinately, such and such Features
compose the Character of a Person, therefore he is morose, a
Glutton, &c. because the Inclination of the human Mind, being not
to one Passion exclusively (though one may predominate) but com
pounded of many Desires, and containing a Variety of Dispositions,
often opposite and contradictory; fo the Signs of those Dispositions
oppose and contradict each other. There is no Man whose




Features exhibit Anger or Hatred, Affection or Tranquillity, alone;
because he is not constantly angry, though often; not always tran
quil and easy, however calm he may be in general; but his Sen
sations being various, his Aspect presents the Marks of that Variety:
hence arises that almost infinite Diversity of Character, which we
remark in the human Countenance; hence the Likeness or Unlike
ness in Persons of the same Family; whose Turn of Mind, being
similar or different, the Family Resemblance is varied into the Fea
tures corresponding therewith.
Natural Inclination, though active and powerful, is not infre
quently so controlled and checked by ACQUIRED HABIT, as to lay
dormant (or nearly) in Action and Demeanour. If a Person be
choleric, he is nevertheless restrained, by a Principle of good
Breeding and Manners, from indulging his Choler: if he be a Man
of Sense and Wisdom, his Care in this Particular will greatly curb
his Disposition; a Person naturally gluttonous will, it a Man of
Decency, for Decency’s Sake refrain from gross Debauchery; De
corum of Behaviour, though it cannot erase the Lines of a Coun
tenance, yet should incline an Artist to soften them; nor represent
to Posterity, as irascible, or as a Glutton, him whose Deportment
is sedate and temperate. Acquired Habit, though it cannot erase
the Lines of a Countenance, frequently adds others to them.
Severe and long continued Study is apt to occasion a Solemnity of
Aspect (chiefly seen in the Brow), which should be carefully distin
guished from IIl-nature; and indeed all Professions occafion à certain
something in the Appcarance of those who follow them, which,
is evident wich little Trouble: the Soldier, the Sailor, the Bucher,
are Instances universally admitted; nor is lie reckoned the most
sharp fighted Person, who does not discover a Taylor at first Sight.
Exceptions must be allowed, but the Principle is just.
This Idea
might be pursued in a very extended Variety of Remarks; but, as
Attention to Nature will confirm the Student in it’s Propriety, we
shall not enlarge upon it here. Habit, arifsng from Causes not pro
fessional, has many Ways of shewing itself, and contributes not a
little to Character. A Person who has constantly affected superior
Judgment (no Matter in what Art) acquires a certain positive and
dogmatical Air, both in his Countenance and Manner: Habit makes




some hold down their Heads, others hold them up; some stare
from Habit; others squint. Nature is the only Guide upon this Sub
ject; the Variety is too copious to be regulated by Precept.
Hitherto we have only considered Rules of general Application;
it may assist to enlarge the ldeas of the Student, if we notice some
Subjects more particularly.
Vain is the Attempt (were it ever fo lawful) to reprefent Driry,
who dwelleth in Light inaccessible invisible to Men, perhaps to
to Angels. The Church of Rome, in permitting such Pictures,
docs equal Dishonour to the Subject, and Injury to Art; which,
if
Properly employed, may expect to be rewarded with Applause;
but, upon Designs INFINITELY beyond it’s Power, it’s utmost Ex
ertions are frivolous and vain.
But in the Person of JESUS CHRIST the Restraint is taken off,
and the human Nature of Christ is equally with others a Subject
for the Pencil; not that there is the least Reason to suppose his Por
trait was ever taken, or that St. LUKE is the Author of those at
tributed to him, which are universally painted in so wretched a
Style, as to make us hope (were they his) he succeeded better in
his Evangelical Calling, than in that of a Painter.
The Plates exhibit Heads of Christ, from various Masters and
Histories (indeed the same Master, when treating different
Facts, could not but insert Heads of different Airs, as the Subject
treated might require;) yet, in he Character which the greatest
Painters have chosen to represent Christ, there appears a Resem
blance of Features; because the Parts which composed his moral
Character being permanent, his pictursique Charaster (so to term
it) of Necessity contains such Traits as correspond wich it. Meck
ness, Benevolence, Compassion, mingled with Dignity (sometimes
with Fervour, never with Anger or Pride) forbid the Marks of
irregular Passions, which (alas!) are too universal among Mankind.
To represent him at any Period during his Life, it should be remem
bered that he was“ a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief;
but after his Resurrection, as his Sorrows and Grief were past, his
Counenance expreffes greater Complacency and Majesty.
The APOSTLES should be drawn in a Style suitable to their apos
tolic Office, and not to their previous Prosessions. PETER, as an




Apostle should have more Dignity united to his Warmth than is
due to him as a Fisherman.
As the Stations of PETER and JOHN are very conspicuous in
the History of the Gospel, they are naturally introduced into
most Compositions representing Events of that History; and
Artists have generally agreed in the Character proper to each:
But to retain (as some have done) the youthful Appearance of
Jonn, when the Story related happened in his old Age, is absurd;
no Excuse can justify fo flagrant Violation of propriety.
A Moment’s Reflection is sufficient to demonstrate the Neces
sity of giving to JUDAS ISCARIOT very distinct Features from
any of the other Apostles: For, although it is evident the Disci
ples rather suspected themselves than him (so fairly did he preserve
Appearances) yet, unless the Artist is permitted to employ some
Signs of his Baseness, he cannot possibly distinguish the Traitor
and Thief.
These Subjects are clear and obvious; but there are others
more obscure and difficult. We have Authority to suppose
St. PAUL was in Person diminutive and inelegant, and troubled
with a Disorder most probably nervous, or paralytic.
Under
these Embarrassments, what Traits shall express the Dignity of
Sentiment, the persuasive Energy, the eloquent Pathos of this in
spired Apostle? The Plates shew the Ideas of RAPHAEL and other
great Masters upon these Subjects, which are selected as being ge
nerally familiar to younger Minds.
Profane History affords innumerable Instances of Diversity of
Character. The heroic ALEXANDER the effeminate DARIUS the
sublime PLATO, must not resemble each other independent of
Likeness to their Portraits. CAESAR must be distinct from NERO,
and TRAJAN from CALIGULA.
Poetry presents an inexhaustible Fund of Subjects for the Ex
ertions of Design: And as Art enjoys the greatest Liberty when
engaged upon them, because Creatures of Fancy, so it is ex
pected that a fertile Imagination and a skilful Hand, should
embody, as it were, the Ideas of the Poet, and present to the
Eye the Similitudes of Deities or Heroes, of Nymphs or Syl
vans, with Freedom and Vigour: But, if Imagination should run




riot, and attempt to express the Subjects treated without strict
Attention to Character, what an heterogeneous Mixture would it
produce!“ Confusion worse confounded“ would be its proper
Motto.
JUPITER or APOLLO, CUPID or HERCULES, must be known not
so much by the Thunderbolt or Lyre, the Quiver or the Club,
as by Features so expressively coincident with the Subject as to
preclude doubt. ACHILLES and NESTOR, AJAX and ULYSSES
must differ as well from each other, as from THERSITES or POLY
PHEMUS.
Our sublime Poet MILTON has expressed and distinguish
ed the Characters of the Personages in his PARADISE LOST with
Skill and Precision at least equal to any other Author. HOMER
only can pretend to be his Superior as having been in some in
stances his Original. In Conformity to the ldea, that to repre
sent DEITY is infinitely beyond the narrow Limits of human
Ability MILTON himself has not attempted it; but has chosen
to describe the attendant Angels, “ the Chariot of Paternal
Deity“ in the most exalted Terms, and having thus elevated the
Mind of his Reader, leaves him to reason with ADAM in another
Instance.
These are thy glorious
Works, Parent of Good.
Almighty, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thyself how wondrous then
  
Unspeakable¬
In a Work which treats of the Sister Art to Poetry it would be
unpardonable to pass slightly over a Poem. which does so much
Honour to our native Country, and which exhibits such excellent
and so various Descriptions of Characters, exalted, abased inno
cent, guilty, lovely, and hateful. The Student who enters into
the Spirit of MILTON's Portraits, will not only be highly enter
tained, but greatly improved: To speak like a Painter, their Co
louring and Expression is noble, in a Stile grand and sublime,
and their Effect wonderfully well adapted to strike the attentive.
Reader.




The following is among the most exquisite Effusions of
poetic Imagination; its Subject is ADAM and EVE in Paradise:
Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,
Godlike erect with native honour clad
In naked majesty seem'd lords of all,
And worthy seem'd; for in their looks divine
The image of their glorious maker shone
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe but in true filial freedom plac’d;
Whence true authority in men: though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seem'd;
For contemplation he and valour form’d,
For softness the and sweet attractive grace,
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large front and eye sublime declar’d
Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clust'ring, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She as a veil down to the slender waist
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dishevell'd, but in wanton ringlets wav'd,
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded—
Book IV.
Nothing can exced the majesty of this description; it is as
much superior to the magnificence of the purple vest, the glit
tering helm, the nodding plume, of some poets, as the real
subjects of the poem were in their state of felicity to any of
their numerous but degraded issue; not that the tokens of
station and dignity are in the present slate of things to be des
pifed, but that the charms of simple and innocent nature are in
finitely superior to the splendid pomp of external decoration.
A striking contrad to the description above, is the representa
tion of Saran about to speak in the council at Pandemonium,
where although the subject is allowably as bad as imagination can
make it, and where alone there is usually thought to be no dan




ger of exaggeration; yet we have not the devil which vulgar
minds would draw, but such a mixture of feelin gand compassion
as expresses “ not less than th’ archangel ruin'd,"
and which very
judiciously heightens the other infernal parts of
his character; as
light is necessary to discern the depth of black itself.
As when the sun new ris'n
Looks through the horizontal misty air
Shorn of his beams; or from behind the moon
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarchs. Darken'd so, yet shone
Above them all th’ archangel; but his face
Deep fears of thunder had entrench’d, and care
Sate on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage and considerate pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime: the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemn'd
For ever now to have their lot in pain
He now prepar'd to speak
Thrice he essay'd, and thrice in spite of scorn
Tears such as angels weep burst forth: at lafs
Words interwove with sighs found out their way. Book I.
The portrait of BEELZEBUB is not less excellent.
With grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seem’d
A pillar of state; deep on his front engraven
Deliberation fat and public care;
And princely counsel in his face yet shone,
Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mighty monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention—
Book I.




To notice the Descriptions of Character which SHAKESPEARE
has left us, would be to transcribe many Pages, and would extend
this Article beyond its proper Limits. It is no new Idea,
that the Genius necessary to Poetry and Painting is greatly simi
lar; of this the Subject before us is a very confiderable Evidence,
for unless both the Poet and Painter carefully maintain in
their Works a regular and obvious Discrimination of Character,
the Beauty and Excellence of their Performances vanish.
From these Remarks it appears, that one Mean, whereby to
attain a competent Discernment of picturesque Character, is a
familiar Acquaintance with the Works of our best Authors.
Whoever with Attention to this Hint reads those SPECTATORS,
which contain Accounts of Sir ROGER DE COVERLEY will quick
Iy perceive the Diversity of Features necessary to distinguish him
from WILL. HONEYCOMB or Sir ANDREW FREEPORT.
The DIFFERENT NATIONS which inhabit the Globe have each
a Something in their Appearance peculiar to themselves, arising
either from Climate or Custom, from religious Rites or civil
Manners, independent of that Cast of Features which each Indi
vidual possesses and of whatever Rank he may sustain in Life. It
is true, that among Europeans, and Nations who have conside
rable Intercourse with each other, this Variety is not so striking
as in People who never mingle with their Neighbours; because
the former become in Time not a little assimilated to those with
whom they have most Communication; and Natives of either
Country, who unite and mix with the other, diffuse their distin
guishing Peculiarity wherever they form Connections: so like
wise Persons of Rank and Fortune seldom present the Marks of
their Nation equally strong with the lower Classes of People, be
cause by Acquaintance with Foreigners at Home, or Residence
among them Abroad, they acquire much of their Manners and
Deportment, while the inferior Part of Mankind not having the
same Opportunities, but continually conversing among such as
resemble themselves, preserve the original and popular Character
of their Country.
National Distinctions of Feature and Manners are so ob
vious, that little need be said upon them; it is useless Labour to



 
prove that an Englishman does not resemble a Chinese, or a
Frenchman a Hottentot; but it would require a very copious
Dissertation to examine into all the Varieties that might be
named; nor is it easy to procure authentic Portraits of remote
Nations sufficiently correct, from which to form a Judgment.
What we have been able to obtain appears in the Plates, what
further may occur will be noticed under the MISCELLANEOUS
OBSERVATIONS.
It may be proper to remark in general, that Geographers and
others, who have studied the human Species, inform us of at least
eight Varieties found upon the Globe, diflerent from each other
in many Respects: (1) The LAPLANDER whose diminutive Fi
gure, instead of measuring seven and half or eight timees the
Length of his Head, admits but from five to six, and of conse
quence has to us an uncouth and squab Appearance, who perhaps
is as little pleased with what he considers as the too tall and
awkward Proportions of the (2) SOUTHERN EUROPEAN:
The
(3) NEGRO has Features peculiar to himself, so has the
(4)
TARTAR, the (5) CHINESE, the (6) HOTTENTOT so have
the
(7) INDIANS of North America, and (8) those of the South
To
which Varieties may be added that singular People the JEWS. 
Many other national Peculiarities might be noticed, but it
becomes us to consider that this Article is, as we have ob
served, a very extensive Field for Investigation, which al
though it abounds with Flowers both fragrant and beautiful,
yet (like all other Paths to Knowledge) is not without many
Thorns and Briars; it requires no little Dexterity to avoid the
latter in whoever wilhes to possess the former. This Dexterity
may be attained in Time, when a ripe Judgment and intelligent
Mind may safely emulate Subjects which, at present, it is prudent
to forbear.
We hinted that the numerous DISORDERS to which the human
Frame is subject, are a considerable Source of those Peculiarities
of Feature which contribute to Character: a sickly Person is
readily distinguished from one in Health; and Distempers,
acute or chronical, produce correspondent Effects in the Coun
tenance.




Whether Distempers accompany us openly, or conceal them
selves closely, their Effect is great; but the most powerful Agent
in changing the Features is TIME to whose irresistible Sway all
Persons and Things submit.
" What remains to be said on the different Appearances of Ages,
being less pleasing than what has gone before, shall be described
with Brevity. In the Age from twenty to thirty, barring Acci
dents, there appears but little Change either in the Colour, or
Lines of a Face; for though the bloom Tints may go off a little,
yet the Features attain a fixed Firmness, which, aided by an Air
of acquired Sensibility, makes ample Amends for that Loss, and
keeps Beauty till thirty pretty much upon a Par: After this
Time, as the Alterations grow more and more visible, we per
ceive the sweet Simplicity of many rounding Parts of the Face
begin to break into dented Shapes, with more sudden Turns
about the Muscles, occasioned by their many repeated Move
ments, as also by dividing the broad Parts, and thereby taking off
the large Sweep of the serpentine Lines. What further Havock
Time continues to make after the Age of fifty, is too remarkable
to need describing; the Strokes and Cuts he then lays on are plain
enough; however, in Spite of all his Malice, those Lineaments
that have once been elegant, retain their flowing Turns even in
venerable Age, leaving to the last a COMELY PIECE or RUINS."
This Passage is borrowed from an Artist whom we have
quoted already. Such is the Close of the most admirable Beauty,
and most elegant Features!
"This is OLD AGE, and thus do Men outlive
Their Youth, their Strength, their Beauty, which will change
To wither’d, weak, and grey.
"Alas! how little from the Grave we claim!“
We have not noticed the Features peculiar to each Sex sepa
rately, because they are too plain to be mistaken, and are in both
Sexes subject to the same Rules of particular Character.
The Abbe WINKELMAN has remarked, (and justly) that the
second Childishness of Mankind shews itfelf in the Assimilation




of the Sexes in advanced Years; In Infancy they are greatly
alike, very distinct at Maturity, and in old Age they return to
Likeness. The most beautiful Woman retains not the Softness
of her Countenance, but, as Wrinkles increase, approaches in
Appearance to a Man of the same Time of Life; as a Man,
who though ever so robust and athletic, loses the distinguish
ing Characters of his Sex, and under the Pressure of a Load of
Years, deserted by Strength and Vigour, dwindles into a close
Resemblance to an old Woman.
As we mean not to enlarge this Article we shall conclude it by
remarking, that DRESS though no essential Part of the Person,
is yet an essential Part of Character: The Features of the Face
cannot be ehanged, but their Appendages may be, and accordingly
have been, almost ad infinitum.
The Absence or Superfluity of the Hair of the Beard, and of
the Head, the different Forms into which it is curled, twisted, or
plaited, and the innumerable Ornaments to which Mankind have
Recourse for an Addition of (supposed) Elegance, contribute very
much to Diversity of Character.
The Ruffs and Caps of our Forefathers would so effectually
metamorphofs a modern fine Gentleman, that his most intimate
Acquaintance would not know him: Nor is less remarkable the
Effect produced by the redundant full-bottomed Wigs of our
great Law Officers, to which, if the pendent Beard was added,
when Mr. SERJEANT became a JUDGE he might justly defy the
acutest Brother of the Coif to discover him. In Effect the Fea
tures of any Man who has not a very singular Cast of Counte
nance, may be so disguised by various Forms of Dress as scarcely
to appear the same The Uses of this Principle upon the Stage
are notorious; and perhaps in real Life its Influence is much
more frequent and deceptive than is generally imagined.
We shall here close this Subject, referring to the Remarks
upon the Plates which accompany it, to the miscellaneous Obser
vations, and to a similar Title when we consider the FIGURE.




A
DISCOURSE UPON EXPRESSION,
DELIVERED TO THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF PAINTING, &c. AT PARIS,
BY MONS. LE BRUN, PRESIDENT.
GENTLEMEN,
At our last meeting you were pleased to approve of my
defign to discourse upon Expression: in the first place it is
necessary to understand in what it consists.
EXPRESSION is, in my opinion, a natural, easy, and striking
resemblance of the subject intended to be represented: it is an
indispenfable requisite in all parts of painting; no picture can
be perfect without it. By Expression is marked the just charac
ter of every object; it distinguishes the natures of different
bodies, imparts to figures life and motion, and gives apparent
reality to what is only delusory: it is a principle equally neces
sary in colouring as in design, and should be regarded as well in
representations of landscape, as in compositions of figures.
Expression is a principle which discovers the sensations of the
mind, and the effects of its various passions. Nothing can be
added to what has been already written by many learned men,
who have treated upon the passions, whose opinions upon this
subject I should not repeat, was it not the better to explain what
concerns our art, and that it seems necessary to touch upon it for
the information of young students.
First then, Passion is an emotion of the mind residing in the
sensitive part, which exerts itself to attain what the mind considers
as good, and to avoid what it regards as injurious; and usually
whatever raises a passion in the mind, produces an action of the
body: therefore, as it is certain the greater part of mental
passions produce bodily motions, it is necessary we should know




what are those motions of the body which express the passions,
and these we term Actions.
ACTION is nothing but the motion or apparent variation of
a
certain part; this variation in the appearance or situation of that
part, is produced by a change made in the muscles; the muscles
receive motion from the nerves which surround them; the nerves
act by the spirits contained in the cavity of the brain; the brain
receives them from the blood, which procceeds continually from
the heart, where it is so heated and rarified as to raise a certain
subtle vapour, which, rising to the brain, fills it.
The brain thus filled, distributes these spirits to the other parts
of the body by means of the nerves, which as so many small
tubes, convey them to the muscles, in a quantity greater or
less, as may be requisite for the action to which they are called;
that muscle, therefore, which is most exerted, receives the great
est portion of spirits, and in consequence becomes more in
flated than the others which are deprived of them, and which,
by that privation are rendered apparently weaker and less con
spicuous.
Though the foul be united to all parts of the body, yet there
are various opinions respecting the place where it more particu
larly exercises its functions.
Some maintain that it is a fmall gland in the midst of the
brain; because this part is single, whereas all other parts are in
pairs; and as we have two eyes, two cars, and all the exterior
organs of sense in pairs, there must be some place where the two
images admitted by the two eyes, or the two impressions received
from a single object by the two organs of any other sense, may
unite before they arrive at the mind itself, in order that they may
not present two objects instead of one.
Others say the feat of the mind, or foul, is in the heart, because
here the passions are felt: my opinion is, that the mind receives
the impressions of the passions in the brain, and feels their effects
in the heart; the exterior movements which I have remarked
confirm me greatly in this opinion.




The ancient philosophers having supposed the mind to possess
in its sensorium two distinct appetites, place the simple passions
in that which is the seat of desire; and in that which is the feat
of anger the more ferocious passions, and those which are com
posed of them. The first, they say contains Love, Hatred,
Desire, Joy, Sorrow; in the other reside Terror, Courage, Hope,
Despair, Anger, Fear; others add Admiration, which they
confider as the first, then Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, and Sorrow;
from these are derived those passions which are compound, such
as Fear, Courage, Hope, &c.
It will not therefore be improper to say something upon the
nature of these passions, for our better understanding them,
before we speak of their exterior movements.
We shall begin
with Admiration.
ADMIRATION is a surprise which makes the mind attentively
consider striking and extraordinary objects; this suprise is so
forcible, that sometimes it impels the spirits towards the part
which receives the impression of the object, and occupies the
mind in considering this impression, so strongly, that there remains
scarce any spirits passing in the muscles, but the body becomes
motionless as a statue.
Excess of Admiration produces Astonishmnent, and Astonish
ment may take place before we know whether the object is
desireable or not; insomuch that it should seem that Admira
tion is united to Esteem, or to Contempt, according to the great
ness or diminutiveness of an object: from Esteem arises Vene
ration; from Contempt, Disdain.
But when any thing is represented as good for us, it raises in
us a Love for it ; when it is considered as evil, or hurtful, it ex
cites in us Hatred.
LOVE is an emotion of the mind, caused by sensations which
incite it to desire an union to those objects which it supposes
desirable.
HATRED is an emotion caused by those sensations which incite
the mind to desire a separation from objects it supposes hurtful.




DESIRE is an agitation raised in the mind by its inclination for
those things which it imagines to be proper: thus not only do
we desire the possession of absent, but the continuance of present
good.
JOY is an agreable emotion of the mind, the effect of its en
joyment of good supposed to be in its possession.
SORROS is a disagreeable languor, the effect of uneasiness
which the mind feels either from present evil, or from the want
it suffers of some good.
COMPOUND PASSIONS.
FEAR is an apprehension of future evil, which anticipates
calamities that threaten us.
HOPE is a promising appearance, or strong expectation of
obtaining what is desired. Hope when extreme, becomes Cer
tainty: as, on the contrary, extreme Fear becomes Despair.
DESPAIR is a persuasion of the impossibility of obtaining what
we desire, and deprives us even of what we possess.
ANGER is a turbulent agitation, excited by Vexation and Cou
rage; by which the mind retires within itfelf, to withdraw from
injury received, and at the same time rises against the cause of
the injury, with purposes of revenge.
There are many other passions which I shall not now enume
rate, but content myself with exhibiting them in the designs. But
let us previously notice those movements of the blood and spirits
which produce Simple Passions.
It has been remarked of ADMIRATION that it does not cause
any change in the heart or in the blood, as the other passions do,
the reason is, that neither good nor evil being its object, but
merely the knowledge of the thing admired; it has no concern
with the heart or blood, upon which depend the functions of the
body.
Love when simple, (that is to say unaccompanied by Joy,
Desire, or Sorrow) has an equal pulsation, more sensible and
stronger than usual: a pleasant warmth invigorates the breast,
and digestion is promoted by it in the stomach, insomuch that this
passion contributes to health.




Of HATRED It is remarked, that, on the contrary,
the pulse
is unequal and weak, often quicker than ordinary; the breast is
afflicted by heats, intermingled with sharp and severe inflam
mations, and the stomach suspends its offices.
In Joy, the pulse is equal and quicker than usual, but
not so strong or sensible as in Love; not only is an agreeable
warmth felt in the breast, but diffused over all the exterior
parts of the body.
In SORROW the pulse is seeble and flow, the heart feels as if
confined by bands, and frozen by icicles which communicate
their frigidity to the rest of the body.
DESIRE has this singularity, that it agitates the heart more
violently than any other passion, and furnishes to the brain
a
greater quantity of spirits, which passing thence through the
muscles, quicken every sense and render every part of the body alert.
I have mentioned these internal movements, the better to ex
plain their connection with the external: I shall now proceed to
observe what parts of the body serve to indicate the passions of
the mind to the spectator.
The mind (as we have asserted) is united to all parts of the
body, and may use them to express her sensations FEAR may
be signified by a man running in a fright; ANGER by a man
beating another with his fist.
But, if it be true that the mind more immediately exercises its
functions in one particular part, (which is in the brain,) we may
say in like manner, that the face is that part where her feelings
are most conspicuously exhibited. And as we have said that the
gland in the midst of the brain is the place where the mind re
ceives the images of the passions, so that part of the face where
the passions shew themselves most distinctly is the eye brow,
though many have supposed it to be the eye. It is true the
eye-ball, by its fire and motion, shews clearly the agitation of
the mind, but it does not express the nature of that agitation.
The mouth and the nose have a great share in expression ; but
in general, these parts only follow the motions of the heart, as
we shall remark in the sequel of this discourse.
And as it has been said, that in the sensitive part of the mind
reside two appetites, from whence procced all the passions, so in




the eye-brow there are two motions which express all their sen
sations. These two motions coincide perfectly to those two
appetites; for the elevation of the brow towards the brain is the
sign of the passions which are savage and cruel: but is yet more
remarkable in these motions, that in proportion as the passions
vary their nature, the movement of the brow varies its form.
For to express a simple passion the movement is fimple, A, B, if
it is a compound passion, the movement is compound; if the
passion is gentle, the movement is gentle, C; if violent; so is the
movement, D.
But it must be remembered, that there are two kinds of ele
vations of the eye-brow; one; when it rises the middle E, and
this expresses agreeable sensations when the brow thus rises F,
the corners of the mouth are elevated, G, whercas, in expressions
of sorrow, the mouth is elevated in the middle, H; But, when
the eye-brow sinks in the middle, I, denoting bodily pain, then
the mouth sinks at its corners, K.
In Laughter all the parts follow each other; for the brows
descend towards the centre of the forehead ; and make the nose,
the mouth, and the eyes follow the same motion L.
In Weeping, M, the movements are compound and contrary ;

for the eye-brows lower themselves on the side of the nose and
eyes, and on that side the mouth rises N.
There is yet this observation to make, that when the heart is
dejected, so are all parts of the face, O: but, on the contrary,
when the heart feels some passion which inflames and hardens
it, P all the parts of the face follow a similar movement; parti
cularly the mouth, which proves, as I have already said, that this
part exhibits more especially the sensations of the heat. For we
must observe, that when the heart suffers, the corners of the
mouth sink, when it is satisfied they rise, O; when the heart has
aversion to any object, the mouth expresses that avertion by rising
in the middle, and pouting.
These, Gentlemen, are the remarks we shall make upon the
simple outlines, which I have sketched, the better to explain my
discourse.


ESTEEM.
There is no other Way to represent
ESTEEM, than by the attention and
motion of the parts of the face, which
seem to be fixed to the object which


causes this attention. For, in this
passion, the Eye-brows appear advan
ced over the eyes, one part approach
ing the side of the nose, the other
somewhat elevated ; the Eye very open,
and the Eye-ball raised ; the veins and
muscles of the Forehead, and those
which are around the Eyes, seem a little
inflated ; the Nostrils gently drawn
downwards ; the Cheeks rather hol
low ; the Mouth a little open, its cor
ners drawn back, and bending down
wards.

ADMIRATION
We have noticed ADMIRATION as
the first and most temperate of all the
passions, and which least agitates the
Heart. The Face receives very little
alteration in general : what there is, is
only in the elevation of the Eye-brow,
but both its sides are equal ; the Eye
a little more open than ordinary ; the
lids, motionless, and fixed upon the
object of admiration; the Mouth half
open, but without any change ; and
all the other parts of the face is usual.
This passion produced only a suspension
of motion, to give time to the
mind for deliberation upon what is to
be done, and consider attentively the
object presented: for, is it is rare
ple extraordinary, this first and sim
and movement, Admiration, begets 
ESTEEM.






 




 

















 

































































 


ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS.
PROPORTION OF THE PARTS OF THE FACE.
IT is necessary to observe, before we proceed to consider the parts of the

face, that although correct rules and dimensions are useful in their places,
yet they are not to be implicitly followed upon all occasions: it is not easy
without them to fix in the mind of the student an abiding idea of regular
proportion; but that such rules are necessarily very confined, appears from
the front face in Plate V. N° 1. and the profile in Plate VIII, N° 2. for it
is evident that a small variation in the situation of the face would deprive the
rule of its application.
It is certain that nature does not in any of her works, confine herself to
mathematical precision, but produces an almost infinite variety of counte
nances, by enlarging or diminishing the features which compose them; so
should the designer be careful to avoid a constant repetition of the same pro
portions, left his performances fatigue the spectator by their too great simi
larity: for, since in observation of natural objects, the eye is delighted by
continual variety, is it liable to be satiated when inspecting the imitations of
those objects, if, instead of that variety to which it has been accustomed,
there is presented to it a continual repetition without diversity.
The parts of the face are too obvious to need division.
The FOREHEAD is usually about one third of the length of the face, but is
more or less, according to the situation of the hair, which in some persons is
high, in others low.
The EYE contains three divisions, the BALL the IRIS and the PUPIL.
The ball may be considered as about one fifth part of the width of the face,
their is one third of the length of the ball. It is differently coloured in dif
ferent persons, but not according to any certain rule; in general, people
whose hair and complexion are high coloured, have the iris blue or grey;
and, on the contrary, those whose hair and complexion are dark, have the
iris of a deep brown. For the pupil, no determinate proportion can be
given, for, by a most admirable contrivance, this part possesses the faculty
of contracting or dilating itself, according to its situation: in a strong light,
which might otherwise be offensive, its orifice closes so as to admit no more
of the rays of light than are convenient; in the shade, or wherever
light is deficien, it expands, and thereby enjoys a much greater portion of
light than otherwise it could receive. In cats, and other animals that prey
in the dark, the pupil of the eye is so variable as to admit more than an



hundred times the quantity of light at one time than at another. The human
eye admits more than ten times the quantity of light at one time than at ano
ther, and perhaps the difference may be yet greater in very dark places: it
is not impossible but that the iris may then be drawn back, and the pupil ex
pand to the whole surface of the cornea. The passions of the mind have
considerable influence upon the pupil of the eye, it is invigorated and in
flamed by some, by others it becomes debilitated and languid.
In what is usually termed a large eye, it is rather the iris than the ball which
is larger than usual; in some persons the ball is more prominent, in others
it is more retired.
The length of the NOSE is one third part of the face, or one fourth part
of the head: seen in front, its width at the nostrils is equal to the length of
the eye, and it has the same dimensions in profile; the height of the nostril
is about one third the width of the nose.
The MOUTH admits of a great variety of forms; its usual extent is about
the length of an eye and a quarter, but for the proportions of the lips
scarce any rule can be given, they may be thicker or thinner, one thick and
the other thin, &c. In profile, the mouth is nearly half the length of the
front, the upper lip should generally be more prominent than the under, but
when the under lip exceeds the upper, it is reckoned a deformity by artists.
The EARS are usually somewhat more than one fourth part of the length
of the head, in profile about half their height, the various positions of the
head very much change their appearance.
In conformity to the foregoing rules,
Plate I. exhibits six studies of eyes at large.
Plate II. six noses at large.
Plate III. six mouths at large.
Plate IV. five ears at large.
These subjects are given of a proper size to be drawn after: and as it is of
the utmost consequence to be able to copy them well, before the Student
proceeds to the other designs, let him repeat them frequently, endea
vouring at very correct imitation.
Having attained to a competent skill in designing the parts, the next
step is to proceed to unite them; in order to attain a certain manner of
doing this.
Plate V. presents a method of placing the parts in a front face,
according to the following principles. Draw an oval broader above, nar
rower below, divide it equally by the perpendicular line A : then by the
transverse line B. divide B into five parts in 2 and 4 place the eyes. From
B downwards the half gives the length of the nose and ear C. From C
to the chin, divide into three parts, upon 1 place the mouth. The neck ap
ears neatly level with the mouth. The head is four noses in length. To

the pit of the neck is another nose.
These rules are not to be too servilely adhered to, but are inserted
merely as a kind of guide to the beginner, till his eye is sufficiently instruc
ted to permit him to quit them.




Plate VI. shews in two examples, the situation of the parts in the oval
which forms the head, when seen either in profile or three quarters.
Plate VII. is a study of a head at large looking downwards.
Plate VIII. contains twelve heads, in varlous positions, which should be
copied much larger than the plate. N°1. is a front face upon the same
principles as Plate V. To design N° 2. form an equilateral triangle, upon

one of its sides mark the features of the face, by dividing it into three equal
parts; the intersections correspond to the places of the top and bottom or
the nose, and the angles to the top of the forehead, and the chin. A little
prominence forms the forehead, chen insert the nose and divide the lower:

part for the mouth and chin, by the proportions of Plate V. The remain
ing point of the triangle shews the situation of the ear. N°3. is an appli
cation of the same rule to a face in profile looking upward.
If the student has ever attentively inspected a globe, the principles of the
following heads will be readily understood by him, or it he will give him
self the trouble to draw an horizontal line or two upon any egg-shaped object,
he will perceive upon furning it, the reason of the variations in the lines.
It is certain the real distances of the features must continue the same in
all positions of the head, but their apparent situation to the eye of
spectator, may vary according to their position, or to the place of his
eye, when viewing them. Numbers 4, 5, 6, are examples of heads

looking upward, where we observe thas those lines which in N°1 and
2, were horizontal, are now become the superior part of a circle, and those
divisions of the fate which were equal, are become unequal, the upper
appearing to diminish as they recede, while the lower preserve their ori
ginal dimensions.As che head reclines more and morc backwards, the

upper parts become less visible till at length the chin nearly conceals the
whole face.
Those lines which in Nos. 1 and z, were horizontal, and in Nos. 4, 5, 6,
were the superior part of a circle, in No 7 8, g, which are heads looking
downwards, become the inferior part of a circle, and the lower parts of the
face are now apparently lessened, while the higher parts project, and retain
their proper size.
CHARACTER OF THE PARTS OF THE FACE.
Plate IX. exhibits six different mouths, &c. of various Characters.
Plates X. XI. contain the parts of the face of Apollo measured from the
antique, they are given not only as the most perfect model of proportion in
the face of a man, but also that they may be compared with the same parts
in the face of the Venus, Plates XII, XIII. which may justly be deemed the
most regular female beauty. The sculptor’s design in the Apollo being to
give the most accurate form united wich the greatest dignity, the measures
should be collated with the head of Antinous, Plates XIV, XV. who be
ing no deity the artist was intent upon masculine delicacy only, in which he
has succeeded to admiration.




The measures of the face of APOLLO and VENUS compared.
Eye in front __5m.1/2__5m.
Eye in profil __2m.__2m.
Eye lid __1m.__m. 1/2
From the eye-lid to the eye-brow __2m.1/4__2m.1/2
Projection of the eye-brow __1m.__m.1/4
Width of the nostril, __7m.1/2__6m. 1/2
Apparent depth of the nostrils __1m.1/2__m. 1/2
Projection of the nose __7m.__6m.1/2
Width at nostrils seen underneath __5m.__4m.1/2
Width between the nostrils, __2m.1/2__2m.
Width of nose in profile, __6m.1/2__6m.
Width of the nostril__2m.1/2__2m.1/2
Width of the mouth in profile __4m.1/2__3m.1/2
From the top of the under lip to commencement of the chin, __5m.__3m.
Width of the mouth in front, __9m.__7m.1/2
Depth of chin, __5m.1/2__6m.
The student will observe a variety of measures besides those compared, all of which merit his attention. 
Plate XIV. contains two heads of the dying Gladiator, Nos. 1, 2. Head of an Egyptian term, N°3. Head of the Grecian shepherdess, N° 4. Heads of the Venus of Medicis, N° 5, 6, 7. Head of Antinous, N° 8. Nose and mouth of Antinous compared with those of a fragment supposed to be executed by the same artist, and the eyes of the same fragment, whose proportions compared with those of the Venus and Apollo deserve attention. 
Plate XV. presents two views of the head of the Farnese Hercules, Two of Antinous, Two of the fragment by the same hand, and Two of the Pythian Apollo. In these heads we may remark the following variations. 
ANTINOUS.  APOLLO.  FRAGMENT.  HERCULES.
Proportion of the eyes		5m.		6m.		51/2 vide Pl. 15.		__
Across the center of the face		2p. 2m.		2p 2m.		__		__
Across the neck		1p. 10m.		2p.		1p. 8m.		1p. 11m.
The same in profile		1p.10m.		__		1p.9m.		2p. 5m. and 3p.
It appears, from hence, that the face of Hercules is by no means larger than those of the other subjects, but his neck is of great dimensions, to give him an appearance of strength. The student will observe, for himself, the difference in the other measures. 
The remaining plates (scarcely admit of remarks, they contain more finished examples of the progress of the countenance, from childhood to maturity and old age, and may be arranged in the following order: 
Plate XVI. Studies of Boys Heads. 
Plate XVII. Childs Head. Old Woman's Head. 
Plate XVIII. Old Man's Head. Young Woman’s Head. 
Plate XIX. Boy's Head laughing. 
Plate XX. Extreme Old Age. 
Plate XXI. Soldiers, after Mortimer. 
Pl. XXII. Boy and Dog. 
Plates XXIII, XXIV, XXV, refer entirely to the Discourse upon Expression, and are there explained.











































































