THE
M ETHOD
O
LEARNING to DRAW
IN
PERSPECTIVE
Made easy and fully explained.
AS ALSO,
The Art of Panting upon Glass,
and Drawing in Crayons, with Receipts
for making them after the French and Ita
lian Manner.
LIKEWISE,
A New and Curious Method of Japaning.
either upon Glass, Wood, or any Metal, so
as to imitate China; and to make black or
gilt Japan-Ware, as Beautiful and Light as
any brought from the East-Indies; wich proper
Directions for making the hardest and most
transparent Varnishes.
AND
Particularly the Way to cast Amber in any Shape.
Chiefly from the MSS. of the Great Mr. BOYLE.
The Second Edition.
LONDON:
Printed for J. Prruz, at Locke’s-Head in Amen
Corner, Pater-noster-Row, M occxxxit.

(Price One Shilling.)




TO THE
Lady WALPOLE.
MADAM,

S your LADYSHIP
is distinguished for
your excellent Per
formances in Paint-
ing, Japaning, and
many other curious

Arts, I beg leave
to lay before you a few experi
enced Receipts, which have ne
ver yet appeared in the World.
Many of theml have been at great
Pains and Expence to procure, and
for the rest I am obliged to some
Manuscripts of the great Mr.




The DEDICATTON.
BOYLE. 'Tis by the Influence of
his Name that I venture to address
this little Treatise to your Lady
ship, which, I perswade myself, will
not be unacceptable to you, as I
am sure the Experiments therein
contamed will fully answer their
several Intentions.




 

I am,

Madam,
Your Ladyship's
Most Obedient;
Humble Servant.






T H E
PREFACE

THE Following Piece
is designed for tbe
Instruction and En
tertainment of Gen
tlemen and Ladies,
who chuse to divert

themselves in the cu
rious Arts of
Drawing, Japan

ing, Painting upon Glass, Var
nishing upon Metal, Wood or Past
board, and of taking Views and
Prospects justly, according to the
Rules of Perspective.
The Author has taken Care to
prescribe short and easy Directions
for the speedy attaining the Know




ii. The PREFACE.


ledge of these useful and amusing
Arts, without giving the Students
the Trouble of consulting large Vo
lumes (which are generally taken
from one another right or wrongs
or of learning several Branches of
the Mathematicks, as is generally
thought necessary, in order to un
derstand Perspective ; a Science,
without the Knowledge of which,
it is impossible to make any great
Improvement in the Arts of Draw
ing or Painting, or even to be a
Judge of good Drawing, or to un¬
derstand whether one is Right or
Wrong, in what one would invent
or design.


I mus confess, I owe my Know
ledge of several valuable Receipts,
to some Manuscripts of the great
Mr. Boyle, which have never been
printed, and have fallen into my
Hands by Means of the same no
ble Lord, his Relation, whom I
before mentioned in my Art of






The PREFACE.
Drawing, and Painting in Water
colours.


I am likewise obliged to a wor
thy Gentleman, who after a deli
berate Study of Perspective, set me
to rights in a few Hours, when I
Was at any Loss. As for the rest
they are Obsersations from the Ex
periments which I have made From
time to time at a large Expence,
and with great Industry.
I have been upbraided by some
Workmen in Curiosities, for publish
ing Receipts of Value, to instruct
the Gentry in the Manner of Draw¬
ing and Painting, and in Arts of the
like kind; for say they, it is a
Damage to the Workmen who get
their Livelihood by such Things
I have a short Answe to this Ar
gument; namely, that there are
none of the Receipts, which I pub
lish, but what are either my own
Invention, or I have bought at a
good Price or else have been pre
sented with by People of Fashion,




The PREFACE.
with their Desire to have them
made publick; and these are such
as would never come to the Know
ledge of tbe Workmen, if I was
not te communcate them in this
Manner, by which they have an
Opportunity of improving them
selves, as many of tbem have done,
from Things that I have already
published in the same wa ; so that
I can say, from my own certain
Knowledge that many of them are
obliged to me, and, instead of com
plaining, ought to thank me.








N. B If any Person should find a
Difficulty in the Performance of

any Article, I shall be ready to
put them to rights for a reason

able Satisfaction.













THE


METHOD


OF


Learning to Draw


IN


PERSPECTIVE, &c.


CHAP. I.


Short Rules for Drawing in Perspective
which will prove of great Use to all De
signers.


WHEN I observe the Faults daily
committed in the Designing of
Landscapes, or Drawing Views
and Prospects, I more and more
find the Necessity of knowing a
little Perspective, to correct and
avoid such Errors ; for, under
standing that Art will render any one capable of
Drawing any Thing with mathematical Truth
and Certainty.











But I conceive that the Reason, why so many ,
Mistakes are commonly made in Drawings, pro
ceeds from the Apprehensions that some have of
the Length of Time it will take up, to render
themselves Masters of Perspective, and from being
frightned at the Difficulties they conceive are in
that Study; particularly imagining, that one must
be first well grounded in the Mathematicks: This
I know has discouraged many from engaging
in the Rules relating to this Art ; but for their
Sakes I undertake, in this Tract, to instruct them
in the following Lessons how to lay any Plan in
Perspective, and raise Pillars or Buildings to due
Heights according to their proper Distances.


Lesson I.
Of the Plan.
FIG. 1.





Suppose we have a square Piece of Pavement,
as in Figure I, consisting of twenty five Pieces
of Marble, each a Foot square, it must be mea
sured exactly, and laid regularly down upon Pa¬
per: You may likewise, for your better Obser











vation, mark every other Stone or Marble black,
which will better inform you how every parti
cular Square will appear, when we have a true
perspective View of them; or else you may num
ber every one, and, when the following Lesson
is done, number those in the perspective Plan,
with the same Figures as are marked on the first
Plan,


Lesson II.


Of laying Figure in Perspective.


It is to be understood in Perspective that there
are two Points to be considered ; the first we call
the Point of Sight, that is, what relates to every
Thing in our View from the Place where we
stand; and it matters little where we stand to
take our View, for the Perspective will still be
true, according to the Appearance of the Plan
to our Eye: If we stand at a Corner, or in the
Middle, or at any Point, the Method I shall pre
scribe presently will lay pur Plan justly before
us as it will appear.


The other Point is called she Point of Distance,
because it governs the Distances, and the Pro
portions of every Thing we can truly see of the
Plan, in whatever Position we happen to be.








FIG. II.





At A, you see the Plan of Fig. I. This is di
vided into Squares, as mentioned in that Figure;
the three at the Bottom, marked B, C, D, in both;
and the Squares in, the Plan A, marked 1, 2, 3,
4, are those which are marked in perspective with
the same Numbers.


Now, to lay your Plan in perspective, fix your
Point of Sight as you observe in the Figure, or
more or less to the right or left as you think
proper; then draw the Line K, K, parallel to,
and at what Distance ypu will from, the Line











L, L ; then raise a Line on each Side from L
to K, to form the Figure you see, as a Frame
to your Picture; then draw a Line from the Cor
ner K, which is the Point of Distance, to L, and
this Line will regulate your Work.


Then draw Lines, from the Squares of your
Plan to the Point of Sight, as exactly as possible ;
and wherever your Line of Distance cuts those
Lines, which are drawn from the Squares of your
Plan to the Point of Sight, that marks where
your Squares in perspective ought to be; then
draw Lines parallel to the Line L, L, where the
Line of Distance cuts, and that will give you
the true Figure of every Square: So D, in the
perspective Plan, answers to D, in the measured
Plan ; and 1, 2, 3, 4, answers to the others in the
same.


When you have done this, the next Rule you
are to know is, how to raise either Pillars, Trees,
Houses, or any other Bodies, according to their
respective Heights, at different Distances and Pro
portion, on the Plan you have laid down.














How to raise Pillars, or any Bodies of a
certain Proportion, in Perspective.


You have now your Plan measured out in
perspective, into Squares of a Foot; one of these
Squares in this Lesson serves for the Base, or Bot
tom, of a pillar a Foot thick. This Figure III.
is exactly of the same Dimensions of the Plan
laid in perspective at Figure II. First mark the
Line L, K in equal Proportions, by the qame
Scale of the Ground-plan, Figure II; as, a, b, c,
d, which are so many Feet in height; and they;
standing on the Base of the first Figure, are Up
rights, not in perspective : Then draw a Line
parallel with L, 1, from Number 4, which gives
you the Front of the Body you are to raise, and
if it is to be only three Feet high, draw a Line
cross from C to the Line raised from No. 4; and
that determines the Height, which you will then
find to be a Foot wide, and three Feet high by


Measure:








Measure: Then from the Top of the Line 4 draw
a Line, with a Black-lead Pencil, to the Point
of Sight, and raise another Line from 3 parallel
to the Line 4, till it touches the pencil’d Line,
passing from 5 to the Point of Sight, which gives
you the Side-appearance of the Column, or Body,
as you will fee it from the Place where you stand.


[The Line from Point 3 should be drawn with a
Pen, because it is to remain.] Then with a Pen
cil draw a Line from C to the Point of Sight,
which will determine the other Line, to make
the Shape of the Top df the Column ; and,then
raise a Line parallel With L, 1, with a Pencil,
from the Point 2, till it touches the Tine from C
to she Point of Sight; draw then a parallel Line
to C, 5, at 6, 7, and you will have the Square
of the Top of the Pillar, or Column, as you can
observe it from the Place where you stand, which
I suppose to be at A. [You must remember,,
that the Line drawn from 2 to 6 is only an ima
ginary Line, to be rubbed out; for it cannot be
seen from the Place Where you stand, and there
fore must not appear in the Drawing; but you
should not leave it out, because it shews you
where to regulate the Top of your Column, and
teaches you how to place your Column upon its
Base with Certainty.] By this means you may
see the Front and one Side of your Column: And
the Line from 1 to 2 must also be rubbed out,
because it can’t be seen.


Then finish your Column only with the Lines


from 1 to C, from C, to 5,


from 4 to 5, from 6, to 7, and


from 3 to 7, 1 from 4;


and it will be drawn without any Imperfection,
and appear as follows in Figure IV.











FIG. IV.


When this is done, you may place another
Column on any one of the Squares erected in the
same Manner, observing to fling your Shades all
on one Side, and then you cannot err : But espe
cially mind where the dotted Lines are in Fi
gure III.


When you can master these few Lesions, which
you may gain with very little Pains, you will
be capable of doing any Thing in this Way, that
will be regular and certain, and know the Faults
of the Ignorant and Unskilful.


CHAP. II.


Of Painting upon GLASS.


PAINTING upon Glass is an Art which
has generally appeared so difficult, that few
have succeeded in the Attempt; and yet there
is no Representation of any Portrait can appear
more elegant, than in a Picture done well in this
Manner: For you have all the Softness and all
the Tenderness that can be desired in a Picture,


and








and it is easy too for any Person to work upon ;
for there are no Out-lines to draw, nor any
Shades to make, but you put on the Colours
without the Trouble of either.


The Pictures, which we use on this Occasion,
are those done in Mezzo-tinto, or what we call
Mezzo-tincto Prints, for their Shades are rubbed
down with an Instrument on the Copper-plates ;
so that the several Lines, which are forced to be
drawn to represent the shady Part of any common
Print, are by this Means scumbled together, and
appear as soft and united as in any Piece done with
Indian Ink.


When you are provided with such Prints as you
like, cut off the Paper of the Margin, so that
none be left but the Print itself; then take some
of the finest Crown-glass, and have it cut exactly
to the Size of your Prints, and, when you have
cleaned your Glass very well, lay on one Side of
it some fine Venice Turpentine, as thin as possible,
with a Brush made of Hog’s-hair; and, if you
perceive the Turpentine to lie unequally, pass a
Piece of Wood, made like a fiat Ruler, over it
till it lies equal in every Part; then wet the Back
of your Print with a Sponge and Water, and
lay the pictur’d Side upon the turpentin’d Side of
the Glass, taking Care that every Part of it lies
close to the Glass, and that there are no Bubbles
or Blisters to be seen; then you may roll it.
over with a Wooden Roll, made like a Cylinder
of two Inches diameter, to fix it close to the
Glass ; and when that is done, wet the Back of
the Print again with a Sponge and Water, till
the Paper will rub off with your Fingers; then
rub it gently till there remains only the Picture
itself upon the Glass; so will you have all the
Lines and Shades very visible, as if it was a fine
drawing in Indian Ink : Then let it remain till the









next Day to dry, for else the Colours would not
take, because they are ground in Oil.


S E C T. I. Colours for Painting on Glass with
the Necessaries for such a Work.


At most Colour-shops of note in London, we
may meet with Colours of several sorts ground
in Oil, and tied up in little Bladders to be fold
at. Three-pence, a Groat, or Six-pence a Piece,
according as they are more or less valuable : Of
these provide as follow.


Whites.


Flake White,
White-Lead.


Yellows.


English Pink,
Yellow Oaker,
Dutch Pink,
Yellow Orpiment.


Reds.


Rose Pink,
Vermillion,
Red-Lead,


Indian Red,


Lake,


Carmine.


Verditer,


Prussian Blue,


Sander? Blue,


Indigo.


Blacks.


Lamp Black,


Ivory Black.


Greens.


Verdigrease distill’d,
Verdigrease and Yellow
Oaker mixt,
Verdigrease andEnglisti
Pink mixt,


Verdigrease and Dutch
Pink mixt.


Blues. 


Ultramarine,


Blue Bise,


Browns,


Spanish Brown,


Umber.


When you are provided with. these Colours,
you may mix them one with another to what
Degree of Colour you think proper upon a Pal
let,








let, with a smooth Knife with a tender bending
Blade, adding a little more of one Colour to ano
ther, mixing them well till you have what you
want.


To get the Colour out of the Bladders, prick
a Hole at the Bottom of each Bladder you de
sign to use, and press the Bladder till you have
Colour enough upon your Pallet for your present
Use; for in a Day's Time the Colours will dry,
and ean never be recovered.


Provide on this Occasion a Box about two
Foot and a half long, about five Inches high and
sixteen Inches wide, with Partitions in it as
follow.








The Use of this Box, which is to keep all your
painting Things together, and preserve them
clean, I shall here very particularly explain.


At Number i must be a Box of tinned
No. 1. Iron to be placed in the wooden Box, be
cause it must hold Oil of Turpentine to
clean your Pencils when you have done work.


When you paint you must take care to use on
ly one Pencil in a Colour, or, in other Words,
to have a Pencil for each Colour; and as soon
as you have done using them for the Day, clean
them from the Colours, by dipping them into
the Oil of Turpentine, and laying the hairy part
of the Pencil on the tinn’d Division, be-
No. 2. tween Number i and Number 2, press
your Finger hard on the Hair, and draw
it four or five times oyer the Tin, then will the
Colours, which came out of the Pencils, -fall into
the Tin-box, number 2, and by that Means the
Pencils will be clean, and the several Mixtures
of Colours, that fall there with their Oils, will
become a good Size for Gold.


Then lay your Pencils with their Sticks
No. 5. in the Box No. 5, and they will be fit for
Use another Time.


Note, the Pencils should be of two Sorts, that
is, some of Camel’s-hair to paint with, such as
will come to a Point when the Colour is in them,
and some dry Brushes of white Hair, never to be
dipp’d in Colour, but used only to scunjble or
join one Colour in another when they are just laid
on, so that they appear soft, atod you cannot di
stinguish where any one leaves off abruptly.


You ought at least to have three Dozen of Ca¬
mel’s Hair-pencils of all Sizes, and a Dozen and
half of rough Brushes, with Sticks to each about
ten Inches or a Foot long; the Sticks may be
bought ready made at the Colour-shops; they









are commonly made of Cedar or Brazil-wood,


. but some nice Persons have them turn’d in Ivory.


At numb. 4, you should have a Case di
No. 4. vided of Wood in several Parts to keep
your dry Colours in, such as Carmine and Ultra
marine, with others that you may keep by you to
grind when you want them, for sometimes you
may have Occasion in the Country to grind ,a
Colour that you want.


The Reason of having Divisions made in this Box
is to keep these Colours from mixing with each
other, and thereby spoiling one another; for if
there were no separate Apartments, sometimes
in a hasty taking out or putting in of these Co
lours you may disturb the Papers they are com
monly wrapped in so much, that some of the Co
lours will be spilled. The fine or rich Colours,
such as Ultramarine or.Carmine, may rather be
bought in Powder than ground in Oil ; for the
first is worth near four Pounds an Ounce, and
she Carmine, if ’tis good, worth about twenty
Shillings ; therefore it is better, to have these in
Powder, than to have them ground in Oil at
the Colour shops; for by Degrees they will dry,
though in the Bladders, and you will have so
much Loss from them.


The Method to grind these in Oil, is to put
a little of either of them upon, a polished Marble,
and with a Drop or two of Oil mix them well
with a soft bladed Knife, and lay it on your Pal
let but of the Ultramarine aud Carmine a very
little will serve, for the least Touch on the light
Sides of your Drawing, will give a Lustre, to
your Picture; and if it be Ultramarine it will be
lasting, whereas I have a great deal of Reason to
suspect, that the Pruffian Blue will not, if it is
exposed to the Weather, at I have observed in
some Sign-paintings of two, Years standing an









there I find that Colour to change into a dirty
Yellow : But if we mix the Prussian Blue with
Varnish, it will hold and last like Ultramarine ;
in short, the Air must be kept from it to pre
serve it.


If we want to grind any other Colours coarser
than these in their Powder, we must have a Mul
ler, which must be made of one of the hardest
Stones we can get, and finely polished ; Porphyry
would be the best, made in the Shape of a Sugar-
loaf, if one could get it: But for the Shape, the
Sugar-loaf Figure is the easiest fof any One to
turn with their Hand, and every Painter knows the
Way. Marble is good, or any Stone that Will
polish; nay, even Glass, or Crystal, or any such
like Thing; but, if you hive a great Quantity
of Colour to grind, you must consider, that you
must have a large Quantity of Oil, but never so
much as to overcome the Quantity of Colour.
In the Grinding-part you may observe, that the
Colour will frequently turn from under the Mul¬
der, then with a thin Knife scrape it up, and place
it under the Muller again, till 'tis as fine as you
desire it : Then immediately put it into a Piece
of Bladder, first having che Bladder immerged
in warm Water, to soften it ; tie it up, and let
it remain to be used as I have directed the others.


Number 3 may in its Use be explain’d
No. 3. thus. Let that Partition be lined with Tin,
or Iron tinn'd, because this is to enclose
the Bladders of Oils, which you should always
keep by you, as Oil of Linseed and Turpentine,
Nut-oyl, and burnt Oil; and in the taking of
these in and' out, the Apartment would be greasy,


and stain the Wood, whereas the Tin will pre-
serve it from any Stain from the Oils.


Number 6 is in the middle of the Box,


No. 6, And should be made of tinh’d Iron like











wise, to take out. and put in at pleasure, for 'tis to
contain all the Bladders of oiled Colours; and,
as some of them will be frequently used, the Re
servoir for them must in Time become greasy ;
and over them is to be laid the Pallet, Which,
every Night after you have done your Work,
should be cleaned of the Colours you have put
upon it; or else covered with its Colours in War
ter, to keep them useful till the next Day. To
keep your Pallet clean, rub it with a coarse Lin-
nen-cloath with Oil of Turpentine, and then rub
it till 'tis dry (as one may call it) with Nut or
Lin seed-oil.


But take what tare you will of your Oil-co
lours in small Quantities, when they are exposed
to the Air, there will be a Coat of thick hard
Scale over them in a Day or two, which indeed
one may take off with a Knife ; but we lose much
of the Colour, and some of them are very costly.
When you take off the scaly Part, the rest of the
Colour is fit to use ; and, if it is too thick, then
put a Drop or two of Linseed-oil to it, and mix
it well with your tender Knife. Some People
when they use Ultramarine and Carmine, because
of their great Price, only put a Drop of Oil on
their Pallets and put as much Colour to it as they
think will be enough, only working them together;
with a Knife ; which indeed is more saving, than
to mix it on the Stone.


S E C T. II. How to use the Colours in Painting 
on Glass. 


As the Lines and Shades of your Picture hap
pen to (open, so you ought to dispose your Co
lours, that is, lay on the lighter Colours first on
the light Places of your Prints, and the darker
over the shaded Places; and, if you have once









laid on the brighter Colours, 'tis no great Mat
ter whether the darker Sorts are laid a little over
them : For the first Colour laid on will hide those
you lay on afterwards; as for Example:


YELLOWS.


The lightest Yellow may be laid on first, and
the Dutch Pink Will shade it.


REDS.


The Red-lead may be laid on first, as the bright
est red Colour, and to shade it with Lake or Car
mine, will bring your Picture to a beautiful Scar
let, equal to any Tincture of the finest Dye of
Cochineal.


BLUES.


Lay on first the blue Life, and shade it with
Indigo; or else take Ultramarine, and lay it on
in the Lights, and lhade it with Indigo.


GREENS.


Lay on first some Verdigrease, and then the
Mixture I have mentioned of that and the Dutch
Pink: But you may make this Green as yellow
as you please, by adding more Dutch Pink, as
you see Occasion.


It is to be noted, that, when any of these Co
lours are too strong, they may be lightened to
any Degree, by mixing White with them upon
your Pallet ; or you may darken them, by mix
ing them with the deeper Colours: But they must
be well mixt with the Knife, before you use them.


When you have painted your Glass, it must
stand three of four Days, before it will be dry
enough to put in a Frame.


CHAP.





C -) ]


chap. in.


Os'the Making of Crayons for dry Colouring.


THE Use of Crayons for dry Colours is so
necessary in raking of Views and Prospects,
and there are so few Crayons that are good of
the Sort, that I think the Way of making them
a necessary Article to be known to every one,
who is a Lover of Drawing and Painting.


W H IT E.


As for White, we have nooccaGon of any other
than white soft Chalk, which should be sawed
into Lengths of an. Inch and half or two Inches.
[There are little Saws made on purpose for such
Uses about four Inches long, and very thin.]
When you have sew’d out your Crayons of Chalk,'
which should be at most a Quarter of an Inch.
ihick, round off the Corners with a Penknife,
and point them, "by drawing your Penknife up¬
wards from the Place where the Point is to be:
[You ought to ha,ve a Qozeh or two of these to
lie-in a little Case by themselves, or they will be
discoloured by the other Cosours.].


; , 1 T E L L O W Pastils,: or Crayons.


' Yellows come next, which stiojuJd be divided into
sourer sive Degrees of Colour. . -
. Fir ft. Take some Grounds of Starch and FJ©w-
er of Brimstone, mix them well with a Knife
upon a polished Marble, so that, they produce-
the Colojjr of Straw, or, a Yellow as faintly will
lhew itselfV then pour a'little Milk- to them, or
D. sa lit-


Digitized by CjOO^se


C *«3


a little pale Ale-wort, till the Colour become like
d Paste •, then spread the Paste on a smooth Piece
of Chalk, with a broad Knife, till it is about the
third Part of an Inch thick, and let it lie till ’tis
half dry then with a sharp Knife cut it in Lengths
of da Inch and half,, about die fourth part of ai\
Inch wide, and roll it thin between two little
Pieces of Board, till they ate round like a Straw,
and point them as I have directed for the Chalk. *
If you please you may use ground Chalk, instead
of Grounds or Starch.


2d Yttlow. It is made of yellow dker, ground
well with fair 'Water, and then dried and beat.
Mix this with ground Chalk, in such Quantity
as it will be a little deeper than the former Colour,
and mix them up with pale Ale-wort, in which
a little white Sugar-candy may be dissolved:
And make these Crayons as the former.


3d Yellow. Grind yellow dker with Witer
with a Stone and Mailer, and when ’tis dry beat
it very fine, and make it into Pastils, or Craybns,
v^ith. pale Ale-wort; Or Sire made with Glovers
Leather, boiled in Water till it comes to a Jfelly;
life it as before directed, and toll'the Pastils be¬
tween two Boards.


4th Yellow. TakelEriglifh Pink, grind it as the
former with Water, and Whreh *ds dry beat' it
fine, and mix it with a very little ground Chalk,
till ’tis deeper man the former Cblour; then put
to it some Wort of pale Ale, and stir all well
together, and majee it mto^pastils, or Crayons, by
rolling in the foregoing Manner.


5th Yellow. EnglHh rrnk is to be alonfe gfound
as the former, ana to be made in Pastils, or Cra¬
yons, by itself with pale Ale-wort.


6th Yellow. DtitchlPink is to be used as the
former, and miit with pale Ale-wort, orMilk,
and to be rvlled and dried. -!


7 th


Digitized by.CjOO^lC


Z *7 3


"Jib Yellow. Qfjiiment jr one of th? most poi-
jCqoous Goloues that can be used; however, it is
one of the most beautiful Sort, and is next to
Qrange-colour. This must have a little ground
Chalk raixt with it, well tempered together, and
made up with pale AJe-wort, with a little Gum-
pdragon dUfylyed in it: And roll up thern into
Pastils you did the former.


Q R AN G E-Gtfours.


iJtQrange£olo,ur. Take yellow Qrpiment, mix
'it with pale A^e-wott, and when it is in PMe,
roll it, and make it into Pastils, or Crayon?.


; pd Qrange-fiokur. Take Orpiment and Red-
lead : (but the Red-lead must be very .finely
ground in -^ater, and dried) then mix a'.li ttle
of this with your Orpiment, till you .have the
.Colour you defineand putting to it some
wpct, wherein dpm* Gym-dragon bas been dis¬
solved, make it into a Paste, and roll it into
Rastils, .or,Qt;ayons.


$4<Qr(in&e-Colo«r, Take )Englilh Pink, .grind^t
Mfi, and put -to it as-much vitf million \as wjll
-Make it of-she Colour you desire; .mix these up
,with Akrwor^ that ha* been .boiled till *tls more
glutinous thav ordinary, and make it into Pastils,
\&s bflfpre ^reistkd.


4th Qrange-Colour. Take Englisl> Pink ,sine|y
ground, and pt to it as much Red-lead, well
.ground, ^ wfll make k agreeable to your De-
■fifgn, mjx'fbes® well with AJe-wort boiled to a
Thickness, and make them iqtp Crayons.


!' sib 'QrangtAjpip^r. fTake some jDutch Pink,


grind jt wefi* andpnix with ihsomejRed-lead,finer


; ly powdered,' to,the X^oiourypu.waot; then make
-ch« iptp, a Paste with.Ale-wott, prjMilk, ah.d.rpli
it ,pp into Crayons as befone directed.


v % Note,


id by Google


;['•*« 3


Note, In the Mixture of these Colours, observe
that they have as many different Shades as pos¬
sible.


REDS.


j ft Red. Take Red-lead, grind it well with Wa¬
ter, then dry it and beat it to fine Powder, an,d
put to it some Chalk or White-lead finely gsound,
to brighten it ; mix this with Ale-wort, wherein
a little Gum-dragon has been boiled, make it in¬
to a Paste, and roll it into Crayons. In this you
lhould make some of your Pastils deeper, others
paler. -i;,‘ '*


2d Red. Take Red-lead, and, when *tis well
ground with a Marble apd Muller,. make' it in¬
to a Paste with Ale-wort, wherein Gum-dragon
has been boiled. -


3d Red. Red Oker wants no Preparation,' but
sawing, as I have directed for Chalk, in the first
Article.


4tb Red. Take Vermilljon, grind it fine, and
mix with it some fine Chalk in Powder, or White-
lead well pulverized; divide your Composition
into three Parts, and, by adding more of the
White to one than another, make three different
Colours j then put to each Ale-wort boiled thick,
and make them severally into Paste, and so into
Crayons. _


$tb Red. Take Vermillion well - ground, - afld
mix it with Ale-wort, that has- been boiled to’a
Thickness with Gum-dragon* kill it is a Paste,
then roll it into Pastils. , : \ i


6th Red. Take some good Lake, grind it well
'with Water upon a Marble, and, when it is well
dried and powdered, lay it ih three'Divisions, and
mix with each as much ground Chalk; or White-
lead, as will make them of several Colours; then


make


O'gifized by CjOO^lC


[ >9 ] .


make them severally into Paste, and "then into
Crayons. :


yth Red. Take fine Lake, and seduce it to as
fine Powder as you can with Water, and, when
*it is' dry, and again finely powdered, mix it with
Ale-wort, and make it into Pastils, or Crayons.


8th Red. Take' Indian Red, grind it well with
Water, and dry it: like the other‘Colours i then
mix it - with Ale-wort that has been boiled to a
Thickness with a little Gum-dragon^: This alone
will be' a very strong Colour, but you should
mix some of ir With'White, in tvro1 or three dis-
. ferent Manners, to be Shades to one another. -
§th Red. - Take Rose-pink, arsd-'cut/itdnto the
ShApeof Crayons, withoutanyPreparaCion.T Car-
' mine istoo dear for them, forwelve Pennyworth
' would" make but a small Crayon; a st »


in.’-. : i~.<. j • ; nv<> rr:j -j r.'.7 '1 v • r


. P UlR P £ E& <; di,_ . . ,


ist Purple. Take Rose-pink finely ground and
^•pbWdered, mix it well with a little Sanders Blue,
^tihPfh'e Powder appears ok the 'Cblour you want,
'then make it 'into a PAste with Ale^wokt thlcknid
; VMvGum-dragon, arid roll them into tire Figtfte
'' pfiG&yons';


- 'lu&d>Pwrplk TAkeLkkefinefy^grouhd^Bd Wafti-
; ie3V pfit to ft ass tench blue Bife aSyoif think; pro-
* per to make E 1 'A %eddHla' Purple,’ and’ you
should vary this in two or three'Mahhers,1 each
^light^than ' tHe-Other: Id tfod lighter Sorts
; pu t ¥'Efficient; ‘ Quantity ‘ Of Chalk,! or White-
tieAd;w‘ell ground,1 and mixj them up - with, Ale-
feoiled to a Thickness with Gum-drSgdn,
' arivF rOllJ them iritb Pastils’. + j ■ >


$&:Parpli. TAfc£ fbteelLake WelFgrbuiid, afcd
-sM tdUft as teuch^ PrustiSn-dlUe as Way make
-ft of’ thoColour ytzu defirLrhix these-'very well
'Mgtther-inseveral Parcels, making some more in-
> dining


Digitized by CjOO^lC


C 3° ]


,-dining to rest then the other*, and to the faintest
Purple of them add some ground Chalk at yoyr
.pleasure, -md make these severally into Paste with
Ale-wort thiekned by boiling; so make them,
sifter the lame Manner a* the former, into pastijb-


B & U E S.


ist Bins. Blue Vise is the lightest blue Golonr
we use, sod must be veil Mound with common
Water on a fine Marble ; then Set k dry, and
reduce it again to Powder s then lay it in four
Parcels, and put to three of, them, in different
Proportions, some ground Chalk, or White.deftd >
.fo that, when they jt©n»c tolbe.mixc, every one
may be lighter (hen ;the Oiherj mix these ftp*-
; rarely with A!e-wort that is j thiekned with Scrap*
of Glovers Leather, and, when jthey are. ina-Paste
to your Mind, make them into Crayons: And
the fourth Part of the blue BiTe must He m^de up
j by itself, in. the (ame Manner.


2d Blue. Take Vcrdker well ground on a Kye
Marble, (ay it in four ParpeU, and mix one pf
. them purely with a thi& made of .white
Glovers Shreds and Ale-wort, and the other thyee
Parts mix with several Proportions of grpppd
Chalk, or Whitc-lead wedlgronnd,.so aato make
.Shades to one another; make ?thesc into PtzLe
with Ale-wort thiekned with Gum-dragon, Hpd
so into Crayons. '


$d Blue. Take some Ptustlan Blue, and grind
it well; then lay it in four Parcels on your Mar¬
ble, and mix with three of them some ground
Chalk, or 'Whitc-lead well ground, to mak« them
of different Degrees of Colour; and the soui-th
Part must hetstone. Make the three mixed Co-
- Jours into Paste with pale. Ale-w.9rc .-boded M: it
thickens; and (be Mso Cqlpqr must be made
into a Paste with some .Aso-iwptf :bwk4 and


thiekned


Digitized by GOOglC


cm:


thicknedwkft white Shaving* Of Leather from the
Glovers. Make all these into Crayons.


4th Blur Take Rockulndiga, andgrindit well
With Water on a Marble, dry it and powder is
again, and then divide it in Parcel*, as is directed
above, and with two or three Parts of them mix
different Proportions of ground Chalk, or Whiter
lead gfouno, to make them paler or deeper;
and one Part most be the simple Colour. Put to
the mist Colours some Ale-wort tbickned with
boiling, and mix them to Pastes, then roll them
into Crayons.


As for the plain Indigo, mix « with Ale-woct
thiakned with Glovers Shreds of white Leather,
by bbiling, and make it into Pastils*


BLACKS.


ift Black. The Black which Is domthonly used
as a Crayon, is Charfcole cut kicd Lengths j the
softest and best is,that which is. made of Willow.
Have at least a Dbzeh or tWO of these; for black
and White are use>d w groat deal more than any
either Colour.


id Black. Take Ivory Black ground very fine
^Ith commbn Watts, and put to, H a very little
ground Indigo, for a blaeish Cast will enliven
ybur Black, and help it from that Dbadness, Which
k plain Black always carries with iff.


B R O W N S. .


i ft Brown. Take for a Hght Brown, someFol-*
lers-earth, grind it well with .Water, and mix
with lif sortie 'ground Chalk, or Whitc-lead* to
make it m differint Cdlotirs, that is, to make iC-
fighter as you think fit i mix this up with pale
Ale-Wort tiaUed tiiick,and at lead hkve four Sorts
nfW • ’ ’ . ■- O' -r •.


Bigitized by C.it)t)^lc


C ;r ]


id Brown. Take some Spanish Brown, grind
it very well, and mix with it some Fullers Ear th*
to make it lighter, for the Spanish Brown is a
dark Colour of .itself; and, when you have made
this Mixture, you may put to some Part of it a
little white Chalk ground, or Whitessead, in dif¬
ferent Proportions, to have them of various
Shades: These are for the lighter Browns; and
mix them severally in Pastes with a light Size
of Fish-glue, or Isinglass, and Water, and some
of them with pale Ase-wort boiled thin, or thick
Water-gruel boiled with Gum-dragon; then make
them into Pastils.


, $d Brown. Take Spanish Brown well ground,
and some Indian Red, mix them well together,
and put to them some pale Ale-wort, till they
become a Paste ; you may make some of them
lighter, if you will, with ground Chalk, or Whire-
lead; and then roll them into Crayons.


GREEN S.


xst Green. Take some Verdigrease, and boil it
in sharp Vinegar, and add to it, when it boils, a
little Tartar powdered; which will dissolve the
Verdigrease so* that the Liquor will be of a fine
Colour. Then set the Liquor ; in little Gallipots
exposed to the; Air, which will dry the Colour,
and then it wist dissolve in common Water. This
may be taken with just as much warm Ale-wort
as will cover it, and will'dissolve the Green;
then make it into Pastils with white Chalk ground,
as much as-what/you think proper,. ,


, 2/ Green. Grind, distilled Verdigrease with Vi¬
negar on a Marble, wash it, well with Water s
the Manner of which is, to throws the Verdigrease
into. Water, and in half a Minute fto pour .off
the Water into a Cup, and let it settle ; then
pour the Water from it, and wash it again in


the


Digitized by CjOO^lC


t H ]


1 the faime Way when this is dry, make it into


i Crayons with Ale-^ort.


i $d Green. Take Verdigreasc, prepared as be-


1 fore, finely powdered* and mix it with a little


i Pruffian Blue in several Proportions: In the Iighq-


est Sorts put a little White, or the brightest Yel-
* low, well ground, to make Varieties of Colour ;


1 mix all these with pale Ale-wort boiled to a


t Thickness.


t Green. Take some Indigo well ground,


t and some Engliso Pink, mix them well together


c upon a Marble ; and, when they are well pow¬


dered, make them into a Paste, and roll them up
I with.i soft Size and Oil, till they are of the Fi-


, gure of Crayons or with pale Ale-wort, or thick


J Water-gruel ; but when we use Water-gruel, it


i must be strained, and boiled with some Gum-


dragon.


' &b Green. Take some blue Bise ground fine,
andpdt to it some Dutch Pink; well ground mix
them. in PaVcefe, and prepare them in Shades
t to one another ; then make them into Pastes^


\ and roll them into Crayons. You-may have five


or fir Varieties of these. Note, The Liquid which
you are to use to make them into Pastils must be
Ale-wort boiled a little thick.


6tb Green. Grind Rock-indigo very fine with
Water on a Marble, and, wjten ’tis dry, beat it finis
again » then lay it in Parrels on^he Marble, and
put to some of them a little flower pf Brimstone;
i*rgreater or' lefler Quantities,and'to others Flower
ofiBrimstone and Dutch-pink mikt, so that you
majKhave Variety of Colous , when these different
Shades ^re as you intend them, then make them
into Pastes with Ale-wprt thickned by boiling
with white Glovers Le^ther-fhreds, or with a
jxtrie Guimdragbn.


E ' Vh


Digitized by CjOO^Ic


C Hl


7th Green. Grind some Rock-indigo with Wa ¬
ter, and add to it, in several Parcels, as much
Dutch-pink as you fee convenient, to make your
Greens of various Shades j when these are well
mixr, put to them some Ale-wort thickened by
boiling, and make them-into Pastes, and, when
they will roll, make them into Crayons.


Memorandum. The Reason why these Crayons
are better than commonly those which are bought
at the Shops is, because they are generally made
too stiff with Gums, and so will hardly touch
the Paper; but all these will Work freely, and
express the several Colours you desire.


We must consider, that the Reason why we
make five or six Shades of each Colour is,
because in this Cafe we cannot mix any when we
use them ; whereas in Oil-painting, and painting
in Water-colours, we may make what Mixtures
we please in an instant : And when we set about
any Painting or Drawing in Crayons, which hap¬
pens to have a great Variety of Colour in; it, we
ought not to be without every Sort of Colour that
can be thought on. iVbte, These Colours should be
kept in a Box partitioned, every Sort by itself,viz.-.
' ThtWhite.


Tellows. Lay the brightest Sorts in one, and the
deeper Sorts in another, till'you come towards
the Orange-colours. * . - ''


Orange-Colour^ The lighter Sorts of Orange-co-
lours in Apartment, and the deeper in another.


- Reds. The paler Sorts, or Flesh-colours,- in one


Apartment, the brighter Reds in another, the
stronger Reds in another, and: the .deepest Reds in
another, every one with its proper Shades, till we
Come towards Purple. - . - * .


- Purples. The paler Sorts inclining to red in one
Apartment, the next Sorts, more inclining to blue;
in another, with their Shades; and these which are


k next


Digitized by (jOO^le


C 35 ]


niext to blue with their Shades, in a Part by them¬
selves. -


Blues should follow the Purples. Put the light¬
est Preparations in the first Apartment the next
Degree' into another, a third into another, and
the fourth, to the last, into others : But keep the
Pruffian-blue quite by itself, and its Mixtures by
themselves; it'serves very well in this Way to
supply the place of Ultramarine; and, as it is
much cheaper, I forbear to mention the Use
of Ultramarine-blue in this Cafe, which is ex¬
travagant in the Price ; for a Crayon of it could
not be made under half a Guinea': And be¬
sides, in this Way of Crayon-drawing, the'Pre¬
paration of Pr«flian-blue does very well an¬
swer the fame End though ' that Colour will
not do in Water-colours, nor even last in
Oil-colours, if it comes to be exposed to the
Weather-j for in either Case it changes to a dirty
Yeliow-colour ; but I find that the Crayons hold,
by being imbodied as 1 have directed.


Greens should be divided into three or four
Sorts, and, with their Shades, be laid in several
Apartments.


Browns should be likewise put in three or sour
Parcels, with their .proper Shades, ’ to be laid in
each Apartment of one great Box. And you should
never be without Crayons of Charcole in ano¬
ther Cafe. With all these you will be compleat-
ly.furnished -, and, when you go out to take any
View, have one of every Sort in a little Bo*, di¬
vided as the foregoing, to carry in your Pocket.


The Paper, which you should use on this Oc-
casion/^hould be Venice rough Paper, almost like
our whitest brown Paper,or even the whitest brown
Paper which they fell at every Chandlers-shop;
the stiffer it is the better;' that which they call
Cap-paper is the best, as I have found by Expe-
E 2 rience j


Digitized by CjOO^l '


[ ;6 ]


rience ; for upon such the Colours easily distri¬
bute themselves. And by this Means every one
may take Figures in their proper Colours as they
fee them ; for they may match the Colours as
they appear with the Crayons they have by them »
and, as the Crayons arc dry, they will not alter
their Colour, but the wetted Colours will appear
deeper when they are wet, than when they arp
dry, which will deceive the Eye of a Beginner.


Instructions for the Use os Crayons. -
Remember when you use these Crayons, that
you point them front the bqttom upwards, and
make not the Points too sharp, unless in thfc
white Chalk, the red Qker, and the Charcole.
One may make a pretty Drawing on blue Pa-


E:r with only Chalk and Charcole -, the strong
ights and the dark Shades make a sine Contrast,


. and a pleasant Appearance in 3 Drawing.


CHAP. IV.


Concerning the Manner of Etching, or Notch¬
ing, to be done with Aqua-fortis on Coffer-
' slates.


YOUR Copper opiates must be very smooth,
and polished on one Side, as they arc doqp
for the Engravers.


Then make a Yarnilh of Petrolium, Bees-wax.
qnd Turpentine incised together in a glazed
Earthen-vessel 5 when it is cold, put it into a
piece of Mantua Si|k, and rye it up, then warm
the backside of the Plate over some. hptSmall-


cole


igitized by GoOglc


C 37 ]


cple Dust, and pass the Silk with thy Mixture in it
over the fore-side of the Plate, till ’ti$ all covered ;
after this, hold the varnished part qf the Plate
over the Smoke of a Candle, moving it back*
wards and forwards till *tis gil equalJy blacked.. f


You must next take your Drawing, or Prints
and rub the back of it with Chalk, or red Oker j
(but Chalk is the best) and when the back of
this Drawing is rubbed a little with a Woollen
Cloth, lay the Chalk part of the Print upon the Var¬
nish, and, fixing it well, draw over all the Strokes
with a blunt pointed Needle, masking it as you
j go along, the Shades ; so you will have all the


Lines marked^upon your VarnishV v...


Then provide four or five Needles of diffe¬
rent Sizes, and with the finest ryake the finer
Lines, and so by degrees on to the Larger;
tracing them over the Varnish upon the Lines
of the Drawing, till they touch she Copper-
pfate; and, to prevent your rubbing out any o£
the Chalk-lines, you must have an even Piece
os Wood supported by two Bits tp move besooe
you, and to rest your Hand upon,; when thia ift
tson^ make your Shades ; and when they are
done, border round the plate some green Wax,
which, being put in warm Water, will become!
soft; and then pour on Jqua-fortis with a thpid,
part of Water; and, when you think the Aqua-;
foxtis has eaten deep enough in the light part, pour;
off ypur Water, and wash thy plate with coma
man Water; dry it, and, with a Pencil of Ca!-)
mel’s Hair, paint pver the lightest parts with ct>m«
soon Varniso then pour in again your Aquafortis,-
aiuj^et it eat into the Copper a little more, and,!
wheir^ou think, that's enough, use the Plate: an
you dm before, and so on to the last : Them
soke off your green Wax and Varnish, by warm¬
ing the Plate as yot^did at first s and clean th®


Plate


lifitteed by Google


[ I


Plate with a coarse piece of Linnen, without any
thing in it that may scratch the Plate ; when
this is done, you may haye your Plate touched
up with a Graver, or you may send it to the
Rolling-prefs for a Proof, and then the Engra¬
ver can ke best what Sharpness or Amendments
ought to be made. ^


CHA P. V.


Of Japanning, and Indian Varnijhes.


SECT. I. Of Japanning Metals. ' ' '


IN japanning of Metals we must take notice,
that Steel or Iron may be japanned or yar-
nilhed with any Colour. I hava only seen it
done by a young Gentleman of Moritpelier, who
performed it extreamly well, and from him I
had the Receipt. - ::


The part of the Metal which we design to
japan in Colours should not be polished; but
'disparts of the Metal, which ought to be polisli-
ed, should be done first, or else, if we poliih
them after the painting, some of the Colour may
be disturbed or taken off. The first Proof I saw
of this Work was a Pair of Scizzars, where, from
the' Blades to the Rings, there were the Figures
of Storks holding the Rings ih their 'Mouths,
which Rings were of Silver;I' do hot know that:
I ever saw any thing so genteel;' and the Gentle-*
man beforementioned was kind: enough to give1-
me the following Method of doing it!


Take any Colour you have mind to, and grind
it well with Water with a Stone and Mulser»


then


Digitized by


Google


C 3? ]


then let jt dry, "and ground it in a Mortar, and
sift it if there is Occasion ; then, instead of Oil,
mix it with white Varnilh, and palht with itwhat'
you think proper.


The Whites are Ceruse, of'FJefh-whi'te.


' Yellows are " Yellow-dker, Englifh-pink, and
Dutch-pink. . v


' ‘Redsarc Vermillfoni Red-lead, and Lake.
Blues are.blue Bife and Ihdigb. ;/ ' '


Blacks are Lamp-black, 'and lvdry or Bone-
black, • V ;


Greens are Verdigrease groiind' or Verditer and;
Dutch-pink ground together: r \


Browns are Fullets-earth and Spaniih-browh. ;
And Purples may be made between red add"
blue, till you fee them mixed t6 your Mind. - ‘'


SECT. II. Ofjapanning Iron Snuff-boxes, which^
now are generally covered with a black Varnijhy
that they may look like China, aind gilt about the


; Edges. • . ; i: ... .j i.v.’. i.'. U r.i i


Take your Iron-plates or Snuff-boxesandlay}
on the Following Preparation on the Top and-
Bottom, viz, White-lead ground with. Water,'7
and dried, then beaten again to' sine Powder, and !
mixed with Size ; this lay equally on the Top and1
Bottom of trout' Snuff-box, and let it dry well. :
Then about the Rims, or Edges of the Box, lay '
on some Yellow-oker with Size^. and over that.
some1 Gold-size -; when the first is well dried, lay 1
on the Gold-size I have mentioned in the" Colour-j
boxLyoh may'buy it at the Col6ur-sti'6psv> 'when -
you W this on, let it be near1 dry before you lay
on youkLeaf-goId, that" it may stick'the better.


You rndft have a Cushion of Woollen Cloth '
to cut your Leaf-gold upon1, that the pieces- of '
Gold may be exactly to y our Size, or the'Shape -
you desire. • 1 -- ' - ....


- - Then


Digitized by CjOO^lC


C 4° J


. Then take your Leaf-gold on some Cotton,
and liy it on the part which is done with Gold-
llke, and dab it oh till it lies smooth, and let
all dry.'


When this is done, paint wfiat Figures you
please on the upper and under Side of your Box ;
upon the White-grourld principally with blue Bise*
mixed with white Varnish,, and shaded with In¬
digo! The best Figures, * to represent China,
may. be taken from Tea-cups, or from Saucers,
or other pieces of China-ware, which wilflook best
ik they. be blue and white; but one might paint
Coats of Arms irf all their Colours, or any other
Deyice » and, when theseaTe dry, wash the white
part with white Varhisti, and the golden part with
the gokjen Varnish.


S,-E € T. IIh White Varnish,- *r Jmbtr-Varmfb*
from a Manuscript of Mt. Boyle’r.


Take white Rezin about two Drachms, melt
it in a clean glazed Pipkin; then put into it an
Ounce of the’whitest Amber you can get (beat
finely to Powder) by little afld little, stirring it .
with a1 small stick over a gentle Fire till it dissolves*
pp^ring in now and-then a little OiJ of Turpen-
tine, when you jind it growing stiff; so continue
till! all1 your Amber is melted; but you must take
care yoq do,not set your House on fire, for the
very Vapours of the Oil of Turpentine will take
fire by Heap only; but, if it happens to do so
aoyn where,, put immediately a fiat Board, or wet
Blanket over the-firey Pot, and by keeping the
Air ' froip ibyon ryjsl. put it out, or suffocate it;
Therefore,! when I make this Varnish, I use the
Caution .to: melt myRezin in a Glass es aCylfn-
driqk; Figure in a Bed of hot Sanck after the Glass ;
has been well annealed or warmed by degrees in
the Sand, under which you must keep a gentle
r..lc Fife,


Digitized by (jOO^lC


[+1 ] ' .


FirC/.; When yozr have madey.oUjrVamisli, pour
st into a coarse’Lihnen-bag, and press4 it between
two hot Boards of-Oak or Iron, and use it with
any of your Colours, as well as’to^ Varnish them
over when they are: painted « But,fco. cover Gpld,
you must take the following Varr)ii|n.,


You must note, that when‘you nave varnished
your Snuff-boxes with this white. Yarnifh, you
may put them . in. a declining: Qyfih, which ;will
’harden the Varnish." > ’ \, , ■ .1,


'S E' C T.‘ IV. Hard Varnish f that will hear the
' ‘Muffle,, (from a Manuscript of,Mr. t) to lay


■.over Gold, or Brass, or any other Metal that ap~
s pears like Gold, to keep it from changing hlacjcx.raS
\ , the Bath-Metal and such othep pill, do, when
they are exposed to the Air, J’s


Take of Colophony, which you may buy at the
.Druggists, half an Ounce, melt it in a glared
Vessel j then strew in by degrees an Ounce of
the Powder of Amber, stirring it all the while ;
and when it begins. to harden, or resist the
Stick, put in a little Oil of Turpentine, which
will. immediately soften it , then take an Ounce
of Gum-copall powdered, and sprinkle that in as
you did the Amber, every now and then pour¬
ing in some Oil of Turpentine, and strain the
Varnish as I have-directed in the foregoing. This
is proper to lay upon your Gold, and the Things
done with it must be put in .a declining Oven
three of four Days successively sand then it will
resist even Fire.]


S E C T. V. To japan Brass, such as is used to
gild Bras-butlons,. or make them look like Gold.


We may use this upon Gold-leaf, or upon that
• which is called the German Lcaf-gold, or upon


Brass,


Digitized by CjOO^lc


.. , :C+i]


Brass,;ttr vpyh W-Lsk-Merr), ^hich are design*
ed to imitate (Sdld: ^


1 Take a Qdartbf’Spirit or Wine, and put it in
a Rdtbrt-gkflsV 'then add haif an Ounce of Gani-
bo$, an Ounce of Lake, and an Ounce of Gum-
mastick ; set this'in a Sand-heat for six Days, or
near the fife, dr put the Body of the Retort fre¬
quently ih Warhi Water, leaking it twice or thrice
a 6a‘y, theft put'it Over a Pan of warm Smal-
cole Dust *, when your Metal is well cleaned, paint
it over thinly with this Varnish, and it will ap¬
pear like the Colodrs of Gold: You may dry this
>n a declining Oven, and it /Ovill not rub off.


‘ N: B. This is a good Varnish to mix with
hhy Colours, that incline to Red ; and the white
Varnish to mik with those Colours that are pale,
or of any other Sort.


1 . (' (i . - i’; h •••*.}'?"t


j 3i /. i - ' ' ' ' .


JC H A P. VI.


{': , . • u.:>r J; !■. ' ; :1


Of Japanning upon Wood or Paper ', : wis h
Receipts for riakfag fives as forts s/Mpan-
' , Wares, either Gold, Silver, or in Colours.


VK J as an 'thd Pcop|e have a Method of‘making
Bowls, Plates,' .and othpr Vessels of brawn
Taper, and fomktihies of sine 8aw-dust: Vsie^e
'Vessels'are Very'-light and ^sr.y' strong, whesi
they come to be varnished, and are in great
Esteem among-us. The Method, of making such
tJcensils I shall here disclose.' \


Take Slips of brown Paper, boil them in cOm-
-rnon ,Water, mashing ic -with’a-..'Stick, while it
.boils, till ’tis-almost become ft: Piste ; then tike
• it


Digitized byCjOO^lO


C 43 ]


t from the Water, and beat s* well in 3 Mortar,
till *tis so reduced as the Rags areJn a, faperr
trtill; then make a strbng Gum-water with t^um-
arabick and common Water, a,Quantity sufficient
to cover your Paper*paste an Inch ; put these tch
gether into a glased* Pipkin,, and let them boil,
stirring them very well, till you think the Paper*
paste is impregnated with the Gum; then have
ready your Mould to give your Paste the-Figure
you design for it. The Mould is made as follows:


For Example, suppose you .design to snake
any Thing of the Figure of ajPlate, have a hard
Piece of Wood turned on one Side of such. a
Figure, and make a Hole or two in the middle
rhuite through the Wood; [You must obsorye
.this Mould must be like the back of a)Plate.Q
when this is done turn another • hard Piece o.t
Wood of the fame .Figure, labout the eighth
part of an Inch less than the former ; but-about
the Rim or Edge you may have some little Qh-
nament carved or ingraved, in the Wood. When
these Moulds are made, oil them:Very Well on the
turned Sides, and continue to do so till they are
well soaked with Oil, then they will be fit.sojr
Use ; when you go to make your Plate of the
Paper-paste, take the Mould,, with the Holpin if,
and oil it afresh, set: it even upon a strong Table,
and spread over it some of your Paste as equal¬
ly as possible, so as to be in; every Part about
a quarter of an Inch thick; then oil the other
Mould very well, j and- set it eSqAIy as , iyay
be on your Paste, and press it hard down ; then
.put a great Weight upon it,/and let it tfgmain
Twenty four Hours. [The Hole at the bottom is
for the Water to pass through, that is pressed
out of the Paste; and the oiling of the Moulds
is to prevent the gummed Paste from sticking


Digitized by CjOO^lC


.1+4-3 ..


to the Wood.}' When you perceive the Paste
dry, it will be as hard as a Board, arid be fit to
day a Ground upon, made with strong Size and
-Lamp-black, lettinfg it dry gently ’; and when that
is dried thrbughly* then take Tome Ivory-black
finely ground, and mix it with the following
Varnish.


SEC T. I. 3'o make the strong Japan-VarniJh


Take half an Ounce of Colophony, melt it in
a glazed Pipkin then sprinkle into it by degrees
an Ounce and half of Amber finely beaten and sift¬
ed, stirring it well, now and then adding some Spirit
of Turpentine; when this is melted, then sprinkle
-in an-Ounce and half of Sarcacole finely beaten?,
stirring it all the while, and putting frequently
more Spirit of Turpentine, till all is melted
then- pour it through a coarse Hair-bag, placed
-between two hot Boards, and press it gently, till
-the clear is received into a glazed warm Vessel;
with this Varnish mix your ground Ivory-black,-
-and, warming first your Paper-plate, paint it on
before a Fire in a warm Room, as equally as you
Pan/and Tet it in a gentle Oven ; then the next
i)ay pus it in a hotter Oven, and the third Day
-into one very hot,: and let it stand till the Oven
-js- quite cold, and then it will be fit for any
Use,- either with'Liquors that gre cold or hor,
Undwill never change, and *lis with great Diffi¬
culty you can break them. I am of Opinion that
df the Moulds were cast in any hard Metal, they
Wfculddo as well as if they were turned in Wood.


S EOT- II- Of making these China-Toys os the
Colour os Gold.


Prepare your Bowls, Plates, or any other Ves¬
sel, in the lame Manner as the former, or you


may


Bigitized by


r;*n


may take fine Saw-dust, if you can have it; and
dry it well then pour bh it some Turpentine,
melted with an equal Quantity of Rezin, and
half as much Bees-wax, mix them Well, and put
to them your dry Saw-dust, stirring all together
till the Mixture becomes thick as a Paste ; then
take it off the Fire, and warm your iMbplds, and
spread some of your Mixture on that' with the
Hole in the middle, as'equaliy as possible, and
press down the Mould upon it; then set it to cool,
and your Vessel will he fit for painting. You
may put into this when your Turpentine is.melt-
■ed some Sarcacole finely;powdered, to the Quan¬
tity of half the Turpentine, stirring it well, and
it will harden it: Hnd you ought to make this
Composition in the open Air, for if will en¬
danger your House,


. . But which ever of the Mixtures you use, if you
have a mind to have them appear like Gold,
paint them over with Size, and when that begins
to stick a little to the Figure, lay on Leaf-gold,


' either pure, or that Sort which is brought to us
from- Germany ; but the list is apt to change
green, as most of the preparations of Brass will
do such as those which are called Bath-Metal,
and others of the like Sort, which appear like
Gold when they are fresh polished, or cleaned
eyety Day : But. as the Air coming upon them
will make them alter to an ugly Colour, lo I chuse
Gold, which is durable, and will never change,
and a much finer Colour than any of. the former
for a Continuance. Bur though the L^af-gold,
we are to Use, is tender and may be subject to
rub oss ; yet the Varnish, we shall putr over it,
will keep it bright and entire. ,, When the Gold
is laid on, and the flying Pieces brushed oss, which
piust be done when the Gold-size is dry, tHeh ap,


Digitized by GOOglC


[ 4-5 D


ply the following Varnish to brighten the Gold,
and preserve it from rubbing.


* . > ■


SECT, III. Varnish for Gold, or such Leas of
Metals as imitate Cold.


Take some Colophony, melt it, and then put
in two Ounces of Amber well pulverized, with
some Spirit of Turpentine, as the Amber thickens,
stirring it well f then, put'an Ounce of Gum-
elemi well powdered, and some more .Spirit
of Turpentine1, still keeping the Liquor stirring,
till ’tis all well mixed : However, use as little
Spirit of Turpentine as you can, because the
.thicker you make yourVarnifh for Use, the harder
it will be. Po this over a Sand-heat in an open
Glass, and strain it, as you are directed for the
former Varnish*. ' .


: Use this Varnish alone, first warming your
Vessels made of the Paper-paste, and lay it on
with a Painting-brush before the Fire; then harden
it by degrees, at three several times, in Ovens ;
the first a stow Heat, the next a warmer Oven,
and the third a-very hot one, dnd your Vessels
will look like polished Gold. ::


* Note, As for those Vessels, made with Saw¬
dust and the Gums, you may use a Varnr/h for
them made' of the fame Ingredients as above? ex¬
cepting thd Gum-elemi ; and this will dry in the
Sun, or ih a.very. gentle ^Varmth. . >


SE C T. TV. To ,ptake your Vessels of a red (folour
I with gilt Figures on ihejnf. ,'N.


Prepare your Vessels as before wjtti brown' .Pa-
,$>er-tast'e, j and .when they are dry^ ihd prepared
as aire&ed. in the/first: mix someVermillion,


5; ‘ ' 00 - Hr


Digitized by CjOO^lC


C 47 3


;or Red-lead, with the Varnish .first directed in
this Chapter, and use- it warm ; then stove it or
harden it by degrees in an OvOn, and it will
be sextreamly bright:; or else lay bn your first
Ground with Size and Vermilliqn, and in proper
Places stick on, with Gum-arabick and Wa¬
ter, some Figures , cut out of Prints,' as little
Sprigs of Flowers, or. such like ; and when they
are dry, paint them over with Gold-size, and let
that remain till *tis a little stickihg to the Touch ;
then lay on your Gold, and let that be well closed
to the Gold-size, and dried ; theh, if you
would shade any part of youY Flower, take
some Ox-gall, and, With a fine Camels Hair-
pencil, trace over the shady Paris dn the Leaf-
gold, and upon that paint wiPh' deep Dntch-
pink; and, when that is dry,' use your Varnish
; in a warm Place, i(l !ttieaij thai Varnilh directed
for: the Covering ;pf Gold;) and.' set1 se to hardeh
by degrees in an Oven ; which Vainilh Will secure
the Leaf-gold sas> 'they call It) brought from
.Germanyi from Changing, by keeping the Air
from dt. - ; <- ' ^ * '■* ** j;|*


S E CTh V. A Method to silver these .Jaiiait-
Vejsels.


When you havettiade: your Vessels, and they are
well dried, paint them over with.Size and ground
/Chalk, or WlikrHgf let them dry well,'and then
-‘'.paint them over again with the' brightest GoIH-
. size you can get; {for there Is muCtfDTfferenct.in
'theColour of it; some is almost whiiei/and another
i ismore yellow ; the first is proper so^Silver, arid
, she other for Gold,) when this-Size is almost dry,
lay on your Leat-silver, and cldieit well to the
Sizie, brushing Off the loose Parts, when 'tis dry,


with


Digitized by GOOglc


C 4» 1


with some Cotton. [Note^. When you lay bniyorar
Silver or. Leaf-Gold, kesp-itj free from the. Air.;
jor the least Motion of the-Air will rumpleyour
Leaves, and they will. not lye smooth.} Then
use the .following Varnish to cover the Silver. 1


S E C T. VI. To make the. Varnijh to cover. 4he


. .7 " • .Silver..■>


. Tajce lome fine Turpentine, and melt it ; then
■take of white Amber wdl pulverized. about
,an Opnce ahalf, put it. by degrees into your
glared Pi,pk‘P to the Turpentine, and stir it well,
.adding forpetimes sortie Spirit of Turpentine, till
.the Amber is all dissolved .; then put to. 'it half
.3n. Ojnpe. 9f Sarcacolie beater), and half an Ounce
;c£. Qum-eifmi:J well levigated, pouring: in at
• times more'qf the. Turpentine-fpirit, till all is
jdissoived -r jet, your Fire be gentle, and stjr-the
. Mixture continually while-’tis on the Fire. ..
j. . This Varnjlh-will be white and strong as,the
. former, andshopld be .used warm, andis- as strong
as that which we lay upon Gold ; it must be
hardened by degrees in an Oven, as the gold
Varnish, and your Vessel will look like polished
-Silver. "->v: : ‘


SECT. VII. Varnijh in Japanning on Wood, to
.7.'1' . iriBcMitb.'several Colours.


Ypu, must^ if you design so use,Varnish -to mix
.with CjOlburs, ! take Spirit of Turpentine, and dis¬
solve in it a little Gum -Taccamahacca over the
Fire, till it is a little thickened ; use this withany
: Colour that has been well ground with Water,and
pulverized afterwards. When your Work is done,


' you may, if y.ou will, varnish, over your. Piece
with the same Varnish dire^ed to colour Silver;


and


Digitized by CjOO^lC


[ 49 3


and one might also cover Tables of Wood, as well
as Tea-boards and Plates, or Bowls of Wood, in
the fame Manner, as is mentioned for the Pastes
of Paper and Saw-dust.


SECT. VIII. Directions for imitating .China, ,or


Purslane-ware, upon Tea-tables, Tea-boards, Lcc.


upon Gold or Silver Grounds.


Prepare your Tea-tables, or any other useful
Thing, as 1 have mentioned in the foregoing Re¬
ceipts, and then mark out your £>esigns upori them;
make Ovals or Rounds upon them in a good Dis¬
position, so as to be uniform, or well adapted to
the purpose, that they answer one another in a
regular Manner ; then paste on some Paper in
proper Places, and, when your paper is dry, draw
your Designs upon them, ahd paint thbm with
Water-colours ; then with a Brush lay Gold-siœ
or Silver-size on the other part, and, when that is
near dry, lay on your Leaf-gold or Silver, and,
when all is well dried, varnish over with the white
Varnish, if it be a Silver-ground; or, if it is
a Gold-ground, varnish with the strongest Var¬
nish, excepting only the Ovals or Circles of Paint¬
ing, for those must be done with the white Var¬
nish, which is so transparent, that all the Paint¬
ing will appear through it. If you lay Oft a Gold-
ground, or any Colour darker then that, then
let your Paintings be blue and white » or, if it
is Silver or Light-ground, then usethff most fitry
Colours in your Paintings,


G SECT-


Digitized by CjOO^lC


C 5° 3


SECT. IX. The Method of Glazing Prints with
•white Varnish, so as to bear Water, and the Polish.


It is best in this Way, first to paste your Print
on a Board, or a Piece of Shock-cloth strained
on a Frame ; to do this well, prepare some stiff
Starch, and with a Sponge, dipt in Water or thin
Starch, wet the back of your Print, and, if
you ‘design to lay it on a Board, dip a large
Brush in the thick Starch, and brush it over the
Board as even as possible, and let it dry ; then a
second Time repeat the same Work, and so con¬
tinue till the Veins or Grain of the Wood is quite
filled: In the last Operation, when the Starch is
just laid on, lay upon it your wet Print as equal¬
ly as possible, so that there appear no Bubbles in
it, press it close every where till it lyes smooth,
and so let it dry. In this Operation your Hands
must be very clean,.or else you will foil the Print;
in about twenty four Hours it will be dry
enough to varnish with the following, viz.


IVbite Varnish for Prints.


Take of Iflhyocolla, or Isinglass,1 or Fi/h-glue, as
some call it, four Ounces, and pull.it into small
Pieces, boil this in a Quart of Brandy, or strong
Spirits, in a glazed Pipkin; and when, by taking
out a little, you find it will make a strong Glue,
by being a little exposed to the Air, it will do
for your Purppse ; but be sure to make it as
strong as you can ; and, while it is hot, with a
large Brush, wash over the Print as quick as
possible, and as smooth as may be -, let this
stand a Day, and then brush it over again with
the same, Varnish, or Glue, and let it dry very


well ;


Digitized byCjOO^lC


C 5 • 3


well; then brusti it over with white Varnish, at
such a Distance from the Fire that it may not be
too hot, or else it will blister, and do this two or
three times over ; then set it by for a Day or
two, and brush it over with white Varnish again
three or four times, and let it stand a Day or two ;
then varnish it a third Time with two or three
Passages of the Brusti, and in three or four Days
polilh it with a soft Linnen-clotb and some fine
Tripoli, rubbing it very gently, till it remains
as smooth as possible, and clear it with Flour
and oil; it will then appear aS bright as Chrystal;
and, if it should at any time be annoyed by Flies,
you may wassi it with a Sponge and Water, which
will clean it.


The white Varnijh.


Take Gum-fandarack of the clearest and whitest
Sort onePound, Gum-mastickof the clearest Sort
one Ounce, Gum Sarcacolla the whitest one Ounce
and half, Venicc-Turpentine three Ounces, Ben¬
zoin the clearest half an Ounce, white Rezin
half an Ounce, Gum-animæ an Ounce and half ;
these must be dissolved and mixe in the follow¬
ing Manner :


Put your Sarcacolla, and Rezin into a little
more Spirits than will cover them to dissolve;
then put your Gum-animæ, Benzoin, and Venice
Turpentine into a Glass, or glazed Vessel, and
pour on as much Spirit as will cover them an Inch,
then provide a glazed Vessel, or Glass, for your
Gum-mastickand Sandarack, and pour on them'
strong Spirits, enough to cover them about an
Inch, to dissolve them rightly ; then, in a distinct
Vessel, of the fame Sort as before, put your Gum-
elemi, and cover it with Spirits to dissolve. {In this
G 2 Pro-


Digitized by GOOglC


C »»]


Process, you need only pulverize the Gums AnL
mat, Sarcacolla and Benzoin, and you may break
the Rczin a little.] While these are dissolving,
for three or sour Days, shake the Bottles twice or
thrice each Day, then put all these togejther in a
glazed Vessel, stirring them well, and strain the Li¬
quor and Gums gently, beginning with the Gums,
through a Linnen-cloth ; [This will prevent any
Dirt getting into your Varnish] then put it into
a Bottle, and let it stand a Week before you use
ir, and pour off as much of the clear only, as you
think you shaH want for present Use.


To paste Prints upon Cloth for Varnishing.


If you put your Print upon Shock-cloth well
strained in a Frame, brush over your Cloth with
strong Paste, made with Flour and Water, and
immediately brush over the back of your Print
with well prepared Starch ; and then as readily
brush the Cloth over again with the same Starch,
and lay on your Print as equally as possible, with-
, out letting any Bubbles or Blisters appear in
the Paper ; but you must observe, tba^, when
you lay on your Paper upon the Cloth, a$ both
the Cloth and the Paper are then wet, however
close you lay the Paper to the Cloth, they will
both together appear slagging, and unstrained,,
yet, as soon as they are dry, all will Bp smooth,.
a£ either was at the first : Let them remain so in
a dry, warm Place for a Day or two, and then.
varnish ypur Print,, as before directed, with Glue:
ryade of jcthyocolla, and then with the white Var-'
nM . , _ '


Wijth this Varnish, you may mix qp any Dolour,
thjLt has been ground dry, upon a Narble, ancl
paint wit]; it uppg any Figure you have Drawn,'


■ _ ' or'


v Google


•V i


[ ft ]


or upon any Print you have pasted upon your
Work; but the varnished Colours should be
chiefly put upon the shady parts.■ To know
what Colours are proper Shades to one another,
fee the Chapter for making of Crayons.,


Varnijh mde voitb Setd~Lacea.


Put a Quart of strong Spirit into a large Glass-
vessel, and puts to it six Pounds of Seed-lacca
let these stand together two Days, shaking them
often i therr take a Jelly-bag, or a Flannel-bag
made like what is called Hippocrates'^ Sleeve, and
pass it through, letting the Liquor drop into a
Receiver, and squeezing the Gums every now
and then ; when the Varnish is almost but of the
Bag, add more, and press it gently, till all is
strained, and the Dregs remain dry ; [Take care-'
you do not put this Dross into the Fire, for fear
you set your House in a Flame.] then put it in
Bottles, and keep them close stopt, setting it by
till you perceive all the thick Parts settles t© the
Bottom, which will be in three or four Days, then
pour off the dear into h fresh Bottley and Hzvfill
be Ft for/Use. _> ••• .. r. —


As for the Varnish shade ofShell-lacfcs, *cis not
of any great Service, though often recommend¬
ed, for it will not .bear the Polish. - -o


When you lay oh yvur Vartiishes, take ch-e fcd^
lowing Method: If yocbvarjstlh Wooes, let youc
Wood be very smooth, dose. grained, free from
Gre: fe, and nibbed hfith Rushes, ;


idly, Lay on your Colours a? smooth as possi¬
ble, and, if-the Varnish .has any Blisters in it,’take
them off by a Polish with Rushes,


Digitized by GOOglC


[J4]


3^/y, When you varnish, keep your Work
warm but not too hot.


4ibly, In Laying on of your Varnish, begin in
the Middle, and stroke the Brush to the Outside,
then to another extreme Part, and so on till all
is covered ; for the Brush if you was to begin at
the Edges would leave Blots there, and make the
Work unequal.


Stbly, In fine Works, use the finest Tripoli to '
polish ; do not polish your Work at one Time,
but, after the first polishing, let it dry two or
three Days, and polish again for the last Time.


6tbly, In the first Polishing you must use a
good deal of Tripoli, bur in the next a very lit¬
tle will serve ; wash off your Tripoli with a
Sponge and Water ; dry your Varnish with a dry
Linnen rag, and clear your Work with Oil,
Whiting, and Lamp-black.


SECT. X. To take ‘off the Figure from any
Piete of China-Ware, though the Person has not
be'tn acquainted with Drawing.


When-you have any Figures to your liking
upon any China-difh, Cup, Plate, or luch like,
you must lay a Piece of oiled Paper over them,
so as to hold the Piece steady, till you can trace
out the Lines of the Figures; then lay the oil¬
ed Paper on a Paper blacked on one side,
and the blacked Paper on a clean Paper ; then
trace the Lines with a Pen, or blunted Point
of a Needle, till the Lines are all impressed on
the white Paper, and draw them over with a black
Lead-pencil, and mark the Shades, where they
separate from the light Parts of the Colour, that
so you may lay on your Colours as you lee them
painted on the China-ware; then cut out your
Figures close to the Out-lines, and fix them upon


your


Digitized by CjOO^lC


I


[ 55 ]


your Ground of Whiting and Size, of Si?e with
ground Chalk, with thick Gum-arabick and Wa¬
ter, and, when they are quite dry, paint them,
the lighter Parts in Water-colours, and the shady
Parts with Varnilh mixed with the darker Co¬
lours ; when these are dry, walh all over with the
white Varnilh before a Fire, but not so hot as
to make the Varnilh rife in Blisters ; when the
Varnilh is dry, lacker it again with the fame
Varnish, and repeat it a third Time; theft
scrape some Tripoli very fine, and with a soft
Rag, dipt in Water, take up a little of the
Tripoli at a time, and polilh it, by gentle rub¬
bing, till ’tis smooth, then walh off the Tripoli
with a soft Sponge and Water, and then, with a
dry fine Cloth, wipe off the Tripoli, and, when
that is dry, clean it with Whiting and Oil, if it
is a white Varnilh; or, with Oil and Lamp¬
black, where the Varnilh is black.


But the common Way is to cut out Prints, and
paste them on such Parts as we think fit, and
then colour them with Water-colours, and var¬
nilh them with white Varnilh. ’Tis an easy Way
of Painting, because the Shades of the Prints,
when you lay on a transparent Water-colour,
will give the Light and Shade that Colour to your
purpose, without using a dark and light Colour.


SECT.. XI. Some remarkable Directions in


Colouring of Draughts or Prints in Japanning,


‘' as Flowers, Birds, Fruits,, &c.


If you have Prints or Drawings in black and
white of Flowers ; if the Centre of the Flower
is rising, just touch the Edges of the Lights with
a thin Tincture of Gamboge, and lay on some
- ' Dutch-*


Digitized by CjOO^lC


I


C 56 ]


Dutch-pink, or Gall-stone, over the Shades, so
as to ran into the Lights a. very little. I fay this
because the Thrums in the Middle of Flowers
arc generally Yellow, but if of any other Colour,
as by Observation I find they are sometimes Blue,
sometimes more light, and sometimes darker,
then touch on the Verges of the Lights a little Ul* .
tramarine-bkie, and over the Shades either some
Sanders.-blue, to run a very little into the Ultra¬
marine, or else shade with Indigo; and, some of
the White of the Print being left void of Colour,
will then give a Life and Spirit to the Colours
so disposed..


All Flowers should be tenderly touched in the
Lights, just co give a little Glare into the light
Parts of the Colouryou would give to the Flower-
Lcaves', and, if you- have a natural Flower to
paint by, yomwiil presently see, that on the shady
Side you must lay on the most shady Part,
such. a Colour as will force the rest to appear
forward ; but do not dawb over the Shades with
too heavy a Colour, let it be such as may be
transparent, if possible, and scumble it into the
light Colour, which Was laid on before; use your
Pencil lightly on this Occasion, with a very little
Gum-watcr in it, and use it before the Colours
are quite dry.


In the Painting of the Leaves of Herbs or
Plants, we ought to have regard to the Colours
of the Greens; the brightest is the Verdigrease-
green, described in my former Book relating to Paint¬
ing in Water-colours; we should touch that Colour
a little into the light Parts of the Leaf; .from the
Place where the lighter Parts of the Shades end j
and then lay oh some Sap-green, on the shady
Parts, so as to unite with, the Verdigreasc-green ;
and if the natural Leaf should be of a darkish


Colour,


Digitized by CjOO^lC


I


I n 3'


Colour, touch the lighter Sides of the Leaves
with a little Verdigrease-greep, and Dutch yel¬
low Pink mixt together, or with a Tincture of
French Berries, .bat fq . as ,to Jet phe Verdigrease
shine more than tne Pink, %ia by-Degrees shade
itwitbrPink. . , v t> r A


The Leaving the Lights;'tvhehwe coteut L-'
Print, has two Advantages,’ #/?.'' - <


If we leave the Lights on this Oscafwo, the
Whiteness of; the Paper serves'instead of thWLse
of white Paint, which is an heavy Colour, and
would rather iconfaund the ,E4ge<s qftthe' CpJfOiifis,*
which I have prescribed tpj bp laid op, ch^n do
them any Service \ butr the Cqlqur?, whicjhj I,{
have directed; where there is nqMhite, LA
wih agreeably shine into thje:jWhite,Qf: :thef Pqp^.l
: I am mose.particular ip this* Efcapse sey^ral,,
if they see a Flower ©f A Colour, ,wiU layj
it all ovep with one Colour, though it lVtjhick,
enough to hide both the Lights and the S^ade^
and then it remains like a Ppnny picture, where .
there, is nothing to be scenbut a Jargon of RqdSj, -
Blues, and Yellows.. ■ ■ rX *qV;b


With a little Practice of what J direct, yqpqwUf.
soon fee the good Effect of laying, pq ^p^uj^ fpy,
this tfsei though the Dawfoingrqf. Prints ;


common Manner may please qhp Ignorant,,
every one of Taste, will soqn( djsWFe? f


pertinence. . t the'• :-;-h . ;... E ['■


In a Word, when you are about such Pieces
of Work, scumble the Lights into the Shades of
every Colour, and save the Middle of the Lights
open on the Papers, for, as the Paper is white of
itself, it makes a Light.


H CHAP.


Digitized by CjOO^lC


I t9 3


_ C H A P. VII.


To melt Amber, and cast it into ‘any Figure
with Flies, or any small Animals in it,


. as.we fee in the valuable Tieces of Amber
fold at great Frices, from Mr. Boyle.


TAKE Turpentine, and melt it in a Glass
in a strong Sand-heat, where the Fire may
be raised at Discretion, then have prepared three'
Ounces of Amber, either of the whitest or yel¬
low Sort ; [If you want your Amber white, pick-
out the clearest white Pieces, or if yellow, the
clearest of that Sort.] levigate either of them ;
and when your Turpentine is melted, sprinkle
the powdered Amber in, keeping it stirring with
a Piece of Fir-wood, till you find no Resistance;
then, if you find your Melting to resist the Stick,
drop in by Degrees a little Venice-turpenrine,
and keep it still stirring, till all your powdered
Amber is dissolved, and is thick enough to pour
into Moulds; and, when’tis cool, you will have
a Figure, or the Medal you propose, filled with
it, and remain as hard as Amber itself, with all
the some Qualities that Amber commonly shews us.


THE


Digitized by CjOO^Ic


' - KrVr'it:&::zj ....


INDEX*


CHAP. ' r ' ' -• Pag;


I- jDHort Roles for Drawing in PerspeStive,


■ ^ which will prove of great Use to all


'.’ Designers 9


- Less. T Of the Fig. I. io


It Of laying Fig. I. in Perspe-
' 1 ■ r ctive ii


Fig. II. ir


“ ^ III. How to raise Pillars, or any


Bodies of a certain Propor¬
tion, in Perspective.Fig.III.14
; Fig. IV. 16


II. Of Painting span Glass ibid.


Sict. I, Colours for Painting on Glass,
with the Necessaries for such
a Work 18


* ■. . A Plan of a Box for Colours,


fcfr. 19


II. Haw to use the; Colours in Paint¬


ing on Glass 23


4 Yellows, Reds, Blues, and GreeAs 24


„ . . ■ . p*


Greens 32


Instructions for the. Use ,of Crayons 36


IV. Concerning the Manner of Etching, or


_Mitching, so be done with Aqua-fortis


\£n CoPI£r:plat<* , .-36


yjPf Japamuife, arid Indian Varnishes -13 8
Sectj. I. Of Japanning Metals ibid.


.-/[ II. Of Japanning Iron Snuff-bo^es*
which now .are g^nerMy co-.


, yered ^itH a; blacks; varnish,


that they may lo^k lil^e Chi-
71 ' ys, and gilt at-out theUdges 39


. / If!. ^Vhite.Varnssh, Os ^mber-var-
. 5 ' ' nish, from a Manuscript of


Mr. Boyle’a 40


*■; .. jy..Ij!?-d Varnish,'rth?t wai bear the


^ .7., - MuKe, (ffom a Manuscript


J ‘ . .. ,Pf '.Mki,ffpy!e’Q t° layover


i Gold. or JBra% or any other


Mesas tha( appear^ske Golcs,


Jjo kepp , sL'HtzMs changing
- Jr^ck,.as she.Lath-rnetal and


7. such others 'yilj do, when they


. 41


V. lo japan BraJL such as is used
'■ tp) gild or make


thepy spph 1 ike Gold 41


k VI. Of Japanning ppon Wood o^ Paper with
Receiprsi fOir^tpajfeyhg sewral, Sorts' ofs
Japan-JVares, either Gold^M.^r, or*


> , in Colours * 77 42


. Sect. I. To n^alf^ th* stifppg Japan-var-


l>: nish' i :uk' - ' - 44


T? II. Of making these China-Toys of


the Colour of Gold ibid.


' . Ill, Varnish for Gold, or such Leaf


, V of Metals as imitate Gold 46


s_vVi... - n.. ’ iv.


Digitized by GOOglc


The / N » & X.


CHAP- Pag.


Sect. IV. To make your Vessels of a red
Colour with gilt Figures on
them ' 4&


V. A Method to silver these Japan-


veflels 47


VI. To make the Varnilh to cover


the Silver 48


VII. Varnish in Japanning on TFood, *


to mix with several Colours ibid.


VIII. Directions for imitating China,
or Purslane-ware, upon Tea-
tables, Tea-boards, upon
Gold or Silver Grounds 49


IX. The Method of Glazing prints
with white Varnish, so as to
bear Water, and the Polish 50
White Varnish for Prints ibid.


» The white Varnilh 51


To paste Prints upon Cloth for
Varnishing 52


Varnilh made with Seed-lacca 53


X. To take off the Figure from any
Piece of China-ware, though
the Person has not been ac¬
quainted with Drawing 54


XI. Some remarkable Directions
in Colouring of Draughts or
Prints in Japanning, as Flow¬
ers, Birds, Fruits, 6?c. AA


VIII. To melt Amber, and cast it into any Fi¬
gure with Flies, or any small Animals
in it, as we fee in the valuable Pieces
of Amber fold at great Prices. From
Mr, Boyle 58


FINIS.


Digitized by CjOO^Ic


/


\


r -


%


T


«


4 .


; i


* »


'. _


/i -


i .4


• j X;.


c -


« . .


t •


. *


. 4


n


»' ✓ * ;


« »


. '. . . .j


. • ^


*


f-


— r ^


4 *


/ 1
• f '


n <' ■ * v


« .. - J . *


fV


/”*• r r


<


i


V. ., >


C


> i ■ •;


4- *• « X


»' »


/ **»
V* I • ✓


VJ X.


J


*■ F


,,!v - '


. *


*; r


».**


• , •


« » t .


/ 1 • .


! v/


/ >


*._« , •


\


' : ’ J


<. i - *


• - ✓


I t


•4 +


i


■ i, 1


i i


*<


• ,
4 •-


4


t


' / ' j


- 4 ^ w *


' 7


/


• V/ 0'


w .


• •


-—4


o


r -


c


r
. I '


r r ,,


k-*


.' i


■1


, e f • . T * * ' '


V> 4 I .» V -


' ' . > » 5 ' ' ;


* 1 1 i . » * * «


«. x


* X * * • •


4 - ' t Li >


?. 'lo


/ r


r


.< *


« ■*


» ♦


i » .«


:o !


• i


*


« »


- \
; . v t


r •


/ : r
»■ v» r f


' ' 4 i J i


' ** f \• i r*. r , » I > I t


J >. t 9 J J . J < 4 » *. « I J


4.


i .


i


• \


k • * 4


-,r


r'


) ::l


. »


*« i t * • •


. f • t - . - -
» I i. ». , ' .4


' ;


» i


• - 4 » V. >. • f. 1


• l


. \p '•


' I


, t


.1


n . U'. i


T .


i * - *


r . . - t *j


X . r


f


l.


-


I


%


i


* •»-.


^ " I


• . -


. I V


% » 1


¥ ^


A


'K


Digitized by


Google


Lately subl'tjhedy
By the same *Author,


The Second Edition, with large Additions, of


THE Art os Drawing, and Painting
in WATER-COLOURS. Where¬
by a Stranger to those Arts may be imme¬
diately rendered capable of Delineating any
View or Prospect with the utmost Exact¬
ness ; of Colouring any Print or Drawing in
the most beautiful Manner ; and of taking off
Medals instantly, by various Ways, never
before made publick: Intermixed with seve-
veral curious Receipts for the Use of Taint ers,
Statuaries, Founders, &c. With Instructions
for making transparent Colours of every Sort;
partly from some curious Personages in Hol¬
lands France and Italy ; but chiefly from a
Manuscript of the great Mr. Beyle; particu¬
larly a Receipt of that Gentleman’s, for ma¬
king a Lie Colour equal to Ultramarine.


Printed for J. Perle, at Locke’s-Hcad in
Amen-Corner, Tater-Nojler Row. [Price one
Shilling.]


Digitized by GOOgfo


1


/


' s ' \ b ‘ \


:■ A i V .W.v *.


- X -


L. '


•: . a .. -


c


0


\ -V


% X


\ -


1 -
*


c


V


V „


4 « . '-J


' \


<


'. V-/


■ . V


- -4* *


ivy*" j t r\ ‘


JvU s* . _


J


v:


r •


i . i


t j. -


1.3


' • V /


r.rr


*-V >-> -


I /


*


- L-


3 J


*


-> - -


•' r


. X


' / V >_ ry, •*♦ * -. f


^ * -
v 1


V > >


i -. 7 ru


.i—


* —.


) j ' <• z •> —


if. -1'j


s; \


? r * - s .


7 k s " s * ' > f » ' *' • > * f • « \ *f \ • J -t ,


.. O


. • i . i


, r


J j


S


x 3 ) i ■ *


\ 7 . ; A-


i..


j.:' ■': I to \va V


^.ihco’oO ’lo £ Evju


floe i orii


: 'r•; ■;-rr y J j.ri.foi xV.ovA


Y:i/;


r


^ 11 :J ^


;i


T? • r r r \ r


• - ' ,t|MM.* * . . \ r. - r ^.y% -X - J


-i — i 1 y . i* y J


• ^ ~


' \


V /
' /


'V' '


" 'r t *». ? o ‘


J A' . 4 I- -J


.3 ^ ^


f '% f «


* * * »


'f 0'/


i.


. I ' i 3


' <7/0*.A


* > -o


- r - - »• • \ > \ > ' '


J 9 J 1 *. • * -- - . - .


•• r 1' I


V 1


r r •


J i vAw I


0 :


r-


ij


.c yj.jnD : J • ir .:
••■'• ? r : f :r-•■I."!f Jedi” orl.


i. V 4


- f * x


•r »r


» i


< 3


. : - -


' >-> V


. .. \ \ " '


- r M


- I 1


Y--A'


3 ► - * v


e i »\U •


.)


^ ♦


»'


* * 1 -


r:


i-


.'!>’< lo 3s\\yy>A r vrr.'


- - (


c:'Tj.;re.7. J 1-fJ ? is-i/o » 77


r > . •"[ •• -■-■:■ :


K j* . t ‘


>


r « *


* >,


^ J • NJ >0* V *- ^ r - ' l . 1 .


/ '


d' '


< ' r"


* *
p/ ' *


x CT 1 - ^ > • ', , ^ 1 ^ v * x • • » <\ \ v* •* '! • \


t . . J • .o ; X. \ j .. ^ 4. W « i'i i j •, ^ . a .» V


r • 11 * r "*


.3 ^


\


• i ( * I k
Vi ' • J 11 • . ,-


_ W


I f


'i. -


Digitized by


Google


t


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


Google


PRESERVATION SERVICE


SHELFMARK


THIS BOOK HAS BEEN
MICROFILMED Qpn3
RPs


MICROFILM NO. SEEESTC


FEAT


Digitized by CjOCK^Ic


Digitized by


Google


