I



T H E.


A
0. F.
A IN.T I N G.
Dr
B. V
C. A. Dv. FR E SN O F:
5

T. I T. H
REMARES AND OESERVATIONS
Tranflated into Englifh, with an Original PREFACE;,
containinga PARALLEL beween Pokrky and PAINTING,
By MR. DR Y D EN.

With a SHORT AccoUNT of the moft EMINENT
P.AIN TERs, both Ancient and Modern.
By RICHARD G.R AHAM.. Efq.

A NEW EDrTroN: To which are added, the Lives of Sir
PETER LELY, Sir GoDPRRY KNELLER, Sir JAMES
THORNHILL, Mr. HOCARTH, and above Twenty other
Moderns, never before inferted.





L 0 N D O N:
Printed for GeGRos PEARCH, No. 12, in Cheapfide.
MDCC LKIx.
50.


TO THE
RICHT HONOURABLE
R I C H A R D

Earl of BURLINGTON, COc.
MY LORD,
N AHE firft Imprestion of this
Latin Poem having been ad-
drefted to the famous Mont.
Colbert, Marquis de Seignelay; I
thought I could not do a greater
Honour to the Memory of its excel-
lent Author, than to infcribe this pre-
sent Edition of it to a young BRITISH
PEER, to whom the noble Arts have
the same Acknowledgments to pay in
thefe Kingdoms, as they had to that
great Minifter in France. The Com-
mand of a King's Purfe was indeed a
A 2
mighty






Epiftle Dedicatory.
mighty Advantage which he had over
Fou. But for a juft Senfe of the Be-
nefits accruing to Mankind, from the
Advancement of Arts and Sciences
in general; or for a refined and ele-
gant Tafte of the particular Beauties
of each of them; as he was by po
means your Superior, fo it mult,
without Flattery, be faid, that hardly
any Man (at your Age) has yet been
equal to Four Lordihip.
Painting, Sculpture, Archirecture,
Mufic, 6Sc. are not more the Enter-
tainments of your Fancy, than of
your Judgment. Your Penetration
has rendered you Mafter of them, in
the same Degree with thofe who make
the Profeffion of them their Bufinets.
And I congratulare my Countrymen
upon the happy Prospect they have,
of laving themfelves the Trouble
and Expence of a Journey to Rome,
of Paris, for the Study of thofe Arts,
which they may find in their urmoft
Perfection at BURLINGTON-HOUSE.
The same Force of Genius which
thines fo bright in thefe the orna-
mental Parts of Life, has no less Luf-
IF8


4
Epiftle Dedicatory.
tre in every other thing you do. It
was this diftinguished you every
where abroad; and made you more
admired in Holland, Flanders, Italy,
and France, for your Endowments. of
Mind, than for your Titles and Pot-
feffions. And to whatever high Sta-
tion your Merit shall call you, in the
Court, the Cabinet, or the Camp,
the same Superiority of Genius will
Hill prevail; and, amongft the moft
Excellent, fou muft excel.
Nor is it a Wonder that your
Lordship should be thus univerfally
accomplifhed. By Right of Succet-
fion, Fou have collected in yourfelf
all the illuftrious Qualities that a-
dorned your Anceftors. The Name
of BOTL E is famous throughour
all the civilized World; wherever
wfeful Knowledge is culcivated, or
wherever sh able and difinterefted
Patriot finds any Efteem. And de-
scended (as You are) from a Father,
Fonounced the
whom our late King
Fineff Gentleman in his Dominions;
and from a Mother, whom one of
the beft of Qucens called Her Friend;
it would be amazings if your Lord-
ship
A 3


Epifile Dedicatory.
ship were any other than what You
AIC.
MY LORD,
Ir is not for common Purpofes
that Heaven has entrufted thefe rich
Talents in your Ilands. You fland
accountable for them to your Prince,
your Country, and your noble Rela-
tions. Nay, every true Briten claims
an Intereft in them; and affures him-
felf, that You are born for his Ad-
Vantage. You have already given
them an Earneft of it, by your gloe
rous Conduct in the North, upon the
late unhappy Difturbances that threa-
tened your Province; and by that
exemplary Moderation and Genero-
fity, which moved Fou to intercede
for the Lives of thofe, againft whom
You food prepared to hazard your
own. But this, my Lord, will be
Matter for our British Chronicles; or
will better become fuch Pens, as have
made the Two Names prefixed to
thefe Sheets renowned in English
Poetry. Confcious therefore of my
own Infufficiency for fuch a Talk, I
shall prefume no farther on your Pa-
tlence,



Epiftle Dedicator
tience, than to fay fomething of the
Work, which Fou have permitted me
to lay at your Feer.
The Repuration of Mont du Fref
noy is eftablifhed all over Earope; and
his Poem allowed to be the moft com-
plete and methodical Syftem, that
has yet been publifhed of the Art of
Painting. And to the Character of
Mr. Dryden, if any thing can be
added, 1t is, that he is one of your
Lordship’s favourite Authors; and,
2s fuch, it will be expected I should
account for some Liberties that have
been taken with his excellent Trant
lation.
The Misfortune that attended him
in that Undertaking, was, that for
Want of a competent Knowledge in
Painting, he fuffered himself to be
mifled by an unskilful Guide. Mont.
de Piles told him, in his Preface, that
his French Verfion was made at the
Requeft of the Author himself; and
altered by him, till it was wholly to
his Mind. This Nir. Dryden taking
upon Content, thought there was no-
thing more incumbent on him, than
t0
A 4


Epistle Dedicatory.
to put it into the beft English he
could; and accordingly performed
his Part here, as in every thing elfe,
with Accuracy. But, my Lord, it
being mamfeft, that the French Tranf-
lator has frequently mistaken the
Senfe of his Author, and very often
alfo not fet it in the moft advanta-
geous Light; to do Juftice to Mont.
du Fresnoy, NIr. Tervas (a very good
Critick in the Language, as well as in
the Subject of the Poem) has been
prevailed upon to correct what was
found amiss; and his Amendments
being every where diftinguished with
roper Marks, are moft humbly fub-
mitted to your Judgment.
I should not have had the Confi-
dence to offer anything to yourl ord-
Ship’s View, that my own mean Ab:-
lities have produced; but as it gives
me a long withed for Opportuniry of
paying the moft humble Tribure of
my Thanks, for a continued Series of
undeferved Favours, which by Inhe-
ritance have defcended to me from
your noble Houfe. They bear Date
from the earlieft Years of my Father's
Life; and your Lordship is now in
the


Epiftle Dedicatory.
the fourth Generation of our Patrons
and Benefactors. To let the World
Know, that 1t. 1s from the firft Perfons
of the Age that thefe great Favours
have been received, is an Ambition,
which, I hope, will be pardoned in
one, who, by all the strncteft Ties of
Duty, Gratitude and Inclination, is,
1
MY LORD.
4
Tour Lordship’s most obliged,
Moft bumble, and
Most abedient Servant,
R. GRAHIAM
A 5



E R V A S.
ME.
WITH
FRESNOTS ART OF PAINTINC,
Tranflated by Mr. DRYDEN.



HIS Verfe be thine, my Friend, nor
thou refufe

This, from no venal or ungrateful
Mufe.
Whetherthy Handffrike outsome free Defign,
WhereLife awakes, and dawns at everyLine;.
Orblend in beauteous Tints the colour dMaIs,.
And from the Canvas call the mimic Face:
Read thefe instructive Leaves, in which con-
Spire
Frefney’s clofe rt, and Dryden's native Fire z.
And reading with, like theirs, our Fate and:
Fame,
Somix’dourStudies, and fojoined our Namey:
Like them to shine thro'long-fucceedingAge,.
So jut thy Skill, fo regular my Rage.
Smit with the Love of Sifter-Arts we came,.
And met congenial, mingling Flame with
Flame;
Like friendly Colours found our Arts unite,
And each from each contract new Strength
and Light.
How


How oft in pleafing Talks we wear the Day,
While Summer Suns roll unperceiv’d away r
How off our flowly-growing Works impart,
While Images reffect from Art to Arts
How oft review; each finding, like a Friend,
Something to blame, and fomething to com-
mend P
Whatflatiring ScenesourwandringFancy
wrought,
RomespompousGloriesrifingtoour Thoughtf
Together oer the Alps methinks we fy,
Fir’d with Ideas of fair Iraly.
With thee, on Rapbaels MonumentI mourn,
Or wait in(piring Dreams at Maros Urn:
With thee repofe, where Tully once was laid,
Or feek fome Ruin's formidable Shade;
While Fancybrings the vanish’dPiles to view,
And builds imaginary Rome anew.
Here thy well-Audy’d Marbles fix our Eye;
A fading Fresco here demands a Sigh:
Each heavenly Piece unwearied we compare;
Match Rapbael’s Grace with thy lov’d Guido's
Air,
Caracers Strength, Correggio's fofter Line,
Paulo's free Stroke,, and Tirian'’s Warmth die
vine.
How finish’d with illuffrious Toil appears.
This small, well-polish’d Gem, the Work f
Of Fears E
Vet Rill how faint by Precept is exprest
The lively Image in the Painter's Breaft )
Thence endlefs Streams of fair Ideas fow,
Strike in the Sketch, or in the Picture glow;
1 Fresney emplayed above twenty Years in finifhing
this Poem.
Thence


Thence Beauty, waking all her Forms, fup-
plies
An Angel’s Sweetnels, or Bridgavater'’s Eyes:
Mufel at that Nams thy facred Sorrows
shed,
Thofe Tears eternal that embalm the Dead:
Call round her Tomb each Object of Defire,
Each purer Frame inform’d with purer Fire:
Bid her be all that chears or foftens Life,
The tender Sifter, Daughter, Friendand Wife F
B.: her be all that makes Mankind adore;
Then view this Marble, and be vain no moref
Vet Hill her Charms in breathing Paint
engage;
Her modeft Cheek shall wasm a future Age.
Beauty, frail Flowr, that evry Seafon fears,
Blooms in thy Colours for a thoufand Vears.
Thus Churchill’s Race shall other Hfearts fur-
PrITE,
And other Beauties envy Wortley'’s Eyes,
Each pleafing Bloans shall endless Smiles be-
fow,
And foft Belinda's Blush for ever glow.
Ohl latting as thofe Coloursmaytheyfhine,
Free as thy Stroke, yet faultless as thy Linel
New Graces yearly, like thy Works, display;
Soft without Weakness, without glaring gay;
Led by fome Rule, that guides, but not con-
rains;
And finifh’dmore thro' Happinets than Pains!
The Kindred rts shall in their Praife con-
Spire,
One dip the Pencil, and one firing the Lyre.
Vet should the Graces all thy Figures place,
And breath an Air divine on evry Face;
Fet


Yet should the Mruses bid my Numbers roll,
Strong as their Charms; and gentle as their
Soul;
With Eeuxis Helen thy Bridgavater Vic,
nd thefe be fung till Granville'’s Mira die;
Alas! how little from the Grave we claim ?
Thou but prefervft a Form, and 1 a Name.
A. POPE.

PREFACE


R E F A G E
O F THE
TR ANSL A TOR.


WITH. A PARALLEL OF
PoETRY and PAINTING.
I may be reafonably expected, that I
should fay fomething on my Behalf,
I in respect to my prefent Undertaking.
Firft then, the Reader may be pleafed to
Know, that it was not of my own Choice
that I undertook this Work. Many of our
moft Kilful Painters, and other Artiffs, were
pleafed to recommend this Aurber to me, as
one who perfectly underffood the Rules of
Painting; who gave the beff and moft con-
cife Intructions for Performance, and the
fureft to inform the judgment of allwholoved
this noble Art: That they who before were
rather fond of it, than knowingly admired
it, might defend their Inclination by their
Reafon: That they might underftand thofe
Excellencies which they blindly valued, to
as not to be farther imposed on by bad Pieces,
and to know when Nature was well imitated
by the moft able Mafters. It is true indeed,
and


XVi


P R E F A C E.
and they acknowledge it, that, befides the
Rules which are given in this Treatife, or
which can be given in any other, to make 2
perfect Judgment of good Pictures, and to
value them more or less, when compared
with one another, there is farther required a
long Converfation with the best Pieces, which
are not very frequent either in France or
England; yet some we have, not only from
the Hands of Holbein, Rubens and Vandyke,
(one of them admirable for Hiftory-Painting,.
and the other twd for Portfaits) but of many
Flemist Mafters, and thofe not inconfidera-
ble, though for Defign not equal to the Ira-
lians: And of thefe latter atfo, we are not
unfurnished with fome Pieces of Rapbael, T:—
gie, Michael Angelo, and others.
tian, Correg
But to return to my own Undertaking of
this Tranflation, I freely own that I thought

myfelf uncapable of performing it, either to
their Satisfaction, or my own Credit. Not
but that I underffoed the Original Larin, and
the French furbor, perhaps as well as moft
Englissmen; but I was not fufficiently verfed:
in the Terms of 4rr. And therefore thought.
that many of thofe Perfons, who put this
honourable Talk on me, were more able to.
perform it themfelves, as undeubtedly they
were. But they affuring me of their Affift-.
ance in correcting my Faules,, where I spoke
improperly,, I was encouraged to attempt it,
that I might not be wanting in whatI could,
to fatisfy the Defires of fo many Gentlemen,
who were willing to give the World this ufe-
ful Work. They have effectually performed
their Promife to me; and I have been as
careful on my Side to take their Advice in
all Things; to that the Reader may affure
himself.


P R E F A C E.
himfelf of a tolerable Tranflation; not ele-
gant, for I proposed not that to myself; but
familiar, clear and infiructive. In any of
which Parts, if I have failed, the Fault lies
wholly at my Door. In this one Particular
only, I muft beg the Reader's Pardon. The
Prose Translation of the Poem is not free from
poerical Expresfions, and I dare not promife.
that tome of them are not Fuffian, or at leaft
highly metaphorical; but this being a Fault
in the firft Digeftion (that is, the Original
Latin) was not to be remedied in the fe-
cond, vix. the Tranflation. And E may
confidently fay, that whoever had attempted
it, muft have fallen into the same Inconve-
nience, or a much greater, that of a falfe
Verfion. When I undertook this Work, I
was already engaged in the Tranflation of
Virgil, from whom I have borrowed only
two Months; and am now returning to that
which I ought to underffand better. In the
mean time, I beg the Reader's Pardon for
entertaining him to long with myself: It is
an ufual Part of ill Manners in all Aulbers,
and almoft in all Mankind, to trouble others
with their Bufiness; and I was fo fenfible of
it beforehand, that I had not now committed
it, unless fome Concernments of the Readers.
had been interwoven with my own. But I
know not, while I am atoning for one Er-
for, if I am not falling into another: For f
have been importuned to fay fomething far-
ther of this 4rr; and to make fome Obfer-
vations in it, in relation to the Likeness and
Agreement which it has with Peetry its Sifter.
But before I proceed, it will not be amiss;
if 1 copy from Belfor: (a moft ingenious Au-
thor) some Part of his Idea of a Painter,
which


KVIE


Rvili


P R E F A C E.
which cannot be unpleating, at leaft to fuch
who are converfant in the Philofophy of
Plaro. And to avoid Tedioufnets, I will not.
tranflate the whole Difcourfe, but take and
leave, as I find Occafion.
God Almighty, in the Fabric of the Universe,
first contemplated himself, and reffected on his
own Excellencies; from which be drew and
constituted those first Forms, which are called
Ideas. So that every Species which was after-
wards expressed, was produced fr. m that first
Idea, forming that wonderful Centexture of all
created Beings. But the celeftial Bodies above
the Moon being incorruptible, and not subject
to Change, remained for evar fair, and in per-
petual Order: on the centrary, all things which
are sublunary, are subject to Change, to Defor-
mily, and to Decay. And though Nature al
aways intends a confummate Baauty in her Pro-
dubtions; yet, through the Inequality of the Mat-
ler, the Ferms are altered; and in particular,
human Beauty suffers Alteration for the werse,
as we see to our Mertification, in the Deformi-
ries and Disproportions which ars in us. For
which reason, the artful Painter, and the Sculp-
fer, imitating the divine Maker form to them-
selves, as well as they are able, a Model of
the superier Beauties; and, reflecting on them,
endeavour to correct and amend the common Na-
ture, and to represent it as it was first created,
without Fault, eirber in Cowur or in Linea-
MCHt.
This Idea, which ave mey call the Goddess of
Painting and of Sculpture, defiends u, on the
Marble and the Cloth, and becomes the Origi
nal of these Arrs; and, being measured by the
Compass of the Intellect, is irself the Measure
of


P R E F A C E.
of the performing Hand; and, being animated
by the Imagination, infuses Life into the Image.
The Idea of the Painter and the Sculptor is un-
doubtedly that perfect and excellent Example of
the Mind, by Imitation of which imagined Form,
all Things are represented which fall under bu-
man Sight : Such is the Defimtion which is
made by Cicero, in his Bock of the Orator to
Brutus. co As therefore in Forms and Figures,
66
there is somewhat which is excellent and
66
perfect, to wbich imagined Species. all
56
Things are referred by Imitation, wbich ars
56
the Objects of Sight; in like manner we be-
56
bold the Species of Eloquence in our Minds,
66
the Effigies, or actual Image of wbich ave
46

This is
feek in the Organs of our Hearing
66
likewise confirmed by Procius, in the Dia-
66
logue of Plato, called Timeus: If; fays he,
66
you take a Man, as be is made by Nature,
cc and compare him with another who is the Ef-
& fect of Art; the Work of Nature will at
co ways appear the less beautiful, because Are
& is more accurate than Nature." ButLCuxis,
who, from the Choice which be made of frve
Virgins, dreaw that wenderful Picture of He-
lena, awhich Cicero in his Orater before-men-
tioned sets before us, as the mest perfect Exam-
ple of Beauty, at the same time admonisbes a
Painter to contemplate the Ideas of the most na-
tural Forms; and to make a judicious Cbeice of
several Bodies, all of them the most elegant
which be can find. By avbich ave may plainly
understand, that he thought it imposfible to find
in any one Body all those Perfections awbich be
fought for the Accomplishment of a Hiclena;
because Nature in any individual Person makes
notbing that is perfect in all its Parts. For
this Reason, Maximus Tyrius alfo Jays, that
the


X


X


P R E F A C E.
the image which is taken by a Painter from se-
veral Bodies, produces a Brauty, which it is
impossible to find in any single natural Body, ap-
proaching to the Perfection of the faireft Sta-
sues. Thus Nature, on this account, is so much
inserior to Art, that these Artifts awbo propose
to themselves only the Imitation or Likene)s of
such or such a particular Person, without Elec-
tion of those ideas before-mentioned, bave often
been reproached for that Omisfion. Demetrius
was taxed for being too natural; Dionyfius
was also blamed for drawing Men like us, and
was commonly called Audcareyeagee, that is, a
Painter of Men. In our Times, Michael n-
gelo da Caravaggio was effeemed too natural.
He drew Persons as they were; and Baaboc-
C1o, and meft of the Dutch Painters, have
drawn the averft Likeness. Lylippus of old
apbraided the common Sort of Sculptors, for
making Wen such as they avere found in Wa-
ture; and beafted of himself, that be made
them as they ought to be; which is a Precept of
riffotle, given as well to Poets, as to Painters.
Phidias raifed an Admiration even to Affonish-
ment, in these who beheld his Statues, with the
Forms which he gave to his Giods and Herces,
by imitating the Idea, rather than Nature.
And Cicero, Speaking of him, affirms, that
figuring Jupiter and Pallas; be did not conten-
plate any Object from acbence be took any Like-
ness, but considered in his own Mind a great
and admirable Ferm of Beauty, and according
to that Image in his Seul, be directed the Ope-
ration of his Hand. Sencea also seems to avon-
der that Phidias having nover tebeld eirber
love or Pallas, yet could conceive their divine
Images in his Mind. Apollonius Tyanxus
says the same in other Werds, that the Fancy
TUTC


P R E F A C E.
pore instructs the Painter, than the Imitation;
for the laft makes only the Things asbich it fees,
but the first makes also the Things which it
never sees.
Leon Battifla lberti tells as, that we ought
not so much to love the Likenets as the Beauty,
and to choose from the fairest Bodies severally
tbe saireff Parts. Leonardo da Vinci inftructs
the Painter to form this idea to himself; and
(Raphael, the greateft of all modern Mafters,
tavrites thus to Caltiglione, concerning his Cra-
Matea: To paint a fair one, it is neceffary
66
for me to See many fair ones; but because
66
there is so great a Scarcity of lovely Women,
66
I am constrained to make use of one certain
66
Idea, ashicb I bave formed to myself in my
3.
co oun Fancy. Guido Reni fending to Rome
his St. Nichael, which be had painted for the
Church of the Capuchirs, at the same time
wrote to Montignor Maffane, asbo avas the
Maettro di Cafa (or Steward of the Hause) to
Pope Urban the Righth, in this manner. co I
wish I bad the Wings of an Augel, to bave
ascended into Paradife, and there to bave te-
beld the Forms of those beatified Spirits, from
which I might bave copied my rchangel.
But not being able to meunt so bigb, it was in
vain for me to fearch his Resemblance here be-
low; so that I was forced to make an Intrespec-
tien into my own Mind, and into that idea of
Eeauty, which I have formed in my own Ima-
gination. I have likewiss created there the
contrary idea of Deformity and Ueliness; but
I lave the Consideration of it, till I paint the
Devil; and in the mean time, bun the very
Thought of it, as much as poffiely I can, and
am even endeavouring to blot it avholly out of
my Remembrance. 7 here was not any Lady in
all


Xi


XX


P R E F A C E.
all Antiquity, who was Mistress of so much
Beauty, as was to be found in the Venus of
Guidus, made by Praxiteles; or the Minervs
of thens, by Phidias; which was thereson
called the beautiful Form. Noitber is there ay
Man of the present Age, equal in the Strength,
Proportion and Knitting of his Limbs, to the
Hercules of Farnefe, made by Glicon; or any
Woman who can juftly be compared with the
Medicean Venus, of Cleomenes. And upon
this account, the nobleft Poets and the beft Ors-
tors, when they defired to celebrate any extraor-
dinary Beauty, are forced to bave recourse to
Statues and Pittures, and to draw their Per-
Jons and Faces into Comparison. Ovid, endea-
vouring to express the Beauty of Cillarus, the
faireft of the Centaurs, celebrates him as next
in Perfection to the most admirable Statues.
Gratus in orevigor, cervix, humerig; manulg;
Pectorac; artificum laudatis proxima fignis.
A pleasing Vigour his fair Face express’d:
His Neck, his Hands, his Shoulders, and his
Breaft,
Did next in Gracefulness and Beauty stand,
To breathing Figures of the Sculpior's Hand.
In another Place be sets Apelles above Venus:
Sivenerem Coisnunquam pinxiffet spelles,
Merfa fub xquoreis illa lateret aquis.
Thus varied.
One Birth to Seas the Cyprian Goddefs eav’d,
A second Birth the Painter's Art befforw’d:
Less by the Seas than by his Powr was givn;
T bey made ber live, but be advanc’ d to Hegvn.


P R E F A C E.
The Idea of this Beauty is indeed various,
according to the several Forms which the Tainter
or Sculptor would describe: As one in Strength.
another in Magnanimity; and sometimes it con-
fifts in Chearsulness, and sometimes in Delicacy.
and is always diversified by the Sex and Age.
The Beauty of Yove is one, and that of June
another: Hercules and Cupid are perfect Beau-
ties, though of different Kinds; for Beauty is
only that which makes all Things as they are in
their proper and perfect Nature; which the best
Painters always choose, by contemplating the
Forms of each. We ought famber to consider
that a Pitture being the Representation of a bu-
man Action, the Painter ought to retain in his
Mind the Examples of all Affections and Pas-
sions; as a Poet preserves the idea of an angry
Man, of one who is fearful, fad or merry, and
so of all the rest. For it is impossible to express
that with the Hand, which never entered into
the Imagination. In this manner, as I bave
rudely and briefty shewn you, Painters and
Scuiptors, choofing the most elegant, natural
Beauties, perfectionate the Idea, and advance
their Art, even above Nature itself, in ber in-
dividual Productions, which is the uimeft Ma-
stery of buman Performance.
From bence arifes that Aftenishment, and al-
mest Adoration, awhich is paid by the Knowing
to those divine Remains of Annquity. From
bence Phidias, Lyfippus, and other noble Sculp-
tars, are fill beld in Veneration; and Apelles,
Qeuxis, Protogenes, and ofber admirable Pain-
ters, though their Works are perished, are and
vill be eternally admired; awho all of them
dreaw after the ideas of Perfection; awhich are
the Miracles of Nature, the Providence of the
Underslanding, the Exemplars of the Mind, the
Light


KXili


Kxiv


P R E F A C E.
Light of the Fancy; the Sun, which, from its
vifing, inspired the Starue of Niemnon, and the
Fire which warmed into Life the Image of Pro-
metheus. It is this which causes the Graces
and the Loves to take up their Habitations in
the bardeft Niarbie, and to subfift in the Emp-
tiness of Light and Shadows. But since the
Idea of Eloquence is as inferior to that of
Painting, as the Force of Words is to the Sight;
I must here break off abruptly, and, having con-
ducted the Reader as it were to a fecret Walk,
there leave him in the midft of Silence to con
template these ideas, which I have only sketched,
and which every Man must finish for himself.
In thefe pompous Expreffions, or fuch as
thefe, the Iralian has given you his Idea of a
Painter; and though I cannot much com-
mend the Stile, I muit needs fay, there is
fomewhat in the Matter: Plaro himfelf is ac-
cuffomed to write loftily, imitating, as the
Criticks tell us, the Manner of Homer; but
furely, that inimitable Peet had not to much
of Smoke in his Writings, though not less of
Fire. But in thort, this is the prefent Ge.
nins of Italy. What Pbileffraras tells us, in
the Proem of his Figures, is fomewhat plainer;
and therefore I will tranflate it almoft Word
for Word. oo He who will rightly govern the
s. Art of Painting, ought of Neceffity firft to
ce understand human Nature. He ought like-
co avise to be endued with a Genius, to express
ot the Signs of their Pattons wbom be repre-
so sents; and to make the Dumb as it were to
so Speak: He must yet farther understand what
io is contained in the Constitaution of the Cbeeks,
as in the Temperament of the Eyes, in the Na-
so turalness (if I may so call ir) of the Eye-
o brows;


P K E F A C E.
86
brows; and in sbert, awbatfeever belongs to
56
the Mind and Thought. He who thoroughty
66
posfesfes all these Things, will obtain the whole;
66
and the Hand vill exquifitely represent the
86
Action of every particular Person. If it
86
happens that he be either mad or angry, me-
66
lanchelic or chearful, a Sprightly Touth, or
66
a languishing Lover; in one Word, he will
66
be able to paint wbatfoever is proportionable
66
to any one. And even in all this there is a
64
sweet Error without causing any Shame. For
66
the Eyes and Minds of the Beholders being
66
fastened on Objects which have noreal Being,
66
as if they were truly existent, and being in-
56
duced by them to believe them jo, what Plea-
66
sure is it not capable of giving? The Ancients
56
and otber wise Men, bave writtenmany T bings
86
concerning the Symmetry, which is in the
6t
rt of Painting; constituting as it avere
66
some certain Laws for the Proportion of every
66
Members not thinking it possible for a Pain-
66
ter to undertake the Expression of those Mo-
ations which are in the Mind, without a con=
&:current Harmny in the natural Measure.
& For that which is out of its own Kind and
o Measure, is not received from Nature, whose
66
Motion is always rigbt. On a serious Con-
is sideration of this Matter, it will be found,
ce That the Art of Painting bas a wonderfid
 Affinity with that of Poetry; and that there
it is betwixt them a certain common lmagina-
t tion. For as the Poets introduce the trods
66
and Heroes, and all those Things which are
66
either majeftical, boneft, or delightful; in like
o manner, the Painters, by the virtue of their
e Outlines, Coleurs, Lights, and Sbadows, re-
s present the same Things ann Persons in their
 Pictures.
B
Thus,


XXv


KXVi


P
R E F
A C B
Thus, as Convey Ships either accompany,
or should accompany their Merchants, till.
they may prosecute the reft of their Voyage
without Danger; fo Phileffrarus has brought
me thus far on my Way, and I can now lail
on without him. He has begun to peak of
the great Relation betwixt Painting and Pee-
try, and thither the greateft. Part of this Dif
courfe, by my Promife, was directed. I have
not engaged myfelf to any perfeet Method,
neither am Iloaded with a full Cargo. It is
fufficient if I bring a Sample of fome Goods
in this Voyage. Itwill be eafy for others to
add more when the Commerce is fattled.
For a Trearife, twice as large as this, of
Painting, could not contain all that might be
faid on the Paraitel of thefe two Siffer-Arts.
I will take my Rife from Belfori, before I pro-
ceed to the Aurbor of this Book.
The Bufiness of his Preface is to prove,
that a learned Painter should form to himself
an Idea of perfect Narure. This Imags he
is to fet before his Mind in all his Undertak-
ings, and to draw from thence, as from a
Storchoufe, the Beauries which are to enter
into his Work; thereby correcting Wature
from what actually the is in individuale, to
what the ought to be, and what the was
created. Now as this Idea of Peefection is of
little fe in Pertrairs (or the Refemblances
of particular Perfons); fo neither is it in the
Charatters of Comedy and Tragedy, which are
never to be made perfect, but always to be
drawn with some Specks of Frailty and De-
ficience; fuch as they have been deferihed to
us in Hiffory, if they were real Characters;
or fuch as the Poer began to thew them, at
their firtt Appearance, if they were only fic-
Citious,


9
1
F E F A C E:
titious, or imaginary. The Perfection of
fuch Stage-Characters confifts chiefly in their
Likenels to the deficient faulty Nature, which
is their Original. Only (as it is obferved
more at large hereafter) in fuch Cafes, there
will always be found a better Likeness, and
a worte; and the better is conflantly to be
chosen; I mean in Tragedy, which reprefents.
the Figures of the higheff Form among Man-
kind. Thus in Pertrairs, the Painter wilt
not take that Side of the Face which has
some notorious Blemish in it; but either
draw it in Profile (as Apelles did Astrgonuss
who had loft one of his Eyes) or elfe shadow:
the more imperfect Side. For an ingenious
Flattery is to be allowed to the Profeffors of
both Arts, fo long as the Likenels is not de-
Rroyed. It is true, that all manner of Im-
pertections muft not be taken away from the
Characters; and the Reafon is, that there
may be left fome Grounds of Pity for their
Misfortunes. We can never be grieved for
their Miferies who are thoroughly wicked,
and have thereby juftly called their Calami=
ties on themfelves. Such Men are the na-
tural Objects of our Hatred, not of our Com-
miferation. If, on the other Side, their
Characters were wholly perfect (fuch as, for
Example, the Character 6f a Saint, or Mar-
yr in a Play) his or her Misfortunes would
produce impious Thoughts in the Beholders;
they would accufe the Meavens of Injuftice,
and think of leaving a Religien, where Piety
was to ill requited. Ifay, the greater Part
would be tempted to to do; I fay not, that
they ought; and the Confequence is too
dangerous for the Practice. In this I have
accufed myfelf, for my own St. Carbarine.
but
B 2


KXViE


Rvili


P R E F A C E.
but let Truth prevail. Sopbockes has taken
the juft Medium in his Oedipus. He is fome-
what arrogant at his firft Entrance, and is
000 inquifitive through the whole Tragedy;
yet thefe Imperfections, being balanced by
great Virtues, they hinder not our Compat-
hon for his Miferies; neither yet can they
deftroy that Horror, which the Nature of his
Crimes have excited in us. Such in Paint-
ing are the Warrs and Moles, which, adding
a Likeness to the Face, are not therefore to
he omitted; but thefe produce no loathing
in us: But how far to proceed, and where
to ftop, is left to the judgment of the Poer
and the Painter. In Comedy there is fome-
what more of the worfe Likeness to be taken;
becaufe that is often to produce Laughter,
which is occafioned by the Sight of some De-
formity; but for this I refer the Reader to
Arifforce. It is a sharp manner of instruction
for the Vulgar, who are never well amended,
till they are more than fufficiently exposed.
That I may return to the Beginning of this
Remark, concerning perfect Ideas, I have only
this to fay, that the Parallel is often true in
Epic Poetry.
The Heroes of the Poers are to be drawn

according to this Rule.
There is fcarce a
Frailty to be left in the beft of them, any
more than is to be found in a divine Narure.
And if REneas fomerimes weeps, it is not in
bemoaning his own Miferies, but thofe which
his People undergo. If this be an imperfec.
sion, the Son of God, when he was incarnate,
shed Tears of Compaffion over Terufalem;
and Lenrulus defcribes him often weeping,
but never laughing; to that Virgil is jufti-
fied even from the boly Scriptures. I have
but


P R E E A C E.
but one Word more, which for once I will
anticipate from the Aurbor of this Book.
Though it muft be an Idea of Perfec-
tion, from which both the Epic Poer and the
Hiffory Painter draws; yet all Perfections
are not fuitable to all Subjects; but every
one muff be defigned, according to that per-
feet Beauty which is proper to him. An
Apollo muft be diftinguished from a Tupiter,
a Pallas from a Venus; and to in Peetry, an
Eneas from any other Hero, for Piety is his
chief Perfection. Homer’s Achilles is a kind
of Exception to this Rule; but then he is
not a perfect Here, nor fo intended by the
Poer. All his Geds had fomewhat of human
Imperfection, for which he has been taxed
by Plate, as an imitator of what was bad
But Virgil obferved his Fault, and mended
it. Vet Acbilles was perfect in the Strength
of his Body, and the Vigour of his Mind.
Had he been less paffionate or lets revenge=
ful, the Poet well forefaw that Hecfor had
been Killed, and Troy taken at the firff Af-
fault; which had defroyed the beautiful
Contrivance of his Riad, and the Moral
of preventing Difcord amongt Confederate
Princes, which was his principal Intention.
For the Moral (as Bofs observes) is the firft
Bufiness of the Poer, as being the Ground-
work of his Instruction. This being formed;
he contrives fuch a Defign or Fable, as may
be moft fuitable to the Moral: After this he
begins to think of the Perfons, whom he is
to employ in carrying on his Design; and
gives them the Manners, which are moft pro=
perto their feveral Cbaracters. The Thoughts
and Words are the laft Parts, which give
Beauty and Colouring to the Piece. When
Itay,
B 3


KKi


8358


P R E F A C E.
I fay;rthat the Manners of the Here ought to
be good in Perfection, I contradict not the
Marquis of Nermanty's Opinion, in that ad-
mirable Verfe, where, fpeaking of a perfect
Character, he calls it
ATaukless Monster, which the World ne er knew.
For that excellent Critic intended only to
Speak of Dramatic Characters, and not of
Epic. Thus at leafl I have thewn, that in
the moft perfect Porm, which is that of Vir-
Fil, a perfect Idea was required, and followed;
and confequently, that all fucceeding Poers
ought rather to imitate him, than even Ho-
mer I will now proceed, as I promifed, to
the Author of this Book. He tells you, al-
moft in the firft Lines of it, that the chief
End of Painting is to please the Exesz and it
is one great End of Pectry to please the Mind.
Thus far the Paraltel of the Aris holds true;
with this Difference, that the principal End
of Painting is to please, and the chief Defign
of Pceiry is to inffracl. in this, the latter
teems to have the Advantage of the former.
But if we confider the rriffs themfelves on
both Sides, certainly their Aims are the very
same; they would both make fure of pleafing,
and that in Preference to Instruction. Next,
the Means of this Pleafure is by Deceit. One
impofes on the Sight, and the other on the
Inderftanding. Fretion is of the Effence of
Peetry, as well as of Painting; there is a Re-
femblance in one, of human Bodies, Things
and Actions, which are not real; and in the
other, of a true Story by a Fiction. And as
all Stories are not proper Subjects for an
Epic Peem or a Tragedy, to neither are they
for


P R E F A C E.
for a neble Picrurs. The Subjects both of
the one and of the other ought to:have no-
thing of immoral, low or filthy in them;
but this being treated at large in the Book
itfelf, I wave it, to avoid Repetition. Only
I muft add, that though Catallus, Ovid, and
others, were of another Opinion, that the
Subject of Poets, and even their Thoughts
and Exprestions might be loofe, provided
their Lives were chaffe and holy; yet there
are no fuch Licences permitted in that frr
any more than in Painting, to defign and co-
four obicene Nudities. Vita proba off; is
no Excute; for it will fcarcely be admitted,
that either a Poer or a Painter can be chaite,
who give us the contrary Examples in their
Writings and their Pictures. We fee nothing
of this Kind in Firgil. That which comes
the nearckt to it, 1s, the Adventure of the
Cave, where Dide and Eneas were driven
by the Storm; yet even there, the Poer pre-
tends a Marriage before the Confummation;
and June herfelf was prefent at it. Neither
is there any Expreffion in that Story, which
a Roman Marron tnight not read without a
Bluth. Befides, the Poer paffes it over as
hatily as he can, as if he were afraid of Ray-
ing in the Cave ith the two Levers, and of
being a Witness to their Actions. Now I
suppofe that a Parnrer would not be much
commended, who should pick out this Ca-
vern from the whole Eners, when there is
not another in the Work. He had better
leave them in their Obfcurity, than let in a
Flath of Lightning, to clear the natural
Darkness of the Place, by which he muft dif
cover himself as much as them. The Attarn
piecrs, and holy Decorations of Painting, thew
B 4
that


KREX


XXXI



P. R E F A C E.
that firr may be applied to better Ufes, as
well as Peerry.

And, amongft many other Inftances, the
Farnese Gallery, painted by Hannibal Car-
racci, is a fufficient Witness yet remaining:
The whole Work being morally infiructive,
and particularly the Herculis Bivinm, which
i5 a perfect Triumph of Virtue over Vice; as
it is wonderfully well defcribed by the inge-
nious Bellori.
 Hitherto I have only told the Reader what
ought not to be the Subject of a Picture, or
of a Poem. What it ought to be on either
Side, our urbor tells us: It muff in general
be great and noble. And in this the Paralle)
is exactly true. The Subject of a Poer, either
in Tragedy, or in an Epic Peem, is a great
Action of some illuftrious Ifero. It is the
same in Painting; not every ction, nor
every Perfon, is confiderable enough to enter
into the Cloth. It muft be the Anger of an
Acbilles, the Piety of an Eneas, the Sacrifice
of an Ipbigenia (for Heroines as well as Heroes
are comprehended in the Rule); but the Pa-
rallel is more complete in Tragedy, than in
an Epic Poem. For as a Tragedy may be
made out of many particular Esijodes of Ho-
mer, or of Virgil; to may a noble Picture be
defigned out of this or that particular Story,
in either fathor. Hiffery is alfo fruitful of
Defigns, both for the Painter and the Tragic
Peet: Curtins throwing himself into a Gulph,
and the two Recis facrificing themfelves for
the Safety of their Country, are Subjects for
Tragedy and Picture. Such is Scipie, refor-
ing the Spaniss Bride, whom he either loved,
or may be tuppofed to love; by which he
gained the Hearts of a great Nation, to in-
tereff


P R E F A C E.
3
tereft themfelves for Rome against Carthape:
These are all but particular Pieces in Lizy's
Hiflory, and yet are full, cemplete Subjects
for the Pen and Pencil. Now the Reafon of
this is evident. Tragedy and Picture are
more narrowly circumfcribed by the mecha-
nic Rules of Time and Place, than the Epic
Poom. The Time of this laft is left indefi-
nite. It is true, Homer took up only the
Space of eight and forty Days for his Thiad;
but, whether Virgils Action was compre-
hended in a Vear, or fomewhat more, is not
determined by Bofn. Homer made the Place
of his Action, Trey; and the Grecian Camp
befieging it. Virgil introduces his Eneds,
Cometimes in Sicily, fometimes in Carthage,
and other Times at Cume, before he brings
him to Laurentum; and even after that, he
wanders again to the Kingdom of Evander
and fome Parts of Tuscany, before he returns
to finith the War by the Death of Turnus.
But Tragedy (according to the Practice of the
Ancients) was always confined within the
Compafs of twenty four Hours, and feldom
takes up to much Time. As for the Place
of it, it was always one, and that not in a
larger Scnfe (as for Example, a whole City,
or two or three feveral Houfes in it) but the
Market, or some other public Place, com-
mon to the Choras and all the Actors.
Which eftabliffed Law of theirs, I have not
an Opportunity to examine in this Place,
becaute I cannot do it without Digreffion
from my Subject, though it feems too drict
at the firtt Appearance, becaufe it excludes
all secret Intrigues, which are the Bcauries
of the modern Stage; for nothing can be car-
ried on with Privacy, when the Choras is
Tup-
B
5


XXXLI


HKIV


P R E F A C E.
suppoted to be always prefent. But to pro-
ceed, I muft fay this to the Advantage of
Painting, even above Tragedy, that what this
laftreprefents in the Space of many Hours, the
former shews us in one Moment. The Action,
the Paffion, and the Manners of to many Per
fons as are contained in a Picture, are to be
difcerned at once in the twinkling of an Exe;
at leaft they would be fo, if the Sight could
fravel over to many different Objects all. at
once, or the Mind could digeft them all at
the same Instant, or Point of Time. Thus,
in the famous Picture of Poufin, which re-
prefents the Iaffitution of the bleffed Sacrament,
you fee our Saviour and his tavelve Disciples,
all concurring in the fame Action, after dif-
ferent Manners, and in different Poftures;
only the Manners of Judas are diffirguithed
from the reft. Here is but one indivifibe
Point of Time obferved; but one Acdion per-
formed by fo many Perfons, in one Room,
and at the fan.e Table; yet the Eye cannot
comprehend at once the whole Object, nor
the Mind follow it fo faft; it is contidered at
Leifure, and feen by Intervals. Such are the
Subjects of noble Pictures; and fuch are only
to be undertaken by noble Hands. There are
other Parts of Nature, which are meaner, and
yet are the Subjects both of Painters and of
Piets.
For to proceed in the Parallel, as Comedy
is a Reprefentation of human Life, in infe-
rior Pertons, and low Subjects, and by that
means creeps into the Nature of Poerry, and
is a kind of Taiper a Shrub belonging to the
Species of Cedar; to is the Painting of Clowns,
the Reprefentation of a Durch Kermis, the bru-
sal Sport of Snick or Snee, and a thouland
other


P R E F A C E.
other Things of this mean Invention, a kind
of Picture; which belongs to Nature, but of
the loweft Form. Such is a Lazar in Com-
parifon to a Venus; both are drawn in human
Figures; they have Faces alike, though not
like Faces. There is yet a lower Sort of Pee-
try and Painting, which is out of Nature:
For a Farce is that in Poelry, which Grotesque
is in a Picture. The Perfons, and Action of
2 Farce, are all unnatural; and the Manners
falfe, that is, inconfifting with the Charac-
ters of Mankind. Grotesque Painting is the
juit Refemblance of this; and Borace begins
his Art of Pectry; by defcribing fuch a Figure
with a Man’s Head, a Horfe's Neck, the
Wings of a Bird, and a Fith's Tail; Parts of
different Species jumbled together, accord-
ing to the mad Imagination of the Dauber;
and the End of all this (as he tells you after-
ward) is to caufe Laughter. A very Mon-
fer in a Barthelomeru-Fair for the Mob to
gape at for their Two-pence. Laughter is in-
deed the Propriety of a Man, but juft enough
to diffinguith him from his elder Brother with
four Legs. It is a Kind of Baftard-pleafure
100, taken in at the Ryes of the vulgar Ga-
zers, and at the Ears of the beafly Audience.
Church-painters ufe it to divert the honeit
Countryman at public Prayers, and keep his
Ryes open at a heavy Sermon. And Farce-
scribblers make ufe of the fame noble inven-
tion, to entertain Citixens, Country Gentlemen,
and Covent-Garden Fops. if they are merry.
all goes well on the Poer’s Side. The better
Sort go thither too, but in Defpair of Senfe,
and the juft images of Nature, which are the
adequate Pleafures of the Mind. But the 4n.
bor can give the Stage no better than what
1V23


KEY


KExVi


P R E F A C E.
was given him by Nature; and the AGers
muff reprefent fuch Things as they are capa-
ble to perform, and by which both they and
the Scribbter may get their Living.After all,
it is a good Thing to laugh at any rate; and
if a Straw can tickle a Man, it is an Inftru=
ment of Happineis. Beafts can weep when
they fuffer, but they cannot laugh. And, as
Sir William Davenant outerves, in his Preface
to Gondiberr, so It is the Wifdom of a Go-
ss vernment to permit Plays, (he might
have added Farces) is as it is the Prudence
cs of a Carter to put Bell, upon his Horfes,
is to make them carry their Burdens chear-
93
so fully.
I have already shewn, that one main End
of Poetry and Painting, is to pleafe, and have
said fomething of the Kinds of both, and of
their Subjects, in which they hear a greatRe-
temblance to each other. I muft now confider
them, as they are great and noble Arrs; and
as they are Arrs, they muft have Rules, which
may direct them to their common End.
To all Arrs and Sciences, but more particu-
larly to thefe may be applied what Hip, ocrates
fays of Phyfic, as I find him cited by an emi-
nent French Critic. 6s Medicine has long
 subfitied in the World. The Principles of
is it are certain, and it has a certain Way;
is by both which there has been found in the
co Courfe of many Ages, an infinite Number
se of Things, the Experience of which has
of confirmed its Ofefulness and Goodness.
. All that is wanting to the Perfection of
so this Art, will undoubtedly be found, if
of able Men, and fuch as are inftructed in
of the ancient Rules, will make a farther In=
of quiry into it, and endeavour to arrive at
of that


P R. E F A C E.
s that which is hitherto unknown, by that
is which is already known. But all, who
 having rejected the ancient Rules, and
it taken the oppofite Ways, yet boaft them-
of felves to be Mafters of this Art, do but
is deceive others, and are themfelves de-
of ceived; for that is absolutely impoffible. I
This is notorioully true in thefe two Arts;
for the Way to pleafe being to imitate Na-
ture, both the Poets and the Painters in an-
cient Times, and in the beft Ages, have stu-
died her; and from the Practice of both these
Ares, the Rules have been drawn, by which
we are instructed how to pleafe, and to com-
pass that End which they obtained, by fol-
lowing their Example; for Nature is Hill the
same in all Ages, and can never be contrary
to herfelf. Thus, from the Pratice of . schy-
lus, Sopbecles, and Enripides, Ariffotle dre
his Rules for Tragedy, and Pbiloffratus for
Painting. Thus, amongtt the Moterns, the
Italian and French Crities, by Rudying the
Precepts of Arifforle and Horace, and having
the Example of the Grecian Poers before their
Eyes, have given us the Rules of modern
Tragedy; and thus the Crities of the fame
Countries, in the Art of Painting, have given
the Precepts of perfecting that 4rr. It is
true, that Poerry has one Advantage over
Painting in thefe laft Ages, that we have sill
the remaining Examples both of the Greet
and Latin Pocts; whereas the Painters have
nothing left them from Apelles, Protegenes,
Parrbasius, Leaxis, and the reit, but only
the Teffimonies which are given of their in-
comparable Works. But intlead of this, they
have fome of their best Starnes, Bafo-relievos,
Columns, Abelifes, &c. which were faved out
Of


XXXVil


XXKVili


P R E F A C E.
of the common Ruin, and are still preserved
in Iraly; and by well diftinguithing what is
proper to Sculfrure, and what to Painting,
and what is common to them both, they have
judicieutly repaired that Lofs. And the great
Genrus of Raphael, and others, having fuc-
ceeded to the limes of Barbarifm and Igno-
rance, the Knowledge of Printing is now ar-
rived to a fupreme Perfection, though the
Performance of it is much declined in the
prefent Age. The greatet Age for Poerry,
amongit the Romans, was certainly that of rn.
gufus Cirfar; and yet we are told, that Paint.
ing was then at its lower Ebb; and perhaps
Sculpeare was alto reclining at the fame time.
In the Reign of Damirian, and fome who
succeeded him, Poerry was but meanly cul.
rivated; but Painting eminently fourithed.
I am not here to give the Hiffery of the t20o
Ares; how they were both in a manner ex-
tinguithed by the Irreption of the barbarcus
Nations; and both reffored about the Times
of Lco the Tenth, Charkes the Fitth, and
Francis the Firtt; though 1 might obterve,
that neither frieffe, nor any of his cotempo-
rary Poets, ever arrived at the Excellency of
Raphael, Tirian, and the reft in Painting.
But in Revenge at this Time, or lately in
many Countries, Poerry is better pradifed
than her Siffer-41r. To whatfleight the Mag-
nificence and Encouragement of the prefent
King of France may carry Paiting and Sculp-
fure, is uncertain; but by what he has done
before the War in which he is engaged, we
may expect what he will do after the happy
Conclufion of a Peace : which is the Prayer
and With of all thofe who have not an inte-
rest to prolong the Miferies of Enrege. For
it


P R E F A C E.
it is meft certain, as our Husbor, amongit
others, has obferved, that Reward is the Spur
of Virtue, as well in all good Arts, as in all
laudable Attempts; and Emulation, which is
the other Spur, will never be wanting either
amongtt Poets or Painters, when particular
Rewards and Prizes are proposed to the best
Defervers.  But to return from this Digref-
fion, though it was almoff neceffary, all the
Rules of Painting are methodically, concife-
1v, and yet clearly delivered in this present
Treatife which I have tranflated. Beffis has
not given more exalt Rules for the Exic Poem,
nor Dacier for Tragedy, in his late excellent
Tranflation of Ariffotle, and his Notes upon
him, than our Frefney has made for Painting;
with the Parallet of which I muft refume my
Discourfe, followingmy furbor’sTert, though
with more Brevity than I intended, becaufe
Virgit calls me. cs The principal and moft
ct important Part of Painting, is to know
io aubat is moft beautiful in Nature, and moft
o proper for that Arr. That which is the
molt beautiful, is the moft noble Subject; fo
in Poetry, Travedy is more beautiful than
Comedy; becaute, as I faid, the Perfons are
greater whom the Poer instructs; and confe-
quently, the instructions of more Benefit to
Mankind: The Action is likewife greater,
and more noble, and thence is derived the
greater and more noble Pleafure.
To imilate Watare well in whatfoever Sub-
jett, is the Perfection of borh Arts; and that
Picture, and that Porm, which comes neareft
the Refemblance of Narure, is the best. But
it follows not, that what pleafes moft in ei-
ther Kind is therefore good, but what ought
to pleafe. Our depraved Appetites, and 1g-
Rorance


KKKIX


X1


P R E F A C E.
nofance of the Arts, miflead our judgments,
and caufe us often to take that for true Imi-
tion of Narure, which has no Refemblance
of Natare in it. To inform our judgments,
and to reform our Taffes, Rnles were invented,
that by them we might difcern when Narare
was imitated, and how nearly. I have been
forced to recapitulate thefe Things, becaufe
Mankind is not more liable to Deceit, than
it is willing to continue in a pleafing Error,
Rrengthened by a long Habitude. The Imi-
tation of Narare is therefore juftly conftituted
as the general, and indeed the only Rule of
Avi-
pleating, both in Poefry and Painting.
fforte tells us, that Imiration pleafes, becaufe
1t affords Matter for a Reafoner to inquire
into the Truth or Falthood of Imitation, by
comparing its Likeness or Unlikeness with
the Original. But by this Rule, every Spe-
culation in Nature, whofe Truth falls under
the Inquiry of a Philesopher, muft produce
the fame Delight; which is not true: I
should rather affign another Reafon. Truth
is the Object of our Underflanding, as Good
is of our Will; and the Underftanding can
no more be delighted with a Lie, than the
Will can choofe an apparent Evil. As Truth
is the End of all our Speculations, to the
Difcovery of it is the Pleafure of them: And
fince a true Knowledge of Narare gives us
Pleafure, a lively Imitation of it, either in
Peetry or Painting, mult of Neceffity produce
a much greater. For borb thefe Arrs, as I
said before, are not only true Imitations of
Narure, but of the beft Narure, of that which
is wrought up to a nobler Pitch. They pre-
sent as with images, more perfect than the
Life in any Individual; and we have the
Pleafure


P R E F A C E.
Pleafure to fee all the fcattered Beauties of
Nature united by a happy Chemiffry, without
its Deformities or Faults. They areImitations
of the Paffions which always move, and there-
fore confequently pleafe; for without Mo-
tion, there can be no Delight; which cannot
be confidered, but as an active Paffion. When
we view thefe elevated Ideds of Natare, the
Refult of that View is Admiration, which is
always the Caufe of Pleafure.
This foregoing Remark, which gives the
Reafon why Imitation pleafes, was fent me
by Mr. Walter Moyle, a moft ingenious young
Gentleman, converfant in all the Studies of
Humanity, much above his Years. He had
alfo furnished me (according to my Request)
with all the particular Paftages in Arifforte and
Horace, which are ufed by them, to explain
the Arr of Pestry by that of Paintings which,
if ever I have Time to retouch this Esay,
shall be inferted in their Places. Having thus
shewn that Imitation pleafes, and why it
pleafes in both these Arts, it follows, that fome
Rules of Imitation are neceffary, to obtain the
End; for without Rales there can be no Arr
any more than there can be a House without
2 Door to conduct you into it. The principal
Parts of Painting and Peetry next follow.
Invention is the firft Part, and abfolutely
neceffary to them both; yet no Rule ever
was, or ever can be given how to compats
it. A happy Gearas is the Gift of Nature:
It depends on the Influence of the Stars,
fay the Affrologers; on the Organs of the
Body, fay the Naturaliffs; it is the particu-
lar Gift of Heaven, lay the Divines, both
Ctriffians and Heathens. How to improve
it, many Books can teach us; how to ob-
tain


li


xlii


P R E F A C E.
tain it, none; that nothing can be done with-
out it, all agree,
Tu mbil irvitd dices faciefos Minerva.
Without Invention a Painter is but a Copier,
and a Poet but a Plagiary of others. Both are
allowed fometimes to copy and transtate; but,
as our furbor tells you, that is not the beft
Part of their Reputation. Imitators are but
a servile kind of Cattle, fays the Poet; or at
beft, the Keepers of Cattle for other Men:
5
They have nothing which is properly their
wivn; that is a fufficient Mortification for me,
while I am tranflating Virgil. But to copy
the beft Author is a Kind of Praife, if I per-
form it as I ought; as a Copy after Rapbed
is more to be commended, than an Orsginal
of any indifferent Painter
Under this Head of Investion is placod its
Dispesition of the Work, to put all Things in a
Beautiful Order and Harmony, that theawhole
may be of a fiece. The Composisions of the
Painter should be conformabte to the fras
of andient Hurbors, to the Cuttoms, and the
Times. And this is exactly the Hame in
Poeiny: Homer and Vingilare twhe our Guides
in the Epic; Sepbocles and Eurtpides McFra
pedy: In all Things we are to imitate the
Culloms and the Times of those Persons and
Things which we reprefent. Not to make
new Rule of the Drama, as Lopex de Vega
has attempted unfuccessfully to do; but to
be content to follow our Mafters, who un
derffood Natare better than we. But if the
Story which we treat be modern, we are to
vary the Cultoms, according to the Time and
the Country, where the Scene of Action:lids;
1o


P R E F A C E.
for this is Hill to imitate Nature, which is al-
ways the fame, though in a different Dress.
As in the Composition of a Picture, the
Painter is to take Care that nothing enter
into it, which is not proper or convenient to
the Subject; to likewife is the Poes to reject
all Incidents which are foreign to his Poem,
and are naturally no Parts of it: They are
Wens, and other Excrescences, which belong
not to the Body, but deform it. No Per-
fon, no incident in the Piece, or in the Play,
but muft be of Ufe to carry on the main De-
fign. All Things elfe are like fix Fingers to
the Hand; when Natare, which is fuperffuous.
in nothing, can do her Work with five. A
Painter muft reject all triffing Ornaments;
to muft a Poer refufe all tedious and unnecer-
Sary Defcriptions. A Robe, which is too
heavy, is less an Ornament than a Burden.
in Poetry, Horace calls thefe Things,
Verjus inopes verum, ugaque canorx.
Thefe are alfo the lacus 8 ara Diane, which
he mentions in the same Arr of Poetry. But
fince there muft be Ornaments, both in Paint-
ing and Poerry, if they are not neceffary, they
muft at leaft be decent; that is, in their due
Place, and but moderately ufed. The Painter
is not to take to much Pains about the Dra-
pery, as about the Face, where the principal
Refemblance lies; neither is the Poer, who
is working up a Paffion to make Similes.
which will certainly make it languith. My
Monrexuma dies with a fine one in his Mouth,
but it is out of Seafon. When there are more
Figures in a Picture than are neceffary, or
at leaft ornamental,
our Author calls them
Figires


Klirs


xliv


P R E F A C E.
Figures to be lert; becaufe the Picture has no
Ole of them. So I have feen in some modern
Plays above twenty Acfors, when the Action
has not required half the Number. In the
principal Figures of a Picture, the Painter is
to employ the Sinews of his Art; for in them
confifts the principal Beauty of his Work.
Our furbor faves me the Compariion with
Tragedy; for he fays, that herein he is to
imitate the TragicPoet, who employs his ut-
moft Force in thofe Places, wherein confifts
the Height and Beauty of the Action. Du
Frefney, whom 1 follow makes Design, or
Drawing, the fecond Part of Painting; but.
the Rules which he gives concerning the Pof=
ture of the Figures, are almoft wholly proper
to that Art; and admit not any Comparifen,
that I know, with Poerry. The Polture of 2
poetic Figure is, as I conceive, the Descrip-
sion of his Heroes in the Performance of fuch
or fuch an Action; as of Acbilks, juft in the
Act of Killing Hecfor; or of Eneas, who has
Turnus under him. Both the Poct and the
Painter vary the Pokures, according to the
Action or Paffion, which they reprefent of
the fame Perfon. But all muft be great and
praceful in them. The fame Eneas muft be
drawn a Suppliant to Dide, with Respect in
his Geffures, and Humilicy in his Ryes: But
when he is forced, in his own Defence, to
Kill Laujus, the Poor thews him compaffionate,
and tempering the Severicy of his Looks with
a Rcluctance to the Action, which he is go.
ing to perform. He has Pity on his Beauty
and his Vouth; and is loth to deftroy fuch a
Mafter-piece of Nature. He confiders Lausus.
refcuing his Father, at the Hazard of his own
Life, as an Image of himself, when he took
Anchifes


P R E F A C E.
nchifes on his Shoulders, and bore him fafe
through the Rage of the Fire, and the Op-
pofition of his Enemies. And therefore in
the Pofture of a retiring Man, who avoids
the Combat, he tretches out his Arm in Sign
of Peace, with his right Foot drawn a little
back, and his Breaft bending inward, more
like an Orator than a Soldier; and feems to
diffuade the young Man from pulling on his
Deftiny, by attempting more than he was
able to perform: Take the Pafiage, as I have
thus tranflated it :
Sbouts of pplause van ringing thro' the Field,
To see the Son the vanquish’d Father shield:
All, fir’d with noble Emulation, strive,
And with a Sterm of Darts to Distance drive
The Trojan Chief; awho held at Bay, from far
On his Vulcanian Orb, sustain’d the War.
Rneas thus cerwbelm’d on evry Side,
Their first Affault undaunted did abide;
And thus to Lautus, loud, with friendly
Ibreatning cry’d,
Why wilt thou rusb to certain Deaih, and rage
In rash Attempts beyond thy tender Age,
Betray’d by pious Love 8
And afterwards,
He griev’d, be avept, the Sight an Image
brought
Of his own fitial Love; a fadly pleasing
Thought.
But, befide the Outlines of the Pofture, the
Disspn of the Picture comprehends in the next
Place the Forms of Faces which are to be
different; and fo in a Poem, or a Play, muft
the


Xly


Xivi


R E F A C Er
P
the feveral Characters of the Perfons be dif.
tinguithed from each other. I knew a Poet,
whom out of Respect I will not name, who
being too witty himself, could draw nothing
but Wits in a Comedy of his; even his Fools
were infeeted with the Difeafe of their Autbor.
+
They overflowed with fmart Repartees, and
were only diftinguished from the intended
Wits, by being called Coxcombs; though they
deferved not to fcandalous a Name. Another,
who had a great Genius for Tragedy, follow-
ing the Fury of his natural Temper, made
every Man and Woman too, in his Plays,
Stark raging mad; there was not a fober Per-
fon to be had for Love or Money: All was
tempeftuous and bluftering; Heaven and
Earth were coming together at every Word;
a mere Iturricane from the Beginning to the
End; and every Actor feemed to be haften-
ing on the Day of Judgment.
Let every Member be made for its own Head,
Lays our Aurbor; not a withered Hand to a
young Face. So in the Perfons of a Play,
whatlsever is faid or done by any of them,
muft be confiftent with the Mannerswhich the
Poer has given them distinctly; and even the
Habits muft be proper to the Degrees and Hu-
mours of the Perfons, as well as in a Picture.
He who entered in the firtt Act, a young
Man, like Pericles Prince of Tyre, must not be
in Danger, in the fifth Act, of committing
Inceft with his Daughter; nor an Wfurer,
without great Probability and Caufes of Re-
pentance, be turned into a catting Moorcraff.
I am not fatisfied that the Comparifon be-
twixt the rve Arys, in the laft Paragraph, is
altogether fo juft as it might have been; but
I am fure of this which follows.
26


P R E F A. C E.
The principal Figure of the Subject must ap-
ear in the midft of the Picture, under the prin-
fifal Light, to diftinguish it from the reft, which
lare only its Attendants. Thus in a Tragedy,
or an Epic Peem, the Here of the Piece mutt be
ladvanced foremoft to the View of the Reader
or Spectator. He muft outthine the reft of all
the Characters; he mult appear the Prince of
them, like the Sun in the Copernican Syftem;
encompaffed with the lets noble Planets. Be-
caute the Hero is the Center of the main Ac-
tion, all the Lines from the Circumference
tend to him alone; he is the chief Object of
Pity in the Dramo, and of Admiration in the
Epic Peem.
As in a Picture, befides the principal Fis
gures which compofe it, and are placed in the
midft of it, there are less Grouges, or Knots
of Figures difpofed at proper Diftances, which
are Parts of the Piece,and feem to carry on
the fame Defign in a more inferior Manner.
So in Epic Poetry, there are Efisodes and a
Cborus in Tragedy, which are Members of the
Action, as growing out of it, not inferted
into it. Such, in the ninth Book of the
Encis, is the Epifode of Nisus and Euryalus;
the Adventure belongs to them alone; they
alone are the Objects of Compaffion and Ad-
miration; but their Bufiness which they carry
on, is, the general Concernment of the Tro-
jun Camp, then beleaguered by Turnus and
the Latines, as the Christians were lately by
the Turks. They were to advertife the chief
Hero of the Diftrefies of his Subjects, occa-
fioned by his Abfence, to crave his Succour,
and folicit him to haften his Return.
The Grecian Tragedy was at firtt nothing
but a Charus of Singers; aftexwards one Affor
in
 t
v:23


t



Klvif


Xivin


P. R E F A C. E.
was introduced, which was the Poer himfelf,
whe entertained the People with a Discourte
in Verfe, betwixt the Paufes of the Singing
This fucceeding with the People, more 6gors
were added, to make the Variety the greater
and in Process of Time, the Cboras only fung
betwixt the Acts; and the Corypbons, or chief
of them, fpoke for the reft, as an Afor con-
cerned in the Bufinets of the Play.
Thus Tragedy was perfected by Degrees,
and being arrived at that Perfction,, the
Painters might probably take the Hint from
thence, of adding Groupes to their Pictures.
But, as a good Picture may be without a
Groupe; to a good Tragedy may fubfift with
out a Chorus, notwithflanding any Reafons,
which have been given by Dacier to the
Contrary.
Monfieur Racine has indeed ufed it in his
Epber, but not that he found any Neceffiy
of it, as the French Critic would infinuate.
The Chorus at St. Cyr, was only to give the
young Ladies an Occafion of entertaining the
King with vocal Mufic, and of commending
their own Voices. The Play itfelf was ne-
ver intended for the public Stage; nor, with
out any Disparagement to the learned 44.
rbor, could poffibly have fucceeded there, and
much less in the Tranflation of it here. Mr.
Wycberley, when we read it together, was of
my Opinion in this, or rather I of his; for
it becomes me to to speak of to excellent a
Peet, and fo great a Judgs. But fince I am
in this Place, as Virgil Jays, Spaties excly.
sus iniquis; that is, shortened in my Time;
I will give no other Reafon, than that it is
impracticable on our Stage. A new Tbearre,
much more ample, and much deeper, muf
De


P R E F A C E.
be made for that Purpofe, befides the Coff of
fometimes forty or fifty Habits, which is an
Expence too large to be fupplied by a Com-
pany of Actors. It is true, I should not be
Corry-to fee a Chorus on a Theatre, more than
as large and as deep again as ours, built and
adorned at a King's Charges; and on that
Condition and another, which is, that my
Flands were not bound behind me, as now
they are, I should not defpair of making fuch
ta Tragedy, as might be both instructive and
delightful, according to the Manner of the
Crecians.
To make a Sketch, or a more perfect Mo-
del of a Picture, is, in the Language of Poets,
No draw up the Scenery of a Play; and the
Reafon is the fame for both; to guide the
Undertaking, and to preferve the Remem-
brance of fuch Things, whofe Natures are
difficult to retain.
To avoid Abfurdities and Incongruities,
tis, the fame Law eftablifhed for both Arts:
The Painter is not to paint a Cloud at the
Bottom of a Pilture, but in the uppermoft
Parts; nor the Poet to place what is proper,
to the End or Middle, in the Beginning of 2
Poem. I might enlarge on this; but there
lare few Peets or Painters, who can be fup-
poted to fin to grofsly againft the Laws of Na-
ture and of 4rs. I remember only one Play.
and for once I will call it by its Name, 73e
Stigbsed Maid: where there is nothing in the
firff 48, but what might have been said or
done in the sifib; nor any thing in the miff,
which might not have been placed as well in
the Beginning or the End. To exprets the
Paltions, which are feated on the Heart by
outward Signs, is one great Precept of the
Painters.


Klix


1


P. R E P. A C E.
Paisters, and very difficult to perform. id
Poetry, the fame Paffions and Motions of the
Mind are to be exprefted; and in this con.
fitts the principal Difficulty, as well as the
Excellency of that 4rs. This (Tays my As
ther) is the Gift of Tupiter; and, to peak
in the Jame Heathen Language, we call it the
Gift of our Apello; not to be ebtained by
Pains or Study, if we are net bern to it
For the Motions which are ftudied, are never
to natural as thofe which break out in the
Height of a real Paffion. Mr. Orway pot
feffed this Part as thoroughly as any of the
Ancients or Moderns. I will not defend every
thing in his Venice Preserved; but I muft bees
this Teffimony to his Memory, That the Pat,
fions are truly touched in it, though perhaps
there is fomewhat to be defired both in the
Grounds of them, and in the Height and
Elegance of Expreffion; but Nature is there
which is the greatelt Beanty.
In the Passions, Jays our Author, ave muf
have a very great Regard to the Quality of the
Persons awho are actually poffesfed with them
The joy of a Monarch for the News of a Vic
tory, muft not be expreffed like the Extaty
of a Harlequin, on the Receipt of a Letiei
from his Mistress: This is to much the fame
in both the arts, that it is no longer a Com
parifon. What he fays of Face-painting, &
the Portraif of any one particular Perfon, com
cerning the Likenefs, is alfo as applicable to
Poetry. In the Cbaracter of an Hero, as well
as in an inferior Figure, there is a better or
worfe Likeness to be taken; the better isa
Panegyric if it be not falfe; and the work
is a ibel. Sepbocles (Tays Arifforle) alwap
drew Men as they ought to be; that is, bet
161



P E E. F: A C E.
fer than they were: Another, whofe Namef
have forgorten, drew them worfe than naru-
fally they were. Exripider aftered nething
in the Charaster, but mlade them fuch as they
were reprefented by Hissory; Epic Poctry, of
Pradition. Of the three, the Draught of So=
Choctes as moft commended by. Ariffork. I
have followed it in that Part of Osdigns,
which I writ; though perhaps 7 have made
him too good a Man. Buf my Characters
of Antheny and Ckepotra, though they are fa=
Vourabletouhrem, have nothing of outrageous
Panezyrit, their Paffions were their own, and
Wuch as were given them by Hiffory, only the
Deformities of thet were calt into Sbadows,
that they might be Obisets of Compaftion;
Whereas, if I had cheten a Weomday: Light for
them, fomewhat mat have been difcovered,
which would rather have moved our Hatred
1.
han our Pity.
The Goibic Manner, and the barbarous
Ornaments which are to be avoided in a Pic-
tre, are juft the same with thofe in an ill-
ordered Play. Por Example; our Engliff
Tragi-comedy: muft be confeffed to be wholly
Cotbic, notwithstanding the Succets which
t has found upon our Tbearre; and in the
Paffor Fido of Guarim, even though Corifca
and the Satyr contribate fomewhat to the
main Action. Neither can I defend my Spa
hish Friar, as fond as otherwife I am of it,
from this Imputation; for though the comi-
tal Parts are diverting, and the ferious mov-
ing, yet they are of an unnatural Mingle:
For Mirth and Gravity dettroy each othier;
and are no tore to be allowed for decent.
than a gay Widow laughing in a mourning
Habir.
I had
C2





43


1


P R E F A. C. E.
1.I had almoft forgotten oneconfiderable
Resemblance.DurFrefney tells. us, T hat ih
Figures of the Croupes muft not be all on
Side, that is, with their Face and Bodies al
turned the jame Way; but must contraft cad
rber by their several Pesitions., Thus in
Play, fome Characters muft be raifed to op
pofe others, and to fet them off the bettes
according to the old Maxim, Cantrarid jurs
je pesita, magis elucescunt. Thus in the Scorn
Jul Lady, the Ofurer is fet to confront the
Prodigal: Thus, in my TyrannicLows; te
Atheilt Maximin is opposed to the Charata
Of St. Catbarine.
I am now come, though with the Omit
Lion of many Likenefes, to the third Parid
Painting, which is called the Cromatic or Cr
Exprestion, and all that belongs&
louring.
Words, is that in a Poem, which Colourin
is in a Picture. The Colours well chofen, it
their proper Places, together with the Light
and Shadows which belong to them, lightd
the Defign, and make it pleafing to the Eys
The Words, the Expreffisns, the Tropes and
Figures, the Verfification, and all the ofhd
Elegancies, of Sound, as Cadences, Turnsd
Words upon the Thought, and many otha
Things, which are all Parts of Expresion
perform exactly the fame Office boch in Drs
matic and Epic Poerry. Our Auther calls Co
louring, tena joreris; in plain. English. i
Baavd of her Siffer, the Defign or Drawing
the cloaths, the dreffes her up, the paints heg
the makes her appear more lovely than nats
rally the is, the procures for the Defign, ad
makes Lovers for her; for the Defign of it
self is only to many naked Lines. Thusls
Poetry, the Exprestion is that which charm
14


PR E F A C E.
the Reader and beautifies the Defign, which
is only the Ourlises of the Fables. It is true,
the Defign muft of itfelf be good; if it be
vicious, or (in one Word) unpleating; the Coft
of Colouring is thrown away upon it. It is
an ugly Woman in a rich Habit, fet out with
fewels; nothing can become her. But grant-
ing the Defign to be moderately good, it is
like an excellent Complexion with indiffe-
rent Features; the White and Red well min-
gled on the Face, make what was before but
paffable, appear beautiful. Operum Colores
is the very Word which Horace ufes, to fig-
nity Words and elegant Expreffions, of which
he himfelf was to great Mafter in his Odes.
mengt the Aaciests, Zearis was moft fa-
mous for his Gelouring; amongft the Moderns,
Fitian and Cerreggio.
Of the two ancient
Epic Peets, who have to far excelled all the
Mederns, the Invension and Defign were the
particular Talents of Homer. Virgil muft
wield to him in both; for the Design of the
Latin was borrowed from the Grecian: But
the Dicfic Firgiliana, the Expreffion of Vir-
gil, his Colouring, was incomparably the bet-
ter; and in that I have always endeavoured
to copy him. Mott of the Pedanss (I know
maintain the contrary, and will have Homer
excel even in this Part. But of all People,
as they are the moft ill-manner’d, to they
are the worlt judges, even of Words, which
are their Province; they feldom know more
than the Grammatical Construction, unless
they are born with a poetical Genins, which
is a rare Portion amongit them : Vet fome,
Iknow, may fland excepted, and fuch 1 ho-
nour. Virgil is to exact in every Word,
that none can be changed but for a worte;
oF
C


1


liy



P R E F A. C E.
por any one repmoved from its Place, ber
the Faymony will be alrered. He preiends
fomstimes to tripi; but it is omlys to Mmake
you think him in Danger of a Fall, when he
is moft facure. Like a Chitful Elancer on the
Ropes (if you will pardon the Micanness of
the Similitude) who flspswillingly, and makes
a feeming Stumble; that you may think him
in great tlazard of Breaking his Neck, while
at the fame time he is only giving you a
Proof of his Rexterity. My late Lord Ros.
cammen was often pleated with this Reffection,
and with the Examples of it in this admira-
WIe Autber.
I have not Lerfure to run through the
Whole Compagifer of Rights and Sbadoaus, wih
Tropes and Figarers yet I cannet burtakeno.
tice of Meraphersa which, like them, have
Power to leffen or greaten any ching. Strong
and glawing Coleurs are the just Reftmblanen
of besd Meraphers, but both mint be judt
croully applied; for there is a Difference: bbe
twikt Daring and Feol-hardinefs. Lncen and
Statins often ventured tham roo fax; our Ppt
gif never. But the great Defelt of the Pias.
Ialia and the Tbebais was in the Defign;; it
that had been more perfect, we might have

forgiven many of their bold Strokes in the
Golouring; or at leaft excufed them s yer fome
of them are fuch as Demoffbanes or Greeracould
not have defended. Firgil, if he could have
feen the firft Verfes of the Sytuer, would have
thought Starras mad, in his fullian Descrip-
tion of the Sterns on the braxen Horse. Bur
that Poer was always in a Foam at his fetting
out, even before the Nbotion of the Race
had warmed him. The Soberness of Firgit,
whom he read (it feems to little Punpofe).
might


P R E F A C E.
might have fhewn him the Difference betwixt
Arma viruing; cane, and Magnamimam [Ea-
cidem, formidataings tonanti progeniem. But
Virgil Knew how to rife by Degrees in his
Expreffions: Statiys was in his towering
Heights at the firft Streech of his Pinions.
The Description of his Running-horfe, juft.
Rarting in tre Funeral Games for Archemo-
rus, though the Verfes are wonderfully fine,
are the true image of their Author;
Stare adeo nescit, pereunt veftigia mille
nte sugam; abjentemy; ferit gravis unguld
Campum.
Which would coft me an Hour, if I had the
Leifure to tranffate them, there is to much
of Beauty in the Original. Virgit, as he bec-
ter knew his Coloars, to he Knew berter how
and where to place ther. In as much Hlatte
as I am, I cannot forbear giving one Exam-
ple. It is faid of him, that he read the se-
cond, fourth, and sixth Books of his Eneis
in the fxrs (which
to Auguftus Cajar.
we are fure he read, becaufe we know Oc-
savia was prefent, who rewarded him fo
bountifulty for the twenty Verfes which
were made in Honour of her deceafed Son
Marcellus) in this fixth Book, 1 fay, the
Poet, speaking of Msenus the Trumpeter,
1275,
Quo nan preftantior alter,
LEre clere viros,—
and broke off in the Hemiffick, or midft of
the Verfe; but in the very Reading, feized as
it were witk a divine Fury, he made up the
latter
C 4





17I



P. R E F A C E.
latter Part of the Hemiffich with thefe follow-
ing Words,
Martemg; accenders canty.
Llow warm, nay, how gleaving a Colouring is
this! In the Beginning of the Verfe, the
Word as, or Brafs, was taken for a Trum-
pet, becaufe the Inffrument was made of that
Meral; which of irfelf was fine; but in the
latter Knd, which was made ex tempere, you
fee three Mictaphors, Martemque, — accen-
dere, Canin. Good Heavensl how the
plain Senfe is raifed by the Beauty of the
Words. But this was Ilappiness, the former
might be only judgment. This was the ca-
riesa felicitas, which Peironins attributes to
Horace. It is the Pencil thrown luckily full
upon the Horfes Mouth, to express the

Foam, which the Painter, with all his Skill,
could not perform without it. Thefe Hits
of Words a true Poer often finds, as I may
Tay, without feeking; but he knows their
Value when he finds them, and is infinitely
pleafed. A bad Peer may fometimes light
on them, but he difcerns not a Diamond
from a Briffof Stone; and would have been
of the Cock’s Mind in Esop, a Grain of Bar-
ley would have pleafed him better than the
Teavel. The Lights and Shadows which be-
long to Colouring, put me in Mind of that
Verfe of Horace;
Hec amat obscurum, vult bec sub luce videri.
Some Parts of a Poem require to be amply
written, and with all the Force and Elegance
of Words: Others muft be cafl into Sha.
dows)



P R E F A C E.
dows; that is, paffed over in Silence, or
but faintly touched. This belongs wholly
to the Judgment of the Poer and the Painter.
The moft beautiful Parts of the Picture and
the Poem mull be the moft finished; the Co-
lours and Words moft chofen; many Things
in, both, which are not deferving of this
Care, mult be shifted off; content with vul.
far Exprestions; and thofe very thort, and
left, as in a Shadow, to the Imagination of
the Reader.
We have the Proverb, Manum de tabula,
from the Painters; which fignifies, to know
when to give over, and to lay by the Pen-
cil. Both Hemer and Firgil practifed this
Precept wonderfully well; but Virgil the
better of the two. - Homer knew that when
Hefor was Hlain, Trey was as good as al-
ready taken; therefore he concludes his Ac-
tion there: For what follows in the Fune-
rals of Patroctes, and the Redemption of
Hecfor's Body, is not (properly (peaking) a
Part of the main Actron. But Virgif con-
cludes with the Death of Tarnus; for, after
that Difficulty was removed, Eneas might
marry, and eltablifh the Trojans when he
pleated. This Rule I had before my Eyes in
the Conclution of the Spanish Friar when
the Difcovery was made that the King was
living; which was the Knot of the Play un-
tied: The reit is shut up in the Compass of
some few Lines, becaufe nothing then hin-
dered the tlappinefs of Torifmond and Leo-
era. The Fauits of that Drama are in the
Kind of it, which is Tragi-comed. But it
was given to the People; and I never writ
any thing, for myself, but Anrbony and CRo-
Paira.
This
D S


lvij


lvill


P. R E F X C E.
This Remart, I mult acknowledge, is not
fo proper for the Colouring as the Defigny
but it will hold for both. As the Words,
Ec. are evidencly shewn to be the Cloashing
of the Thoughts in the same Senfe as Co-
lours are the Cloathing of the Defign; to the
Painter and the Poer ought to judge exacily
when the Colouring and Expreffions are per-
fect, and then to think their Work is truly
fnithed. Apelles faid of Profogenes; that be
knew not wben to give over. AA Works may
be over-wrought, as welf as under-wrought:
Too much Labour often takes away the Spi-
rit, by adding to the poliffing; to that there
remains nothing but a dull Correetnels, a
Piece without any confiderable Faules, but
with few Beautiess for when the Sprrits are
drawn off, there is nothing but a cafur mon
Inum. Statius never thought an Expreffien
could be bold enough; and if a bolter could
Be found, he rejected the finst. Rirgif had
Judgment enough to Know Daring was ne-
ceffary; but he knew the Diffenence betwixt
a glowing Colour and a glarino: As when he
compared the Shocking of the Fleets at 4c-
trum, to the Julling of Ilands rent from their
Foundations, and meeting in the Orean.. He
Knew the Comparison was forced beyond Na-
care, and raifed top high.; he therefone fof
tens the Metapbor with a credas. Nou would
almoff believe that Mountains or Hlands
ruthed againit ea h other:
Credas innare revulfas
Cycladas; ast montes concurrere mentibus aqaon
But here I muff break, off without finishing
the Difcourfe.
Cyntbins


P R E F A C E.
Cynthius aurem vellit, ES admonnit, &cc. the
Things which are behind are of too nice a
Confideration for an Esay begun and ended
in twelve Mornings; and perhaps the Judges
of Painting and Poeiry, when I tell them how
short a Time it coft me, may make me the
Same Anfwer which my late Lord Rocbefter
made to one, who, to commend a Tragedy,
faid, it was written in three Weeks. How
the Devil could he be fo long about it 3 For
that Poem was infamoully bad, and I doubt
this Parallel is little better; and then the
Shortness of the Time is to far from being a
Commendation, that it is fcarcely an Ex-
cufe. But if I have really drawn a Portrait
to the Knees, or an Half-length, with a to-
lerable Likenefs, then I may plead with some
Juftice for myfelf, that the reft is left to the
imagination. Let fome better Artiff pro-
vide himfelf of a deeper Canvas; and taking
thefe Hints which I have given, fet the Figure
on its Legs, and finith it in the Invention,
Defign and Colouring.
F HE


lix


T H E
P R E F A C E
0 F
MoNS. DE PILE S
THE FRENCH TRANSLATOR.
AMONG, all the beautiful and delight-
a a Jul Arts, that of Painting bas always
found the moft Lovers; the Number of
them almoft including all Mankind. Of whom
great Multitudes are daily found, awbe value
themfelves on the Knowledge of it; either be-
cause they keep Company with Painters, or that
they have seen good Pieces; or laftly, because
their Gurto is naturally good: Which notwith-
fanding that Knowledge of theirs (if we may
so call ii) is so very superficial, and so ill
grounded, that it is impaffible for them to de-
scribe in what confifts the Beauty of those Works
which they admire; or the Faults, which are in
the greateft Part of those awhich they condemn.
And truly it is not bard to find that this pro-
ceeds from no otber Cause, than that they are not
furnished with Rules by which to judge; nor
have any solid Foundati us, which are as so
many Lights set up to clear their Understanding
and lead them to an entire and certain Know-
ledee. I think it superfluous to prove, that this
is necesary to the Knowledge of Painting. I4
is sufficient tl at Eainting be acknowleiged for
anArt; for that being granted, it follows with-
out Disfute, that no Arts are without rbeir Pre-
cepts. I shall satisfy myself with telling you.
that this little Treaufe avill furnish you with
infallible


Ixii


P R E F A C E.
infallible Rules of judging trulys since they are
not only founded upon right Reafon, bat upon
the beft Pieces of the beft Wiakers, wbich our
Ruthor bath carefully examined, during the
Space of more than thirty Vears; and on which
be has made all the Reffestions awbict are necef-
sary to render this Eysatife worthy of Posterity;
which, though little in Bulk, yet contains most
judicious Remarks; and suffers nothing to escape,
that is effentied to the Subject which it bandles.
If you will please to read if with Attentio, you
will find it capable of giving the most nrce and
delicate fort of Knowledge, not only to theLovers,
but even to the Profeffors of that Art.
It would be too long to tell you the particular
Advantages, which it has above all the Books
that have appeared before it in this Kind; you
need only read it, and that avill convince you of
this Trurb. All that I will allow myself to Jay,
is only this, that there is not a Word in it which
carries not its Weights. whereas, in all otbers,
there are tawo confiderable Faulis which lie o; en
to the Sight, (viz.). That faying too much,
they always fay too litele. Faffure myself,
that the Reader avill own it is a Work of re-
neral Profit; to the Loversof Painting, for their
Instruction bow to judge knowingly, from the
Reafon of the Thing; and to the Fainters them-
fetves, by removing their Difficulties, that they
may avork auith Pleajure; becarse they may be
in some manner certain that their Productions art
good. It is to be used like Spirits and precious
Liquers; the lass you drink of it at a Time, it
is with the greater Pleasure. Read it often,
and but little at once, that you may digeft it bet-
ter, and dwell particularly on these Pasfages.
wbich you find marked with an AAterifm For
the Observations wbick follow such aNote, wit
gizs


P R E F A C E.
give you a clearer Light on the Wratter which is
there treated. Fou vilt find them by the Rum-
bers which are on the Side of the Frantiation,
from five to frue Vertes, by seurching for the like
Number in the Remarkes which are at the End
of it, and aubict are diftinguished from each otber
by this Noreg. Tow-will find in the latter tages
of this Book, the judgment of the Author on
those Carnters, who have acquired the greateft
Reputation in the Warlds amongft whom be was.
nat willing to comprebend these who are now liv-
ing. They are undoubtedly his, as being found
among his Papers, avritten in his own Hand.
Hs for the Profe Trantlation, which you
will find on the other Side of the Latin Foem,
I must inform you on what Occasion and in what
Manner it was performed. Tbe Love rsbick I
bad for Painting, and the Picature which. I
found in the Exercite of that noble Art, at my
Leisure Hours, gave me the Defire of being ac-
quainied with the late Mons. du FKEsNOY
who was generally reputed to bove a thorough
Knowledge ex ir. Our Acquaintance at lengtb.
proceeded to that Begree of Intimacy, that be
entrufted me with his Feem, which be believed
me capasle borb of Underitanding and Trant-
tating; and accordingly defired me to undertake
it. The Frath is, ave bad conversed so often.
on that Subject, and be had communicated bis
Thoughts of it so fully to me, that I had not the
leaft remaining Difficulty concerning it. I under-
took therefore to tranflate it, and employed my-
seif in it with Pleajure, Care and Affiduitys
after which I put it into his Hands, and be af=
tered in it awbar be pleased, till at laft it was
avbolly to his Mind: And then be gave his Con-
ent that is sould be publiped; but his Death
preventing that Delign, I thought ir a Wrong to
115


Exi


Ixiv


P R E F A C E.
bis Memory to deprive Mankind any longer of
this Trantatuon, which I may safely affirm to be
done according to the true Senfe of the Author,
and to his Liking; since be himself has given
great Tellimonies of his. Approbation to many
of bis Friends. And they who vere acquainted
with him, know his Humour to be such, that
he would never conftrain himself fo far, as ta
courmend what be did not really approve. 1
thought myself abliged to say thus much in Vin-
dication of the Faithfulness of my Work, to these
who underffand not the Latin; for as to those
who are converfant in both the Tongues, I
leave them to make their own Judgment of it.
The Remarks which I have added to his
Work, are also avbolly conformable to his Opr-
Rions; and I am certain that he would not bast
disapproved them. I have endecvoured in them.
to explain some of the moft obicure Paltages,
and these wbich are meft necektary to be under-
Rood; and I have done this according to the
Manner awherein be used to express himself, in
many Convertations which we had togetber. F
have confined them also to the narroweff Com-
pass I avas able, that I might not tire the Pa-
tience of the Reader, and that they might be
read by all Persons. But if it bappens, that
they are not to the Tatte of Some Readers (as
doubtless it vill so fall our) I leave them en-
tirely to their own Discretien; and shall not be
displeased that another Hland should succced
berter I shail only beg this Favour from them,
that in reading what I have written, they will
bring no particular Curto along with them, or
any Prevention of Mind; and thar rwbaife-
over Judgment they make, it may be purely their.
own, avbether it be in my Favour, or in my
Condemnation.
A TABLE





1
1
A. B L
E

OF T H E
P R E C E P T S
CONTAINED IN THIS
T R E A T 1 S. E.
7F what is Beautiful.
Page 7
C
Of Theory and Practice.
9
Concerning the Subject.
9
1
invention, the first part of Painting.
11
The Disposition of the awhole Work.
11
The Faithfulness of the Subject.
11
Whatfeever palls the Subject to be rejected.
11
Defign, or Drawing; the second part of
Painting
13
Variety in the Figures.
1
5
The Members and Drapery of every Figure
to be suitable to it.
15
The Actions of Mutes to be imitaied.
15
Of the principal Figure of the Subject.
1
Groupes of Figures.
5
15
The Diversity of Attitndes in the Groupes.
15
Equality of the Piece.
27
Of the Number of Figares.
1
Of the Joints and Feet.
17
The Motions of the Hands and Head muft
agree.
19
What


1 N D. E 2.
What muft be avoided in the Distribution
Page
of the Figures.
That ave muft not tie eurselves to Nature,
but accommodate her to our trewius.
Anmient Figures the Rules of imitating Na-
ture.
is
A single Figure, bow to be treated.
Of the Draperies.
What Things contribute to adorn the Picture.
Of precious Stones and Pearls for Ornament.
The Model.
The Scene of the Picture.
The Graces and the Nobleness.
Let every thing be fet in its proper Place.
Of the Passions.
Cothic Ornaments to be avoided.
Colouring, the rbird part of Painting.
The Conduct of the Tints of Light and Sho
dows.
Of dark Rodies ox light Grounds.
Tbat there muft not be taue equal Lights in
a Picture.
Of White and Elack.
The Reflection of Colours.
Tbe Union of Colours.
Of the Interposition of Aix-
The Relation of Distances.
Of Bodies which are distanced.
Of Bodies which are contiguous, and of thase
which are separated.
Centrary Extremities to be asoided.
Diverfity of Tints and Coleurs.
The Choice of Light.
Of certain Things relating to the practical
Part.
The Field, or Ground of the Picturs.
Of the Vivacity of Colours.
Of Shadorws.


19
19
21
21
21
23
23
23
23
23
25
25
25
29
29
31
33
3
3
3
37
37
32
37
37
37
39
39
9
35
41
240


I N D E X.
Page 41
The Pilture to be of one Piece.
TheLooking-glats the Painter's beft Mafter.41
An balf Figure, or a wbole one before others. at
41
A Portrait.
The Place of the Picture.
43
Large Lights.
43
What Lights are requifite.
43
Things avhich are vicious in Painting to be
avoided.
43
The prudential Part of a Painter.
43
43
The Idea of a beautiful Piece.
Advice to a young Painter.
45
Art muft be subservient to the Painter.
45
Diversity and Facility are pleasing.
45
The Original must be in the Head, and the
Copy on the Clotb.
47
The Compass to be in the Eyes.
47
Pride, an Enemy to good Painting.
47
Know yourself.
49
Practife perpetually.
49
The Morning most proper for Werk.
49
Every Day do Something.
49
The Paffions which are true and natural.
49
Of Table Books
57
The Methed of Studies for a young Cainter.
55
Nature and Experience perfett Art.
57
T H E





T H E



4

nd. P.



1










& .


-








5.
10.


D E
A R T E G R A P H I C A
L I B E R.
T PICTUEA POESIS ERIr;
similifque Poesi

Sit Pictura; refort par amula quagus
fororem,
Alternantque vices (8 nomina; muta Poesis
Dicitur bec, Picturdlequens Jolet illa coocari.
Quod fuit audiru gratum cecinere Peete;
Quod pulchrum aspectu Pictores pingere curant:
Queque Peetarum Nmeris indigna suene,
Non eadem Pretorum Operran Studining; t
rentur:
Ambe quippe facres ad Relligionis Honores
Sydereos superant ignes, Aulamque Tonantis
Ingreffee, Divum aspectu, alloquieque frauntar;
Oraque magna Deum, ES dieta observata repor-
tant,
Cxleffemque Juorum operum martalibus Ignem.
Ineds


T H E
R
7
A
0 F
 A I N T I N G.

INTING and Poksy are two The Pafages
 Sifters; which are fo like in all which you see
marked with
Things, that they marually lend to
an Afferifm
other both their Nanme and Office.
each
&, are more
One is called a dumb Peefy, and the other
amply ex-
plained in the
a speaking Picture. The Poets have never
Remarks.
said any thing, but what they believed
would pleafe the Ears: And, ir has beeh
5.
the conftant Endeavour of the Painters to
give Pleafure to the Eyes. In short, thofe
Things which the Poets have thought in-
worthy of their Pens, the Painters have
judged to be unworthy of their Pencils.
For both of thofe Arts, that they might
6
advance the facred Honours of Religion,?
have raifed themfelves to Heavens and, hav-
10.
ing found a free Admittion into the Palace of
Gove himself, have enjoyed the Sight and
Converfation of the Gods; cs whole awful
Majefty they observe, and whofe Dictates
& they communicate to Mankind; whom,
at the fame time they inspire with thofe celef
al Flames, which shine to glorioufly in their
Works.


4
15.
20.
25.
30.
35.


De Arte-Graphica.
1
Inde per bunc Orbem studiis cocuntibus erran
Carpentes que digna jui, revelutaque luftrant
Tempora, Querendis confortibus Argumentis.
Denique quacung; in calo, terraque, marign
Longius in tempus durare, ut pulchra, merents
Nobilitate Jud, claroque infignia caju,

Dirves ES ampla manet Pictores atque Peetas:
Materies; inde alta sonant per seecula munde
Nomind, magnanimis Hercibus inde superfies
Gloria, perpetueque operum Miracula restant:
Tantus neft divis Honor Artibus atque Peteffas.
Non mibi Pieridum chorus bic, nec Apelle os
Landus,
Majus ut Eloguium numeris, aut Gratia fandi
Degmaticis itluffret opus rationitus borvens:
Cum nitida tantum tS facili dig:fta loqueld.
Ornari precepta negent, contenta deceri.
Nee mibi mens animasve suit confiringert no
405.
Artificum manibus, ques tantum dirigit Ujus;
Indolis at Viger inde potens obstrictus bebefcat,
Normarum numere immani, Genining; moretur;
Sed verum ut pallens Ars Gagnitione, gradatim
Nature fefe infinuet, oerique capacem
Tranjeat in Genium, Geniutg; usu induat Arten.
Precipun


The rt of Painting.
Works. From Heaven they take their Par-
fage through the Worlds and, cs with con-
ce curring Studies, collect whatfoever they
findworthy of them. " They dive (asI may
tay) into all pat Ages; and fearch their
Hiffories for Subjects which are proper for
their Ufe; with Care avoiding to treat of any
but thofe, which, by their Nobleness, or by
some remarkable Accident, have deferved to
be confecrated to Eternity, whether on the
Seas, or Earth, or in the Heavens. And by
this their Care and Study it comesto pais, that
the Glory of Heroes is not extinguithed with
their Lives; and that thofe admirable Works,
thofe Prodigies of Skill, which even yet are
the Objects of our Admiration, are Htill pre-
served. Somach thefe divine Arts have been
always honoured; and fuch Authority they
preferve amongt Mankind. It will not here
be neceffary to implore the Succour of Apollo
and the Mufes, for the Gracefulness of the
Difcourfe, or for the Cadence of the Verfes;
which, containing only Precepts, have not fo
much need of Ornament, as of Perspicuity.
I pretend not in this Treatife to tie the
Hands of Artifts, is whom Practice only di-
a rects; neither would 1 fiffe the Genius,
by a jumbled Heap of Rules; nor extinguith
the Fire of a Vein, which is lively and aoun-
dant. But rather to make this my Bufinefs,
that Art, being frengtherned by the Know-
ledge of Things, may at length pass into Na-
ture by flow Degrees; and 10, in Process of
Time, may be fublimed into a pure Genius,
which is capable of chusing judiciouly what
is true; and of diftinguithing betwixt the
Beauties of Nature, and that which is low and
mean in her; and that this original Genius
by


I


5
155
25.
25.
30.
35a


De Arte Graphica.
6
0
Primum
Preecipud imprimis rrisque pariffima pars eff,
Prxceptum. Nofe quid in rehus Natura crearit ad Artem
be Puichro. Pulchrias, idgue Medum juxta, Mentemgus Ve.
tustam:

Qua fine Barbaries caca tS temeraria Pul
40.
chrum
Negligit, infultans ignote audacior Arti,
IIt curare nequit, que non mode noverit effe=
Illud apud Veteres fuit unde notabile dietum,
Nil Pictore malo fecarius atque Poeta.
Cognita amas, ES amatd cupis, sequerifgs eu
45.
pita;
Paffibus affequeris tandem que fervidus urges:
Illa tamen que pulchra decent; non omnia cajus
Qualiacumque dabunt, etiamese funillima. wer
ris:

Nam quamcumque mode servili haud Jufficu
ipJam
Naturam exprimere ad vicoum; sed ut Arbiter
50.
Artis,
Seliget ex illa tantum pulcberrima Pictor.
Quodque minus pulcbrum, aut mendesum, core
rifet ipfe
Merte Jue, Forme Veneres captando fugaces.
Siqut


The Art of Painting.
by long Exercife and Cuffom, may perfectly
poffess all the Rules and Secrets of that Art.
& The principal and moft important Part
of Painting is to find out, and thoroughly to
underftand, what Nature has made moft beau-
tiful, and moft proper to this Art; v and
that a Choice of it may be made according
to the Tafte and Manner of the Ancients:
&Without which all is nothing but a blind
and rash Barbarity; which rejects what is.
moff beautiful, and feems with an audacious
Infolence to defpife an Art, of which it is
wholly ignorant; which has occafioned thefe
Words of the Ancients : & That no Man is
6
to bold, fo rath, and fo overweening of his
6
own Works, as an ill Painter, and a bad
Poet, who are not confcious to themfelves
of their own Ignorance.
& We love what we undersland; we defire
what we love; we purfue the Enjoyment of
thofe Things which we defire; and arrive at
laft to the Poffeffion of what we have purfued,
if we warmly perfiff in our Defign. In the
mean time we ought not to expect that
blind Fortune should infallibly throw into our
Hands thofe Beauties; for though we may
light by Chance on some which are true and
natural, yet they may prove either not to be
decent, or not to be ornamental. Becaufe it
is not fufficient to imitate Nature in every
Circumstance, dully, and as it were literally
and minutely; but it becomes a Painter to
take what is moft beautiful, as being the
fovereign Judge of his own Art; co what is
 less beautiful or is faulty, he shall freely
11
f orret by the Dint of his own Genius,
and permit no tranfient Beauties to efcape
his Observation.
 I17
D2


Precept I.
Of what is
beautiful.
40.
450
50.


3
II.
De Specu-
tatione &c
Praxi.
55
60.
65.
11l.
De Argu.
mento.
70.


De Arte Graphica.
Vique Manas grandi wil Nomine. prattica
dignum
primum arcane quam deficit frtis
Affequitur,
in preceps abitura ut caca vagatur;
Lumen, ES
Sic nibil Ars operd Manuum private Jupre-
Thum
Excquitur, sed languet iners uti vintia lacerres;
Dispefstumgne typum non lingua pinxit Apelles.
Ergo-licet tola nermam hand paffimns in Arn
Penere (cum nequeant que junt pulcherrima
dici)
Nitimar hee paucis, serutati summa magiffre.
Degmata Nature, Artifque Exemplaria prima.
Altius intuiti; fic Mens, babilifque facultas
Indolis excelitar Geniumque Scientia complet;
Luxuriansque in Monftra Furor compescitur
Arte:
Eff Modus in rebus, funt certi denique Fines,
Quos ulira citraque nequit confiffere Rec
tum.
His pasitis, erit eptandum Thema nobile, put
chrum.
Quedgue Venuftatum circa Fermam aique Co
lorem
Spente capax, amplam emerites mex prbeat Arn
Materiam, relegens aliguid Salis Es Decumentic
Tanden


The Art of Painting.
II.
In the Jame Manner that bare Practice,
Of Theory
deffiruce of the Lights of Art, is always fub-
and Pratice.
jed to fall into a Precipice, like a plind Tra-
veller, without being able to produce any
55.
thing which contributes to a folid Reputa-
tion; to the speculative Part of Painting,
without the Affiftance of manual Operation;
can never attain to that Perfection which is
its Object, but ffothfully languithes, as in a
Prifon; for it was not with his Tongue that
Apelles performed his noble Works. There-
60.
fore, though there are many Things in Paint-
ing, of which no precife Rules are to be
given ( becaufe the greateft Beauties cannot
always be expreffed for want of Terms) yet I
shall not omit to give fome Precepts, which I
have felected from among the moft confider-
able which we have received from Nature, that
exact Schoolmiftresss after having examined
her moft secret Receffes, as well as thofe
Mafter-picces of Antiquity, which were the
chief Examples of this Arr: And it is by this
means that the Mind and the natural Dispo-
65.
fition are to be cultivated, and that Science
perfects Genius; "and alfo moderates that
Fury of the Fancy, which cannot contain itfelf
within the Bounds of Reafon, but often car-
ries a Man into dangerous Extremes: For
there is a Mean in all Things; and cer-
tain Limits or Bounds wherein the Good
and the Beautiful confift, and out of which
they never can depart.
III.
This being premifed, the next Thing is to Concerning
make Choice of a Subject beautiful and no- the Subject.
70.
ble; which being of itfelf capable of all the
Charms and Graces, that Colours and the
Elegance of Defign can poffibly give, shall
afterwards afford, to a perfect and confum-
mate Art, an ample Field of Matter wherein
10
D 3


8
II.
De Specu-
tatione &c
Praxi.
55.
60.
65.
III.
De Argu-
mento.
70.


De Arte-Graphica.
Urque Manas grandi nil Nomins. prattica
dignum
primum arcane quam deficit Artis
Asequitur
in preceps abitura ut caca vagatur;
Lumen, ES
Sic nibil rs operd Manuum private Jupre-
Mum
Excquitur, sed languet iners uti vintia lasertes;
Dispesstumgne typum non lingua pinxit Apelles.
Ergo-licet tota nermam hand peffimns in rte
Penere (cum nequeant quee funt pulcherrima
dici)
Nitimur hee paucis, ferutati summa magifirs.
Degmata Nature, Arrifque Exemplaria prima.
Altius intuiti; fie Mens, babilifque faculras
Indolis excolitur Geniumque Scientia complets.
Luxuriansque in Monfira Furor compescitur
Arte:
Eft Modus in rebas, funt certi denique Fines,
Quos ulira citraque nequit confiftere Rec
tun.
His pasiris, erit eptandum Thema nobile, put-
chrum.
Quedgue Venufatum Circa Fermam atque Co-
lorem
Spente capax, amplam emerits mex preebeat Ardi
Materiam, relegens aliquid Salis Es Decumenti.
Landins


The Art of Painting.

II.
In the same Manner that bare Practice,
Of Theery
deflitute of the Lights of Art, is always fub-
and Pratice.
ject to fall into a Precipice, like a plind Tra-
veller, without being able to produce any
55.
thing which contributes to a folid Reputa-
tion; to the speculative Part of Painting,
without the Affiftance of manual Operation;
can never attain to that Perfection which is
its Object, but ffothfully languifhes, as in a
Prifon; for it was not with his Tongue that
60.
Apelles performed his noble Works. There-
fore, though there are many Things in Paint-
ing, of which no precife Rules are to be
given (r becaufe the greateft Beauties cannor
always be expreffed for want of Terms) yet 1
shall not omit to give fome Precepts, which I
have felected from among the moft confider-
able which we have received from Nature; that
exact Schoolmiffress, after having examined
her moft secret Receffes, as well as & thofe
Mafter-pieces of Antiquiry, which were the
chief Examples of this Art: And it is by this
means that the Mind and the natural Dispo-
65.
sition are to be cultivated, and that Science
perfects Genius; "and alfo moderates that
Fury of the Fancy, which cannot contain itfelf
within the Bounds of Reafon, but often car-
ries a Man into dangerous Extremes: For
there is a Mean in all Things; and cer-

tain Limits or Bounds wherein the Good
and the Beautiful confift, and out of which
they never can depart.
III.
This being premifed, the next Thing is to Concerning
make Choice of a Subject beautiful and no- the Subject.
70.
ble; which being of itfelf capable of all the
Charms and Graces, that Colours and the
Elegance of Defign can poffibly give, shall
afterwards afford, to a perfect and confum-
mate Art, an ample Field of Matter wherein
10
D3


16
75.
INVEN T7O
prima Pic-
lura pars.
IV.
Difpofitio,
tive operis
forius Oc-
conomis.
80.
V.
Fidelifas
Argumenti,
VI.
Inane reji-
ciendum.
85.
90.


De Arte Graphica.
Tandem ofas aggredior; primogs occurrit in
Alto
Disponenda Typis concefta patente Minerva,
Macbina, quee neftris Inventio dicituroris.
Illa quidem prius ingenuis inffructa Sovorum
Artibus Honidum, E Phebi sublimior ostu.
Quevendasque inter Posituras, luminis, um-
bre
Atque siturerum jam presentive colorum
Par erit Harmoniam, captande ab urrisque us-
nustum.
Sit Thematis genuing ac vica expreffio, juxid
Textum Antiquerum, propries cum tempore formis.
Nee quod inant, nibil facit ad rem, five vi-
detur
Impropriam, minimeque urgens. potiora tenebit
Ornamenta operis; Tragice sed lege Sororis,
Summa ubi ves agitar wis summa requiritur
Artis.
Iffa Labore gravi, Studie Monitisque Magiffri
Ardua pars nequit addifci variffima: namgue,
Ni prius ethereo vapuit quod ab Axe Promerbens
Sit Tubar insusum ments cum flamine Vite,
Mortali haud carvis divina bec Muneradanturs
Non ati Dadaleam licet omnibus ire Corin-
thum.
SEryplO
3


The Art of Painting.
to expatiate itself; to exert all its Power,
and to produce fomewhat to the Sight, which
is excellent, judicious, t and ingenious; and
at the fame time proper to ipntruct, and to
enlighten the Underitanding.
. At length 1 come to the Work itself,
is and at firft find only a bare frained Canvas,
o: on which the Skerch is to be difpofed by
39
of the Strength of a happy Imagination,
t which is what we properly call Invention.
F INVENNTION L. a Kind of Mufe, which be-
ing poffeffed of the other Advantages common
to her Sifters, and being warmed by the Fire of
Apollo, is raifed higherthan the reft, and fhines
with a more glorious and brighter Flame.
t it is the Bufiness of a Painter, in his
Choice of Attitudes, to forefee the Effeet and
Harmony of the Lights and Shadows, with
the Colours which are to enter into the
whole; taking from each of them that which
will most conduce to the Production of a
beautiful Effect.
" Let is there be a genuine and lively Ex-
c preffion of the Subject, conformable to
the Text of ancient Authors, to Cultoms, and
to Times.
ce Whatever is trivial, foreign or impro-
:per, ought by no means to take up the
principal Part of the Picture. But here-
in imitate the Sifter of Painting, Tragedy
which employs the whole Forces of her Art
in the main Action.
"This Part of Painting, fo rarely met with,
is neither to be acquired by Pains or Study,
nor by the Precepts or Dictates of any Matter.
for they alone who have been inspired at their
Birth with some Portion of that heavenly Fire

which was Holen by Promerbens, are capa-
ble of receiving fo divine a Prefent.
Painting
D 4


I7
75.
INVENN-
TION the
first Part of
Paiting.
IV.
The Disposi-
tion, or Occo-
nomy of the
whole Work.
80.
V.
The Hairb-
fuiness of the
Subject.
VI.
Wearsoeier
pallsthe Sub-
jett to be re-
jetted.
85.
90.


5


X2
95.
100.
VII.
GRATHIS,
Jen Pofifn-
Ta, Secun-
3a Picturse
Pars.
10g.
120.
115.


De Arte Graphica.
Egypte informis quendam Pictura reperta,
Grecorum ffudirs, &S mentis acomine crevit:
Egregiis tandem illustrara, E8 adulte Magiffris,
Naturam vifa eff mire Juperare labore.
Qyos inter, Graphides Gymnafia prima suere
Pertus Atbenarum, Sicyon, Rbodos, atque Co-
rinthus,
Disparia inter fe, modicum Ratione Laboris;
Uf patel ex vererum Statuis, forme atque de-
Coris
Archetypis; queis posterier wil protulit PEtas
Condignum, ES non inferius longe, rte, Mo-
deque.
Horum igitar vera adnermam Pohtura lege
18r3
Grandia, inequalis, formesaque Parribus amplis
Anteriora dabit membra, in contraria moty:
Diverso variata, Jue libratague centro.
Membrerumque Sinus ignis ffammantis ad in=
Pars
Serpenti undantes flexu; fed lavid, plana,
Magnaque signa, quasi fine txbere subdita taeu,
Exlongs deducta sluant, non secta minutim.
Insertifgus foris sint nota Ligamina, juxta
Compagem natomes, (S Membrificatio Grece
Deformata Mode, paucifque exprefa-lacerfis,
Qualis apud Veteres; leteque Eurythmia partis
Componar; gemitumque juo generante sequenti
Sit minus, (8 puntle videatar cantia jub une.
Reguls


The Art of Painting.
Painting in Eggpt was at firff rude and im-
perfect, till being brought into Greece, and
being cultivated by the Study and Jublime
Genius of that Nation, & it arrived at length
to that Height of Perfection, that it feemed
to furpats even original Nature.
Amongt the Academies, which were com-
posed by the rare Genius of thofe great Men,
thefe four are reckoned as the principal;
namely, the Afbenian School, that of Sicgon,
that of Rbodes, and that of Corintb. Thefe
were little different from each other, only in
the Manner of their Work; as it may be feen
by the ancient Statues, which are the Rule of
Beauty and Gracefulness; and to which fuc-
ceeding Ages have produced nothing that is
equal; cs or indeed, that is not very much
if inferior, both in Science, and in the Man-
32
of ner of its Execution.
H
An Attitude therefore muft be chofen
according to their Taffe: & The Parts of it
muft be great and large, & se contrafted
 by contrary Motions, the moft noble Parts
if foremoft in Sight, and each Figure carefully
99
i poifed on its own Center.
s os The Parts muft be drawn with flow-
ing gliding Outlines, large and fmooth,
& rifing gradually, not fwelling fuddenly, but
which may be juft felt in the Statues, or
 caufe a little Relievo in Painting. Let the
"Mafcles have their Origin and infertion &
"according to the Rules of Anatomy; let
them not be fubdivided into fmall Sections,
but kept as entire as poffible, inlmitation
: of the Greet Forms, and expreffing only the
"principal Mufcles." In fine, "let there be
a perfect Relation betwixt the Parts and the
whole, that they may be entirely of a Piecc.
Let
D5


13
3
95.
100.
VII.
Design, the
(clond Part
af Painting.
105.
110.


14
120.
VIII.
Varietas in
Figuris.
125.
I.
Figura fit
una cum
Membris &c
Vellibus.
X.
Mutorum
Actiones
imifandss.
XI.
Figura
Princeps.
130.
XII.
Figurarum
Cilobi, fen
Cumuli.
135.
KIII.
Pofiturarum
Diverfilas its
Cuinulis.


De Arte Graphica.
Regula certa licet nequeat Prospectica dici,
Aut Complementam Graphides; jed in rte Tu-
Vamen,
Et Modus accelerans operandi: at corbora false
Sub vifu in multis referens, mendofa labafcit:
Nam Geometralem nunquam funt corpera juxta
Mensuram depicta eculis, sed qualia vifa.
Non eadem Forma Species, non omnibus PEtas
Equalis, similifque Color, Crinesque Figuris:
Nam varus velut orta Flagis Gens dispare Vul-
14 est.
Singula Membra, suo Capiti conformia, fiant
Unum idemque Junul Corpus cum veftibus ip.
p5
Muterumque sitens Positura imitabitur Attus.
Prima Figurarum, Jen Princeps Dramatis,
uiro
Profiliat media in Tabula, sub lumine primo
Pulchrior ante alias, reliquis nec operta Figuris.
Agglomerata simul fint Membra, ipfeque Fi-
gure
Stipentur circumque Clobos Locus usque waca-
bit;
Ne, male difperfis dum Visus ubique Figuris
Dirviditur, cunctifque Operis fervente Tumuliu
Partibus implicitis, crepitans Confusio surgat.
Inque Figararum Camulis non omnibus idem
Corporis Inslexus, Motusques vel Artubus omnes
Converss


The Art: of Painting.
15
Let the Part which produces another Part,
115.
be more ftrong than that which it produces;
and let the whole be feen by one Point of
Sight. r Though Perspective cannot be called
yet it is a
a perfect Rule & for Defigning;
great Succour to Art, and facilitates the
f Dispatch of the Work; though frequently
2200
falling into Error, it makes us behold Things
under a falfe Aspect; for Bodies are not a1-
ways reprefented according to the Geometri-
cal Plane, but fuch as they appear to the Sight.
VIII.
Neither the Shape of Faces, nor the ge, Variety in
nor the Colour, ought to be alike in all Fi- the Figures.
gures, any more than the Hair; becaufe Men 125.
Ix.
are as different from each other, as the Re
The Members
gions in which they are born are different.
and Drapery
Lic every Member be made for its own
of every Fie
Head, and agree with it; and let all together
gure to be
fuitable to ir.
compofe but one Body, with the Draperies
H.
which are properand faitable to it. And above
The Actionsef
all, &let the Figures to which Art cannot give
Nures to be
a Voice, imitate the Mutes in their Actions.
imitaied.
H
Let the principal Figure of the Subject
130.
appear in the middle of the Piece, under the
XI.
Of tbe prin-
Arongeft Light, that it may have fomewhat
cipal Figure
to make it more remarkable than the reft;
of the Sub-
and that the Figures which accompany. it,
Ject.
may not fteal it from our Sight.
 Let the ss Parts be brought together,
XII.
33
Groupes of
and the Figures difpofed in Groupes;
Figures.
and let thofe Groupes be feparated by a void
Space, to avoid a confufedifeap; which, pro-
ceeding from Parts that are dilperfed witnout
135.
any Regularity, and entangled onewithin an-
other, divides the Sight into many Rays, and
caufes a difagreeable Confufion.
 The Figures in the Groupes ought not
KIII.
The Diversry
to  have the same Inffections of the Body,
of Artituderin
46
Ror
tbe Groupts.


16
140.
145
KIT
Tabulsx Li
Bramentum.
150.
Xv.
Numerus
Figurarnim.
155
160.
XVI.
Intemodis
& Pedes Ex-
hibendi.


De Arte Graphies.
Conversis pariter non connifantur codem:
Sedquedamindiverfatrahant contrarialtembra,
Transverseque aliis pugnent, &S ctera frangant.
Plaribus adversis overfam oppone Figuram,
Pettoribufgus humeros; ES dextera membra fir
iftris,
See mutis constabit Opus, pancifive Figuris.
Altera Pars tabute vacue ne frigida Campe,
Aut deferta fiet, dum pluribus attera Formis
Ferwida Mole jua supremam exurgit ad oram.
Sed tibi sic pesitis respondeat traque ribus,
Or fialiquid sursum se parte attellat in und,
Sic aliquid parts ex alid confurgat, E8 ambas
Equiparet, geminas cumslande equaliter orar.
Plaribus implicitum Personis Drama Juprems
In genere ut rarum eft; muttis ita densa Figuris
Rarior eff Tabulaexcellens; vel adbuc fere nulle
Preffititinmaltis, qued wix bene preeftat in und:
Quippe Jolet verum nimio disper fa Turultu.
Majeffate carere gravi, Requieque decoras
Nee speciefa nittt vacue nisi libera Campa.
Sed fi Opers in magne, plures T hema grands
requirat
Efe Figurarum Cumales, Spectabitur und
Niachina tota vei; non fingula quague seorsim.
Precipua extremis rare Internedia membris
Abdita fint? sed Summa Pedum veffigia nun
a
91
Gratis


17
The Art of Painting.
58
nor the fame Motions; not should they lean
 o e
140.
f all one May, but break the Symmetry, by
if proper Oppositions and Contrafts.
 To feveral Figures feen in Front oppofe
if others with the Back toward the Spectator,
if that is, the Shoulders of fome oppofed to
if the Breafts of others, and right Limbs to
e left, whether the Piece confifts of many
29
of Figures, or but of few.
4
One Side of the Picture muft not be void,
145.

XIV:
while the other is filled to the Borders; but
Equalty of
let Matters be fowell disposed, that if ce any
the Piece.
f thing rifes high on one side of the Piece,
150.
io you may raife fomething to antwer it on
of the other," to that they shall appear in
some fort equal.
XV.

As a Play is feldom very good, in which of te Num-
ber. of Fr=
there are too many Actors; fo it is very fel
dom feen, and almoff impoffible to perform, gurgs:
that a Picture should be perfect, in which
155:
there are too great a Number of Figures.
f fow should they excel in putting feveral
f Figures together, who can fcarce excel in
33
is a lingle one ps
 Many disperted Objects breed Confu-
or fion, and take away from the Picture that
c folemn Majefty, and agreeable Repofe,
i which give Beauty to the Piece, and Satif-
160.
is faction to the Sight. But if you are con-
io rained by the subject to admit of many
& Figures, you muft then make the whole
 to be feen together, and the Effect of the
 Work at one View; and not every thing
32
" teparately and in particular.

The Extremities of the Joints muft, be
XVI.
feldom hidden; and the Extremities of End Ofthe Tuinrs
and Fecs.

of the Feet Rever.

The





De Arte Graphica.
18
Gratianullamanet, Morusque, Vigerque Figuras
Retro aliis subter majori ex parte latentes,
165.
Ni Capitis motum Manibus comitentur agende.
XVII.
Motus ma-
nuummorul
capitis jun-
gendis.
XViIl.
Cux fugi-
Difficiles fugite aspectus, contractague vifu
enda in Dif-
Membra sub ingrate, motusque, actujg; coacles;
tributione
Quodgs resert signis, rectas quodammode trac-
& Compo-
12453
fitione.
Sive Parallelos plures simnl, ES vel acutas,
170.
Vel Geometrales (ut Quadra, Triangula) For-
MMas
Ingratamque pari Signorum ex ordine quandam
Symmetriam: sed preecipua in contraria Jemper
Signa volunt duci tranfversa, ut diximus ante.
Summaigitur ratio Signorum habeatur in omni
175.
Composite; dat enim reliquis pretium, aty; vi-
gorem.
Non it a Nature aftanii sis cuigus revinetus,
FI.
Natura Ge-Hanc preeter nibil ut Genio Studioque relin
nio accom-
quass
modanda.
Nee fine fefle vei Natura, rrisque Magiffra,
Quidlibet Ingenio, memor ut tantummode verum,
180.
Pingere peffe putes; Errerum eft plurima splva,
Multiflicesque Vie, bene agendi Terminus unus;
Linea recta velut jola eff, E3 mille recurac.
381


The Art of Painting.
4
The Figures which are behind others,
have neither Grace nor Vigour, unlets the
Motions of the Hlands accompany thofe of
the Head.
Avoid s all odd Aspects or Pofitions, and
is all ungraceful or forced Actions and Mo
cctions. Shew no Parts which are un
pleating to the Sight, as all Fore-Thortening

ufually are.
H
Avoid all thofe Lines and Outlines which
are equal; which make Parallels, or other
tharp-pointed and Geometrical Figures; such
as are Squares and Triangles; all which, by
being too exact, give to the Lye a certain
difpleafing Symmetry, which produces no
good Effect. But as I have already told
you, the principal Lines ought to contraff
each other For which Reafon, in thefe Out-
lines, you ought to have a special Regard to
the whole together; for it is from thence
that the Beauty and Force of the Parts pro-
ceed.
4
Be not fo frictly tied to Nature, that
you allow nothing to Study, and the Bent
of your own Genius. But on the other fide,
believe not that your Genius alone, and the
Remembrance of thofe Things which you
have feen, can afford you wherewithal to fur
nith out a beautiful Piece, without the Suc
cour of that incomparable Schoolmifirefs,
Nature; & whom you muft have always pre-
fent as a Witness to the Truth. to Errors
f are infinite;" and, amongtt many Ways
which miffead a Traveller, there is but one
true one, which conducts him farely to his
Journey's End; as alfo, there are many feve-
ral Sorts of crooked Lines, but there is one
only which is Rraight.
Our


16
1
165.
XVII.
The Motions
of the Hands
and Head
must agree.
KViIr.
Whatmust be
avoided in the
Distriburion
of the Figures
170.
175.
KIK.
That we muft
not tie our-
felverto Na-
ture; but ac-
commodateber
to our Genius.
180.


28
185.
XX.
Signa Anti-
qua Nature
modumcon-
fituunt.
190.
XXI.
Sola Figura
quomodo
traclanda.
195.
XXII.
Quid in
Pannis ob-
fervandum.
200.
205.


De Arte Graphica.
Sed juxta Antiques Nataram imitabere put
chram,
Qualem Forma vei propria, Objectumque requi-
Vit.
Non te igitur lateant antiqua Numismata, Gem
MCs
Vasa, Tyfi, Statuce, calataque Marmora Signis,
Quodg; refert specie Veterum post seecula Men.
ten
Splendidior quippe ex illis afurgit Image,
Magnaque se verum Facies a erit meditantiz

Tune nefiri tenuem facli miserebere fortem,
Cum spes nulla fiet rediture equalis in eevum.
Exquifita fiet Forma, dum sola Figura
Pingitur; E8 mulis variata Coloritus efte.
Lati, amplig; finus Pannerum, ES nobilis Orde
Membra Jequins, subter latitantia, Lumine Ed
Umbra
Exprimet; ille licet transwerfus sope seratur,
Et circumfuses Pannerum perrigat extra
Membra finus; non contigues, ipfifque Figurd
Partibus impreffes, quasi Fannus adbereal illis.
Sed modice expresfos cum Lumine servet Es Um
bris:
Quaque intermiffis paffim sunt diffita vanis,
Copulet, inductis jubterve, Juperve lacernis.
Et Membra, ut magnis, pancisque expreffa la
Certis.
Majeffate aliis prestant, Forma, arque Decers.
Han


The Art of Painting.
Our Bufinets is to imitate the Beauties of
Nature, as the Ancients have done before
us, and as the Object and Nature of the
Thing require from us. And for this Rea-
fon, we muft be careful in the Search o.
ancient Medals, Statues, Gems, Vafes, Paint
ings, and Baffo Relievo’s; " and of all
other Things, which difcover to us the
Thoughts and Inventions of the Grecians, be-
caufe they furnith us with great Ideas, and
make our Productions wholly beautiful. And
in Truth, after having well examined them,
we shall therein find fo many Charms, that
we shall pity the Deftiny of our prefent Age,
without Hope of ever arriving at fo high a
Point of Perfection.
&If you have but one fingle Figure to work
upon, you ought to make it perfectly finished,
and diverfified with many Colours.

Let the Draperies be nobly pread upon
the Body; let the Folds be large; "and let
them follow the Order of the Parts, that they
may be feen underneath, by Means of the
Lights and Shadows; notwithflanding that the
Parts should be often traverfed (or croffed) by
the Flowing of the Folds, which loofely en-
compass them, without fitting too fraight
upon them; but let them mark the Parts
which are under them, fo as in some manner
to diftinguith them by the judicious Ordering
of the Lights and Shadows. & And if the
Parts be too much diftant from each other,
to that there be void Spaces, which are deeply
Rhadowed, we are then to take Occafion to
place in those Voids fome Fold to make a
Joining of the Parts. cs And as thofe Limbs
and Members, which are exprest by few and
32
"largeMufcles, excel in Majefty and Beauty;
in


24
135.
XX.
Ancient Fi-
Fures tbe
Rules of imi-
lating Na-
THTE.
190a
XEI.
A single Fi-
gure how to
be treated.
XXII.
Of the Dra-
peries.
195.
200.


22
210.
215.
KXIII.
Quid mul-
tum confe-
Tat ad Ta-
Dulx Orna-
mentum.
XXIV
Ornamen-
sum Auride
Gemmarum
EXV.
Prototypus.
220.
XXVI.
Convenien-
tia rerum
cam Scena.
XXVIl.
Charites &c
Nobilitas.


De Arte Graphica.
Haud Jecus in Fannis, quos supra optavimus
amplos,
Perpauces finuum flexus, rugasque, striasque,
Membra super eversu faciles, inducere prostat.
Natureque vei proprins fit Fannus, abundans
Patricius; Jaccinetus erit, craffusque Bubulcis,
Manciprifque; lovis teneris, gracitifque Puellis.
Inque cavis maculijque Umbrarum aliquande tw
mescet,
Lumen ut excipiens, operis qua Maffa requirit,
Latius extendat, sublarifque aggreget umbris.
Nobilia Arma juvant Virtutum, ornantgue
Figuras,
Qualia Musarum, Belli Culiusque Decram.
i
Nee fir Opas nimium Gemmis Hureg; refortum;
Rara cremim magne in Pretie, sed Plarima vil.
Qux deinde ex Vere nequeant presents videri,
Protetypum prins illorum formare juvabit.
Cinveniat locus, atque babifus? vitusg; de
cusque
Servetar: Sit Nobilitas, Charitumque Venufan
(Rarum bomini munus, Coclo, non Arte petew
dum.)
Nalurd


The Art of Painting.
in the fame Manner, the Beauty of the Dra-
peries confifts not in the Mulcitude of the
Folds, but in their natural Order, and plain
Simplicity. The Quality of the Perfons is
alfo to be confidered in the Drapery. r As
suppoting them to be Magiftrates, their Dra-
peries ought to be large and ample; if Coun-
try Clowns or Slaves, they ought to be coarfe
and short; if Ladies or Dmfels, light and
foft. It is fometimes requifice to draw out, as
itwere, from the Hollows and deey Shadows,
tome Fold, and give it a Swelling, that fo re-
ceiving the Light, it may contribute to ex-
tend the Clearness to thofe Places where the
Body requires it; and by this means we shall
ditburden the Piece of thofe hard Shadow-
ings, which are always ungraceful.
7
The Marks or Enfigns of Virtues contri-
bute not little by their Nobleness to the Or-
nament of the Figures. Such, for Example,
as are the Decorations belonging to the libe-
But let not
ral Arts, to War, or Sacrifices.
the Work be too much enriched with Gold or
Jewels, is for the Abundance of them makes
"them look cheap, their Value arifing from
& the Scarcity.)
"It is very expedient to make a Model
of thofe Things, which we have not in our
Sight, and whofe Nature is difficult to be re-
tained in the Memory.
We are to confider the Places where we
lay the Scene of the Picture; the Countries
where they were born, whom we reprefent
the Manner of their Actions, their Laws and
Cultoms, and all that is properly belonging
to them.
Let a Nobleness and Grace be remark-
able through all your Work: But to confess
the


23
205.
210.

215.
XXIII
WharTkings
contribute to
aforn the
Pisture.
XXIV
Of precions
Stones and
Pearl for
Ornaments.
XXV.
The Model.
220.
XxVI.
The Scene of
tbe Pitturs.
XXVII.
The Graces
and the No-
bleness.


24
228.
XXVIII.
Res quaque
focum Juum
Etheat.
230.
KKIK.
Affectus.
235.
240.
HRR.
Gothorum
Ornamenta
fugienda.


De Arte Graphica.
Natura fit ubique tenor, vatioque sequenda.
Non vicina pedum tabulata excelfa Tenantis
Affra domus depicta gerent, Nubesque Notesque:
Nee Mare depreffum Laquearia summa, vel On
CHMS
Marmoreamque serer cannis wage pergula mr
tem?
Congrua sed proprid semper stations lacentur.
Hec preter, metus Animorum, E8 corde vil
postes
Exprimere Affectus, paucisque colcribus iffam
Pingere peffe Animam, atque eculis prebere vi
dendam,
Hoc opus, hic labor eff. Pauci, quos xquiff
amavit
VI
Juppiter, ant ardens evexit ad athera virin
Dis similes, potuere many miracula tantd.
3
Hos ego Rbetoribus trattandes defere; tor
tum
Egregii amiquum memorabe sophisma Mariffly
Verins affectus animi Vigor exprimit a
dens,
Solliciti nimium quam fedula cura Laboris.
Denique wil Japiat Gotborum barbara trite
Ornamenta mode, seclorumts monsir a malorun
Qucis ubi bella, Jamem, ES peftem, Discordn
Luxuss
Ef Romanerum Res grandier intulif Orbis
Ingenuce periere fArtes, periere superbe
Artifion


The Art of Painting.
e Truth, this is a moft difficult Undertak-
g; and a very rare Prefent, which the Ar-
H receives rather from the Hand of Heaven,
an from his own Induftry and Studies.
In all Things you are to follow the Order
Nature; for which Reafon you muft be-
are of drawing or painting Clonds, Winds
id Thunder towards the Bottom of your
iece, and Hell and Waters in the upper-
of Parts of it: You ars not to place 2
one Column on a Foundation of Reeds; but
& every Thing be fet in its proper Place.
Befides all this, you are to express the Mo-
ons of the Spirits, and the Affections or Paf
ons whofe Center is the Heart; in a Word,
make the Soul vifible by the Means of
me few Colours; "this is that in which
e greatell Difficulty confitts. Few there are
hom Tupiter regards with a favourable Eye
this Undertaking; to that it appertains
ily to thofe few wno participate tomewhat
Divinity itfelf, to work thefe mighty Won-
1s. It is the Bufiness of Rhetoricians to
eat the Characters of the Paffions; and I
all content myfelf with repeating what an
cellent Mafter has formerly said on this Sub-
d, that a true and lively Expreffion of
the Paffions, is rather the Work of Genius,
than of Labour and Study.
We are to have no manner of Relifh for
1othic Ornaments, as being in Effect to many
loufters, which barbarous Ages have pro-
uced; during which, when Difcord and Am-
ition, caufed by the too large Extent of the
oman Empire, had produced Wars, Plagues
ad Famine through the World; then 1fay,
e Rately Buildings and Coloffes sell to
ain, and the Nobleness of all beautiful
ArES


25
KXVIII.
Let every
thing be fot
in its proper
Place.
225.
230.
KKIK.
Of the Paf-
foms.
235.
240.
XXE.
Cothic Or-
naments ore
to be aveided.


26
24½

250.
255.
CHROM A-
TICE ter-
tia Pars
Picturs.
260.


De Arte Graphica.
Antificum moles; Jud tune Miracula vidit
Ignibus absumi Pictura; laters coatta
Fornicibus, fortem (S reliquam confidere Crp
t253
Marmoribusque diu Sculptura jacere sepultis.
Imperium interea, scelerum gravitate fatifeeny
Horrida nox totum invafit, donoque juperi
Luminis indignum, errorum caligine merfit,
Impiaque ignaris damnavit secia tenebris.
Unde Coloratum Grains buc usque Magiffris
Nil Jupereft rantorum Hominum, quod Met
Modoque
Neftrates juvet Artifices, deceatque Laborem;
Nee qui Chromatices nobis, hee tempore, partn
Reffituar, quales Lcuxis tractaverat elim,
Hujus quande magnd velut Arte equavit Ayer
lem
Pictorum Archigraphum, meruitque Coloribn
altam
Nominis xterni famam, tote orbe sonantem.
Hec guidem ut in Tabulis fallax, sed grat
Venuftas.
Et complementum Grapbides (mirabile wisu
Pulchra vocabarur, jed subdola, Lena Sereris:
Non tamen bec lenocinium, fucusque, dolujque
Dedeedl


The Art of Painting.
27
rts was totally extinguished. Then it was
2450
hat the admirable; and almoft fupernatural
Yorks of Painting were made Fuel for the
fire; but that this wonderful Art might not
tholly perifh, & some Relies of it took Sanc-
Mary under Ground, ce in Sepulchres and
Catacombs, and thereby efcaped the
ommon Dettiny: And in the same profane
ge, Sculpture was for a long Time buried
nder the same Ruins, with all its beautrful
roductions and admirable Statues. The Em-
fire, in the mean time, under the Weight
its proper Crimes, and undeferving to
250.
njoy the Day, was inveloped with a hideous
ight, which plunged it into an Abyts of
rrors, and covered with a thick Darkness
fignorance thofe unhappy Ages, in jut
levenge of their Impieties. From hence it
omes to pafs, that the Works of thote great
recians are wanting to us; nothing of their
ainting and Colouring now remains to affift
ur modern Artifts, either in the Invention,
255.
 the Manner of thofe Ancients. Neither
s there any Man who is able to reffore v.
Re CROMATIC Part, or COLOURINNG, or to Colouring, tbe
third Par: of
enew it to that Point of Excellency to which
Painting
had been carried by Zeavis; who, by this
art, which is fo charming, fo magical,
nd which to admirably deceives the Sight,
260.
made himself equal to the great Apelles, that
rince of Painters; and deferved that Hleight
Reputation, which he sill poffeffes in the
Vorld.
And as this Part, which we may call the
timoft Perfection of Painting, is a deceiv-
ng Beauty, but withal foothing and plea-
ing; to the has been accufed of procuring
overs for her Sitter, and artfully engaging
413


28
265.
270
XXXI.
Tonorum
Luminum
& Umbra-
rum ratio.
275.
280.


De Arte Graphica.
Dedecori fuit unquam; illi sed semper honori,
ES merifis; banc erge nafe jurt
Laudibus
6it
Lux varium, vicoumque dabit, wullum Imbi
Colorem.
Duo magis adversum eft Corpus, Lucique in
pinguiim,
Clarius eff Lumex; nam debilitatur eunde.
Que magis eff Corpus directum, oculifgue pr
pinquum,
Conspicitur melius; nam vifus bebescit eunds.
Ergo in corperibus, que vifa adverfa, ran
d
5
Integra fint, extrema abscedant perdita fixms
Confusis, non precipiti labentur in Umbram
Clara gradu, nec adumbrata in clara aliar
pente
Prerumpant; sed erit sensim bine atque in
meatus
Lucis Eo Umbrarum; Capitifque unius ad infia
Torum opus, ex multis quamquam fit partity
Unus
Luminis Umbrarumque Globus tantummode fit
Sive duas, vel tres ad summun, ubi grand
96
Divisum Pigma in partes fatient remetar.
Sintgus ita difcreti inter si, vatiens colorum,
Lumin


The Art of Painting.
us to admire her: But to little have this
Profficution, thefe falfe Colours, and this De-
ceit, difhonoured Painting, that on the con-
trary, they have only ferved to fet forth her
D
1raife, and to make her Merit fartherknown;
and therefore it will be profitable to us to
have a more clear Underftanding of what we
call Colouring.
& The Light produces all Kinds of Co-
lours, and the Shadow gives us none. The
more a Body is nearer to the Eyes, and the
more directly it is opposed to them, the more
it is enlightened; becaufe the Light lan-
guithes and leffens, the farther it removes
from its proper Source.
The nearer the Object is to the Eyes, and
the more directly it is oppofed to them, the
better it is feen, becaufe the Sight is wea-
kened by Distance.
It is therefore neceffary io that thofe Parts
 of round Bodies, which are feen directly
 oppofite to the Spectator, should have the
 Light entire;
and that the Extremities
turn, in lofing themfelves infenfibly and con-
fafedly, without precipitating the Light all on
the fudden into the Shadow, or the Shadow
into the Light. But the Paffage of one into
the other muft- be common and impercepti-
ble; that is, by Degiees of Lights into Sha-
dows, and of Shadows into Lights. And it
is in Conformity to thefe Principles, that you
ought to treat a whole Groupe of Figures,
though it be compofed of feveral Parts, in the
Lame Manner as you would do a fingle Head:
Or if the Wideness of the Space, or Large-
"ness of the Compofition, requires that you
should have two Crroupes or three (t which
should be the moft) let the Lights and
of Shadows


29
265.
270.
XXEI.
The Condust
of the Tinis
of Light and
Shadorus.
275.
280.


30
285.
290.
295.
300.
KXXI.
Corpora
denia 8c O-
Pica cum
franlucen-
tihus.
305.


De Arte Graphica.
Laminis,
umbrarumque, antrorsum ut corpon
clara
Obscura umbrarum requies spectanda relinquar;
Claroque exiliant umbrata atque aspera Camp.
Ae velati in speculis convexis, eminet ante
Asperior reipsa Vigor ES Vis aucta colorum
Partibus adversiss magis ES Fuga rupta w
trorsum
Illorum eff (ut wifa minus vergentibus oris)
Corporibus dabimus Formas hee more rotunda.
Mente Modeque igitur Plaffes, E8 Pictor, eoden
Dispositum tractabit opus; que Sculptor in orbin
Atterit, bec rupto procul abscedente colore
Affequitur Pictor, jugientiague illa retrorsum
Iam signata minus confusa coloribus ausert:
Anteriord quidem directe adversa, colore
Integra vrvaci, Jummo cum Lumine ES Umbra
Antrorsum diftineia refert, velut aspera visu.
Sicque super planum inducit Lencoma Colores.
Hes velut ex ipsd Naturd immotus codem
Intrtu circum Statuas daret inde rotundas.
Densa Figuraram solidis que Corpora Formn
Subdita sunt taetn, non tranfincent, sed epaca
In transtucendi spatie ut Juper dera, Nubes,
Lympida Stagna Undaruim, E8 indma exterd fr
bent
Asperiora illis prope circumstantibur effe;
Ot diffinetd magis firmo cum Lamine &f Umbra,
Et gravisribus at suffenta coloribus, inter
Herias Species subsiftant semper epaca:
514


The Art of Painting.
e Shadows be fo difcreetly managed,
that
tor light Bodies may have a fufficient Mafs or
 Breadth of Shadow to fuftain them, and that
of dark Bodies may have a fudden Light be-
o hind, to detach them from the Ground.
66 4
As in a convex Mirror, the collected
Rays Hrike Ilronger and brighter in the
t: middle than upon the natural Object, and
of the Vivacity of the Colours is increafed in
of the Parts full in your Sight; & while the
to: Goings off are more and more broken and
s faint as they approach to the Extremities,
t: in the same manner Bodies are to be raifed
e and rounded.
Thus the Painter and the Sculptor are to
vork with one and the same Invention, and
with one and the fame Conduct: For what
the Sculptor rikes off, and makes round with
his Tool, the Painter performs with his Pen-
il, calling behind that which he makes lefs
Wilible by the Diminution and Breaking of
his Colours; is that which is foremoff and
neareft to the Eye, muft be to diffinctly
expreffed, as to be sharp or almoft cutting
to the Sight. Thus shall the Colours be
dispoted upon a Plane, which, from a pro-
per Place and Diftance, will feem fonatural
and round, as to make the Figures appear
to many Statues.
& Solid Bodies, subject to the Touch, are
not to be painted tranfparent; and even
when fuch Bodies are placed upon tranfpa-
rent Grounds, as upon Clouds, Waters, Air
and the like Vacurties, they muft be pre
ferved opaque , that their Solidity be not
of deftroyed
The French Tranflater here, as well as Ir. Dryden,
 aimlligible; awbich bappened by their mistaking the
Mhaning of the Word Opaca, which is not pur for dark;
E 2.
645


37
285.
2900
295.
300.
305.
XXXII.
Of dark Bo-
dies on lixbt
Grounds.


32
310.
EXKIII.
Non duo ex
CeloLumi-
Ha in Tabu-
lam xqualia
315.
320.
325.


De Arte Graphica.
Sed contra,
procul abscedant perlucida, denfir
Corporibus
leviora; uti Nubes, Her, ES Unde.
Non poterunt diversa locis due Lumina eaden
In Tabula paria admitti, aut equalia pingi:
Majus at in mediam Lumen cadet usque Tabel
lam
Latius insusum, primis qua summa Figuris
Res agitur circumque oras minuetur eundo:
UUtque in pragreffu Tubar attenuarur ab orin
Solis, ad occasum paulatim, ES cefat cunde;
Sic Tabulis Lumen, fota in compage Colorum,
Primo a Fonte, minus senfim declinat eunde.
Majus ut in Statuis, per Compita stantibus (
6is,
Lumen babent Partes superce, minus inferiores;
Idem erit in Tabulis; majorgue nec Umbra, od
Ater
Membra Figuraram intrabit Color, atque seer
bit:
Curpora sed circum Umbra cavis latitabit obr
VEHS:
ique ita queretur Lux oppertund Figuris,
Of lere infusum Lumen lata Umbra sequatur.
Onde, sec immerito, fertur Tilianns abique
Lucis E8 Umbrarum Normam appellaffe Rre
nuin.
Purm


8.
The Art of Painting.
85
deftroyed among thofe light, aerial, tranf-
88
parent Species; and muft therefore be ex-
66
preffed sharper and rougher than what is
60
next to them, more diffind by a firm Light
66
and Shadow, and with more folid and fub-
68
Rantial Colours; that, on the contrary,
68
the finoother and more tranfparent may be
28
68
thrown off to a farther Diftance.
We are never to admit two equal Lights in
the same Picture, but the greater Light muft
rike forcibly on the middle; and there ex
tend its greateff Clearness on thofe Places of
the Picture, where the principal Figures of it
are, and where the Strength of the Action is
performed, diminifhing by Degrees as it comes
nearer and nearer to the Borders; and after
the fame Manner that the Light of the Sun
languiches infenfibly, in its preading from
the Ealt, from whence it begins, towards the
Welt, where it decays and vanifhes; fo the
Light of the Picture being diftributed over
all the Colours, will become lets fenfible, the
farther it is removed from its Original.
The Experience of this is evident in thofe
Statues, which we fee fet up in the midtt of
public Places, whofe upper Parts are more
enlightened than the lower; and therefore
you are to imitate them in the Distribution
of your Lights.
Avoid Hrong Shadows on the middle of
the Lumbs, left the great Quantity of Black
which compofes thofe Shadows should teem to
enter into them, and to cut them; rather take
Care to place those Shadowings round about
them, thereby to heighten the Parts; and take
such advantageous Lights, that after great
by Opaque, in Oppesstion to tranfparent; for a robite
Canent way be opaque, c.
E 3
Lights,


33
2
31eo
XXXIII.
That there
muft not be
two equal
Lights in a
Pifture.
315.
320.
325.


34
330.
KEKIV
Athum &
Wigrum.
XXXV
Colorypm
refectio.
335
XEXVI.
Wnio Colo-
Tum.
3400
345.


De Arte Graphica.
Purum Album effe poteft propiusque magin
remotum:
Cum Nigro antevemt propius; fugit absy; w
Mottims
Purum autem Nigrum antrorsum venit usgn
Propinguum.
Lux fucata sao tingit miscelque Colore
Corpord, sicque sue, per quem Lux funditur, Ac.
Cerfora juneta fimul, circumfusosque Colora
Exciprant, propriumque aliis radiefa reflectunt.
Plaribus in Selidis liguida sab lace propingun
Participes, mixtefque simul decet efe Colerss.
Hane Normam Veneti Pictores vite sequirti,
(Que suit Anriquis Corruptio ditta Colorum,
Cum plares opere in magno posuere Figuras;
Ne conjuneta simal wariorum inimica Colorum
Formam implicitan, ES concifa in
Congeries
nutis
Membra darel Pannis, totam unamquamque Fr
Suram
Affini, aut ane tantum veftive Colore,
Sunt Jolitis variando Tonis tunicaimg; regang
Carbascesque Sinus, vel amicum in Luminet
Umbra
Contiguis circum rebus sociando Golorem.
111



The Art of Painting.
Lights, great Shadows may fucceed. And
therefore Titian faid, with Reafon, that he
Knew no better Rule for the Distribution of
the Lights and Shadows, than his Obferva-
Bunch of Grapes.
tions drawn from a
Pure or unmixed White either draws an
Object nearer, or carries it off to farther Dif-
tance; it draws it nearer with Elack, and
throws it backward without it. x But as for
pure Black, there is nothing which brings the
Object nearer to the Sight.
The Light being altered by some Colour,
never fails to communicate fomewhat of that
Colour to the Bodies on which it ftrikes; and
the same Effect is performed by the Medium
of Air, through which it paffes.
The Bodies which are clofe together, re-
ceive from each other that Colourwhich is op-
pofite to them; and reffect on each other that
which is naturally and properly their own.
It is alfo confonant to Reafon, that the
greatef Part of thofe Bodies which are under
a Light, which is extended and diffributed
equally through all, should participate of each
others Colours. The Venerian School having
a great Regard for that Maxim (which the
Ancients called the Breaking of Colours) in
the Quantity of Figures with which they fill
their Pictures, have always endeavoured the
Union of Colours; for Fear, that being too
different, they should come to encumber
the Sight; i& therefore they painted each Fi-
 gure with one Colour, or with Colours of
near Affinity, though the Hlabit were of
different Kinds, diftinguithing the upper
 Garment from the under, or from the
loofe and fowing Mantle, by the Tints
6
or Degrees, harmonizing and uniting
of the
E 4


35
330.
KXKIV
of White and
Black.
338.

RXXV
TheReffettion
of Colours.

B.ARVI.
Union of Co-
Wurs.
3400
345.


36

1A.5 VII.
Aer Inter
PcLtus.
350.
EFXVIII.
DHtantia-
Tary Relatio
355.
KKEIN.
Corpora
procul dif-
Lantia.
FL.
Contigua &c
Diffita.
360.
XLI.
Contraria
Extrema
fugienda.
XLII.
Tonus &c
Color Varil.
365.
KLIIl.
Luminis
delectus.


De Arte Graphica.
Qa minus eft Spacii acrei, aut qua purior Air,
Cuncta magis distincta patent, speciesgs refer.
vant:
Duaque magis denjus nebulis, ant plurimus Air
mphum inter suerit spatium perrectus, in Auran
Confundet verum specres, (5 perdet inanes.
Anteriora magis semper finita, remotis
Incertis dominsmur Es abscedentibus, idgue
More relative, at majora minoribus extent.
Cuneta minuta procul Maffam denfantur in
Uarns
Of folia arboribus Sylwarum, Ef in Equert
Stutus.
Contigua inter se creant, sed diffita diftent,
Distabuntque tamen grate, E8 discriming parve.
Extrema extremis contrarid jungere notiz
Sed medio sint usque Gradu sociata Coloris.
Corporum erit Tonus atque Gelor wariatus
ubique;
C
Quarat Amicitiam vetro; ferus emicet ante.
Supremum in Tabulis Lumen captare Diei,
InJanus Laber Artificum; cam attingere famun
Non Pigmenta queant anream sed vespere Lucemi
361


The Art of Painting.
37.
tor the Colours, with whatever was next to
19
tos them.
350.
The less aereal Space which there is betwixt
KXKVIL
us and the Object, and the more pure the Air
Of the Inter-
is, by to much the more the Species are pre-
position of
served and diftinguithed; and on the contrary,
Air.
the more Space of Air there is, and the lefs
pure it is, to much the more the Object is
confated and embroiled.
Thofe Objects which are placed foremoft to KXXVIII.
the View, ought always to be more finifhed The Relarion
than thofe which are caft behind; and ought of Distances.
to have Dominion over thofe Things which
are confufed and tranfient.  But let this be
done relatively, (viz.) one Thing greater
355.
and flronger, cafting the lefs behind, and ren-
dering it lefs fenfible by its Opposition.
TholeThingswhich are remaved to a diftant
XXKIK.
Of Bodies
View, tho' they are many, yet ought to make
which are
but one Mafs; as for Example, the Leaves
distanced.
on the Trees, and the Billows in the Sea.
Let not the Objects, which ought to be
360.
contiguous, be feparated; and let thofe which
XI.
Of Bodies
ought to be feparated, be apparently fo to us 
wbicb are
but let this be done by a fnall and pleating
contigious,
Difference.
and of those
& Lettwo contrary Extremities nevertouch.
which dre
each other, either in Colour or in Light; but
separared.

24I.
let there always be a Medium, partaking both
Contrary Ex-
of the one and of the other.
tremiries to be
Let the Bodies every where be of different
avoided.
Tints and Colours; that thofe which are be-
XLII.
hind may be tied in Friendship together; and
Diversity of
Tints and Co-
that thofe which are foremoft may be Hrong
Jours.
and lively.

It is Labour in vain to paint a High-
365.
noon or Mid-day Light in your Picture, be- Kilil.
caufe we have no Colours which can fuffici- Tbe Choice of
ently Ligbs.
E S.


38
370.
KIIv.
Quxdam
CircaPraxim
375
KXIV.
CampusTa-
Dulss.
380.
KIVI.
Color vivi
Jos, hon ta
men palli-
3iis.


De Arte Graphica.
Seu modicum mane albentem; frve TEtheris ar
an
Poft Fyemem nimbis transfuse Sole caducam;
Sen Nebulis fultam accipient, Tonitruque ru
bentem.
Levia que lacent, veluti Cryffalla, Metalla,
Ligna, Ofa, ES Lapides; Villefa, ut Vellera,
Pelles,
Barbe,
agueique Oculi, Grines, Holoserica,
Pluma;
Et Liquida, ut stagnans Aqua, restexeque jud
Indis
Corporece Species, ES Aquis contermina cuncta,
Subter ad extremam liquide sint picta, superque
Luminibus percufa Jurs, Signifque repastis.
Area, oel Campus Tabula vagus effo, levif
9236
Abscedat latus, liquideque bene uncius Amicis
Tota ex Mole Colcribus, and five Parella;
Quaque cadunt retro in Campum, confinia Cam-
70.
Vividus efto Color, nimio nin pallidus Albo;
Adversifque Loers ingeffus plarimns ardens:
Sed leviter parceque datus vergentitus oris.
Canda


The Art of Painting.
30
ently express it: But it is better Counfel to
chufe a weaker Light; fuch as is that of the
Evening with which the Fields are gilded by
the Sun; or a Morning Light, whofe White-
nets is allayed; or that which appears after
a Shower of Rain, which the Sun gives us
3700
through the Breaking of a Cloud; or during
Thunder, when the Clouds hide him from our
View, and make the Light of a fiery Colour.
XLIV.
Smooth Bodies; fuch as Cryftals, polifhed
Of certain
Metals, Wood, Bones, and Stones; thofe
Things re-
which are covered with Hair, as Skins, the
lating to the
Eeard, or the Hair of the Head; as alfo prattical
Part.
Featuers, Silks, and the Eyes, which are of a
Watery Nature; and thofe which are liquid, as
Waters, and thofe corporeal Species, which
375.
we fee reflected by them; and, in fine, all
that which touches them, or is near them,
ought to be se carefully painted flat, in fow-
cing Colours; then touched up with fpritely
o Lights, and the trucLines of the Drawing
f refiored, which were loff or confufed in
33
s working the Colours together.
XIV.
 Let the Field or Ground of the Picture
The Field, or
be pleafant, free, tranfient, light, and well
Groundef the
Picture.
anited with Colours, which are of a friendly
380.
Nature to each other; and of fuch a Mix-
ture, as there may be fomething in it of every!

Colour that compofes your Work, as it were
the Contents of your Palette. ss And let
 thofe Bodies that are back in the Ground
& be painted with Colours allied to thofe of
 the Ground itfelf
4
XLVI.
Let your Colours be lively, and yet not
Of the Vi-
look (according to the Painter's Proverb) as
vacity of Co-
if they had been rubbed or fprinkled with
1ors.
Meal; that is to fay, let them not be pale.

Lct


40
KLVII.
Umbra.
3
XLVIII.
Ex und Pa-
tella fit Ta-
Dula.
XLIE.
Speculum
Pictorum
Magifter.
L.
Dimidia Fi-
Burd, velin-
Legra ante
alias.
390.
LI.
Effigies.
395.


De Arte Graphica.
Cuntia Labore simul cocant, velat Umbra in
eadem.
Tota fiet Tabula ex und depicta Patelld.
Multa ex Naturd Speculum preclara docebit;
Queque procul Sero Spatiis spectantur in amplis.
Dimidia Effigies, que fola, vel integra plures
Ante alias posita ad Lucem, stat prexima visu,
Et latis Spectanda Lecis, Oculifque remota,
Luminis Umbrarumque Gradn sit pitla supreme.
Partibus in minimis Imitatio justa juvabit
Effigiem, alternas referendo tempore eodem
Consimiles Partes; cum Luminis atque Coloris
Compositis, justifque Tonis; tune paria Labore
Si facili to begeto micat ardens, visa wide-
Iir.
Visa


The Art of Painting.
& Let the Parts which are neareft to us,
and mott raifed, be firongly coloured, and as
it were (parkling; and let thofe Parts which
are more remote from Sight, and towards
the Borders, be more faintly touched.
& Let there be to much Harmony or Con-
fent in the Maffes of the Picture, that all the
Shadowings may appear as if they were but
One.
of Let the whole Picture be of one Piece,
23
f as if it were painted from one Palette.
t The Looking-Glats will intruct you in
many Beauties, which you may obferve from
Nature; fo will allo thofe Objects which are
seen in an Evening in a large Prospect.
If there be a half Figure, or a whole one,
to be fet before the other Figures, and placed
nearer to the View, and next the Light. Or
if it is to be painted in a great Place, though
at a Diftance from the Eye; be fure on thefe
Occations not to be fparing of great Lights,
the moft lively Colours, nor the Hrongeft
Shadows.

As for a Portrait, or Pictures by the Life,
you are to work precifely after Nature, and
to exprets what the shews you, working at
the fame time on thofe Parts which are ra-
tembiing to each other; as for Example, the
Fyes; the Cheeks, the Noftrils, and the Lips;
to that you are to touch the one, as foon as
you have given a Stroke of the Pencil to the
other, left the Interruption of Time caufe you
to lofe the Idea of one Part, which Nature has
produced to refemble the other: And thus
inutating Feature for Feature, with a juft and
harmonious Compolition of the Lights and
Chadows, and of the Colours; and giving to
the Picture that Liveliness, which the Freedom
and





47
385.
KIVII.
Of Shadorws.
KIVIII.
The Picture
to be of one
Piece.
KLlx.
The Looking.
Glass, the
Painter's beft
Master.
L.
n balf Fi-
gure, or a
whole one, be-
fore oliters.
390.
LI.
A Portrait.
395


42
LII.
Locus Ta-
Dulse.
400.
LIII.
Luminalata
LIV.
Qhantitas
Luminis
Loci in quo
Tabula eft
exponenda.
405.
Iv.
Errores &c
Vitia Pic-
ture.
410.
IVI.
Pruderfia
in Pittore.
415.
I.VII.
Elegantium
Idxa Tabu-
Iarum.


De Arte Graphica.
Visa Loco angusto tenere pingantur, amice
Tuntta Colore, Gradugue; procul que pitta,
fereci
Sint tS inequali variata Celore, Toneque.
Grandia Signa volunt Spatia ampla, ferefqu
Colores.
Lumina lata, unctas simul undique copulet Im
bras
Labor. In Tabulas demiffa fenes.
Extremus
1ris
Lux parod, Color clariffimus efto:
Si suerit
at contra, obscurusque, in Lumine a
Vividus
perto.
Due vacuis divifa cavis, oitare memento;
Trita, minuta, simul quea non stipata debiscunt;
Barbara, cruda Oculis, rugis fucata Colorum,
Luminis Umbrarumque Tonis cequalia cuncta;
Feda, cruenta, cruces, obscena, ingratd, chis
Meras,
Sordidaque ES misera, ES vel acuta, vel aspera
tactu;
Queque dabunt Forme, temere congefta, Rui-
na,
Implicitas aliis confundent mixtaque Partes.
Dumque sugis vitiosa, cave in contraria labi
Damna Mali; Virium extremis nam semper
inberet.
Pulchra Gradn Jummo, Graphidos ftabilite
Vetute
Nobilibus Signis, sunt Grandia, Diffita, Pura,
Terfas


The rt of Painting.
and Force of the Pencil make appear, it may
seem the living Iland of Nature.
The Works which are painted to be feen
near, in little or narrow Places, muft be very
tender, and well united with Tints and Co-
lours; is let thofe which are to be feen at a
o Diftance, be varied with fiercer Colours
is and ftronger Tints.
VerylargeFiguresmufthaveroomenough
35
 and Hrong, or rather fierce Colouring.
t You are to s take the utmolt Care that
of broad Lightsmay be joined to a like Breadth
95
f of Shadows.
If the Picture be fet in a Place which re-
ceives but little Light, the Colours muft be
very clear; as, on the contrary, very brown,
if the Place be Rrongly enlightened, or in the
open Air.
Remember to avoid Objects which are full
of Hollows, broken in Pieces, little, and which
are feparated, or in Parcels: Shun alfo thofe
Things which are barbarous, fhocking to the
Eye, and party-coloured, and which are all of
an equal Force of Light and Shadow; as alfo
all Thingswhich are obfcene, impudent, filthy,
unteemly, cruel, fantaffical, poorand wretched;
and thoss Things which are sharp to the Feel-
ing: In short, all Things which corrupt their
natural Forms, by a Confufion of their Parts
which are entangled in each other: & Forthe
Lyes have a Horror for thofe Things, which
the Hands will not condefiend to touch.
But while you endeavour to avoid one
Vice, be cautious left you fall into another;
21
for, & Extremes are always vicious.
Thofe Things which are beautiful in the
yimoll Degree of Perfection, according to
the Axrom of ancient Painters, rought to
have


43
LII.
The Place of
the Picture.
400.
LIII.
Large Lights
LIv
What Ligbts
are requisite.
405.
IV.
Thingrwbich
are vicious itn
Painting to
be avorded.
410.
IVI.
The pruden-
tial Part of
a Painter
41
IVII.
Tbe Idea of
a beautiful
Piece.


De Arte Graphica.
444.
Terfa, velut minime confusa, Labore ligata,
Partibus ex magnis paucifque efficia, Colorum
Corporibus diffincta feris, sed semper amicis.
420.
Qui bene capit, uti faci jam fertur habere
IVIII.

Pictorlyro. Dimidium; Picturam it a nit, jub limine prims
Ingrediens, Puer, effendit damnofins Arti,
Quam oaria Errorum Genera, ignorante Ma-
Fistre,
Ex pravis libare Typis, Mentemque Veneno
425.
Inficere in tote quod non abstergitur eve.
Nec Graphides rudis rtis adbuc cite qualia
Cunque
Corpora viva super, Studium meditabitur, antt
Iilorum quam Symmetriam, Infornodia, For-
mam
inspectis, docto evelvente Magiftre,
Noverit,
4
430.
Archetypis; dulcesque Dolos presenferit Artis.
Plusque Mann ante Ocules quam Voce decebitur
IJus.
LIK.
Artem quecunque juvant; fage que
Quare
Ars debet
Servire Pic-
que repugnant.
tori, non
Pictor Arti.
Corpora diverse nature junta placebunt;
435.
Sic ea que facili contempta labore videntur:
L.
REtbereus quippe lgnis ineff E8 Spiritus illis;
Oculos re-
Mente din versata, mann celeranda repenti.
creant Di-
verfitas &c
Arsque Laborgue Operis grata sic fraude latebit:
Operis faci-
Maxima deinde erit Ars, mbil Artis inesfe vi
litas, quz
deri.
Speciatim
Bi
Ars diciture


The Art of Painting.
45
have fomewhat of Greatness in them, and
their Ourlines to be noble; they muft be dif-
entangled, pure, and without Alteration, clean,
and knit together, compofed of great Parts,
yet thofe but few in Number: In ine, ditlin-
420.
guished by bold Colours, but of fuch as are
related and friendly to each other; and as it
LVIII.
is a common Saying, that He who has begun
Advice to a
3
well, has already performed half his Work;
young Painter
& to there is nothing more pernicious to a
Youth who is yet in the Klements of Painting,
than to engage himfelf under the Difcipline of
an ignorant Mafter, who depraves his Taffe
by an infinite Number of Miftakes, of which
his wretched Works are full, and thereby
4255
makes him drink the Poifon, which infects
him through all his future Lire.
Let him, who is yet but a Beginner, not
make to much Haffe to Hudy after Nature,
every Thing which he intends to imitate; as
not in the mean Time to learn Proportions,
the Connection of the Joints, and their Out-
lines: And let him firft have well examined
430.
the excellent Originals, and have thoroughly
udied all the pleafing Deceptions of his Art;
which he muft be rather taught by a knowing
Mafter, than by Practice; and by feeing him
perform, without being contented only to
hear him speak.
LIX.
& Search whatfoever is aiding to your Art, Arn must be
and convenient; and avoid thofe Things subfervient to
the Painter.
which are repugnant to it.
LiK.
Bodies of divers Natures which are ag- Diversiuy and
grouped (orcombined) together, are agreeable Facitiry ars
and plealant to the Sight; was alfothofe Things pleasing.
which feem to be flightly touched, and per-
435.
formed with Eafe, becaufe they are ever full of
Spirit, and appear to be animated with a kind
Of


46
De rte Graphica,
440.
Nee prins indacas T abule Pigmenta Colorum
LKI.
Expensi quam signa Tyfi ftabilita nitescam,
Archetypus
Et menti prasens Operis fit Pegma suturi.
inmente, A-
Pographum
1n tela.
LXII
Preevaleat sensus rationi, que officit rti
Circinus in Conspicnce; inque oculis tantummede Circinn.
oculis.
ofto.
Utexe Doctorum Monitis, nec Sperne superbus
445.
Discere, que de to Jaerif Sententia Vulgi.
IKIII.
Superbia
Eff cscus nam quiique juis in vebus, t3 is
pictori no-
pors
cet pluri-
Judicii, Prolemque Juam miratur amaique.
mum.
Aff ubi Consilium deerit Sapientis Amicis
Id tempus dabif, atque mord intermiffa labori.
450.
Non facilis tamen ad Nutus, (S inania Vulgi
Dicta, levis mutabis Opus, Geniumque relin
qes:
Nam qui parte Jua sperat bene posfe mereri
Malrivaga de Plebe, nocet fibi, nec placet ulli.
C.11


The Art of Painting.
of celeftial Fire. Butwe are not able to com-
passthefe Thingswith Facilicy, tillwe have for
along Time weighed them in our judgment,
and thoroughly confidered them. By this
Means the Painter shall be enabled to conceal
the Pains and Study which his Art and Work
have coll him, under a pleafing fort of Deceit;
for the greateft Secret which belongs to Art,
is to hide it from the Difcovery of Spectators.
Never give the leaft Touch with your Pen-
cil, till you have well examined your Defign,
and have fettled your Outlines; & nor till
you have prefent in your Mind a perfectIdea
of your Work.
4
Let the Rye be fatisfied in the firft Place,
eren againft, and above all other Reafons,
which beget Difficulties in your Art, which of
itfelf fuffers none; and let the Compass be
rather in your Eyes, than in your Hlands.
 Profit yourfelf by the Counfels of the
Knowing; and do not arrogantly difdain to
learn the Opinion of every Man concerning
your Work. All Men are blind as to ther
own Productions; and no Man is capable of
judging in his own Caufe. " But if you have
no knowing Friend to affift you with his Ad-
vice, yet Length of Time will never fail; it
is but letting tome Weekspafsover your flead,
or at leaff fome Days, without looking on
your Work; and that Intermiffion will faith-
fully difcover to you the Faults and Beauties:
Vet fuffer not yourfelf to be carried away by
the Opinions of the Vulgar, who often (peak
without Knowledge; neither give up your-
felf altogether to them, and abandon wholly
your own Genins, fo as lightly to change
that which you have made; for he who has
a windy Head, and flatters himfelf with the
empty


47
440.
LXI.
The Original
must be in the
Head, and the
Copy on the
Clotb.
LEII.
The Compass
to be in the
Eyes.
445.
LXIII.
Pride, an E-
Ry to good
Painting.
450.


43
453.
IXIV.
Frsb:
Ocaulov.
160.
LXv.
Quod Mente
conceperis
Manu com-
Proba.
465.
LXvI.
Matutinum
tempus la.
Dori aptum.
LVIl.
Singulisdic-
bus aliquid
Jaciendum.
470.
L.AVIII.
Affectusin
obtervati &
aturalea.


De Arte Graphica.
Cung; Opere in profrio soleat se pingere Pir
for,
(Prolem adco sibi ferre parem Natura suevr)
Proderit imprimis Pictori yrubi ocavior,
Or data que genio colat, abstincatque negaris.
Fruftibus utque Juns nunquam eft Jafor aigu
venustas
Floribus, infucto in fundo, precoce sub anni
Tempore, ques cultus violentus ES ignis adegit:
Sic nunquam, nimio quee funt extorta labore,
Et pieta invite Genie, nunquam illa placebunt.
Vera Super meditando, Manus Laber improbus
adfit.
Nec tamen obtundat Genium, mentifgs vigersmi
Optima neffrorum Pars matatina dierum,
Difficili banc igitur potiorem impends Laberi.
Nulla Dies abeat, quin lined dufta superst.
Perg; Vias, Valus Hominum, Motusq; notabi
Libertate sud propries, positasque Figuras
Ex fese faciles, ut inobfervarus, babebis.
M102


The Art of Painting.
49
empty Hope of deferving the Praife of the
common People (whofe Opinions are incon-
fiderate and changeable) does but injure him-
elf, and pleafes no Man.
455.
Since every Painter paints himself in his
LXIV
pown Works (to much is Nature accuftomed
Know your.
to produce her own Likenefs (it is advanta-
folf.
geous to him to know himself. & To the End
that he may cultivate thofe Talents which
make his Genius, and not unprofitably lofe
hhis Time, in endeavouring to gain that which
460.
the has refufed him. As neither Fruits have
the Talte, nor Flowers the Beauty which is
ratural to them, when they are tranfplanted
pato an unkindly orforeign Soil, and are forced
to bear before their Scafon by an artificial
Heat; to it is in vain for the Painter to Tweat
over his Works, in Spite of Nature and of
Genius; for without them it is impoffible for
him to fucceed.
LXV
While you meditate on thefe Truths, and
Perperually
obferve them diligently, by making neceffary
practife, and
Reffections on them; let the Labour of the
docasily rwbat
Hand accompany the Study of the Brain; let
you Eave con-
ceived.
the former second and fupport the latter; yet
without blunting the Sharpness of your Ge-
465.
nius, and abating of its Vigour, by too much
Affiduity.
LXVI.
The Morning is the beft and most pro-
The Morning
per Part of the Day for your Bufiness; em-
mist proper
ploy it therefore in the Study and Exercife of
for Work.
thofe Things which require the greateft Pains
EKVIl.
Every Day
and Application.
do somithing.
Let no Day pass over you without a Linc.
470.
Obferve, as you walk the Streets, the Airs
LKViIl.
of Heads, the natural Poltures and Expref-
The Passions
fons; which are always the moft fice, the
rubicb are
lets they feem to be obferved.
irue and na-
& Betural.


50
LKIK.
Non defint
Pugillares.
475.
430.
485.
490.


De Arte Graphica.
Mox quedcumque Maris Terris, ES in Ain
putchrum
Contigerit, Chartis propera mandare paratis,
Dum presens animo species tibi servet hianti.
Non epulis nimis indulget Pictura, meroque
Parcit micorum nifi cum fermone benigne
Exhauffam reparet Mentem recreata; sed inde
Litibus, E8 Curis, in Celibe libera vild,
Seceffus procul a turba, sirepituque remotes,
Villarum, Rurisque beata silentia quarit.
Namque recollecto, tota incumbente Minered,
Ingenie, verum species presentior extai;
Commodiufque Operis compagem amplectitur on
Nem.
Infami tibi non potior fit avara peculi
Cura, Aurique Fames modied quam Son
beato,
Nominis aterni, E8 Landis pruritus babende,
Condignee pulchrorum Operum Mercedis in &
UHIl.
docile Ingenium, Cor nobile, Senfus
Judicium,
Sublimes,
firmum Corpus, Herensque Tuvema,
Res, Labor, Artis mor, deciufgt
Commoda
Magifter;
2


The Art of Painting
t Be ready to put into your Table-Book
which you muft always carry about you)
whatfoever you judge worthy of it; whether
fit be upon the Earth, or in the Air, or upon
the Waters, while the Species of them is yet
freth in your Imagination.
& Wine and good Chearare no great Friends
to Painting; they ferve only to recreate the
Mind, when it is oppreffed and spent with La-
bour; then indeed it is proper to renew your
Vigour by the Converfation of your Friends.
Neitheris a true Painternaturallypleated with
the Patigue of Bufinefs, and particularly of the
Law; but delights in the Liberty which be-
 Painting
longs to the Batchelor’s Estate.
haturally withdraws from Noife and Tumult,
and pleafes itfelf in the Enjoyment of a Coun-
ry Retirement; becaufe Silence and Solitude
fet an Edge upon the Genius, and caufe a
Greater Application to Work and Study; and
alto ferve to produce the Ideas, which, to con-
ceived, will be always prefent in the Mind,
Even to the finifhing of the Work; the whole
Compass of which the Painter can at that
Time more commodioutly form to himself,
han at any other.
X
Let not the covetous Defign of growing!
uch, induce you to ruin yourReputation; but
father fatisfy yourfelf with a moderate For-
une. And let your Thoughts be wholly
aken up with acquiring to yourfelf a glo-
ious Name, which can never perifh, butwith
he World, and make that the Recompence
fyour worthy Labours.
The Qualities requifite to form an ex-
ellent Painter, are, a true difcerning judg-
nent, a Mind which is docible, a nobic
leart, a fublime Senfe of Things, and Fer-
VOur


57
LKIK.
Of Table-
Books.
475.
480.
485.


495.
500.
505.


52


De AArte Craphica.
Et quamcumque voles Occaso parrigat Hnsam,
Ni Genius quidam adfuerit, Sydusque benignun,
Dotibus his tantis, nec adbuc 4rs tanta pars
tir.
D Rtat ab Ingenio longe Manus. Optima Dr
125
Censentur, que prava minus; latet omiby
Error?
Vitaque tam longe brevier non sufficit Arti.
Definimus nam passe Senes, cum scire periti
Incipimns, declamque Manum graval egrat
necluss
Nec gelidis sercuet juvenilis in Artubus ardor.
Quare agite, O Tavenes, placide ques Sydn
TatOs
Pacifere Studia allectant tranquilla Minervs
Quesque sno sovet igne, sitigue optavit Alumuil
E)a agite, atque Animis ingentem ingentibus t
ten
Exercets alacres, dum firenua corda Tuvtnin.
Firibus extimalatvegetis, pariensque laborumf
Di


The Art of Painting.
your of Soul; after which follow, Health of
Body, a convenient Share of Fortune, the
Flower of Vouth, Diligence, an Affection for
the Art, and to be bred under the Difcipline
of a Knowing Mafter.
And remember, that whatfoever your Sub-
ied be, whether of your own Choice, or what
Chance or good Fortune shall put into your
Hand, if you have not that Genins or natu-
ral Inclination, which your Art requires, you
shall never arrive to Perfection in it, even
with all thofe great Advantages which I have
mentioned; for the Wit and the manual Ope-
ration are Things vaftly diftant from each
other. It is the Influence of your Stars, and
the Happinets of your Genius, to which you
muft be obliged for the greateft Beauties of
your Art.
Nay, even your Excellencies fometimes
will not pass for fuch in the Opinion of the
Learned, but only as Things which have lefs
of Error in them: For no Man fees his own
Fainings; "and Life is to short, that it is not
sufficient for fo long an Art. Our Strength
fails us in our old Age, when we begin to
Know fomewhat: Age oppreffes us by the
same Degrees that it inftructs us; and per-
mits not that our mortal Members, which are
frozen with our Vears, should retain the Vi-
four and Spirits of our Vouth.
4
Take Courage therefore, 0 ye noble
Vouths! you legitimate Offepring of Minerva,
who are born under the Inffuence of a happy
Planet, and warmed with a celeffial Fire,
which attracts you to the Love of Science!
Exercife, while you are young, your whole
Forces, and employ them with Delight in an
Art, which requires a whole Painter. Exer-
Cife


53
490.
495.
500:


54
LKX.
Ordo Studi-
Orum.
510.
515.
520.


De Arte Graphica.
Dam vacua Errerum, nulleque imbuta Saperi.
Parg itet Mens, Es rerum sitibunda nove
TMTS
Presentes haurit species, atque humide servat.
In Geemerrali prins Arts parumper adutti,
Signa ntiqua Juper Graiorum addifcite Fere
Mam3
Nee Mova, nec Requies, noetugue diugue le
beris
Ilorum Menti atque Mode, wos donec agendi
Praxis at affidue faciles affueverit usu.
4
Mox, ubi Judicium emensis adeleverif Annp
Singula ques celebrant prime Exemplaria Clap
Sss
Romani, Veneti, Parmenses, atque Bopenis
Partibus in cantlis pedetentim, atque ordin
rettas
Of monitum supra eff, ves expendife jnvabit.
Hes apud invenit Raphael miracule Jumme.
Dutta mode, Venerefqus babuit quas neme tf
inceps.
Quidguid erat forme scivit Bonarota pelenin.
Julin


The Art of Painting.
55
cife them, I fay, while your boiling Youth.
supplies you with Strength, and furnishesyou
505.
with Quicknefs, and with Vigour; while your
Mind, yet pure, and void of Error, has not
taken any ill Habitude to Vice; while yet
your Spirits are infiamed with the Thirff of
Novelties, and your Mind is filled with the
firkt Species of Things which prefent them-
selves to a young Imagination, which it gives
in keeping to your Memory; and which your
Memory retains for Length of Time, by Rea-
fon of the Moifture wherewith at that Age
LXX
the Brain abounds. & you will do well r t0 TheMetbodof
begin with Geometry; and after having made Sindies for a
young Painter
some Progress in 1t, fet yourself on defigning
after the ancient Greeks :r And ceafe not Day
510.
or Night from Labour, till by your continual
Practice you have gained an eaty Habitude of
imitating them in their Invention, and in their
Manner. "And when afterwards your Judg-
ment shall grow Rronger, and come to its Ma-
curity with Vears, it will be very neceffary to
see and examine one after the other, and Part
by Part, those Workswhich have given fogreat
2 Reputation to the Mafters of the firft Form
5153
in Purfuit of that Method, which we have
taught you here above, and according to the
Rules which we have given you; fuch are the
Romans, the Venetians, the Parmesans, and the
Belognefes. Amongt thofe excellent Perfons,
Rapbacl had the Talent of Invention for his
520.
Share, by which he made as many Miracles
as he made Pictures: In which is observed a
certain Grace, which was wholly natural and
peculiar to him, and which none fince him
have been able to appropriate to themfelves.
Michael Angelo poffefted powerfully the Part
of Defign above all others. a Tulie Remane
F 2
(educated


56
525.
530.
535.
LXXI.
Witurs &
Experientis
Artem per-
ficiunt.
540.


De Arte Graphica.
 fulius a Puero Musarum eductus in ntris,
Aonias referavit Opes, Graphicaque Peesi
Que non vifa prius, sed tantum audita Por
125,
Ante ocules spettanda dedit Sacraria Phebi:
Queque covonatis complevit Bella Triumpbis
Heroum Fortuna potens, Casusque decores,
Nobilius reipsd antiqua pinxiffe videtur
Clarior ante alios Corregius extitit, ampla
Luce superfufa, circum eccuntibus Umbris,
Pingendique Mode grandi, ES trattande Colore
Corfora. Amicitiamgue, gradusque, dolefgu
Colerum,
Compagemque it a disposuit Titianus, ut inde
Divus appellatus, magnis fit bonoribus duclus;
Fortunaque benis: Ques Jedulus Llaunibal on
NeS
In propriam Mentem, atque Medum mird Am
coegit.
Plurimus inde Labor Tabulas imitanda jw
vabit
Egregias, Operumque Typos; sed plura decebl
Natura ants ocules presens; nam firmaits aw
861
Vim Genii, ex illaque Artem Experientia-compld.
MaHs


The Art of Painting.
fedurated from his Childhood among the
Mufes) has opened to us the Treafures of Par-
naffus; and in the Poetry of Painting has dif-
covered to our Eyes the moft facred Myfteries
of Apollo, and all the rareff Ornaments which
thatGod is capable of communicating to thofe
Works that he infpires; which we knew not
before, but only by the Recital that the Poets
made of them. He feems to have painted
thofe famous Wars, cs in which Fortune has
is crowned her triumphant Heroes;" and
thofe other glorious Events, which the has
caufed in all Ages, even with more Magni-
ficence and Nobleness, than when they were
alted in the World.
 The fhining Eminence of Corregio con-
if fitts in his laying on ample broad Lights,
if encompaffed with friendly Shadows, and
in a grand Stile of Painting, with a Deli-
r cacyin the Management of Colours. And
Titian underffood to well the Union of the
Maffes, and the Bodies of Colours, the Har-
mony of the Tints, and the Difpofition of the
whole together, that he has deferved thofe
Honours and that Wealth which were heaved
upon him, together with that Attribute of be-
ting firnamed the Divine Painter The labo-
ious and diligent Annibal Caracci has taken
from all thofe great Perfons already mention-
ed, Whatfoever Excellencies he found in them,
and, as it were, converted their Nourifhment
into his own Subltance.
It is a great Means of profiting yourfelf,
ho copy diligently thofe excellent Pieces, and
thofe beautiful Defigns; but Nature, which
tis prefent before your Eyes, is yet a better
Millrefs: For the augments the Force and Vi-
four of the Genius; and the it is, from whom
F 3
Art


57
523.
530.
535.
LXKI.
Nature and
Experience
persett Arre


56
525.
530.
535.
LXXI.
Witara &
Experientia
Artim per-
ficiunt.
540.


De Arte Graphica.
Julius a Puero Musarum eductus in Antris,
Honias reseravit Opes, Graphicaque Poesi
Que non vifa prius, sed tantum audita Poa
125
Ante eculos spectanda dedit Sacraria Phebi.
Quceque coronatis complevit Bella Triumpbis
Heroum Fortuna potens, Casusque decores,
Nobilius reipsd antiqua pinxiffe videtur
Clarior ante alios Corregius extitit, ampla
Luce superfusa, circum cocuntibus Umbris,
Pingendique Modo grandi, E8 trattande Colore
Amicitiamque, gradusque, delesqui
Corpora.
Colcrum,
Compagemque it a dispesuit Titianus, ut inde
Divus appellatus, magnis fit bonoribus auctus,
Fortunaque benis: Quos Jedulus Ilannival on
NES
In propriam Mentem, atque Modum mird Ane
coegit.
Plurimus inde Labor Tabulas imitanda ju
vabit
Egregias, Operumque Typos; sed plara decebil
Natura ante ocules preesens; nam firmat to aw
pet
Vim Genii, ex illaque Artem Experientia compld.
Mula


The Art of Painting.
fecurated from his Childhood among the
Mufes) has opened to us the Treafures of Par-
naffus; and in the Poetry of Painting has dif
covered to our Kyes the moft facred Myfteries
of Asollo, and all the rareff Ornaments which
thartrod is capable of communicating to thofe
Works that he infpires; which we knew not
before, but only by the Recital that the Poets
made of them. He feems to have painted
thofe famous Wars, co in which Fortune has
crowned her triumphant Heroes;r and
thofe other glorious Events, which the has
caufed in all Ages, even with more Magni-
ficence and Nobleness, than when they were
acted in the World.
 The fhining Eminence of Corregio con-
18
fitts in his laying on ample broad Lights,
18
encompaffed with friendly Shadows, and
16
in a grand Stile of Painting, with a Deli-
"cacy in the Management of Colours. And
Titian underftood to well the Union of the
Maffes, and the Bodies of Colours, the Har-
mony of the Tints. and the Difpofition of the
whole together, that he has deferved thofe
Honours and that Wealth which were heaved
Upon him, together with that Attribute of be-
ing firnamed the Divine Painter. The labo-
nous and diligent Annibal Caracci has taken
from all thofe great Perfons already mention-
ed, whatfoever Excellencies he found in them,
and, as it were, converted their Nourifhment
into his own Subftance.
It is a great Means of profiting yourfelf,
to copy diligently thofe excellent Pieces, and
thofe beautiful Defigns; but Nature, which
is prefent before your Eyes, is yet a better
Millrefs: For the augments the Force and Vi-
four of the Genius; and the it is, from whom
Art
F 2


57
523

530.
535.
LXKXI
Nature and
Experience
perselt Art.


7


58
545.
550.


De Arte Graphica.
Mulsa supersileo qua Commentaria dicent.
Hec ego, dum memoror subitura volubily
evi
Cuncta vices, variifque olim peritura ruinis,
Pauca Sopbismata Jum Grapbica immortalibm
aujus
Credere Pieriis, Romx meditaius: ad Alfes,
Dum Juper inJanas Moles, inimicaque cafira
Borbonidum Decas (S Vindex Lodoicus fur
Pum.
Fulminat ardenti dextrd, Patriceque resurges
Gallicus Alcides premit Hispani ora Leenis.


The Art of Painting.
Art derives her ultimate Perfection by the
Means of fure Experience: 7I pais in Silence
many Things, which will be more amply
treated in the enfuing Commentary.
And now, confidering that all Things are
subject to the Viciffitude of Time, and that
they are liable to Deftruction by several Ways,
I thought I might reafonably take the Bold-
nesst to intruft to the Mufes (thofe lovely
and immortal Sifters of Painting) these few
Precepts, which I have here made and col-
lected of that Art.
I employed my Time in the Study of this
Work at Rome, while the Glory of the Bour-
bon Family, and the juff Avenger of his in-
jured Ancettors, the victorious Leavis KIIl.
was darting his Thunder on the Alpr, and
cauting his Enemies to feel the Force of his
unconquerable Arms; while he, like another
Gallic Hercules, born for the Benefit and Hio-
nour of his Country, was griping the Spanis
Geryen by the Throat, and at the Point of
Rrangling him.
F A


59
540.
545.
550.


OBS ER V A T I ON S
ON TH E
ART Of PAINTING
0. F
CHARLES ALPHONSE DU FRESNOY
AINTING and Poesy are two Sifters,
&c. It is a received Truth; that the
Arts have a certain Relation to each
other. Thire is no Art (Laid Terfullian, in
his Treatife of Idolatry) which is not eitber
the Father or the near Relation of another
And Cicero, in his Oration for Archias the
Roet, fays, that the Arts which bave respect
to buman Life, have a kind of Alliance amongtt
themfelves, and hold each other (as we may say)
by the Hand. But thofe Arts which are the
nearell related, and claim the moft ancient
Kindred with each other, are Painting and
Pectry; and whofoever shall thoroughly exa-
mine them, will find them to much refem-
bling one another, that he cannot take them
for lets than Siffers.
They both follow the same Bent, and fuffer
themfelves to be rather carried away, than
ted by their secret Inclinations, which are fo
F
many.


2.
The Number
at the Head
of every Ob-
servation,
serves to find
in the Text
1le particular
Paffage, on
rubich the
Observation
was made.


3


62


Observations on the
many Seeds of the Divinity. 7 here is a God
within us (Tays Ovid, in the Beginning of his
Sixth Book de Faffis, there (peaking of the
Poets) acbo by his Agitation warms us. And
Suidas fays, that the Jamous Sculpior Phidiss,
and Leuxis, that incomparable Painter avirr
both of them transported by the same Enthusialm,
which gave Life to all their Works. They
both of them aim at the fame End, which is
Imitation. Both of them excite our Paffions;
and we fuffer ourfelves willingly to be de¬
ceived, both by the one and by the other;
our Eyes and Souls are to fixed to them, that
we are ready to perfuade ourfelves, that the
painted Bodies breathe, and that the Fic-
tions are Truths. Both of them are fet of
Fire by the great Actions of Heroes; and
both endeavour to eternize them. Both of
them, in short, are fupported by the Strength
of their lmagination, and avail themfelvesef
thofe Licences which Apollo has equally be
fowed on them, and with which their Genins
has inspired them.
Pictoribus atque Peetis
Quidliter andendi, semper fuit cqua Poleffar.
Painters and Poets free from servile Aus,
May treat their Subjects, and their Oljeds
draw.
As fferrce tells us, in his Art of Peetry.
The Advantage which Painting poffeffes
ahove Pofy, is this, that amongit to great
a Diverfity of Languages, the makes herfilf
underfleed by all the Nations of the World
and that the is neceffary to all other Arts,
becaufe of the Need which they have of de
inonfirative


Art of Painting.
monftrative Figures, which often give more
Light to the Understanding, than the cleareft
Difcourfes we can maks.
Segnius irritant animos demiffa per aurem,
Quam quee junt eeulis commiffa fidelibus.
Hearing excites the Mind by stow Degrees;
The Man is warm’d at once by what be feer.
Horace, in the fame Art of Poetry.
For both these Arts that they might advance,
&c. Poetry by its Hymns and Anthems, and
Painting by its Starues, Atar-pieces, and by
all thole Decoraions which inspire Respect
and Reverence for our facred Myfferies, have
been serviceable to Religion. Gregory of Nice,
after having made a long and beautiful De-
scription of Abrabam facrificing his Son Waac,
(ays thefe Words: I have often caft my Eyes
upon a Picture, which represents this moving
Ob,ect, and could never withdraw them awith-
out Tears: So well did the Pictare represent the
Thing itself, even as if the Action avere then
pasfing before my Sight.
So much these divine Arts have been always
honrured, Exc. The greateft Lords, whole Ci-
ties, and their Magiffrates of old (Cays Pling,
110. 3;.) took it for an Henour to obtain a Pic-
ture from the Hands of those great ancient Pain-
fors. But this Honour is much fallen of late
amongt the French Nobilicy: And if you will
undersand the Caufe of it, Vilrwvins will tell
you, that it comes from their lgnorance of
the charming Arts, Propier Ignorantiam Artis,
Virtules obscurantar (in the Preface to his fitth
Book). Nay more, we should fee this admi-
rable Art fall into the latt Degree of Con-
tempt


 T.
8 24.


6r
3


E4
 Mr. Le
Brun.
F Mr. Col.
Bert.


Observations on the
tempt, if our mighty Monarch, who yields in
nothing to the Magnamity of Alexander the
Great, had not fhewn as much Love for Paint-
ing, as for Valour in the Wars: We daily
fee him encouraging this noble Art, by the
confiderable Prefents which he makes to his
chief Painter; and he has alfo founded an
Academy for the Progress and Perfectionating
of Painting, which his firft Minifter f ho.
hnours with his Protection, his Care, and fre-
quent Vifits: Infomuch that we might shortly
fee the ge of Apelles reviving in our Coun
try, together with all the beauteous Arts, if
our generous Nobility, who follow our in-
comparable King with to much Ardour and
Courage in thofe Dangers, to which he ex-
pofes his facred Perfon, for the Greatness
and Glory of his Kingdom, would imitate
him in that wonderful Affection, which he
bears to all who are excellent in this Kind.
Thofe Perfons who were the moft confider.
able in ancient Greece, either for Birth or
Merit, took a moft particular Care for many
Ages, to be instructed in the Art of Paint-
ing; following that laudable and profitable
Cuffom, begun and eftablifhed by the great
Alexander which was, to learn how to de-
fign. And Pliny, who gives Teltimony to
this, in the tenth Chapter of his 3sth Book,
tells us farther ((peaking of Pumpbilus, the
Matter of Apelles) that it avas by the Aurbority
of lexander, that firff at Sicyon, and after-
wards through all trreece, the young Gentlemen
learned before all otber Things to design upon T a
blets of boxen Wood; and that the firft Place
among all the liberal Arts was given to Paint
ing. And that which makes it evident, that
they were very knowing in this Art, is, the
Love


Art of Painting.
Love and Efteem which they had for Painters.
Demerrius gave high Tertimonies of this, when.
he befieged the City of Rbodes; for he was
pleafed to employ some Part of that Time,.
which he owed to the Care of his Arms, in
vifiting Profogenes, who was then drawing the
Pilture of Lalyjus. This Lalyfus (Lays Pliny).
bindered King Demetrius from taking Rhodes,
out of Fear left be should burn the Pictures; and
not being able to fire the Town on any other Side,
he was pleased rather to spare the Painting, than
to take the Victory, awhich was already in bis
Hands. Prorogenes, at that Time, had his
Painting-reom in a Garden out of the Town,
and very near the Camp of the Enemies,
where he was daily finifhing thofe Pieces which
he had already begun; the Noife of Soldiers
not being capable of interrupting his Studies:
But Demerrias caufing him to be brought into.
his Prefence, and alking him, Whatmade him
to bold, as to work in the midft of Enemies ?
He antwered the King, that he underffood the
Warawbick be made was againft the Rhodians,
and not againff the Arts. This obliged Deme-
trius to appoint him Guards for his Security;
being infinitely pleafed that he could preserve
that Hand, which by this Means he faved
from the Barbarity and Infolence of Soldiers.
Aexander had no greater Pleafure than when
he was in the Painting-room of Apelles, where
he commonly was found: And that Painter
once received from him a fenfible Teftimony
of Love and Efteem, which that Monarch had
for him; for having cauted him to paint naked
(by reafon of her admirable Beauty) one of
his Concubines, called Campaspe, who had the
greatell Share in his Affections; and berceiv-
ing that Apelles was wounded with the fame
fatal


65


66


Observations on the
fatal Dart of Beauty, he made a Prefent of her
to him. In that Age, fo great & Deference was
paid to Painting, that they who had any Maf
tery in that Art, never painted on any thing
but whatwas portable from one Place to ano-
sher, and what could be secured from burning.
They took a particular Care (Lays Pliny, in
the Place above cited) not to paint any thing
againft a Wall, which could only belong toone
Mafter; and muft always remain in the same
Place; and for that Reafon could not be re
moved in cafe of an accidental Fire. Men
were not suffered to keep a Picture, as it were
in Prison, on the Walls: It dwelt in common
in all Cities, and the Painter himfelf was
respected as a common Good to all the World.
See this excellent uthor, and you shall find,
that the roth Chapter of his 3gth Book is filled
with the Praifes of this Art, and with the He
nours wbichwere ascribed to it. Vou will there
find, that it was not permitted to any but
thofe of noble Blood to profefs it. Francis the
Firft (as Vasari tells us) was in Love with
Painting to that Degree, that he allured out of
Iraly all the beft Mafters, that this Art might
flourith in his own Kingdom; and, amongt
others, Leonardo da Vinci, who, after having
continnued for some Time in France, died at
Fontainblean, in the Arms of that great King
who could not behold his Death, withoutfhed
ding Tears over him. Charkes the Fifth has
adorned Spain with the nobleft Pictures which
are now remaining in the World. Ridelpbi,
in his Life of Titian, fays, T hat Emperor onn
Day took up a Pentil, which soll frim the Hand
of that Artiff, who was then drawing bis Pic
Firidn
tare; and, upon the Compliment which
Wordss
made him on this Occasion, be said these
Titias


Art of Painting.
Titian has deferved to be served by Exfar.
And in the same Life it is remarkable, that
the Emperor valued himself, not so much in sub-
jecting Kingdoms and Procoinces, as that he had
beenthrice made immortal by the Handof Tiian.
If you will but take the Pains to read this
famous Life in Ridelpbi, you will there fee
the Relation of all thofe Honours which he
received from Charles the Fifth. It would
take up too much Time here to recount all
the Particulars: I will only obferve, that the
greateff Lords, who composed the Court of
that Emperor, not being able to refrain from
Some Marks of Jealouty, upon the Preference
which he made of the Perfon and Converfa-
tion of Titian, to that of all his other Cour-
tiers; he freely told them, that be contderever
want a Court or Courtiers; but he could not
have Titian always with him. Accordingly,
he heaped Riches on him; and whenfoever he
fent him Money, which, ordinarily speaking,
was a great Sum, he always did it with this
obliging Teftimony, that his Defign was nor
to pay him the Value of his Pictures, because
they were above any Price. fter the Example
of the Worthies of Antiquity, who bought
the rarelt Pictures with Buthels of Gold, with-
out counting the Weight or the Number of
the Pieces, In numme auree, menfurd accepit,
non numere (lays Pliny, (peaking of Apelles).
Puinfilian infers from hence; that there is no-
thing more noble than the Art of Painting; be-
caule other Things for the moll part are Mer-
chandife, and bought at certain Rares: Moft
Things for this very Reafon, fays he, are vile,
becaufe they have a Price: Pleraque boc ipp
toffunt videri vilic, qued pretium pabent; tec
the 34th, 35th, and 36th Books of Pliny.
Many


67


68
& 37.
8 39.


Observations on the
Many-great Perfons have loved it with an ex-
treme Paffion, and have exercifed themfelves
in it with Delight. Amongft others, Lalins
Fabius, one of thote famous Romans, who, as
Gicero relates, after he had tafed Painting,
and had practifed it, would be called Fabins
Pictor: As allo Turpilins, a Roman Knight;
Labeo, Preter and Conful, Quintus Pedius; the
Poets Ennius and Pacuvius; Socrates, Plaie,
Mctredorus, Pyrrbo, Commodus, Neve, Vespa-
fian, Alexander Se-verus, Antoninus, and many
other Kings and Emperors, who thought if
not below their Majefty, to employ fome
Part of their Time in this honourable Art.
The principal and most important Part of
Painting is to find out, and therougbly to under-
frand, awbat Nature bath made mest beautiful,
and most proper to this Art, &c. Obferve here
the Rock on which the greateft Part of the
Flemish Painters have (plir. Moft of that Na-
tion Know how to imitate Nature, at leaff as
well as the Painters of other Countries; but
they make a bad Choice in Nature itfelf;
whether it be that they have not feen the an.
cient Pieces, to find thofe Beauties; or that
2 happy Genius, and the beautiful Nature, is
not of the Growth of their Country. And to
confess the Truth, that which is naturally
beautiful is fo very rare, that it is difcovered
by few Perfons; it is very difficult to make a
Choice of it, and to form to ourfelves fuch an
Idea of it, as may ferve us for a Model.
And that a Choice of it may be made accords
ing to the Guft and Manner of the Ancients, &c.
That is to fay, according to the Starnes, the
Baso Relieves, and the other ancient Pieten
as well of the Grecians, as of the Romans.
Ancient (or antique) is that which has been
made


Art of Painting.
made from the Time of Alexander the Great,
till that of Phocas; during whofe Empire the
Artswere ruined by War. Thefe ancient Works
from their Beginning have been the Rule of
Beauty; and in Effect, the Authers of them
have been so careful to give them that Pers
fection, which is ftill to be obferved in them,
that they made fe not only of one fingle
Body, whereby they formed them, but of
many, from which they took the moft regu-
lar Parts, to compofe from them a beautiful
Whole. The Sculptors (Jays Maximus Tyrius,
in his 7th Differtation) with admirable Arri-
fice, chose out of many Bodies those Parts which
appeared to them the most beautiful; and out of
that Diversity made but one Statue. But this
Mixture is made with so much Prudence and
Propriety, that they seem to have taken but one
only perfect Beauty. And ler us not imagine
what ave can ever find one natural Beauty,
which can dispute with Statues that Art, which
has always jomewbat mere perfect than Na-
4ss. It is alfo to be prefumed, that in the
Choice which they made of thofe Parts, they
followed the Opinion of the Phificians, who
at that Time were very capable of inftruct-
ing them in the Rules of Beauty; fince
Beauty and Health ordinarily follow each
other. For Beauty (lays Galen) is nothing
elfe but a juft Accord, and mutual Harmony of
the Members, animated by a healtbful Conffi-
lution. And Men (Tays the fame Author
commend a certain Statue of Polycletus, which
they call the Rule, and which deserves ibat
Name, for having so perfect an Agreement in
all its Parts, and a Proportion so exact, that
it is not possible to find a Fault in it. From
What I have quoted, we may conclude, that
the


69


68


& 37.
F 39.


Observations on the
Many-great Perfons have loved it with an ex-
treme Paffion, and have exercifed themfelves
in it with Delight. Amongft others, Eelins
Fabias, one of thofe famous Romans, who, as
Cicero relates, after he had taked Painting,
and had practifed it, would be called Fabins
Pictor: As alfo Turpilins, a Roman Knight;
Labeo, Preter and Consid, Quintus Pedius; the
Poets Ennius and Pacuvius; Secrates, Plate,
Mctrodorus, Pyrrbo, Commodns, Nero, Vespa-
fian, Alexander Severus, Anteninus, and many
other Kings and Emperors, who thought it
not below their Majelty, to employ fome
Part of their Time in this honourable Art.
The principal and most important Part of
Painting is to find our, and thoroughly to under-
fand, awbat Nature bath made most beautiful,
and most proper to this Art, &c. Obferve here
the Rock on which the greateff Part of the
Flemish Painters have (plic: Moft of that Na.
tion Know how to imitate Nature, at leaft as
well as the Painters of other Countries; but
they make a bad Choice in Nature itfelf;
whether it be that they have not feen the an.
crent Pieces, to find thofe Beauties; or that
a happy Genius, and the beautiful Nature, is
not of the Growth of their Country. And to
confess the Truth, that which is naturally
beautiful is fo very rare, that it is difcovered
by few Perfons; it is very difficult to make a
Choice of it, and to form to ourfelves fuch an
Idea of it, as may ferve us for a Model.
And that a Cboice of it may be made accord:
ing to the Guft and Manner of the Ancients, &c.
That is to lay, according to the Starnes, the
Rafo Relievos, and the other ancient Piecess
as well of the Grecians, as of the Remans.
Ancient (or antique) is that which has been
made


Art. of Painting.
made from the Time of lexander the Great,
till that of Phocas; during whofe Empire the
Artswere ruined by War. Thefe ancient Works
from their Beginning have been the Rule of
Beauty; and in Effect, the durbors of them
have been fo careful to give them that Per-
fection, which is still to be obferved in them,
that they made Ufe not only of one fingle
Body, whereby they formed them, but of
many, from which they took the moft regu-
lar Parts, to compofe from them a beautiful
Whole. The Sculptors (Tays Maximus Tyrius,
in his 7th Differtation) with admirable Arti-
fice, chose out of many Bodies those Parts which
appeared to them the moft beautiful; and out of
that Diversity made but one Statue. But this
Mixture is made with so much Prudence and
Propriety, that they seem to have taken but one
only perfect Beauty. And ler us not imagine
that ve can ever find one natural Beauty,
which can dispute awith Statues that Art, which
has aluays somewbat more perfect than Na-
14i. It is alfo to be prefumed, that in the
Choice which they made of thofe Parts, they
followed the Opinion of the Physicians, who
at that Time were very capable of inftruct-
ing them in the Rules of Beauty; fince
Beauty and Health ordinarily follow each
other. For Beauty (Jays Galen) is nothing
elfe but a juft Accord, and mutual Harmony of
the Members, animated by a healthful Confir-
tution. And Men (Tays the fame Author)
commend a certain Statue of Polycletus, avbich
they call the Rule, and which deserves that
Name, for having so perfect an Agreement in
all its Parts, and a Proportion so exatt, that
it is not possible to find a Fault in it. From
What I have quoted, we may conclude, that
the


69





Observations on the
the ancient Pieces are truly beautiful, be.
caufe they refemble the Beauties of Nature;
and that Nature will ever be beautiful
which refembles those Beauties of Anriquity.
It is now evident upon what Account none
have prefumed to conteft the Proportion of
thofe ancient Pieces; and that, on the con
trary, they have always been quoted as Mo.
dels of the moft perfect Beauty. Ovid, in
the 12th Book of his Meramorpboses, where
he defcribes Cyllaras, the moft beautiful of
all the Centaurs, fays, that he had so great a
Vivacity in his Countenance, bis Neck, his Shout
ders, his Hands and Stomach were so fair, tha
it is certain the manly Part of him avas as braw
tiful as the most celebrated Statues. And Phi-
leffratus, in his Heroies ((peaking of Profe
plans) and praifing the Beauty of his Face,
Lays, that the Form of his Nose awas squary
as if it had been of a Statue: And in another
Place, peaking of Euphorbys, he fays, that
bis Beauty had gained the Affections of all ih
GGrecks, and that it resembled so nearly ihn
Brauty of a Statue, that one might have takn
him for Apollo. Afterwards alfo (freakinf
of the Beauty of Neoprolemns, and of his
Likeness to his Father Acbilles) he fays, that
in Beauty his Farher had the same Advantag
over him, as Stotues bove over the Bedary of
living Men.
This ought to be underffood of the snref
Statnes; for, amongft the Multitude of Sculg
fors which were in Greece and Fraly, it is im
Poffible but fome of them muft have been bad
Workmen, or rather lefs good; for though
their Works were much inferior to the Arals
of the firft Form, yet fomewhat of Greamels
is to he feen in them, and formewhat of har
monious


Art of Painting.
monious in the Distribution of their Parts,
which makes it evident, that at that Time
they wroughton common Principles, and that
every one of them availed himfelf of thofe
Principles, according to his Capacity and
Genius. Thofe Starues were the greateit
Ornaments of Greece; we need only open the
Book of Pausanias, to find the prodigious
Quantity of them, whether within or without
their Temples, or in the croffing of Streets,
or in the Squares and public Places, or evern
the Fields, or on the Tombs. Statues were
crected to the Muses, to the Nympbs, to He-
roes, to great Captains, to Magiffrates, Pbi-
losopbers and Poers; in thort, they were fet up
to all thofe who had made themfelves emi-
pent, either in Defence of their Country, or
for any noble Action, which deferved a Re-
compence: For it was the moft ordinary and
moff authenric Way, both amongft the Greeks
and Remans, thus to teffify their Gratitude.
The Romans, when they had conquered Gre-
cis, transported from thence not only their
moff admirable Statues, but alfo brought
along with them the moft excellent of their
Sculptors, who indructed others in their Art,
and have left to Pofterity the immortal Ex-
amples of their Knowledge, which we fee
confirmed by thofe curious Starmes, thofe
Vases, thofe Baso Relievo's, and thofe beau-
tiful Columns, called by the Names of Trajan
and Antonins. Thefe are thofe Beauties which
our Author proposes to us for our Models,
and the true Fountains of Science; out of
which both Painters and Starsaries are bound
to draw for their own Ofe, without amufing
themfelves with dipping in Streams which are
offen muddy, at leaff troubled; I mean the
Manner


72





72
40.


Observations on the
Manner of their Mafters, after whom they
creep, and from whom they are unwilling to
depart, either through Negligence, or through
the Meanness of their Genius. Ir belongs only
to beavy Minds (Tays Gicero) to spend their Time
on Streams, without searching for the Springs
from awbence their Materials pow in all manner
of abundance.
Without which all is notbing but a blind and
rash Barbarrty, &&c. All that has notuing of
the acient Crulto, is called a barbarcus or Go.
thic Manner, which is not conducted by any
Rule, but only follows a wretched Fancy,
which has nothing in it that is noble. We
are here to obferve, that Painters are not
obliged to follow the Anrique as exactly as the
Sculptors; for then the Picture would favour
too Rrongly of the Starme, and would seem to
be without Motion. Many Painters, and some
of the ableff amongt them, believing they
do well, and taking that Precept in too literal
a Senfe, have fallen thereby into great incon.
veniencies; it therefore becomes the Painters
to make Ufe of thofe ancient Patterns with
Difcretion, and to accommodate the Nature
of them in fuch a Manner, that their Figures,
which muft feem to live, may rather appear
to be Models for the Antique, than the Antigue
a Model for their Figures.
It appears that Raphael made a perfect Ufe
of this Conduct; and that the Lombard Scheol
have not precifely fearched into this Precept,
any farther than to learn from thence how to
make a good Choice of the Nature, and to
give a certain Grace and Nobleness to all
their Works, by the general and confuted
Idea, which they had of what is beautiful.
As for the reft, they are fufficiently licentious,
excepting


Ari of Painting.
excepting only Titian, who, of all the Lom-
bards, has preferved the greatelt Purity in his
Works. This barbarous Manner; of which
I spoke, has been in great Vogue from the
Vear 611 to 1450. They who have reffored
Painting in Germany (not having seen any of
those fair Relics of Antiquity) have retained
much of that barbarous Manner. Amongit
others, Lucas van Leyden, a very laborious
Man, who with his Scholars has infected al-
molt all Enrope with his Designs for Tapeftry,
which by the lgnorant are called ancient Hlang-
ings (a greater fionour than they deferve);
thefe, I fay, are efteemed beautiful by the
greatef Part of the World. I muft acknow-
ledge, that I am amazed at to gross a Stupi-
dity, and that we of the French Nation should
have fo barbarous a Tafte, as to take for
beautiful thofe flat, childifh, and infipid Ta-
petries. Albert Durer, that famous German,
who was Cotemporary to that Lncas, has had
the like Misfortune to fall into that abfurd
Manner, becaufe he had never feen any thing
that was beautiful. Obferve what Vasari
tells us, in the Life of Mark Antonio (Ra-
phael's Graver) having firft commended 41
bere for his Skill in Graving, and his other
Talents. And in Truth (Cays he) if this, so
excellent, so exact, and so univerfal a Man,
had been born in Tulcany, as be was in Ger-
many, and bad formed his Studies according to
those beautifal Pieces which are seen at Romc.
as the reft of as bave dene, he had proved the
boft Painter of all ltaly, as be was the greateft
Ginius, and the most accomplished which Ger-
many ever bore.
We love awbat ave undersland, &c. This
Peried informs us, that though our Inven-
tions


f x2


73


7
A


ff 50.
f 52.


Observations on the
tions are never to good, though we are for.
nithed by Nasure with a noble Genins, and
though we follow the Impulfe of it; yet this
is not enough, if we learn not to underffand
what is perfect and beautiful in Nature: 77
the End, that, having found it, we may be
able to imitate it, and by this Inffraction we
may be capacitated to obferve those Errors
which the herfelf has made, and to avoid them,
to as not to copy her in all Sorts of Subjeds,
fuch as the appears to us, without Choice of
Diffinction.
As being the sovereign Judge of his own
Art, &c. This Word, sovereign Judge, of
Arbiter of his own Arr, prefuppoies a Paiter
to be fully instructed in all the Parts of
Painting; fo that being fet as it were above
his rt, he may be the Mafter and Soverigh
of it; which is no eafy Matter. Thofe of
that Profeffion are fo feldom endowed with
that fupreme Capacity, that few of them ar
rive to be good judges of Painting; and
should many Times make more Account of
their Judgment, who are Men of Senfe, and
yet have never touched a Pencil, than of the
Opinion which is given by the greatef Par
of Painters. 4ll Painters therefore may be
called Arbiters of their cawn Arr, but to b
sovereign Arbiters belongs only to knowing
Painters.
And permit no tranfient Beauties to escape bn
Observation, exc. Thofe fugitive or trantien
Beauties are no other than such as we obfene
in Nature, with a short and tranfient Vies,
and which remain not long in their Subjectsy
such are the Pasfions of the Soul. There as
of this Sort of Reauties which laft but for
Moment; as the different Airs of an Affem
67


Art of Painting.
ly, upon the Sight of an unexpected and
incommon Object; fome Particularity of a
fiolent Paffion; fome graceful Action; a
mile, a Glance of an Eye, a difdainful
ook, a Look of Gravity, and a thouland
ther fuch like Things: We may alfo place
 the Catalogue of thefe flying Beauties, fine
flouds, fuch as ordinarily follow Thunder,
 2 Shower of Rain.
in the same Manner that bare Practice def-
We find in
itule of the Lights of Art, &c.
The Theory
Qaintilian, that Pythagoras faid,
& nothing without the Prattice.
And what
Weans (Lays the younger Pliny) bave ave to
etain what has been taught us, if ave put it
9
We would not allow that
ot in Practice 8
an to be an Orator, who had the best
Thoughts imaginable, and who knew all the
Rules of Rheforic, if he had not acquired
y Exercife the Art of ufing them, and of
compoling an excellent Discourfe. Painting
5 2 long Pilgrimage: Whatavails it to make
il the neceffary Preparatives for our Voyage,
or to inform ourfeives of all the Difficulties
in the Road1 If we do not actually begin
the Journey, and travel at a round Rate, we
hall never arrive at the End of it. And as
would be ridiculous to grow old in the
tudy of every neceffary Thing, in an Art
which comprehends fo many leveral Parts;
to, on the other Hand, to begin the Practice
without knowing the Rules, or at leaft with
light Tincture of them, is to expofe our-
eives to the Scorn of thofe who can judge
pfPainting, and to make it apparent to the
World, that we have no Care of our Repu-
ation. Many are of Opinion, that we need
pnly work, and mind the practical Part, to
beconme


75
F 540


56


Observations on the
become skilful and able Painters; and the
the Theory only encumbers the Mind; n
ties the Hand. Such Men do juft like f
Squirrel, who is perpetually turning the wha
in her Cage; the runs apace; and wears
herfelf with her continual Motion, and ye
gets no Ground. Ir is not enough for din
rwell to walk apace (Jays Quintilian) but iti
enough for avalking apace to do well. It s.
bad Excufe to fay, I was but a little whi
about it. That graceful Eafinefs, that celd
tial Fire, which animates the Work, proced
not fo much from having ofcen done it
like, as from having well underffood who
we have done: See what I shall farther fap
on the Coth Rale, which concerns Easnf
Others there are, who believe Precepts an
Speculation to be of abfolure Neceffity; be
as they were ill instructed; and what thy
Knew, rather entangled, than cleared thi
Underffanding, to they oftentimes turnfher
and if they perform a Work, it is not withod
Anxiety and Pain. And in Truth, they n
to much the more worthy of Compaffion, &
caufe their intentions are right; and if thy
advance not in Knowledge as far as others
and are fometimes caft behind, yet they as
grounded upon fome Sort of Reafon; ford
is belonging to good Senfe, not to go orer
faft, when we apprehend ourfeives to be of
of the Way, or even where we doubt which
Way we ought to take. Others, on the con
trary, being well instructed in good Maxing
and in the Rules of Art, after having do
fine Things, yet spoil them all, by endeavon
ing to make them better, which is a Kindll
overdoing; and they are to intoxicated will
their Work, and with an earnest Defirs &
beit


Art of Painting.
72
feing above all others, that they fuffer them-
lves to be deceived with the Appearance of
 imaginary Good. pelles, one Day ad-Pliny,
35.10.
iring the prodigious Latour which he jaw in a
licture of Protogenes, and knowing bow much
weat it must have coft him, said, That Pro-
bgenes and himself avere of equal Strength;

aj, that be yielded to him in some Parts of
lainting; but in this be surpaffed him, that
fotogenes never knew when he bad done well,
nd could never hold his Hand. He also added,
& the Nature of a Precept, that be wisbed all
lainters would imprint this Lesfon deeply in
beir Memory, that with Ocverstraining and Ear-
efness of finishing their Pieces, they often did
vein more Harm than Good. There are some
ays Qxintilian) who never satisfy themselves,
10. 30
ever are contented with their firft Notiens and
agressions, but are continually changing all, till
ihing remains of their first Ideas. Otbers there
re (Continues ac) who dare never truft them-
ives, nor resolve on any thing; and who be-ng,
it were, entangled in their own Genins, ima-
fne it to be a laudable Correctness, when they
wm Difficulties to themfelves in their own Work.
nd, to speak the Trutb, it is bard to discern,
pheiber of the tave is in the greateft Error;
& wbo is enameured of all be dees; or be,
thom nothing of his own can pleass. For it
as happened to young Men, and often even to
ofe of the greatest Wit, to wafte their Spirits,
yd io consume themselves with Anxiety and Pain
their own giving, to far as even to doxe upon
eir Work with too much Eagerness of deing
fell. I avill now tell you, bow a reasenable
fon ought to carry himself on this Occasion. If
certain, that ave iugbt to use iur beft Endea-
our to give the laft Perfection to our Works;
3
901


78
9 61.
Declam. 19.
 Lib. s.
Sat. 7.
£ Lib. 10.
EP.22.


Observations on the
yet it is always to be underffoed, that we a
tempt no more than wbat is in the Compassy
our Genius, and according to our Vein. Ev
to make a true Progress, I grant that Diligin
and Study are both requifite; but this Swe
ought to have no Mixture, eitber of Self-Op
nion, Obffinacy, or nxiety; for which Ris
son, if it blows a happy Gale, ave muft fery
all our Sails, though in so doing it sometimes bey
pens, that ave follow those Motions awhere our in
tural Heat is more powerful than our Care an
our Correctness, provided ave abuse not this ir
cence, and suffer not ourselves to be deceived&
it; for all our Productions cannot fail to plhal
us at the Moment of their Birth, as being won
10 M5.
Recause the greateff Beauties cannot alug
be expressed for Want of Terms, Ecc. Ihat
learned from the Mouth of Monfieur du Frus
ney, that he had eftentimes heard Guide fap
that no Man could give a Rule of the greatf
Beauties; and that the Knowledge of them wa
so abstruse, that there was no manner of spiak
ing avhich could express them. This comes jt
to what Quintilian fays, that Things incret
ble wanted Words to express them; for somey
them are too great, and too much elevated, &
be comprebended by buman Discourse. Fron
hence it proceeds that the best judges, whof
they admire a noble Picture, seem to be filt
tened to it; and when they come to themm
felves, you would fay they had loft the U
of Speech.
Paufiacd terpes, infane, Tabella, favs M
race: And Symmacbus & fays, that the Grul
ness of Affonishment binders Men from giving
juf Applause. The Italians (ay, Opera da f
pire, when a Thing is wonderfully good.
947


Art of Painting
Tbose Mafter-pieces of Antiquity, which were
he chief Examples of this Art, &c. He means
the moft knowing and beft Painters of Anti-
uity, that is to fay, from the laft two Ages
to our Times.
And also moderates that Fury of the Fancy,
&c. There is in the Latin Text, awhich pro-
fuces only Monffers, that is to fay, Things out
fall probable Refemblance; fuch Things as
te often found in the Works of Pierro Teffa.
& often happens (Lays Dionysius Longinus, a
hrave Author) that some Men, imagining them-
ives to be peffeffed with a divine Fury; far
rom being carried into the Rage of Bacchana-
ans, often sall into Toys and Triffes which are
aly Pucrilities.
A Subject beautiful and noble, c. Paint-
hg is not only pleafing and divertifing, but
allo a kind of Memorial of thofe Things
thich Antiquity has had the moft beautiful
id noble in their Kinds; replacing the
fliftory before our Eyes, as it the Thing
Were at this very Time effectually in Ac-
on; even fo far, that beholding the Pic-
hres, wherein thofe noble Deeds are repre-
tated, we find ourfelves ftung with a Defire
W endeavouring fomewhat, which is like
hat Action there expreffed, as if we were
tading it in the Hiffory. The Beauty of
he subject inspires us with Love and Admi-
ption for the Pictures, as the fair Mixture
pules as to enter into the Subject which it
Mitates, and imprints it the more deeply
pto our Imagination and our Memory
hefe are two Chains which are interlinked;
hich contain, and are at the fame Time
bntained, and whofe Matter is equally pre-
lous and eftimable.
And
6 2


79

9 63.
9 66.
769.


80
872.
De Opt.
Gen. Orat.
8 74.
8 75.


Observations on the
And ingenious; &cc. Aliquid falis, fome.
what that is well feafoned, fine and picquant,
extraordinary, of a high Relifh, proper to in
struet, and to clear the Underftanding. The
Painters ought to do like the Orarors ((ays.
Cicero). Let them instruet, let them diver
tife, and let them move us; this is what is
properly meant by the Word Salt.
On which the Skerch (as it may be called
of the Picture is to be disposed, &c. It is wr
without Reafon, nor by Chance, that or
Author ufes the Word Macbina. A Ma
chine is a juft Affembling or Combination
of many Pieces, to produce one and the fame
Effect. And the Disposition in a Picture i
nothing elfe but an Affembling of many
Parts, of which we are to forefee the Agree
ment with each other, and the Jultness to
produce a beautiful Effect, as you shall fee
in the 4th Precept, which is concerning the
Oeconomy. This is alfo called the Composs
tion, by which is meant the Diftribution and
orderly Placing of Things, both in general
and in particular.
Which is atbat ace properly call Invention,
&c. Our Author eflabliffes three Parts of
Painting, the IVENTION, the DESICN O
DRAWINC, and the CoLOURINC, which
in fome Places, he alfocalls the CROMATiC
Many Authors who have written of Painting
muliply the Parts according to their Plea
fure; and, without giving you or myfelf the
Trouble of difcuffing this Matter, I will onl
tell you, that all the Parts of Painting which
others have named, are reducible into thef
three, which are mentioned by our Author
For which Reafon I elleem this Divifiol
so be the juileft; and, as thefe tbree Partl
218


Art of Painting.
are effential to Painting, to no Wan can be
truly called a Painter who does not poffefs
them all together; in the fame Manner that
we cannot give the Name of Man to any
Creature, which is not compofed of Body,
Coul and Reason, which are the three Parts
neceffarily confirtuent of a Man. How there-
uality of
fore can they pretend to the O
Painters, who can only copy and purloin
the Works of others, who therein employ
their whole Indufiry; and with that only
Talent would pass for able Painters ) And,
do not tell me, that many great Artifts
have done this; for 1 can cafily anfwer
you, that it had been their better Courfe
1to have abdained from to doing; that they
have not thereby done themfelves much He-
nour, and that Copying was not the beft
Part of their Reputation. Let us then con-
ciude, that all Painters ought to acquire
this Part of Excellence; not to do it, is to
want Courage, and not dare to thew them-
selves. It is to creep and grovel on the
Ground; it is to deferve this juft Reproach,
Onnia.ores servum pecus! it is with Painters,
in reference to their Productions, as it is with
Orators: A good Beginning is always coftly
to both; much Sweat and Labour is required,
but it is better to expofe our Works, and
leave them liable to Cenfure for fifteen Vears,
than to bluth for them at the End of fifty.
On this account it is neceffary for a Painter
t begin early to do fomewhat of his own,
and to accullom himfelf to it by continual
Exercife; for fo long as endeavouring to
raile himfelf, he fears falling, he shall be
alwys on the Ground. See the following
Observation.
C
Invention



81


82
 76.


Observations on the
Invention is a Kind of Muse, which bin
peffefed of the other Advantages common to be
Siffers, &c. The Attributes of the Muser in
often taken for the Muses themfelves; andi
is in this Senfe, that Invention is here cald
a Muse. Authors ascribe to each of themin
particular the Scrences which they have (by
they) invented; and in general the Bellesls.
fres, becaute they contain almoft all the other
Thefe Sciences are thofe Advantages of which
our Author (peaks, and with which he would
have a Painter furnish himself fufficienty.
And in Truth, there is no Man, though his
Underffanding be very mean, who Know
not, and who finds not of himself, how mad
Learning is neceffary to animate his Gening,
and to complete it. And the Reafon of thi
is, that they who have fiudied, have not onl
feen and learned many excellent Things in
their Courfe of Studies; but alfo they hant
acquired by that Exercife a great Faciliyf
themfelves, by reading good Ar
profiting
They who will make Profeffion of
thors.
Painting; muff heap up Treafures out of thei
Reading; and there they will find may
wonderful Means of raifing themfelves abou
others, who can only creep upon the Ground,
or if they elevate themfelves, it is only to fall
from a higher Place, becaufe they serve them
felves of other Mens Wings, neither under
Randing their Ufe, nor their Virtue. Kisf
crue, that it is not the prefent Mode forsf
Painter to be fo knowing: And if any of
them in thefe Times be found to have eithel
a great Wit or much Learning, the Muli
cude would not fail to fay, that it was gread
Pity; and that the Vouth might have come
to fomewhat in the practical Part of the Law
Of


Art of Painting:
of it may be in the Treafury, or in the Fami-
lies of some Noblemen. so wretched is the
Dektiny of Painting in thefe latter Ages. By
Learning, it is not fo much the Knowledoe of
the Greek and Larin Tongue, which is here
to be underttood, as the reading of good Au-
thers, and underftanding thote Things of
which they treat For Tranflations being
made of the beff Aurbors, there is not awy
Painter who is not capable, in fome fort,
of underftanding thofe Books of Humanity,
which are comprehended under the Name of
the BellesLertres. In my Opinion, the Books
which are of the moft Advantage to thofe of
the Profeffion, are thefe which follow:
The Bible.
The Hifory of Tesepbns.
The Reman Fliffory of Geefercan, for thofe
who underfland the French; and that of Titns
Livins, in Latin.
Homer, whom Pling calls the Fountain-head
of Invention and noble Thoughts.
Virgil, and in him, particularly his Eneis.
The Ecclefiatical HiRory of Gedean, or
the Abridgment of Baronins.
Ovid’s Metamorpbeses.

The Pictures of Pbileffrains.
Plutarch’'s Lives.
Pansanias, who is wonderful for giving of
great Ideas; and chieffy for fuch as are to
be placed at a Diftance, or caff behind, and
for the combining of Figures. This Hurber,
in Conjunetion with Homer, makes a good
Mingle of what is pleafing, and what is per-
Secl.
The Religion of the ancient Romans, by die
Chol; and in Engliss, Gedwin’s Roman An-
sighities.
Trajan's
6 4


& Tablegux.


83


34


Observations on the
Trayan's Pillar, with the Difcourfe whie
explains the Figures on it, and infirudss
Painter in thofe Things with which he is in
difpentibly to be acquainted. This is one of
the moft principal and moft learned Books,
which we have for the Modes, the Cuffam,
the Arms, and the Religion of the Romans.
Tulio Romano made his chief Studies on the
Marble irfelf.
The Books of Medals.
The Bass Reliefs of Perrier and others,
with their Explanations at the Bortom of its
Pages, which give a perfect Underffanding
of them.
Horace's Art of Poetry, becaufe of the He
lation which there is betwixt the Rules f
Poetry, and thofe of Painting.
And other Books of the like Nature, ihs
Reading of which are profitable to warm the
Imagination. Such as in English, are Spencert
Fairy Queen; the Paradife Loff, of Milor;
Tafo, trantlated by Fairfax; and the Hilloy
of Polybins, by Sir Henry Shere.
Some Romances alfo are very capableof
entertaining the Genius, and of ftrengthes.
ing it, by the noble Ideas which they gire
of Things: But there is this Danger in them
that they almoff always corrupt the Tril
of Hiffory.
There are alfoother Books which a Paints
may ufe upon some particular Occafions, and
anly when he wants them : Such are,
The Myrbelogy of the God:.
The Images of the Gods.
The Iconolegy.
The Tables of Hyginus.
The practical Perspective.
And some others, not here mentioned.
Tht


Art of Painting.
Thus it is neceffary, that they who are de-
frous of a Name in Painting, should read
at Leifure-Times thefe Books with Dili-
fgence; and make their Observations of fuch
Things as they find for their Purpofe in
them, and of which they believe they may
ome Time or other have Occafion. Let
the imagination be employed in this Read-
ing; and let them make Skerches, and light
Touches of thofe Ideas, which that Read-
ing forms in their imagination. Quintilian,
acctes, or whoever was the Author of that
Dialogue, which is called, in Larn, De Cau-
is corruptce Eloquentie, lays, that Painting
&fembles Fire, which is fed by the Fuel, in-
flamed by Motion, and gathers Strength by
Burning: For the Power of the Gemus is ony
augmented by the tundance of Matter to sup-
bly it; and it is impossible to make a great and
n guificent Work, if that Matter be wanting,
r not dispased rightly. And therefore a Pain-
fer, who has a Crenius, gets nothing by
ong Thinking, and taking all imaginable
C:re to make a noble Compofition, if he be
bit affitied by thofe Studies which I have
pentioned. All that he can gain by it, is,
only to weary his Imagination, and to travel
Ever many vall Countries, without dwelling
n any one Thing which can give him Satit-
aition.
All the Bocks which I have named may be
erviceabl: to all Sorts of Perfons, as well as
o Painters. As for thofe Books which were
 particular fe to them, they were unfor-
nately lod in the fe Ages which were before
he Iavention of Printing. The Copvers, neg-
iling (probably out of lgnerarce) to tran-
ribe them, as not finding themfelves capable
0f
6


85


Observations on the
86
& That is to ofmaking the demonttrative Figurest p
the Eye, by
the mean Times, it is evidently known; by
Diagrams
the Relation of Authors, that we have lof
and Sketches,
fifty Volumes of them at the leaft: See Ply
&c.
in his 3gth Book; and Franc. Tunius in his f
Chapter of the 2d Book of the Painting of th
Ancients. Many Moderns have written of it
with small Succets, taking a large Compat,
withour coming directly to the Point, and
talking much, without faying any thing; yt
fome of them have acquitted themfelves for
cessfully enough. Amongst others, Leouard
da Vinci (though without Method); Pat
Lomazzo, whofe Book is good for the greatel
Part, but whofe Difcourfe is too diffufive and
Very tirefome; John Baptiff Armenini; Fras
ciscus Junius, and Monfieur de Cambray, w
whofe Preface I rather invite you, than 1o
his Book. We are not to forget what Mort
fieur Felebien has written of the hifforiedl
Piece of Alexander by the Hand of Montien
te Bran; befides, that the Work itfelf is vey
eloquent, the Foundations which he eftablishsf
for the making of a good Picture are wert
derfully folid. Thus I have given you veyf
near the Litrary of a Painter, and a Catalogal
of such Books as he ought either to read himl
felf, or have read to him; at leaft if he wilf
not fatisfy himfelf with poffeffing Paintinff
as the molt fordid of all Trades, and not al
the nobleft of all Arts.
II is the Business of a Painter in his Choidl
877.
of Attitudes, &c. See here the most imfor
fant Precept of all thofe which relate to Paint)
ing. It belongs properly to a Painter alontl
and all the reft are borrowed, either foal
Learning or from PEyfic, or from the Matel
maries, or in thort, from other Arts: Fordl


87
Art of Painting.
is sufficient to have a natural Wit and Learn-
ting to make that which we call in Painting,
a good Invention; for the Defign, we muft
have some Infight into Anaromy. To make
Buildings, and other Things in Perspectise,
we muft have Knowledge in the Matbematres;
and other Arts will bring in their Quera’s, to
furnish out the Matter of a good Picture. But
for the Oeconoimy, or Ordering of the Whole
together, none but only the Painter can un-
dertland it; becaufe the End of the Artiff is
pleafingly to deceive the Eyes, which he can
never accomplish, if this Part be wanting to
him. A Picture may have an ill Effect,
though the Invention of it be truly underftood,
the Design of it correct, and the Colours of it
the moft beautiful and fine that can be em-
ployed in it. And on the contrary, we may
behold other Pictures ill invented, ill defigned,
and painted with the molt common Colours,
which shall have a very good Effect, and
which shall more pleafingly deceive: Nothing in Occono-
mice.
pleafes a Man so much as Order, tays Kenophen;
and Horace, in his Art of Poetry, lays it down
125 2 Rule;
Singula queeque locum teneant fortita decenter.
Set all Things in their own peculiar Place;
And knew that Order is the greateft Grace.
This Precept is properly the Ufe and Ap-
plication of all the reft; for which Reafon it
requires much Judgment. Vou are therefore
in such manner to forefee Things, that your
Picture may be painted in your Head, before
It comes upon the Canvas: Wben Menander
(lays a celchrated Author) bad ordered the Corm, ve-
Scents of his Comedy, be held it to be in a man-tus.
116F


88


Observations on the
ner already made, though be had not begun this
firff Verse of ir. It is an undoubted Truui)
that they who are endued with this Forefight)
work with incredible Pleafure and Facki
lity; others, on the contrary, are perpernalyf
changing and rechanging their Work, which
when it is ended, leaves them but Anxiey
for all their Pains. It feems to me, that thet
forts of Pictures remind us of thofe old Co
thie Caftles, made at feveral Times; and
which hold together only as it were by Rags
and Parches.
It may be inferred from that which I hav
faid, that the Inventien and the Disposition an
two feveral and diftinct Parts. In Effed,
though the laft of them depends upon the
firft, and is commonly comprehended unds
its yet we are to take great Care that we dot
not confound them. The Invention fimply
finds out the Subjects, and makes a Choid
of them fuitable to the Hiffory which ut
treat; and the Dispesstion dittributes thot
Things which are thus found each to its pro
per Place, and accommodates the Figures and
the Groupes in particular, and the Teur En
semble (or hole together) of the Picture in
ggeneral: So that this Occonomy produces the
Same Effect in Relation to the Eyes, ss a Cot.
fort of Musie to the Ears.
There is one Thing of great Confequenc
to be obferved in the Occenomy of the whel
Work; which is, that at the firft Sight wt
may be given to underttand the Quality of
the Subject; and that the Picture at the firt
Glance of the Eyes may inspire us with the
principal Paftion of it. For Example, if the
Subject which you have undertaken to treat
be of Joy, it is neceffary that every Thing
Which


39
Art of Painting.
which enters into your Picture should contri-
bure to that Paffion; fo that the Beholders
shall immediately be moved with it. If the
Subject be mournful, let every Thing in it
have a Stroke of Sadness; and fo of the other
Paftions and Qualities of the Subjects.
 81.
Let there be a genuine and lively Expression
of the Subject, conformable to the Text of an-
cient duthers, &c. Take Care that the Li-
cences of Painters be rather to adorn the Hif
tory, than to corrupt it. And though Ho-
Arr of
race gives Permiffion to Painters and Poets to
Pcerry.
dare every Thing, yet he encourages neither
of them to make Things out of Nature or
Verifimility; for he adds immediately after,
But let the Bounds of Licences be sixed;
Net Things of disagreeing Natures mix’d:
Ro: Seet with Sour nor Birds with Ser-
pents joined;
Nor the fierce Lien with:be fearful Hind.
The Thoughts of a Man endued with good
Senfe, are not of Kin to vifionary Madness;
Nen in Fevers are only capable of fuch
Dreams. I reat then the Subjects of your
Pictures with all poffible Faitrfulnef:, and
ut yrurLicences with a becoming Boldness,
provided they be ingenious, and not imino-
herac:nl extravagant.
Take Care that aubatfoover makes notbing to
f 83.
yeir Subject, &cc. Nothing deadens to much
the Compofition of a Picture, as Figures
which a.e not appertaining to the Subject;
We may call them pleafantly enough, Frgures
to be loir.
This Part of Painting so varely met avitb, 9 87.
ac. 1 har is to lay, Invention.
W Bicb


90
f 89.
192.
 Prolege
Man.
7 95.


Observations on the
Which was stoten by Prometheus, Eac. T
Poets feign, that Promerbens formed out &
Clay fo fair a Statue, that Minerva one Dj
having long admired it, faid to the Work
man, that it he thought there was any thing
in Heaven which could add to its Perfection
he might aff it of her; but he, being igne
rant of what might be moft beautiful in the
Habitation of the Gods, defired Leave that
he might be carried thither, and being there,
to make his Choice. The Goddets bore his
thither upon her Shield; and, fo foon as he
had perceived that all celeftial Things were
animatec with Fire, he Hole a Parcel of it,
which he carried down to the Earth, and ap
plying it to the Stomach of his Statue, er
livened the whole Body.
That it happens not to every one to serto
rinth, Esc. This is an ancient Proverb, which
fignifies, that every Man has not the Genin,
nor the Difposition, that is neceffary for the
Sciences; neither yet a Capacity fit for the
Undertaking of Things, which are great and
difficult. Corinsh was heretofore the Centr
of all Arts, and the Place whither they fel
all thofe whom they would render capable of
 Cicero calls it the Light of al
any thing.
Grecia.
It arrived at lengtb to that Height of Piu
Jection, &c. This was in the Time of Aler
ander the Great, and lafted even to Augufm;
under whofe Reign, Painting fell to grea
Decay : But under the Emperors, Domitian
Nerva and Trajan, it appeared in its primi
tive Luftre, which latted to the Time. of Pb.
cas the Emperor; when Vices prevailingord
the Arts, and War being kindled through
all Enrope, and e(pecially in Lombardy (Occr
fioned


Art of Painting.
fioned by the Irruption of the Huns) Painting
was totally extinguished. And if some few
in the fucceeding Ages ftrained themfelves to
revive it, it was rather in finding out the moft
glaring, gaudy, and coftly Colours, than in
imitating the harmonious Simplicity of thofe
illuffrious Painters who preceded them. At
length, in the fourteenth Century, fome there
were who began to fet it again on foot; and
Ii may truly he faid, that about the End of
the fifteenth Age, and the Beginning of our
lixteenth, it appeared in much Splendor, by
means of many Knowing Men in all Parts
of Naly, who were in perfect Poffestion of it.
Since thofe happy Times, which were to fruit-
ful of the noble Arts, we have alfo had tome
Knowing Painters, but very few in Number,
becaufe of the little Inclination which Sove-
reign Princes have had for Painting: But,
Thanks to the Zeal of our great Monarch,
and to the Care of his firff Minifter, Mon-
feur Golbert, we may thortly behold it more
fourithing than ever.
An Attirude therefore mast be chosen accord-
ing to their Taffe, ec. This is the second
Part of Painring, which is called Desen, or
Drawing. As the Ancients have fought as
much as poffible whatfoever contributes to
the making of a perfect Body; to they have
diligently examined in what confifts the
Bcauty of good Attitudes, as their Works
sufficiently inform us.
The Parts of it muff be great, &c. Vet not
to great as to exceed a juff Proportion. But
he means, that, in a noble Attitude, the
greatell Parts of the Body ought to appear
foremoll, rather than the less; for which
Reafon, in another Paffage, he vehemently
forbids


103.
f 104.


97


92
f 104.
8
1 105.


Observations on the
forbids the Forefhortenings, becaufe the
make the Parts appear little, though o
themfelves they are great.
And large, &c. To avoid the dry Man
ner, fuch as is moft commonly the NNaur
which Lucas wan Leyden, and Albert Durn
have imitated.
Centrafted by contrary Motions, the most o
ble Parts foremoft in Sight, and each Figure can
fully poised on its own Center, &xc. The Me
fions are never natural, when the Member
are not equally balanced on their Center,
and thefe Members cannot be balanced of
their Center in an Equality of Weight, bu
they muft contraff-each oher. A Man who
dances on the Rope, makes a manifelt De.
onitration of this Truch. The Body is 1
Weight balanced on its Feet, as upon twop:
vors; and though one of the Feetmoll com
menly bears the Weight, yet we fee that the
whole Weight refts cenrrally upon it. Info
much that if (for Example) one Arm is
Rrerched out, it muft of Neceffity be either,
that the other Arm or the Leg be caff back.
ward, or the Body fomewhat bowed on the
oppofite Side, fo as to make an Equilibrinm,
and be in a Situation which is unforced. 1
may be, though feldom (if it be not in old
Men) that the Feet bear equally; and for
that Time half the Weight is equally difin.
buted on each Foot. Vou ought to make
Hfe of the fame Prudence, if one Foot bears
three Parts in four of the Burden, and that
the other Foot bears the remaining Part
This in general is what may be faid of the
Balance, and the Libration of the Body. In
particular, there may many Things be faid,
which are very afeful and curious, of which
70u


Art of Panting.
you may fatisfy yourfelves in Leenarde da
Vines. He has done wonderfully well on that
Subjet; and one may truly fay that the
Ponderation is the beft and foundeft Part of
all his Book of Painting.. It begins at the
181 Chapter, and concludes at the 273d.
I would alfo advife you to read Paulo Ls-
maxko, in his 6th Book, Chapter 4th, Del
Mote del Corpo bumano, that 1s, the Miction of
a buman Bedy. You will there find many
Things of great Profit, for what concerns the
Contraft. I will only fay in general, that
nothing gives to much Grace and Lire to
Figures: See the 17th Precegr, and what I
say upon it in the Remarks.
The Parts muft be drawn with. flowing,
gliding Ourlines, &cc. The Reafon of this pro-
i
ceeds from the Acsen of the Mufcles, which
are as to many Well-Buckets; when one of
them acts and draws, it is neceffary that the
other muft obey; fo that the Mufcles which
acl, drawing always towards their Principal,
and thofe which obey, ftretching in Length,
and on the Side of their Infertion; it muft
needs follow, that the Parts muft be defigned
in Waves: Bur beware, left in giving this
Form to the Parts, you do not break the
Bones which fuftain them, and which always
muft make them appear firm.
This Marim is not altogether fo general,
but that Actions may be found where the
Maffes of the Mufcles are fituate one over
againlt another; but that is not very com-
mon. The Outlines, which are in Waves, give
not only a Grace to the Parts, but alfo to
the whole Body, when it is only fupported
on one Leg; as we fee in the Figures of An-
incus, Meleager the Venus of Medices, that of
1he


8 107.


93


94
8 112.
 113.
ff 114.


Observations on the
the Varican, the two others of Borghese, and
that of Flera, of the Goddets Veftd, the to
Bacchus's of Borgbefe, and that of Ludovifsy
and in fine, of the greateft Number of the
ancient Figures, which are ftanding, and
which always reft more upon one Foot thar
the other. Befides, that the Figures and
their Parts, ought almoff always to haves
ferpentine and ffaming Form naturally; thet
Sorts of Outlines have, I know not whatef
Life and feeming Motion in them, which
very much refembles the Aclivity of the
Flame and of the Serpent.
According to the Rules of Anatomy, Ec.
This Part is nothing Known at prefes
amongft our modern Painters. I have shews
the Profit, and even the Neceffity of it is
the Preface of a little Epiteme which I hasst
made, and which Monfieur Torrebar has pub
lifhed. I know there are some who think
this Science a Kind of Monffer, and beliew
it to be of no Advantage, either becaute they
are mean (pirited, or that they have not cos
fidered the Want which they have of it; st
reffected, as they ought, on its Importancd;
contenting themfelves with a certain Track,
to which they have been ufed. But certail)
it is, that whoever is capable of fuchial
Thought, will never be capable of becoming
a great Defigner.
In Imitation of the Greek Forms, &c
That is to fay, according to the ancieall
Statnes, which for the mott part come fiod
Greece.
Let there be a perfect Relarion betwixt itn
Parts and the Whole, &c. or let them apn
well together, which is the same Thing. Hil
Meaning in this Place, is, to (peak of the
u Stack


Art of Painting.
fultness of Proportions, and of the Harmony
which they make with one another. Many
famous Authars have thoroughly treated this
Matter. Amongit others, Paule Lemaxso,
whose firft Book (peaks of nothing elfe: But
thereare to many Sub-divifions, that a Reader
mull have a good Brain, not to be turned
with them. See thofe which our Author has
remarked in general, on the moft beautiful
Statues of the Ancients. I believe them to be
to much the better, as they are more con-
formable to thofe which Virruvius gives us,
in the first Chapter of his third Book; and
which he tells us, that he learned from the
Artiffs themselves; becaufe in the Preface to
his seventh Book, he makes his Boaft to have
had them from others, and particularly from
Architeets and Painters.
The Measures of a human Bedy.
The Ancients have commonly allowed
eight Heads to their Figures; though some
of them have but feven: But we ordinarily
divide the Figures into ten Faces; that 1s
o fay, from the Crown of the Head to
the Sole of the Foot, in the following Man
ACF:
From the Crown of the Head to the Fore-
head, is the third Part of a Face.

The Pace begins at the Root of the lowest
flairs, which are upon the Forehead, and ends
at the Bottom of the Chin.

The Pace is divided into three proportion-
able Parts; the firft contains the Forehead,
the fecond the Nofe, and the third the Mouth
and the Chin.
Trom


 This de-
pends on the
Age and
Qualiry of
tbe Persons.
The Apollo
and Venus
of Medices
Duve Mora
han ten
Faces.


25


96
5
The Apollo
Eas a Nofe
More.
TheApello
has baif a
Nose more;
and the apper
Ealf of the
Venus de
Rledices is
1 the lover
Part of The
Belly, and
Nit to the
privy Parts.


Observations on the
From the Chin to the Pit, betwixt de
Collar-Bones, are two Lengths of a Nofe.,
From the Pit, berwixt the Collar-Bones,y
the Bottom of the Brealt, one Face.
. From the Bottom of the Breafts to ihe
Navel, one Face.

From the Navel to the Genitories, of
Face.
From the Genitories to the upper Partof
the Knce, two Faces.
The Knce contains half a Face.
From the lower Part of the Knee to th
Ancle, two Faces.
From the Ancle to the Sole of the Fod
half a Face.
A Man, when his Arms are fretched on
is, from the longet Finger of his right Han
to the longeft of his left, as brosc as hei
long.
From one Side of the Breafts to the other
two Faces.
The Bene of the Arm, called Humerus, isih
Length of two Faces, from the Shoulder wl
the Elbow.
From the End of the Elbow to the Rod
of the little Finger, the Bone called Cutil
jus, with Part of the Hand, contains to
Faces.
From the Box of the Shoulder-Blade, wf
the Pit betwixt the Collar-Bones, one Fact
If you would be farisfied in the Meaforal
of Breadth, from the Extremity of one Firt
gerto the other, to that this Breadch thould
be equal to the Length of the Body, you mut
obferve, that the Boxes of the Elbows will
the Humerns, and of the Humerns, with it
Shoulder-Blade, bear the Proportion of hall
a Face, when the Arms are frerched out
177



Art of Painting.
The Sole of the Foot is the fixth Part of
e Figure.
The Hand is the Length of a Face.
The Thumb contains a Nofe.
The Infide of the Arm, from the Place
here the Muscle difappears, which makes
e Breaft, called the Pectoral Mufcle, to the
fiddle of the Arm, four Nofes.
From the Middle of the Arm to the Be-
fnning of the Hand, five Nofes.
The longeft Toe is a Nofe long
The two utmoft Parts of the Teats, and
fe Pit betwixt the Collar-Bones of a Wo-
an, make an equilateral Triangle.
For the Breadth of the Limbs, no precife
leatures can be given; becaufe the Meafures
emfelves are changeable, according to the
vality of the Perfons, and according to the
fovement of the Mufcles.
If you would know the Proportions more
articularly, you may fee them in Paule Lo-
az20. It is good to read them, once at
all, and to make Remarks on them; every
han according to his own judgment, and
cording to the Occafion which he has for
BeIn,
Though Perspective cannot be called a perfect.
lut, ac. That is to tay, purely of ittelf,
ithout Prudence and Difcretion. The
beatrit Part of thofe who underftand it,
hring to practife it too regularly, often
bake such lhings as thock the Sight, tho'
hey are within the Rules. If all thote
feat Painters, who have left us fuch f ir
latfornms, had rigoroufly observed it in their
igures, they had not wholly found their
ccount in it. They had indeed made
hings more regularly true, but withal
Very


117.


97


98


Observations on the
very unpleating. There is great Appearan
that the Arcbiteets and Staruaries of form
Times have not found it to their Purposes
ways.; nor have followed the Geomeiig
Part fo exactly as Perspective ordains: Re
he who would imitate the Frontifpiece of ih
Retanda according to Perspective, wouldb
grofly deceived; fince the Columns, which
are at the Extremities, have more Diamen
than thofe which are in the Middle. 74
Cornith of the Palaxxe Farnese, which make
to beautiful an Effect below, when vieud
more nearly, will be found not to have it
jult Meafures. In the Pillar of Trajan, 
see that the higheft Figures are greater this
thofe below; and make an Effect quite con
trary to Perspective, increafing accordingts
the Meafure of their Diffance. I know ther
is a Rule which teaches a Way of making
them in that Manner; and which, thoughtt
is to be found in fome Books of Perspedine
yet notwithttanding is no Rule of Perspectiva
Becaufe it is never made Ufe of, but ony
when we find it for our Purpose; for if (d
Example) the Figures which are at the Tof
of Trajan's Pillar, were but as great as thot
which are at the Bottom, they would not te
for all that arainit Perspective: And thuswel
may fay, with more Reafon, that it is a Ritf
of Decorum in Perspective, to eafe the Sight
and to render Objects more agreeable. 1i
on this general Obfervation, that we maychf
tablish in Perspective the Rules of Decormt
(or Convenience) whenfoever Occafion fhal
offer. We may alfo fee another Exampleisf
the Bafe of the Farnessan Hercules; whichi
not upon the Level, but on an eafy Declicliff
on the advanced Part, that the Feet of thf
Figarl


Art of Painting.
gure may not be hidden from the Sight, to
te knd that it may appear more pleafing:
Which the noble Authors of these Things
hve done; not in Contempt of Geometry
hd Perspective, but for the Satisfaction of
e Eyes, which was the End they proposed
themfelves in all their Works.
We muft therefore underftand Perspective.
a Science which is abfolutely neceffary,
nd which a Painter muft not want; yetwith-
ut subjecting ourfelves to wholly to it, as to
ecome Slaves of it. We are to follow it,
then it leads us in a pleafing Way, and
pews us pleafing Things; but for some Time
p fortake it, it it leads us through Mire or
p a Precipice. Endeavour after that which
aiding to your Art, and convenient, but
froid whatfoever is repugnant to it, as the
9th Rule teaches.
let every Member be made for its own Head,
ic. That is to fay, you ought not to fee
he Head of a young Man on the Body of an
ld one; nor make a white Hand for a wi-
hered Body. Not to habit a Hercules in Taf-
pia; nor an Apollo in coarfe Stuff. Queens,
nd Perfons of the firff Quality, whom you
fould make appear majeffical, are not to be
po negligently dreffed, or on dispabillec, no
pore than old Men: The Nymphs are not
p be overcharged with Drapery. In fine,
t all that which accompanies your Figures,
pake them known for what effectively they
WE.
Let the Figures to wbich Art cannot give a
Voice, imitate the Mutes in their Actions, &c.
Nutes having no other Way of Speaking, or
prefting their Thoughts, but only by their
bettures and their Acdions, it is certain that
they


8 126.

" 128.


99.


1C0
f 129.


Observations on the
they do it in a Manner more expreffive thi
thofe who have the Ufe of Speech; for whit
Reafon, the Picture which is mate, oughty
imitate them, to as to make itfelf undertod
Let the principal Figure of the Subject, &c
It is one of the greatett Blemifhes of a Pillure
not to give Knowledge, at the firtt Sight, o
the Subject which it reprefents: And truy
nothing is more perplexing than to extin
guith, as it were, the principal Figure, by
the Opposition of some others, which prefen
themfelves to us at the firft View, and which
carry a greater Luffre. An Orator, who had
undertaken to make a Panegyric on Alexar
ter the Great, and who had employed the
Rrongelt Figures of his Rberoric in the Prait
of Bucepbatus, would do quite the contray
to that which was expected from him; b.
caufe it would be believed, that he raths
took t.e Horfe for his Subject, than the
Watter. A Painter is like an Orator in the
He muft difpofe his Matter in fuch fort, thi
all Things may give Place to his principi
Subject. And if the other Figures which so
company it, and are only as Acceffaries ther,
take up the chief Place, and make themfel
moft remarkable, either by the Beauty of
their Colours, or by the Splendor of the Light
which Rrikes upon them, they will carch itf
Sight, they will stop it shore, and not futit
it to go farther than themfelves, till, affd
some confiderable Space of Time, to find of
thatwhich was not difcerned at firtt. The prin
cipal Figure in a Picture, is like a King amorg
his Courtiers, whom we ought to know de
the firit Glance, and who ought to dim it
Luffre of all his Artendants. Thofe Painted
who proceed othe wife, do juft like thell
Wh


rt of Painting:
who in the Relation of a Story, engage them-
selves fo foolifhly in long Digreffions, that
they are forced to conclude quite another
Way than they began.
let the Parts be brought together, and the
Figures disposed in Groupes, Ec. I cannot
better compare a Groupe of Figures, than to
a Concert of Voices, which, tupporting them-
selves all together by their different Parts,
make a Harmony, which pleafingly fills the
Ears, and flatters them; but if you come
to teparate them, and that all the Parts are
equally heard, as loud as one another, they
will fun you to that Degree, that you would
fancy your Ears were torn in Pieces. It is
the fame of Figures; if you fo affemble
them, that fome of them fuftain the others,
and make them appear; and that all together
they mane but one entire Whole, then your
Eyes will be fully fatisfied: But if, on the
contrary, you divide them, your Eyes will
fuffer by feeing them all rogether disperted.
for each of them in particular. All fogetber.
becaufe the vifual Rays are multiplied by the
Muluplicity of Objects: Each of them in par-
ticular; becaufe if you fix your Sight on one,
those which are about it will Arike you, and
attract your Eyes to them, which extremely
pains them in this Sort of Separation, and
Diverfity of Objects. The Eye, for Exam-
ple, is fatisfed with the Sight of one fingle
Grape; and is diffracted, if it carries itfelf
at one View, to look upon many several
Grapes, which hie fcattered on a Table. We
muft have the same Regard for the Memberss
they aggroupe and contraft each other in the
Jame Manneras the Figures do. Few Painters
have observed this
Precept as they ought;
HI
which


10½
1 132.


102
8 137.
 145.
8 152.


Observations on the
which is a moft folid Foundation for the Hss
mony of a Picture.
The Figures in the Groupes ought not to hav
the same Inflections of the Body, Ec. Tae
Heed in this Contraft to do nothing thats
extravagant; and let your Poftures be alwap
natural. The Draperies, and all Things the
accompany the Figures, may enter into the
Contraff with the Members, and with the
Figures themfelves: And this is what on
Poet means, in thefe Words of his Verles,
Cxtera frangant.
One Side of the Picture must not be voil,
while the orber is silled, &cc. This Sort of Sym
metry, when it appears not affected, fills the
Picture pleafingly; keeps it in a Kind of E.
lance, and infinitely delights the Eyes, which
thereby contemplate the Work with mor
Repofe.
As a Play is seldom good, in wbich there or
too many Actors, &c. Annibal Caracci did wr
believe that a Picture could be good, in which
there were above twelve Figures. It was 4
bano who told our Hutbor this; and from hi
Mouth I had it. The Reafons which he gaw
were, firlt, That he believed there ought nd
to be above three great Groupes of Figat
in any Picture; and secondly, That Silens
and Majetly were of Neceffity to be there, wh
render it beautiful; and neither the one not
the other could poffibly be in a Multindl
and Crowd of Figures. But nevertheless, if
you are conftrained by the Subject (as fa
Example, if you painted the Day of Julf
ment, the Mafacre of the Innecents, a Baille
Sc.) on fuch Occafions you are to dispett
Things by great Maffes of Lights and Shi
dows, and Union of Colours, without trosl
blin


Art of Painting.
bling yourfelf to finith every Thing in par-
ticular, independently one of the other, as is
ufual with Painters of a little Genius, and
whofe Souls are uncapable of embracing a
great Defign, or a great Composition.
KEmilium circa ludum, Faber imus ES ungues
Exprimet, ES molles imitabitur are capillos;
infelix Operis Summa; quid ponere tolum
Nesciet.
The meaneff Sculpter in the TEmilian Square,
Can imitate in Brass the Nails and Hair;
Expert in Triffes, and a cunning Fool,
Able 1 express the Parts, but not dispese the
Whole.
Says Horace, in his Art of Postry.
The Extremities of the Toints muft be seldom
bidden, and the Extremities or End of the Feer
nover, &&c. Thefe Extremities of the Joints
are, as it were, the Hafts or Handles of the
Members; for Example, the Shoulders, the
Elbows, the Thighs, and the Knees: And if
a Drapery should be found on thefe Ends of
the Joints, it is the Duty of Science and of
Decorum, to mark them by Folds, but with
great Difcretion; for what concerns the Feet,
tthough they should be hidden by some Part
of the Drapery; nevertheless, if they are
marked by Folds, and their Shape be diffin-
guithed, they are fupposed to be feen. The
Word never, is not here to be taken in the
trilleff Senfe; he means but this, to rare,
that it may feem we should avoid all Occa-
ions of dispenting with the Rule.
The Figares which are bebind others, bavs
Ecither Grace nor Vigoar, &c. Raphael and
11 2
7ulio


103
f 162.
8f 164.


104
f 169.
f 176.


Observations on the
Tulio Remane have perfectly obferved this
Maxim; and Raphael especially in his lat

Works.
Asaid alfo these Lines and Outlines which
are equal, avbich make Parallels, Ec. Ie
means principally to (peak of the Poftures fo
ordered, that they make together thofe Geo.
metrical Figures which he condemns.
Be not so srictly tied to Nature, &c.
This Precept is againt two Sorts of Painters;
firft, againft thofe who are fo fcrupulouly
tied to Nature, that they can do nothing
without her; who copy her, juft as they be
lieve they fee her, without adding or re
trenching any thing, though never fo litle,
either for the Nudities or for the Drape
ries: And, secondly, againft thofe who paint
every Thing by Practice, without being able

to subjsct themfelves to retouch any thing
of to examine by the Nature. Thefe lat,
properly (peaking, are the Libertines of Paint
ing; as there are Liberfines of Religion, who
have no other Law but the Vehemence of
their Inclinations, which they are refolved
not to overcome; and in the Jame Manner,
the Libertines of Painting have no other Me
del but a rhodomontade Genias, and very it
regular, which violently hurries them awap
Though thefe two Sorts of Painters an
both of them in vicious Extremes; yet ne
verthelefs, the former Sort feems to be the
more Tupportable; becaufe though they
do not imitate Nature, as she is accompt
nied by all her Beauties, and her Gracts)
yet at leal they imitate that Nature, which
we know, and daily fee : Instead of which
the others shew us a wild or favage e
sure, which is not of our Acquaintanc
294


Art of Painting.
and which feems to be of a quite new
Creation.
Whom you must bave always present, as a
Witness to the Trutb, &cc. This Paltage feems
to be wonderfully well faid. The nearer a
Picture approaches to the Truth, the better
it is; and though the Painter, who is its
Author, be the firtt judge of the Beauties
which are in it, he is neverthelefs obliged
not to pronounce it, till he has firft confulred
Nature, who is an irreproachable Evidence,
and who will frankly, but withal truly, tell
you its Defects and Beauties, if you compare
11
it with her Work.
nd of all other Things which difcever to us
the Thoughts and Inventions of the Grecians,
Gc. As good Books, fuch as are Homer and
Paufanias. The Prints which we fee of the
Antiquities, may alfo extremely contribute to
form our Genius, and to give us great Ideas;
in the fame Manner as the Writings of good
Authors are capable of forming a good Stile,
in thofe who are defirous of writing well.
If you bave but one single Figure to work
yjos, e&c. The Reafon of this 1s, that there
being nothing to attract the Sight but this
only Firure, the vifual Rays will not be too
much divided by the Diverfity of Colours and
Draperies; but only take ffeed to put in
nothing which shall appear too sharp or too
hard; and be mindful of the 4it Precept.
which fays, that two Extremities are never
to touch each other, either in Colour, or in
Light; but that there muft be a Mean, par-
taking of the one and of the other.
Lot the Draperies be nobly spread upon the
Body; let the Folds be large, &&c. As Raphacl
practifed, after he had forfaken the Manner
Of
H3


265
P. 178.
f 188.
f 193.
f 195.


106
1
196.
2
 200.


Observations on the
of Pietro Perugine, and principally in his lat
cer Works.
And let them follow the Order of the Parts,
&c. As the farreft Pieces of Antiquity will
thew us. And take Heed that the Folds de
not only follow the Order of the Parts, but
that they alfo mark the moff confiderable
Mufcles; becaufe that thofe Figures, where
the Drapery and the naked Part are seen both
together, are much more graceful than the
other.
Without sitting too frait upon them, &c.
Painters ought not to imitate the Ancients in
this Circumftance. The ancient Statuaries
made their Draperies of wet Linen, on Pur-
pofe to make them fit clofe and frait to
the Parts of their Figures; for doing which,
they had great Reafon; and in following
which, the Painters would be much in the
Wrongs and you shall fee upon what Grounds:
Thofe great Geniufes of Antiquity; finding
that it was impoffible to imitate with Marble
the Finenets of Stuffs or Garments, which it
not to be difcerned but by the Colours, the
Reffexes, and more especially by the Lightt
and Shadows; finding it, 1 fay, out of their
Power to difpofe of thofe Things, thought
they could not do better, nor more pruden
tially, than to make Ife of such Draperies, ai
hindered not from feeing through their folds,
the Delicacy of the Fleth, and the Purity of
the Outlines; Things, which truly speaking;
they poffeffed in the laft Perfection, and which
in all Appearance were the Subject of their
chief Study. But Painters, on the contrarys
who are to deceive the Sight, quite otherwife
than Statuaries, are bound to imitate the dif
ferent Sorts of Garments, fuch as they nath
Fally


Art of Painting.
rally feem; and fuch as Colours, Reffexes,
Lights and Shadows (of all which they have
Thus we
Mafters) can make them appear.
fee that thofe who have made the neareft
Imitations of Nature, have made Ofe of fuch
Stuffs, or Garments, which are familiar to our
Sight; and thefe they have imitated with to
much Art, that, in beholding them, we are
pleafed that they deceive us; fuch were 7i-
rian, Paul Veronese, Tintoret, Rubens, Vandyke,
and the reft of the good Colouriffs, who have
come neareff to the Truth of Nature. In-
Read of which, others who have fcrupuloufly
fied themfelves to the Practice of the An-
cients in their Draperies, have made their
Works crude and dry; and by this Means
have found out the lamentable Secret, how
to make their Figures harder than even the
Marble itfeif; as Andrea Mantegna, and Pie-
tre Perngino have done; and Raphael alto
had much of that Way in his firft Works, in
which we behold many small Foldings often
repleated, which look like fo many Whip-
Cords. It is true, thefe Reperitions are feen
in the ancient Starses, and they are very pro-
per there; becaufe they who made Ule of
wetLinen, and clofe Draperies, to make their
Figures look more tender, reafonably forefaw
that the Members would be too naked, if
they left not more than two or three Folds,
tuch as thofe Sorts of Draperies afford them,
and therefore have ufed thofe Repetitions of
many Folds; yet in fuch a Manner, that the
Figures are always foft and tender, and there-
by teem oppofite to the Hardness of Marble.
Add to this, that in Scalprure, it is almoft
Impoffible that a Figure, cloathed with coarfe
Draperies, can make a good Effect on all the
11 4
Sides;


197.



TOu


& 202.
& 204.


Observotions on the
Sides; and that in Painting; the Draperts,
of what Kind foever they be, are of fres
Advantage, either to unite the Colours and
the Groupes; or to give fuch a Ground; is
one would with to unite, or to feparate; of
farther, to produce fuch Reffectrons as fr
off; or for filling void Spaces; or in shot,
for many other Advantagess which help to
deceive the Sight, and which are no ways
eceffary to Sculgrers, fince their Work is al
Ways of Relievo.
Three Things may be inferred from whail
have faid, concerning the Rule of Draperies
Firtt, that the ancient Sculprors had Reafon to
cloath their Figures as we fee them. Second
ly, that Painters ought to imitate them in the
Order of their Folds, but not in their Ous
lity, nor in their Number. Thirdly; thai
Seulprors are obliged to follow them as much
as they can, without defiring to imitate un
profitably or improperly the Manner of the
Painters, by making many ample Fold,
which are infufferable Hardneffes, and look
more like a Rock, than a atural Gor
ment. See the 21ith Remart about the
Middle of it.
And if the Parts be teo much diffant from
each orber, &c. It is with Intent to hinds
(as we have said in the Rule of Groupes) the
vifual Rays from being too much divided;
and that the Eyes may not fuffer, by look
ing on to many Objects which are feparated
Guide was very exact in this Observation. Sd
in the Text the End of the Rule, which relats
to Draperies.
And as these Limbs and Members which on
expressed by few and large Muscles, &&c. Rr
phaes, in the Beginning of his Painting, ha
So01.


Art of Painting:
somewhat too much multiplied the Foldsz.
becaufe being with Reafon charmed with the
Graces of the Ancients, he imitated their
Beauties fomewhat too regularly; but hav-
ing afterwards found, that this Quantity of
Folds glittered too much upon the Limbs,.
and took off that Repofe and Silence, which
in Painting are fo friendly to the Eyes; he
made fe of a contrary Conduct, in the
Works which he painted afterwards, which
was at that Time when he began to underftand:
the Effect of Lights, of Groupes, and the
Oppositions of the Lights and Shadows; fo
that he wholly changed his Manner (this was.
about eight Years before his Death) and tho'
he always gave a Grace to whatfoever he
painted, yer he made appear, in his latter
Works, a Greatness, a Majesty, and a Har-
mony, quite other than what we fee in his:
firt Manner: And this he did, by leffening
the Number of his Folds, making them.
more large, and more opposing them, and.
by making the Maffes of the Lights and
Shadows greater and more difentangled.
Take the Pains to examine thefe his different
Manners, in the Prints which we fee of that.
great Man.
As supposing them to be Magiffrates, their
Draperies ought to be large, &cc. Vet make
not your Draperies fo large, that they may
be big enough to cloath four or five Figures,.
as some there are who follow that Method.
And take fleed that the Foldings be natural,.
and to difpoted, that the Eye may be direcied
to difcover the Folds, from the Beginning of
them to the End. By Magifirates, he means.
all great and grave Perfons, and such as are
aivanced in Age.
H1 s



F:2104.


209.


110
 212.
a


Observations on the
1f. Ladies or Damfels, light and foft, &c:.
By this Name of Ladies, Maids of Damfoh,
he means all young Perfons, ffender, finely
shaped, airy, and delicate; fuch as are Nympts
and Naiades, and Fountains. Angels are allo
comprehended under this Head, whofe Dra-
pery should be of pleafing Colours, and re.
tembling thofe which are feen in the Hea.
vens, and chieffy when they are fuspended in
the Air. They are only fuch Sorts of light
Habits, as are subject to be ruffied by the
Winds, which can bear many Folds; yet so
that they may be freed from any Hardneffes.
It is eafy for every one to judge, that betwint
the Draperies of Magiffrates, and those of
young Mards, there muft be fome Mediocrity
of Folds, fuch as are moff commonly feen
and obferved; as in the Draperies of a Cbrif.
of a Madonna, of a King, a Queen, or a Duches,
and of other Perfons of Confideration and
Majefty; and thofe alfo who are of a middle
Age; with this Dilinction, that the Habies.
muft be made more or lets rich, according
to the Dignity of the Perfons; and that Closh
Garments may be diftinguished from thofe of
Silk, Sattin from Felvers, Brocade from Em
broidery; and that in one Word, the Eye
may be deceived by the Truth, and the Dif
ference of the Stufts. Take Notice, if you
pleafe, that the light and tender Draperies
having been only given to the Female Sex.
the ancient Scaptors have avoided, as much
as they could, to cloath the Figures of Men,
becaufe they thought (as we have formerly
faid) that in Sculpture-Garments could not
be well imitated, and that great Folds made
2 very bad Effeel. There are almoff 21
many Examples of this Truth; as amongt
16


Art of Painting.
the Ancients, there are Statues of naked Wen.
I will name only that of Laocoon, which, ac-
cording to all Probability, ought to have
been cloathed: And in Effect, what Likelj-
hood can there be, that the Son of a King;
and the Prieft of Apollo, should appear naked
in the actual Ceremony of Sacrifice ? For
the Serpents paffed from the Ile of Tenedos
to the Trogan Shore, and furprized Ldocoon,
and his Sons, while they were facrificing to
Neptune on the Sea-sbore, as Virgil witneffes
in the second of his Eneids. NotwithRand-
ing which, the Sculptors  who were An
thors of this noble Work, had well confi-
dered, that they could not give Veftments
faitable to the Quality of the Perfons repre-
fented, without making, as it were, a Heap
of Stones, whofe Mats would rather be like
a Rock, than thofe three admirable Figures,
which will ever be the Admiration of all
Ages. And for this Reafon, of two Incon-
veniencies, they judged that of Draperies to
be greater than that which was againft the
Truth itfelf.
This Observation well confirms what I
have faid in the 200th Remarf. It feems to
me, that it deferves you should make fome
Reffection on it; and to eftablish it the bec-
ter in your Mind, I will teil you, that Il:-
chal Angelo, following this Maxim, has given
the Propbers, which he painted in the Cba-
pol of the Pope, fuch Draperies, whofe Folds
are large, and whofe Garments are coarfe;
inftead of which the Mofes, which he has
made in Seulprure, is habited with a Drapery
much more clofe to the Parts, and hold-
ing more of the Ancients. Neverthelefs, he
15 a Prepber, as well as thofe in the Chapel.
& Man


IFI
r Polydorus,
Athenode-
Tus, andAge-
Lander, all
Rhodians.


172
8 275.
& 217.
Lib. 2. Px.
das. Cap. 12.
Pistarch.


Observations on the
a Man of the same Quality, and to whom
Michael Angele ought to have given the fame
Draperies, if he had not been himlered by
thofe very Reafons, which have been given
you.
The Marks or Ensigns of Virtues, &c. Thet
is to fay, of the Scrences and Arts. The
Italians call a Wian a Ferruoso, who loves
the noble Arts, and is a Critic in them.
And, amongft our French Painters, the Word
Verrueux, is underffood in the same Signiy
cation.
But let not the Work be teo much enriched
with Gold or Tervels, &cc. Clemens Alexandri-
mus relates, that Apelles baving seen a Iiclens
which a young Scholar of his bad made, and
adorned with a great Quantity of golden Ornd-
ments and Teavels, said to him, My good Friend,
though thou couldft not make ber beaunful, at
leaft thou baft made her ricb. Befides, that
these glittering Things in Painting, as pre-
cious Stones prodigally Rrewed over the Ha-
bits, are destructive to each other, becaute
they draw the Sight to feveral Places at the
Same Time, and hinder round Bodies from
turning, and making their due Effect; it is
the very Quantity which often makes us
judge that they are falfe. And befides, it is
to be prefumed, that precious Things are al
ways rare. Corinna, that learned Theban
Lady, reproached Pindar whom the had five
Times overcome in Poetry, that he fcattered.
through all his Works the Flowers of Parnof
Jas 100 prodigally; faying to him, that
Men forved awith the Hand, and not with ibt
Sack; for which Reafon a Painter ought to
adorn his Veftments with great Difcresion:
And precious Stones look exceedingly well,
when


frt of Painting.
when they are fee in thote Places, which we
ould make to come our of the Picture; as.
for Exaiple, on a Shoulder or an Arm; to
ric fonme Drapery, which of itfelf is of no
rong Colouring. They do alfo perfectly.
well with White, and other light Colours,
which are ufed in bringing the Parts or Bo-
dies forward; becaufe Jewels make a Shew,.
and glitter, through the Opposition of the
great Lights in the deep Brown, which meet
together.
II is very expedient to make a Model of these
Things which ave have not in our Sight, and
towhose Natare is difficult to be retained in the
Memory, &cc. s for Example, the Gronper
of many Figures, the Poftures difficult to be
long kept, the Figures in the Air, in Ciel-
ings, or much raifed above the Sight; and
even of Animals, which are not eafily to be.
ditposed.
By this Rule we plainly fee, how neceffary
it is for a Painter to Know how to moded,
and to have many Models of foft Wax.
Paul Feronese had to good a Store of them,,
with to great a Quantity of different Sorts,.
that he would paint a whole bifforical Com-
position on a perspective Plan, how great and
how diverfified fo ever it were. Tinfores.
practifed the fame; and Michael Angclo (as
brievan. Bapr. Armenini relates) made Ufe of.
I, for all the Figures of his Day of Judgs
Ment. It is not that I would advife any one
ho would make any very confiderable
Work, to finith after thefe Sorts of Models;
but they will be of vait Ufe and Advantage
to fee the Maffes of great Lights and great
hadows, and the Effect of the Whole to-
fother. For what remains, you are to have
2Lay-


II.F
f 228a.


Observations on the
174
& A Figure a Laymant almoft as big as the Life; for.
madeef Wood
every Figure in particular, befides the natw:
or Cork, turn-
ral Figure before you, on which you muff
ing upon
alfe look, and call it for a Witness, which
Toints.
muft firft confirm the Thing to you, and
afterwards to the Spectators, as it is in
Realiry
You may make Ufe of thefe Models with
Delight, if you fet them on a perspective Plan,
which will be in the anner of a Table made
on Purpofe. You may either raife, or let it
down, according to your Convenience; and
if you look on your Figures through a Hole,
to contrived, that it may be moved up and
down, it will ferve you for a Point of Sight,
and a Point of Diffance, when you have once
fixed: it.
The fame Hole will farther ferve you to
fet your Figures in the Cieling, and dispoled
upon a Grate of Iron Ware, or fupported in
the Air, by little Strings raifed at Difcretion,
or by both Ways together.
You may join to your Figures what yos
fee fitting, provided that the Whole be pro
portioned to them; and in fhort, what yor
yourfelf may judge to be of no greater Big-
ness than theirs. Thus, in whatfoever yor
do, there will be more of Trush feen, vour
Work itself will give you infinite Delight
and you will avord many Doubts and Diff.
culties, which often hinder you; and chieff
for what relates to lineal Perspective, which
you will there infallibly find, provided thi
you remember to proportion all Things tof
the Greatness of your Figures, and especialy
the Points of Sight and of Diftance; but for
what belongs to acrial Perspective, that adl
being found, the Judgment muft fupply l
Tintorl



Art of 4 ainting.
Timtores (as Ridolphs tells us in his Life). had.
made Chambers of Board and Pafteboard,
proportioned to his Models, with Doers and
Windows, through which he diftributed on
his Figures artificial Lights, as much as he
thought reafonable, and often paffed fome
Part of the Night, to confider and observe.
the Effect of his Compofitions: His Models
were two Feet high.
We are to consider the Places where ave lay
the Scene of the Pitture, &cc. This is what
Monficur de Cambray calls, to do Things
according to Decorum: See what he fays
fof it, in the Interpresation of that Word, in
his Book, Of the Perfection of Painting. It
is not fufficient, that, in the Picture, there
be nothing found which is contrary to the
Place, where the Action which is reprefent-
ed, paffes; but we ought befides to mark
out the Place, and make it known to the
Spectaior by fome particular Address, that
his Mind may not be put to the Pains of dif-
covering it; as whether it be Irafy, or Spain,
for Creece, or France; whether it be near the
Sea-thore, or the Banks of fome River; whe
Wher it be the Rbine, or the Loyre, the Po, or
the Tyber; and fo of other Things, if they
hre effential to the Hiffory. Nealces, a Man
of Wit, and an ingenious Painter (as Pliny
tells us) being to paint a naval Fight berawixt
tbe Egyptians and the Perfians, and being
fvilting to make it known that the Battle was
given upon the Nile, wbose Waters are of the
Jame Colour with the Sea, dreav an Ass drink-
ing on the Banks of the River, and a Crocodile
indeavouring to jurprise him.
Let a Nobleness and Grace, &cc. It is diffi-
fuh enough to fay what this Grace of Parns-
ing


115
W227.
41
Liv. 25.72.
& 222.


EI5


& 233.


Obfervations on the
ing is; it is to be conceived and underffood,
much more eafily than to be explained by
Words. It proceeds from the Iliuminacions
of an excellent Mind (not to be acquired) by
which we give a certain Turn to Things,.
A Figuremay
which makes them pleating.
Be defigned with all its Proportions, and have
all its Parts regular; which, notwithflanding
all this, shall not be pleafing, if all those
Parts are not put together in a certain Man
ner, which attracts the Eye to them, and holds
it fixed upon them; for which Reafon, there
is a Difference to be made betwixt Grace and
Beauty: And it feems that Ovid had a Mind.
to diftinguith them, when he faid, (peaking
Of Venuss.
Nulraque cum forma gratia mifta suit.
A matchless Grace avas with ber Beauty.
mix’ d.
And Suetonins, (peaking of Nero, fays, he
was rather beautiful than graceful: Fulis
pulchro, magis quam wenuffo. How many
fair Women do we fee, who pleafe us
much lefs than others, who have not fuch
beautiful Figures 9 It is by this Gray
that Raphael has made himself the molt re-
nowned of all the Ialians, as Apelles, by
the fame Means, carried it above all the
Greeks.
This is that in which the greateff Difficuly
confifts, c. For two Reatons Firft, be-
caute great Study is to be made,, as well
upon the ancient Beauties and noble Pic
tures, as upon Nature itfelf; and, fecondly,
becaufe that Part depends. entirely on the
Genilis


Art of Painting.
Cinins, and feems to be purely the Gift of
Heaven, which we have received at our Birth:
Upon which Account our Author adds, Un-
doubtedly we see but feav, awbom in this par-
ticular, Jupiter has regarded with a gracious
Eye; so that it belongs only to those elevated
Souls, awho partake somewbat of Divinity, to
work such mighty Wonders. Tho' they who
have not altogether received from Heaven
this precious Giff, cannot acquire it without
great Labour; neverthelets ir is needful, in
my Opinion, that both the one and the
other should perfectly learn the Character of
every Paffion.
All the ctions of the sensstive Appetite
are in Painting called Passions, becaute the
Soul is agitated by them, and becaufe the
Body fuffers through them, and is fenfibly
altered. They are thofe divers Agitations
and different Motions of the Body in gene-
fal, and of every one of its Parts in parti-
cular, that our excellent Painter ought to
underftand; on which he ought to make
his Study, and to form to himself a perfect
Idea of them. But it will be proper for us
t0 know, in the firft Place, that the Phile-
Cophers admit eleven; Love, Hatred, Defire,
Shunning, Toy, Sadness, Hope, Despair, Bold-
ness, Fear, and Anger The Painters have
multiplied them, not only by their different
Digrees, but alfo by their different species;
for they will make, for Example, fix Per-
sons in the fame Degree of Fear, who shall
express that Paffion all of them differently.
And it is that Diverfity of Species which dif-
tinguithes thofe Painters who are able Art..
ifts, from thofe whom we may call Man-
riffs, and who repeat five or fix Times
ORCF


277


113


Observations on the
over in the fame Picture the same Airs of 2
Head. There are a vaft Number of other
Paffions, which are as the Branches of those
which we have named: We might, for Ex.
ample, under the Notion of Love, compre.
hend Grace, Gentleness, Civilify,: Careffes,
Embraces, Kiffes, Tranquility, Sweetness, &c.
and, without examining whether all these
Things which Painters comprize under the
Name of Paffiors, can be reduced to thofe
of the Pbileupbers, I am of Opinion, the
every one may ufe them at his Pleafure;
and that he may ftudy them after his own
Mianner; the Name makes nothing. One
may even make Paffions of Majeffy, Fiere.
ness, Disfatisfaction, Care. Avarice, Sloth
fulness, Ency, and many other Things like
these. Theie Pasions (as I have faid) ought
to be learnt from the Life itfelf, or to be
Rudied on the ancient Statues and excellem
Pictures. We ought to fee, for Exampie,
all Things which belong to Sadness, or ferve
to exprets it; to defign them carefully, and
to imprint them in our Memories after fuch
a Manner, as we may diftinctly underland
seven or eight Kinds of them, more or less;
and, immediately after, draw them upon
Paper, without any other Original, than the
Image which we have concerved of them.
We muft be perfect Mafters of them; but
above all, we muft make fure of poffefting
them thoroughly. We are to know that
it is fuch or fuch a Stroke, or fuch a Sha.
dow, fronger or weaker, which make fuch
or fuch a Pasion, in this or that Degrec.
And thus if any one should afk you what
makes in Painting the Majeffy of a King,
the Gravity of a Hero, the Love of a Chrif,
the


Art of Painting.
the Grief of a Madonna, the Hope of the good
Thief, the Despair of the bad one, the Grace
and Beauty of a Venus; and, in fine, the
Character of any Paffion whatfoever, you
may answer pofitively, on the Spot, and
with Affurance, that it is such a Pasture, or
sucb Lines in the Parts of the Face, formed
of such or Juch a Fasbion, or even the one
and the other both together; for the Parts
of the Body feparately, make Known the
Passions of the Sonl, or elfe conjointly, one
with the other: But of all the Parts, the
Head is that which gives the moft of Life;
and the moft of Grace to the Passion, and
which alone contributes more to it, than all
the reft together. The orbers separately can
only exprets fome certain Passions, but the
Head exprefies all of them; neverthelets there
are some which are more particular to it;
2s, for Example, Humility, which it ex-
preffes by the Stooping or Bending of the
Head. Arragance, when it is litted, or, as
We fay, tofied up. Languishment, when we
hang it on one Side, or lean it upon one
Shoulder. Obffinacy (or, as the French call
I1, Opiniarrere) with a certain Rubborn, un-
ruly, barbarous Humour, when it is held up-
right, Riff and poifed betwixt the Shoul-
ders. And of the reft, there are many
Marks, more eafily conceived, than they can
be exprefied; as Bashfulness, Admiration, In-
dignation, and Doubr.. It is. by the Head that
e make Known more vifibly our Supph-
cations, our Tbreatnings, our Mildness, our
Haughtiness, our Love, our Harred, our Jey,
our Sadness, our Humilty; in fine, it is
enough to fee the Face, and to underfland
the Mind at half a Word. Blaping and Pals-
7e15


179


320


Observations on the
ness fpeak to us, as alfo the Mixture of the
Doth.
The Parts of the Face do all of thes
contribute to expofe the Thoughts of on
Hearts; but above the reft, the Eyes, which
are, as it were, the two Windows, through
which the Soul looks out, and thews it
felf. The Passions which they more part
cularly exprets, are, Plecsure, Languissment,
Disdain, Severity, Sweetness, Admiration ad
Anger.
Joy and Sadness may bear theit
Parts, if they did not more especially pro
ceed from the Eye-brows and the Mouth
And the two Parts laft named, agree moe
particularly in the Expreffion of thofe twt
Passions; neverthelefs if you join the Eyes i
a third, vou will have the Product of a wor
derful Harmony for all the Passions of the
Soul.
The Wose has no Paffion which is partice
cular to it; it only lends its Affittance to the
other before named, by the Streching of the
Neffrils, which is as much marked in 7s.
as it is in Sadness. And yet it feems, that
Scork makes us wrinkle up the Nese, and
Aretch the Neffrils alfo, at the fame Tins
drawing up the apper Lis to the Place which
is near the Corners of the Mourb. The 4s
cients made the Nese the Seat of Derissen:
Eum Jubdole irrisioni dicaverant, tays Pligs
that 1s, they dedicated the Nofe to a cunning
Sort of Mockery. We read, in the sd sa
tyr Of Persins,
Disce, sed ira cadat Nafe, rugesaque Jama:
Learn, but let your Anger fall from yor
Nofe, and the fncering Wrinkles be dit
ounted.


Srt of Painting.
pounted. And Philaffrarns, in the Picture
W Pan, whom the Nymphs had bound, and
fornfully infulted over, fays of that God;
at before this, be was accuffomed to sleep
with a peaceable Nose, foftening in his Slum-
fers the Wrinkles of it, and the Anger which
ommonly mounted to that Part; but now his
Neftrils avere avidened to the laft Degree of
y. For my own Part, I should rather
believe that the Nese was the Seat of Wraib
pr Beafts, than in Mankind; and that it was
nbecoming of any God but only Pan, who
had very much of the Beaft in him, to wrin-
Kle up his Nose in Anger like other Animals.
The moving of the Ligs ought to be but
noderate, iI it be in Conversation; becaute
We speak much more by the Tongue than by
the Lips. And if you make the Mouth very
ppen, it is only when you are to exprets the
Violence of Paffien, and more properly of
Anger.
for what concerns the Hands, they are
the servants of the Head, they are his Wea-
pons and his Auxiliaries; without them the
Altion is weak, languithing, and haif dead.
Their Motions, which are almoff infinite,
make innumerable Expreffions. It is not
by them, that we defire, that we boge, that
we promise, that we call rewards us, and
What we rejecr. Befides, sbey are the Intru-
ments of our Tbreats, of our Petitions, of the
Hrror which we shew for Things, and of the
Praifes which we give them. By them we
fear we aft Questions, we approve, and we
resuse, we shew our Tey and our Sadness, our
Douhts and our Lamentations, our Cencern-
ments of Pity, and our Admirariens. In short,
it may be faid, that they are the Language
of


E2.F


222


Observations on the
of the Dumb, that they contribate not abf
tle to the Speaking of the unioverfal Tenga
common to all the World, which is chard
Painting.
Now to tell you how thefe Parts are to t
difposed, to as to exprets the different Pasten,
is impostible; no precife Rales can be given
of it, both becaufe the Talk itfelf is int
nite, and alfo becaute every one is left to the
Conduct of his own Genins, and to the Frint
of his former Studies; only remember to be
careful, that all the Actions of your Figurs
muft be natural. Ir seems to me (Jays Quir
tilian, (peaking of the Paftions) that ths
Part, which is so noble and so great, is t
altogether unacceffitle; and that an eafy We
may be found to it; it is to consider Naturt,
and to copy ber; for the Spettators are satisfel
when, in artificial Things, they can discon
that Nature, avbich they are accuffomed to be
hold. This Pafiage of Quintilian is perfetly
explained by the Words of an excellent Mat
ter, which our Author propofes to us fors
Rule; they are thefe which follow: That th
Rudied Motions of the Soul are never so naw
ral, as these wbich we see in the Transfort of
a true Passion. Thefe Motions will beterbe
expreffed, and be much more natural, if we
enter into the fame Thoughts, become of the
same Piece, and imagine ourfeives to be in
the same Circumstances with thofe whom wel
would reprefent. For Nature (Tays Horad
in his Art of Peetry) disposes the Inside of Mar
kind to all Sorts of Fortunes; sometimes fr
makes us contented, sometimes the drives us i
Choler, and sometimes the so oppreffes us wil
Grief, that she seems to tread us down, ad
plange ur into merial Anxieties; and, on al
14


Art of Painting.
sbise Occasions, the drives outwards the Mo-
tions of the Heart by the Tongue, wbich is ber
Interpreter. Now, inftead of the Tongue, let
the Painter fay by the Actions, which are her
nterpreters. What Means bave ave (lays
Quintilian) to give a Colour to a Thing, if
owe have not the same Colour 2 It is necesfary.
that ave ourselves should firft be touched with
a Passion, before ave endeavour to move others
with it. And bow (continues he) can we be
touched, since the Passions are not in our Power 3
This is the Way in my Opinion. We must form
to ourselves the Visions and 1mages of absent
Things, as if they avere in Reality before our
Eyes; and he who conceives these Images with
the greateft Strength of Imagination, shall pos-
fess that Part of the Passions with the most
Advantage, and the greateff Ease. But we
mutt take Care (as I have already faid) that
in thefe Vifions, the Motions may be natu-
ral; for there are fome who imagine, they
have given Abundance of Light to their Fi-
gures, when they have made them do violent
and extravagant Actions; which we may more
realonably call the Convulsions, or Contersions
of the Body, than the Paffions of the Mind;
and by this Means they often put themfelves
to much Pains to find a Hrong Paffion, where
no Paftion is required. Add to all that I
have faid concerning the Paffions, that we
are to have a very ferious Regard to the Qua-
lity of the Perfons who are to be expreffed in
Pasions. The Joy of a King ought not to re-
temble that of a Serving-man; and the Fierce-
ness of a private Soldier mutt not be like that
of an Officer
in thefe Differences confitts
all the Fineness and Delicacy of the Paffions.
Paule Lemaxxe has written at large on every
Paffion


12.3


2


£24
& 247.
8 256.


Observations on the
Passion in particular, in his secend Beek; bu
beware you dwell not too long upon it, and
endeavour not to force your Crenius.
SomeRelies of it took Sancluary under Grount
&c. All the ancient Painting that was is
Iraly perifhed in the Invation of the Hunsand
Gorbs, excepting thofe Works which wee
hidden under Cround, or there painted;
which, by reafon they had not been much
exposed to View, were preferved from theis.
folence of thofe Babarians.
The Cromatic Part, or Colouring, &&c. Te
third and latt Part of Painting is called ihs
Cromatic, or Colouring. Its Object is Cr
lour; for which Reafon, Lights and Shadons
are therein alfo comprehended, which are ne.
thing elfe but White and Brows (or Dark)
and by Confequence have their Place among
the Colours. Phileffratus fays, in his Lifey
Apollonius, that that may be truly called Paint
ing, wbich is made only with twe Colours, for
vided the Lights and Sbadows be observed to
it For there ve behold the true Refemblance of
Things, with their Beauties; ave alfe see tn
Passions, though without orber Colours: So muh
of Life may be also expresfed in it, that we may
perceive even the very Blood; the Colour of the
Hair, and of the Beard, are likewise to be dif
cerned; and ave can diffinguish (awithout Cor
fusion) the Fair from the Black, and the Vouy
from the Old, the Differences betwixt the whill
and the staxen Hair; ave diftinguish with Eap
betawixt the Moors and the Indians; nd
enly by the Camus Nefes of the Blacks, thit
aveelly Hair, and their high Jarws, but af
by that black Gelour which is natural to them
We may add to what Phileffratas has faid,
that with two Colours only (the Light and
48


Art of Painting.
the Dark) there is no Sort of Stuff or Ha-
bit, but may be imitated. We fay then,
that the Colouring makes its Observations
on the Maffes or Bodies of the Colours, ac-
companied with Lights and Shadows, more
or less evident by Degrees of Diminution,
according to the Accidents Firft, of a lu-
minous Body; as for Example, the Sun or a
orch Secondly, of a diaphanous or trant-
parent Body, which is betwixt us and the
Object; as the Air, either pure or thick, of
ared Glafs, (Sc. Thirdly, of a folid Body il-
luminated; as a Statue of white Marble, a
green Tree, a black Horse, &cc. Fourthly, from
his Part, who regards the Body illuminated;
as beholding it either near, or at a Diftance,
directly in a right Angle, or afide in an ob-
ute Angle, from the Top to the Bottoni,. or
from the Bottom to the Top. This Part, in
the Knowledge which it has of the Virtue of
Colours, and the Friendship which they have
with each other, and alfo their Antipathies,
comprehends the Strength, the Relievo, the
Brikkness, and the Delicacy, which are ob-
terved in good Pictures; the Management
of Colours, and the Labour, depends alfo on
his latt Part.
Her Siffer, &cc. That is to fay, the De-
pon or Drawing, which is the second Part
t Painting; which, confifting only of Lines,
flands altogether in Need of the Colouring to
ppear. It is for this Reafon that our Au-
ther calls this Part, her Sitter'’s Procurer; that
bs, the Colouring shews us the Defign, and
makes as fall in Love with it.
The Light produces all Kinds of Colours, &cc.
Here are three Theorems fucceffively follow-
ng, which our Auchor propofes to us, that
from


 263.
 267.


125


126
 280.
f 283.


Observations on the
from thence we may draw some Conclutions,
You may likewife find others, which are in
the Nature of to many Propositions, to which
we ought to agree, that from thence we may
draw the Preceprs contained in the following
Part of this Trearife; they are all founded o
the Senfe of Secing.
Which should be the most, &c. See the Re
mark of Number 152.
That light Bodies may bave a sufficient Mass,
or Breadth of Stadow, to Justain them, &c.
That is properly to fay, that, after the
great Lights, there muft be great Shadows
which we call Repofes; becaufe in Reality
the Sight would be tired, if it were attrat
ed by a Continuity of glittering Objects
The Lights may ferve for a Repofe to the
Darks, and the Darks to the Lights. I have
faid in another Place, that a Groupe of Ri.
fures ought to be confidered as a Choir of
Musie, in which the Bases fupport the Tn.
bles, and make them to be heard with greater
Pleafure. Thefe Repofes are made two fe
veral Ways, one of which is natural, the
other artificial. The natural is made by an
Extent of Lights or of Shadows, which na
turally and necefiarily follow folid Bodies;
or the Maffes of folid Bodies aggroupedf
when the Light trikes upon them. And the
artifcial counfts in the Bodies of Coloury
which the Painter gives to certain Things
such as pleafes him; and compofes them inf
such a Manner, that they do no injury to ids
Objects which are near them. A Drapery
for Example, which is made yellow or red
on fome certain Place, in another Place mis
he brown, and will be more fuitable toth
to produce the Effeet required. We are twl
1968


Art of Painting.
take Occafion, as much as poffibly we can,
to make Ife of the firft Manner, and to find
the Repofe of which we speak, by the Light
and by the Shadow, which naturally accom-
pany folid Bodies. But fince the Subjects
on which we work, are not always favourable
to difpote the Bodies as we defire; a Painter
in fuch a Cafe may take his Advantage by
the Bodies of Colours, and put into fuch
Places as ought to be darkened, Draperies,
or other Things, which we may fuppofe to
be naturally brown and fullied, which will
produce the fame Effect, and give him the
same Repofes as the Shadows would do, which
could not be cauted by the Dispolition of the
Objects.
Thus an underftanding Painter will make
his Advantages both of the one Manner and
the other. And if he makes a Defign to be
graved, he is to remember that the Gravers
dispofe not their Colours as the Painters do;
and that by Confequence, he muft take Oc-
cation to find the Reafon of his Design in
the natural Shadows of the Figures, which
the has dispoted to caufe the Effect. Rubens
thas given us a full information of this, in
thofe Prints of his, which he caufed to be
engraved; and I believe that nothing was
terer seen more beautiful in that Kind: The
Whole Knowledge of Groupes, of the Lights
and Shadows, and of thoie Maffes which
Wilian calls a Bunch of Grapes, is there ex-
poted to clearly to the Sight, that the View
of thofe Prims, and the careful Obfervation
of them, might very much contribute to
the Forming of an able Painter. The bett
hnd fairell of them are graven by Vafterman,
Pintins, and Bolfvert; all of them admira-
ble
1 2


127


128


Observatrons on the
ble Gravers, whofe Works Rubens himfel
took Care to overfee; and which, without
Doubt, you will find to be excellent, if you
examine them. But expect not there the
Elegance of Defign, nor the Correctness of the
Outlines.
It is not but the Gravers can, and ought
to imitate the Bodies of the Colours by the
Degrees of the Lights and Shadows, as much
as they shall judge that this Imitation may
produce a good Effect. On the contrary, it
15 impoffible, in my Opinion, to give mach
Strength to what they grave, after the Works
of the School of Venice (and of all thofe who
have had the Knowledge of Colours, and
of the Contraff of the Lights and Shadows
without imitating in fome fort the Colourof
the Objects, according to the Relation which
they have to the Degrees of Whice and Black.
We fee certain Prints of good Gravers dif-
ferent in their Kinds, where thefe Things
are obferved, and which have a wonderful
Strength. And there appears in public, of
late Years, a Gallery of Archduke Leopold;
which, tho' very ill graven, yet shews fomb
Part of the Beauty of its Originals, becaute
the Gravers who have executed it (though
otherwife they were fufficiently ignoranl)
have obferved in almoft the greateff Parts of
their Prints, the Bodies of Colours, in the
Relation which they have to the Degrees of
the Lights and Shadows. I could with the
Gravers would make fome Reffection upou
this avbole Remark; it is of wonderful Cord
fequence to them : For when they have atf
tained to the Knowledge of thefe Reposes, thef
will eafily refolve thofe Difficulties whith
many times perplex them; and then chiclff
Whet


Art of Painting.
when they are to engrave after a Picture,
where neither the Lights and Shadows, nor
the Bodies of the Colours are (Kilfully ob-
terved, tho' in its other Parts the Picture may
be well performed.
As in a consex Mirror the collected Rays
frike fronger, &cc. A convex Mirror alters
the Objects which are in the Middle, to that
it feems to make them come out from the
Snpersicies. The Painter mult do in the same
Manner, in respect of the Lights and Shadows
of his Figures, to give them more Relievo
and more Strength.
While the Goings off are more and more
broken and faint, as they approach to the Ex-
tremities, &cc. It is the Duty of a Painter
even in this alfo, to imitate the convex Mir-
rer, and to place nothing which glares, ei-
ther in Colour or in Light, at the Borders of
his Picture; for which there are two Rea-
sons: The firtt is, that the Eye, at the firft
View, directs isfelf to the midft of the Object,
which is prefented to it; and by confequence,
mull there neceffarily find the principal Ob-
sell, in order to its Satisfaction: And the
other Reafon is, that the Sides or Borders
being overcharged with a ffrong and glitter-
ing Work, attract the Eyes thither, which
are in a Kind of Pain, not to behold a Con-
linuity of that Work, which is on the fudden
interrupted by the Borders of the Picture;
intead of which, the Borders being ligh-
tened, and cafed of to much Work, the Eye
continues fixed on the Center of the Pic-
ture, and beholds it with greater Pleafure.
I is for the same Reafon, that in a great
Composition of Figures, thofe which com-
ing moft forward, are cut off by the Bot-
tom
13


129
 286.
290.
11


130
8 329.
330.


Observations on the
tom of the Picture, will always make an ill
Effect.
A Bunch of Grapes, &cc. It is fufficienty
pranifeft, that Tiran, by this judicious and
familiar Comparifon, means, that a Painter
ought to collect the Objects, and to dispole
them in fuch a Manner, as to compofe one
Wholes the feveral contiguous Parts of which
may be enliohtened, many fhadowed, and
others of broken Colours to be in the Tum-
ings; as on a Bunch of Grapes, many Grapes,
which are the Parts of it, are in the Light,
many in the Shadow, and the reft faintly co.
loured, to make them go farther back. 7i
lian once told Tintoret, that, in his greatef
Works, a Bunch of Grapes had been his princ-
pal Rule, and his sureft Guide.
Pure or unmixed White either draws an Ob.
jeet nearer, or carries it off to farther Diffanct.
It draws it nearer with Black, and throws it
backward vitheut it, Ec. All agree: that
White can fubfiff on the Fore-ground of the
Picture, and there be ufed without Mixture:
The Queftion therefore is to know if it can
equally fubfiff, and be placed in the same
Manner upon that which is backward, the
Light being univerfal, and the Figures fup-
pofed in a campaign and open Field.
Our Aurbor concludes affirmatively; and
the Reafon on which he eftabliffies his Rule,
is this. That there being nothing which
partakes more of the Light than Whiteness,
and the Light being capable of fubfiffing
well in Remoteness (or at a long Dillance, as
we daily fee in the Rifing and Setting of the
Sun) it follows, that White may fubfiff in the
Same Manner. In Painting, the Light and 2
white Colour are but one and the fame Thing.
Aod


Art of Painting.
that we have no Colour which
Add to this,
more refembles the Air than White, and by
confequence no Colour which is lighter;
from whence it comes, that we commonly
fay, the Air is heavy, when we fee the Hea-
vins covered with black Clouds, or when a
thick Fog takes from us that Clearness, which
makes the Lightness or Serenity of the Air.
Titian, Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and all thofe
who beft underftood Lights, have obferved it
in this Mianner; and no Man can go againft
this Precept, at leaft without renouncing any
Skill in Landicape, which is an undoubted
Confirmation of this Truth. And we fee that
all the great Maffers of Landscape have fol-
lowed Trian in this, who has always em-
ployed brown and earthly Colours upon the
fore Part, and has referved his greatest Lights
for Remoteneffes, and the back Parts of his
Landscapes.
It may be objected againft this Opinion,
that White cannot maintain itfelf in Remote-
neffes, becaufe it is ordinarily ufed to bring
the Objects nearer on the advanced Part. It
is true that fo it is ufed, and that to very
good Purpofe, to render the Objects more
tentible, by the Opposition of the Dark, which
mult accompany 1t, and which retains it, as
it were by Force; whether the Dark ferves
It for a Ground, or whether it be combined
t0 it: For Example, if you would make a
white Horse on the Fore-ground of your Pic-
ture, it is of abfolute Neceffity thatthe Ground
muft be of a mixed Brown, and large enough,
or that the Furniture muft be of very fenfible
Colours; or laftly, that fome Figure muft be
fet upon it, whofe Shadows and the Colour
may bring it forward.
But
14


137


132


& 332.


Observations on the
But it feems (fay you) that Efue is the
moft fying or tranfient Colour, becaufe the
Heavens and Mountains, which are at the
greateff Diftance, are of that Colour. Iis
very true, that Blue is one of the lightef
and sweefeff Colours: But it is alfo true,
that it poffeffes thefe Qualities to much the
more, becaufe the White is mingled in it,
as the Example of the Diftances demon.
Rrate to us. But if the Light of your Pic
tare be not univerfal, and that you fuppose
your Figures in a Chamber, then recal to
your Memory that Theerem, which tells you,
that the nearer a Body is to the Light, and
the more directly it is opposed to us, fo much
the more it is enlightened, becaufe the Light
grows languifhing, the farther it removes
from its Original.
You may alfo extinguith your White, if
you suppofe the Air to be fomewhat thicken
and if you forefee that this Supposicion wil
make a good Effect in the Oeconomy of the
whole Work; but let not this proceed to fat,
as to make your Figures fo brown, that they
may feem as it were in a filthy Fog, or tha
they may appear to be Part of the Ground
See the following Remark.
But as for pure Black, there is nothing that
brings the Object nearer to the Sight, &cc. Bc.
caute Black is the heavieft of all Colours, the
moft earthy, and the moft fentible. This is
clearly underffood by the Qualities of White
which is oppoted to it, and which is (as wt
have faid) the lighteft of all Colours. Then
are few who are not of this Opinion; and vl
I have known some who have told me, the
the Black being on the advanced Part, makes
nothing but Holes. To this there is hill
elle


Art of Painting.
elfe to be anfwered, but that Black always
makes a good Effect, being fet forward, pro-
vided it be placed there with Prudence. Vou
fare therefore fo to dispofe the Bodies of your
Pillures, which you intend to be on the Fore-
ground, that thofe forts of Holes may not be
perceived, and that the Blacks may be there
by Maffes, and infenfibly confufed. See the
17th Rule.
That which gives the Relievo to a Borwl,
may fome fay to me) is the quick Light,
or the White, which appears to be on the
side which is neareft to us, and the Black
by confequence diftances the Object. We
fere here to beware, not to confound the
furnings with the Diftances. The Question
sonly in respect of Bodies, which are fe-
parated by fome Diftance of a backward Po-
fition, and not of round Bodies, which are
of the fame Continuity; the Brown, which
ts mingled in the Turnings of the Borvl,
makes them go off, rather in confounding
hem (as we may fay) than in blackening
them. And do you not fee that the Reflects
he an Artifice of the Painter to make the
Turnings feem more light, and that by this
Means the greateff Blackness remains to-
Wards the middle of the Bowl, to fuftain the
White, and make it deceive us with more
leature 7
This Rule of Whire and Black is of to
filat Confequence, that, unless it be ex-
Aly practifed, it is impoffible for a Picture
p make any great Effect, that the Maffes
an be difentangled, and the different Dif-
haces may be observed at the firft Glance
 the Eye without Trouble.
15
I


133


134


Observations on the
It may be inferred from this Precept, that
the Maffes of other Colours will be fo muck
the more fenfible, and approach to much the
nearer to the Sight, the more Brown they
hear; provided this be amongft other Co
lours, which are of the fame Species: For
Example, a yellow Brown shall draw neares
to the Sight, than another which is less yel
low. I laid, provided it be amongtt other
Colours, which are of the fame Species; be
caufe there are fimple Colours, which naid.
rally are ftrong and fenfible, though they
are clear, as Vermilion; there are others alld,
which, notwithlflanding that they are brown,
yet ceafe not to be foft and faint, as the Blue
of Uhramarine. The Effect of a Picture comes
not only therefore from the Lights and Sha
dows, but alfo from the Nature of the Co.
lours. I thought it was not from the Purpote
in this Place, to give you the Qualities of
Thofe Colours which are moft in Ofe, and
which are called capiral, becaufe they ferve
to make the Compofition of all the rel,
whofe Number is almoff infinite.
Red Oker is one of the moft heavy Co
Jours.
Fellow Oker is not fo heavy, becaute it is
clearer.
And the Mafficor is very light, becaut
it is a very clear Vellow, and very near to
White.
Uhramarine, or Azure, is very light and
very sweet Colour.
Vermilion is wholly oppofite to Whrams
Vitle.
Late is a middle Colour, betwixt Ulrs
marine and Vermition, yet it is rather more)
sweet than harth.
Bron


Art of Painting.
Brown Red is one of the moft earthy and
moft fenfible Colours.
Pint is in its Nature an indifferent Colour,
that is, very fufceptible of the other Colours
by the Nixture: If you mix brown Red with
it, you will make it a very earthy Colour;
but, on the contrary, if you join it with
White or Blse, you shall have one of the moft
faint and tender Colours.
Terre Verte, or green Earth, is light; it
is a Nican betwixt yellow Oker and Ultrama-
ViRe.
Umbre is very fenfible and earthy; there
is nothing but pure Black which can difpute
with it.
Of all Blacks, that is the moft earthy,
which is mott remote from Blue. According
to the Principle which we have eftablifhed of
Whire and Black, you will make every one
of thefe Colours before-named more earthy
and more heavy, the more Black you mingle
with them; and they will be lighter, the
more White you join with them.
For what concerns broken or compound
Colours, we are to make a judgment of
their Strength by the Force of thofe Co-
lours which compofe them. All who have
thoroughly underffood the Agreement of
Colours, have not employed them wholly,
pure and fimple, in their Draperies, un
less in fome Figure upon the Fore-ground
of the Picture; but they have ufed broken
and compound Colours, of which they made
a ffarmony for the Eyes, by mixing thofe
which have fome kind of Sympathy with
each other to make a Whole, which has an
Union with the Colours which are neigh-
bouring to it. The Painter, who perfectly
underftands


135.


8


136
F 355.
361.


Observations on the
underffands the Force and Power of his Co.
lours, will afe them moft fuitably to his pre=
fent Purpofe, and according to his own Dif
cretion.
But let this be done relatively, ecc. One
Body muft make another Body: fly. off in fuck.
a Manner, that itfelf may be chafed by those
Bodies which are advanced before it.  We.
are to take Care, and use great Attention (Eays.
Quintilian) not only of one separate Thing, but.
of many which follow each otber and by a
certain Relation which they have with each:
other are as it avere continued. In the same
Manner, as if in a firait Street, ave caft our
Eyes from one End of it to the otber, we
discover at once those different Things which
are presented to the Sight; so that ave not enly
see the laft, but awbarfoever is relating to the

1ap.
Let two contrary Extremities never teuch each
orber, &c. The Senfe of Seeing has this in
common with all the reft of the Senfes, thit
1t abhors the contrary Extremities: And in
the same Manner as our Llands, when they
are very cold, feel a grievous Pain; when on.
the fudden we hold them near the Fire; fo
the Eyes, which find an extreme White, nexx
to an extreme Black, or a fair cool Azure;
next to a hot Vermilion, cannot behold thete
Extremities without Pain, though they are
always attracted by the Glaring of two Conn
Iraries.
This Rule obliges us to know thofe Co.
lours which have a Friendship with each
other, and thofe which are incompatible;
which we may eafily difcover, in mixing to-
gether thofe Colours, of which we would
make Trial.
And


Art of Painting.
And if by this Mixture, they make a gra-
cious and fweet Colour, which is pleafing
to the Sight, it is a Sign that there is an
Usion and a Sympathy betwixt them; but
if, on the contrary, that Colour which is
produced by the Mixture of the two, be harth
to the Sight, we are to conclude, that there
is a Contrariety and Antipathy betwixt thefe
two Colours. Green, for Example, is 2
pleating Colour, which may come from a.
Blue and a Fellow mixed together; and by
confequence, Blue and Fellow are two Co-
lours which fimparbixe: nd, on the con-
Hary, the Misture of Blue with Vermilion,
produces a sherj. harfh, and unpleafant Co-
lour; conclude  an that Elae and Vermilion
are of a contrar Nature. And the same may
be said of other Colours, of which you may
make the Experiment, and clear the Matter
once for all. (See the Conclufion of the
332d Remark, where I have taken Occafion
to speak of the Force and Quality of every
capital Colour.) Vet you may neglect this
Precept, when your Piece confifts but of one
or two Figures; and when, amongtt a great
Number, you would make fome one Figure
more remarkable than the reft. One, I fay,
which is one of the moft confiderable of the
Subject, and which otherwife you cannot
diltinguith from the reft. Titran, in his Tri-
umph of Bacchus, having placed friadne on
one of the Borders of the Picture, and not
being able, for that Reafon, to make her re-
markable by the Brightness of Light, which
he was to keep in the middle of his Picture,
gave her a Scarf of a Vermition Colour upon a
the Drapery, as well to loofen her from his
Ground, which was a Ghee Sea, as becaufe the
13


137


138
1 365.
8 378.


Observations on the
is one of the principal Figures of his Subjed,
upon which
he defired to attract the Eye.
Paul Veronese, in his Marriage of Cana, be
caufe Chriff, who is the principal Figure of
the Subject, is carried fomewhat into the
Depth of the Picture, and that he could not
make him diftinguithable by the Strength of
the Lights and Shadows, has cloathed him
with Vermilion and Blue, thereby to conduct
the Sight to that Figure.
The beffile Colears may be to much the
more allied to each other, the more you mis
them with other Colours, which mutually
fympathize, and which agree with thofe Co.
lours which you defire to reconcile.
It is Labour in vain to per it a high Noon,
8c. He faid in another t ace, endeavour
after that which aids your Art, and is fair.
able to 1t, and fhun whatfoever is repugnant;
it is the goth Precept. If the Painter would
arrive to the End he has proposed, which is
to deceive the Sight, he muft make Choice
of fuch a Nature, as agrees with the Weak.
nets of his Colours; becaufe his Colours
cannot accommodate themfelves to every fort
of Nature. This Rule is particularly to be
obferved, and well confidered, by thofe who
paint Landscapes.
Let the Field or Ground of the Picture, &c.
The Reafon of it is, that we are to avoid the
meeting of thofe Colours which have an Annis
parky to each other, becaufe they offend the
Sight; to that this Rule is proved fufficiently
by the 41ff, which tells us, that two contrary
Extremities are never to touch each other,
whether it be in Colour, or in Light; but
that there ought to be a Mean betwixt them,
which partakes of both.
1d


Art of Painting.
Let your Colours be licvely, and yet not look
(according to the Painter’s Proverb) as if they
had been rubbed, or Sprinkled with Meal, &c.
Denner dans la farine, is a Phrafe amongit
Painters, which perfectly exprefies what it
which is to paint with clear or bright
Means;
Colours, and dull Colours together; for being
tomingled, they give no more Life to the
Figures, than if they had been rubbed with
Meal. They who make their Fleth Colours
very white, and their Shadows grey, or in-
clining to Green, fall into this Inconvenience.
Red Colours in the Shadows of the moft de-
licate or fineft Flefh, contribute wonderfully
to make them lively, shining, and natural;
but they are to be ufed with the fame Dif-
exetion, that Titian, Paul Veronese, Rubens,
and Vandyke have taught us, by their Ex-
ample.
To preserve the Colours fresh, we muft
paint by putting in more Colours, and not
by rubbing them in, after they are once laid;
and if it could be done, they should be laid
jut in their proper Places, and not be any
more touched when they are once to placed;
becaufe the Freshness of the Colours is tar-
nithed and loft, by vexing them with the con-
finual Drudgery of Daubing
All they who have coloures well, have had
yet another Maarm to maintain their Colours
freth and flourithing, which was to make Ufe
of wbite Grounds, upon which they painted,
and oftentimes at the firft Stroke, without re-
touching any thing, and without employing
new Colours. Rubens always ufed this Way;
and I have feen Pictures from the Hand of
that great Perfon, painted up at once, which
Wire of a wonderful Vivacity.
The


239
382.


140


Observations on the
The Reafon why they made fe of these
Kinds of Grounds, is, becaufe White as well
preserves a Brightness, under the Trantps.
rency of Colours, which hinders the Air
from altering the Whireness of the Ground,
as that it likewife repairs the Injuries which
they receive from the Air, to that the Ground
and the Colours affift and preferve each
other. It is for this Reafon that glazed Co.
lours have a Vivacity which can never be imi-
tated by the moff lively and most brilliant
Colours; becaufe, according to the common
Way, the different Tints are fimply laid on,
each in its Place, one after another. S0 true
it is, that White, with other frong Colours,
with which we paint at once that which we
intend to glaze, are, as it were, the Life, the
Spirit, and the Luffre of it. The Ancients
moft certainly have found, thatwhite Grounds
were much the beft; becaufe, notwithfland
ing that Inconvenience, which their Eyes re-
ceived from that Colour, yet they did not
forbear the Ufe of it; as Gaten terifies, in
his tenth Book of the UUse of the Parts.
Painters (Lays he) wben they avork upon their
white Grounds, place before them dark Co
lours, and ofbers mixed with Blne and Green,
to recreate their Eyes; because White is a
glaring Colour, wbich avearies and pains the
Sight more than any ofher. I know not the
Reafon why the fe of it is left off at pre-
fent, if it be not that in our Days there are
few Painters who are curious in their Colour
ing, or that the firft Strokes which are begun
upon White are not feen foon enough, and
that a more than French Pacience is required
to wait till it be accomplithed; and the
Ground, which by its Whiteness tarniffes
the


Art of Painting.
the Luftre of the other Colours, muft be en-
hirely covered, to make the whole Work ap-
pear pleafingly.
let the Parts wbich are neareft to us, and
most raifed, ec. The Reafon of this is, that
upon a flat Superficies, and as much united
as a Cloth can be, when it is strained, the
leaft Body is very appearing, and gives a
Heightening to the Place which it poffeffes;
do not therefore load thofe Places with Co-
lours, which you would make to turn; but
flet thofe be well loaded, which you would
have come out of the Canvas.
Let there be so much Harmony or Consent in
the Mafes of the Piefure, that all the Shadow-
tings may appear as if they avere but one, ec.
He has faid in another Place, that after great
Lights, great Shadows are neceffary, which
he calls Resefes. What he means by the pre-
Hent Rule, is this, that whatfoever is found in
those great Shadows, should partake of the
Colours of one another, to that the different
Colours which are well diffinguifhed in the
Hights, seem to be but one in the Shadows,
by their great Union.
let the whole Picture be of one Piece, Exc.
That is to fav, of one and the same Conti-
uity of Work, and as if the Picture had been
painted up all at once; the Latin fays, all of
Whe Pallet.
The Looking-Glass avill insiruct you, Ec.
The Painter muft have a principal Respect to
the Maffes, and to the Effect of the Whole
together. The Looking-Glass dittances the
Objects, and by confequence gives us only to
fee the Maffes, in which all the little Parts
hre confounded. The Evening, when the
Night approaches, will make you better un
derltand


147
ff 383.
ff 385.
f 386.
f 387.


142
 393.


Observations on the
dertland this Obfervation; but not fo coam
modioutly, for the proper Time to make n
lafts but a Quarter of an Hour, and the
Locking-Gless may be ufeful all the Day.
Since the Rirror is the Rule and Male
of all Painters, as thewing them their Faull
by diftancing the Objects; we may conclude
that the Picture which makes not a goodlf
feet at a Ditance, cannot be well done; and
a Painter muft never finith his Picture, befor
he has examined it at fome reafonable Dif
tance, or with a Looking-Gloss, whether th
Maffes of the Lights and Shadows, and the
Bodies of the Colours, be well diftributed
Giergione and Correggio have made Ufe o
this Method.
As for a Portrait, or Picture by the lif
&c. The End of Porrraits is not fo precifelf
as tome have imagined, to give a fmiling and
pleafing Air, together with the Refemblance)
this is indeed fomewhat, but not enough
It confifts in expreffing the trus Temperd
thofe Perfons which it reprefents, and y
make Known their Phyfiognomy. If the fee
fon whom you draw (for Example) be naw
rally fad, you are to beware of giving his
any Graiety, which would always be a Thing
which is foreign to his Countenance. IfM
or the be merry, you are to make that good
Humour appear, by the exprefting of thes
Parts where it acts, and where it shews itfelf
If the Perfon be grave and majeffical, ihe
Smiles, orLaughing, which is too fenfible, wit
take off from that Majeity, and make it look
childifh and undecent. In short, the Painef
who has a good Genins, muft make a d
Difcernment of all thefe Things, and I. H
underflands Physsognomy, it will be more caf
10


Art of Painting.
to him, and he will facceed better than an-
oiner. Pliny rells us, that Apelles made his
Pidures so very like, that a certain Phyfiagno-
ais and Fortsne-Teller (as it is relared by 45-
fhrn the Crammarian) joretold, by locking on
vim, the very Time of their Dearhs, whom
those Pictures represented; or at aubat Time
tbeir Deach happened, if such Persons avere al-
yeady dead.
Ton are to take the atmost Care that broad
Hights may be joined, &cc. This muft be done
tenderly; yet not to as to make your Colours
fhie, by Force of formenting them; but that
you should mix them as haffily as you can,
and not retouch the fame Place, if conveni-
eatly you can avoid it.
Bread Ligbts, &cc. It is in vain to take
fains, if you cannot preferve large Lights;
becaufe withour them, your Work will never
make a good Effect at a Distance; and alfo,
becaufe little Lights are confufed and ef-
faced, proportionably as you are at a Distance
fim the Picture. This was the perpetual
Maxim of Correggio.
Ought to have somewhat of Greatness in them,
and their Ourlines to be noble, &c. As the
fieces of Anriquity will evidently shew us.
There is nothing more pernicions to a Touth,
&c. It is common to place ourfeives under
he Difcipline of a Maffer of whom we have
good Opinion, and whofe Manner we are
pr to embrace with Eafe; which takes Root
pore deeply in us, and augments, the more
1o fee him work, and the more we copy
her him. This happens oftentimes to that
tegrec, and makes to great an Impreffion in
1e Mind of the Scholar that he cannot give
t Approbation to any other Manner what-
Toever,


143
Of 403.

 403.
8 427.
 422.


144


 433.


Observations on the
foever, and believes there is no Man under
the Cope of Heaven, who is to knowing as
his Master
But what is moft remarkable in this Point
is, that Nature appears to us always like
that Manner which we love, and in which we
have been taught; which is juft like a Glass
thro' which we behold Objects, and which
communicates its Colour to them, without
our perceiving it. After I have faid this,
you may fee of what Confequence is the
Choice of a good Maffer, and of following;
in our Beginning, the Manner of thofe who
have come neareft to Warare. And how mach
Injury do you think have the ill Manner;
which have been in France, done to the
Painters of that Nation; and what Hindrance
have they been to the Knowledge of what is
well done, or of arriving to what is fo, when
pnce we know it? The Iralians fay to thote
whom they fee infected with an ill Manner,
which they are not able to forfake: If jas
knew juft nothing, you would soon learn some
thing.
Search awbatfeever is aiding to your Ar
and convenient; and aveid these Things which
are repagnant to it, &c. This is an adis
rable Rule; a Painter ought to have it per
petually prefent in his Mind and Memoryil
It refolves thofe Difficulties which the Ratt
beget; it loofens his Hands, and affifts his
Underttanding. In short, this is the Rutt
which fets the Painter at Liberty; becautl
it teaches him, that he ought not to fubjedt
himself servilely, and be bound like an Apf
prentice to the Ruter of his Art; but that
the Ryles of his Art ought to be fubjed 1d
him, and not hinder him from following th
Didae


Art of Painting.
Dillates of his Genins, which is fuperior to
them.
Bodies of diverse Natures, which are ag-
crouped (or combined together) are agreeable
and pleasant to the Sight, Ec. As Flowers,
frnts, Animals, Skins, Sattins, Velvets, beau-
tiful Flesh, Works of Silver Armours, Instru-
ments of Music, Ornaments of ancient Sacri-
fies, and many other pleafing Diverfities,
which may prefent themielves to the Painter's
magination. It is moft certain, that the
Diverfity of Objects recreates the Sight, when
tthey are without Confulion, and when they
diminith nothing of the Subject on which we
work. Experience teaches us, that the Eye
grows weary with poring perpetually on the
ame Thing, not only on Pictures, but even
on Nature iffelf: For who is he, who would
not be tired in the Walks of a long Foreft, or
twith beholding a large Plain which is naked
of Trees; or in the Sight of a Ridge of
Mountains, which, inftead of Pleafure, give
is only the View of Heights and Bottoms 2
Thes to content and fill the Eye of the Un-
dertanding, the beft Authors have had the
Address to fprinkle their Works with plea-
ing Digreffions, with which they recreate the
Minds of Readers. Discretion in this, as in
all other Things, is the fareff Guide: And,
as tedious Digreffions, which wander from
tbeir Subject are impertinent; to the Painter,
who, under Pretence of diverting the Eyes,
would fill his Picture with fuch Varicties as
falter the Truth of the Hiffory, would make a
pidiculous Piece of Painting, and a mere
Callimaufry of his Work.
As also those Things which seem to be flightly
Moucbed, and performed with Ease, Ec. This
Eafe


f 435.


145
f 434.


146


Observations on the
Eafe attracts our Eyes and Spirits to mad
the more, becaufe it is to be prefumed thit
a noble Work, which appears fo eaty to us, is
the Product of a skilful Hand which is Mil
ter of ats Art. It was in this Part that spelts
found himself superior to Prorogenes, whenht
blamed him for not knowing when to lay
down his Pencil (and as I may almoft fay)
to make an End of finithing his Piece. And
it was on this Account he plainly faid, thit
nothing was more prejudicial to Painters that
too much Exactness; and that the greateft Fad
of them knew not awben they bad done enough
As we have likewife a Proverb, which faps)
An Englishman never knows when he is wlll
It is true, that the Word enough, is very of
ficult to understand. What you have to dif
is to confider your Subject thoroughly, andd
in what Manner you intend to treat it, acd
cording to your Rules, and the Force of jout
Genias; after this, you are to work with all
the Eafe and all the Speed you can, withot
breaking your Head to very much, and being
to very induffrious in farting Scruples 1f
yourfelf, and creating Difficulties in youlf
Work. But it is impoffible to have this Fat
cility, without poffesting perfectly all the Pitl
cepts of the 4rr, and to have made it habitulf
to you: For Eafe confitts in making pres
cifely that Work which you ought to makef
and to fet every thing in its proper Placef
with Speed and Readiness, which cannot tol
done without the Rules; for they are the ald
sured Means of conducting you to the En
that you defign with Pleafure. It is thert
molt certain, though againtt the Opnion off
vict of
many, that the Rutes give Facility, 9
Mind, and Readiness of Iland to the llowelf
Geninsi/


Art of Painting.
Cenius; and that the fame Rules increafe and
guide that Eafe in thofe, who have already.
received it at their Birth, from the happy ln-
luence of their Stars.
From whence it follows, that we may con-
fider Facility two feveral Ways; either fim-
(Dy, as Diligence, and a Readiness of Mind and
of the Hand; or as a Disposition in the Mind,
te remove readily all thofe Difficulties which
can arife in the Work. The firtt proceeds
from an active Temper, full of Fire; and the
second from a true Knowledge and full Pof-
fettion of infallible Rules. The firft is plea-
ing, but it is not always without Anxiety,
bbecaufe it often leads us aftray; and, on the
contrary, the laft makes us act with a Repofe
of Mind, and wonderful Tranquillity, be-
caule it afcertains us of the Goodneis of our
Work. It is a great Advantage to poffets
the firtt; but it is the Height of Perfection to
have both in that Manner which Rubens and
Vardike poffeffed them, excepting the Part
of Delign or Drawing, which both of them
100 much neglected.
Thofe who fay, that the Rules are to
far from giving us this Facility, that, on
the centrary they puzzle and perplex the
Mind, and tie the Hand, are generally fuch
People, who have paffed half their Lives
in an ill Practice of Painting; the Habit
of which is grown fo inveterate in them,
that to change it by the Rules, is to take,
hsit were, their Pencils out of their Hands,
and to put them out of Condition of do-
ing any thing; in the Jame Manner as we
Make a Countryman dumb, whom we will
not allow to speak, but by the Rules of
CTanar.
Obferve,


147
1


148
P 442.
8 443.


Observations on the
Obferve, if you pleafe, that the Facilityand
Diligence of which I fpoke, confitts not is
that which we call bold Strokes, and a feef
Handling of the Pencil, if it makes not f
rreat Effect at a Diftance; that fort of Free.
dom belongs rather to a Wricing-mafter than
a Painter. I fay yet farther, that it is almolf
impostible that Things which are painted)
should appear true and natural, where we obf
ferve thefe Sorts of hold Strokes; and all thots
who have come neareft to Narure, have neve
ufed that Manner of Painting. Thofe tended
Hairs, and thofe hatching Strokes of the Pen
cil, which make a kind of minced Meat in)
Painting, are very fine, I muft confess; bu
they are never able to deceive the Sight.
Nor till you barve present in your Mind a fre
fect Idea of your Work, &cc. If you will have
Pleafure in Painting, you ought to have fol
well confidered the Oeconomy of your Work
that it may be entirely made and difposed in
your Head, before it be begun upon the Cloh
You muft, I fay, forefee the Effect of the
Groupes, the Ground, and the Lights and
Shadows of every Thing, the Harmony of ihd
Colours, and the Intelligence of all the Subl
ject, in fuch a Manner, that whatfoever jod
shall put upon the Cloch, may be only a Cop
of what is in your Mind. If you make Ule of
this Conduct, you will not be put to the Trod
ble of to often changing and rechanging.
Let the Eye be fatisfed in the first plaid
even againft and alove all other Reasons, &id
This Paffage has a Respect to some particut
lar Licences which a Painter ought to takef
and as I despair not to treat this Matter mort
at large, I adjourn the Reader to the fitt
Opportunity which I can get, for his farched
Satisfallion


Art of Painting.
Satisfaction on this Point to the beft of my
Ability: But in general he may hold for cer-
tain, that thofe Licences are good, which
contribute to deceive the Sight, without cor-
rupting the Truth of the Subject, on which
the Painter is to work.
Profit yourself by the Counsels of the Know-
ing, &c. Parrbasus and Cliton thought them-
selvesmuch obliged to Socrates for the Know-
ledge which he gave them of the Passions.
See their Dialogue in Kenepbon, towards the
And of the third Book of Memoirs. T bey
who the most avillingty bear Reproof (Lays Pliny
the Vounger) are the very Men in rwbom ave
find more to commend, than in other People. Ly-
sippus was extremely pleafed when Apelles told
him his Opinion; and Apelles as much, when
Lypppus told him his. That which Praxiteles
faid of Nicias, in Pliny, shews the Soul of
an accomplifhed and an humble Man.
Eraxneles leing asked which of all his Works
be valued most 2 Those, says be, which Nicias
has retouched. So much ccount he made of
his Criticifims and his Opinions. You know
the common Practice of Apelles; when he
had finished any Work, he expofed it to the
Sight of all Paffengers, and concealed him-
felf, to hear the Cenfure of his Faults, with
the Prospect of making his Advantage of
the Informations, which unknowingly they
gave him; being fentible, that the People
would examine his Works more rigoroufly
than himself, and would not forgive the leatt
Milake.
The Opinions and Counfels of many to-
gether, are always preferable to the Advice
of one fingle Perfon. And Cicero wonders
that any are beforted on their own Produc-
X
tions,


149
 445.

8. 201
5. S.


150
Tufcul.
lib. 5.
Georg.3.
lib. 5.
Ep. 16.


Observations on the
tions, and fay to one another, Very geod, if
your Works please you, mine are not unpleasing
to me. In Effect, there are many,, who, thre
Prefumption, or out of Shame to be repre.
hended, never let their Works be feen. Bnt
there is nothing can be of worfe Confequence;
for the Disease is nourished and increafes (ys
Virgil) avbile it is concealed. There are none
but Fools (Tays Horace) who out of Shame.
facedness hide their Uicers, which, if shewn,
might eafily be healed.
Stultorum incurata malus pudor ulcera celat.
There are others who have not altogether to
much of this foolifh Bathfulness, and who
alk every one'’s Opinion with Prayers and
Earnellness; but if you freely and ingeay.
outly give them Notice of their Faults, they
never tail to make fome pitiful Excule for
them; or, which is worfe, they take in ill
Part the Service which you thought you did
them, which they but feem ngly defired of
you, and out of an eftablifhed Cuffom amongt
the greatelt Part of Painers. If you defire)
to get yourfelf any Honour, and require a
Reputation by your Works, there is no farer
Way than to fhew them to Perfons of goodf
Senfe, and chieffy to thofe who are Crieel
in the Art; and to take their Counfel, wilf
the fame Mildnets and the same Sincerity, aal
you defired them to give it you. You maf
alfo be indutirious to difcover the Opinion of
your Enemies, which is commonly the truekff
for you may be affured, that they will girvl
you r, Quarter, and allow nothing to Comy
Pialfance.
L4


Art of Painting.
But if you have no knowing Friend, &c.
Quintilian gives the Reafon of this, when he
lys, that the beff Means to correct our Faults,
is doubtless this, to remove our Designs out of
Sight, for some Space of Time, and not to look
upon our Pictures; to the End, that after this
interval, we may look on them as it avere with
other Eyes, and as a new Work, which avds of
another Hand, and not our own. Our own.
Productions do but too much flatter us; they
are always too pleafing and it is impoffible
not to be fond of ther ar the Moment of
their Conception. They are Children of 2
tender Age, which are not =apable of draw-
ing burflatred on them. It is ideithat Awes,
as fown as they have brought their Voungg
into the Warld, keep their Eyes continually
tatened. on them, and are never weary of
admiring their Beauty; fo amorous is Warure
oft hattoever the produces.
To the End that be may cultivate those T a-
its which make bis Genrus, Ec.
Qui fua metitur pondera, ferre poteft.
That we may undertake nothing beyond our
Ferces, we muft endeavour to know them. On
this Prudence our Reputation depends. Cr-
two calls it a good Grace, becaute it makes a
Man feen in his greateft Lulre. Ir is (Tays
be) a becoming Grace, which ave shall easily
make appear, if ave are careful to cultivate that
which Nature has given us in Propriety, and
made our own, provided it be no Vice or Im-
ierfection. We ought to undertake notbing
which is repagnant to Nature in general; and
when we bave paid ber this Dury, ave are
round so religioufly to follow our own Nature,
that
R 2


157
8449.
 458.
1Of.


152


Observations on the
that though many Things awhich are more f
rious and more impartant, present themselves to
us, yet we are always to conform our Studies
and our Exercifes to our natural Inclinations.
It avails nothing to dispute againft Nature,
and think to obtain what the refuses; for then
we eternally follow what ave can never reach;
for (as the Proverb Jays) there is nothing can
please, nothing can be graceful, which we en
terprize in spite of Minerva; that is to Jas,
in Spite of Nature. When we have considered
all these Things atten rsely, it will then be ne
teGary that very Nian should regard that in
porficular, acl:3 Nature has made his Por.
tion, and that be sreald culticrate it wrb Corn.
It is not bis Business to give himself the Trow
ble of trying avberper it avill became him to fat
on the Narure of anorber Man; or, as one weall
say, to att the Person of another. There i w
thing which can mere become us, than what is
property the Gift of Nature. Let every on
therefore endeavour to understand his own fe-
lent; and, without flartering himself, let him
make a true Judgment of his own Virles,
and his own Defetts and Vices; that he may
not appear to have less Judgment than the Co
medians, who do not always chuse the bif
Plays, but those wbich are beft for them; that
is, those avhich are moft in the Compass of
their ading: Thas ave are to six on thes
Things for which ave have the firengeff inds
nation. And if it fometimes happins, that 
are forced of Necefity to apply ourselves to sud
otber Things, to awbich ave are no ways i
clined; ave muft bring it so about, by our Can
and Induftry; that if ave perform them not viy
well, at leaff ave may not do them so very ithe
as to be shamed by them: We are not so wil


in
Art of Painting
to frain curselves to make these Virtues appear
in us, wbich really we have not, as to avoid
those Imperfections which may difbondur us.
Thefe are the Thoughts and the Words of
Cicero, which I have tranflated, retrenching
only such Things as were of no Concernment
to my Subject; I was not of Opinion to add
any thing, and the Reader, I doubt not, will
ind his Satisfaction in them.
While you meditate on these Truths, and
observe them diligently, ecc. There is a great
Connection betwixt rhis Precept and that
other, which tells you, that you are to pass
no Day vitbout a Line. It is impoftible to
become an able Arfiff, without making your
Art habitual to you; and it is imposfible to
gain an exact Habitude, without an infinite
Number of Acts, and without perpecual
Practice. In all Arts, the Rules of them
are learned in little Time; put the Perfec-
tion is not acquired without a long Practice,
and a fevere Diligence. We never saw that
laxiness produced any thing which was excel-
thit, lays Maximus Tyrias; and Quintilian
tells us, that the Arts draw their Beginning
from Wacure; the Wantwe often have of them,
Kaufes us to foarch the Means of becoming
able in them, and Exercife makes us enturely
Wlakiers of them.
The Morning is the beft and mest proper Part
Wite Day, eec. Becaufe then the Imagi-
nation is not clouded with the Vapours of
Mleat, nor diffracted by Vifits, which are not
phally made in the Morning: And the
Mind, by the Sleep of the foregoing Night,
t refiethed and recreated from the Toils of
former Studies. Malberbe fays well to this
Pupole,
K 3
18


153
f 464.
Difl. 34.
 466.


154
 468.
8 473.
8 475.
35. 10.


Observations on the
Le plus beau de nos jours, eff dans lear matines.
The Sprightly Morn is the best Part of the Day.
Let no Day pass over you without a lim,
&c. That is to fay, without working; with
out giving fome Strokes of the Pencil or the
Crayon. This was the Precept of Spelles;
and it is of fo much the more Neceffity, be
caufe Painting is an Art of much Length and
Time, and is not to be learned without gret
Practice. Michael Angelo, at the Age of for
fcore Vears, faid, that be learned something
every Day.
Be ready to put into your 7able-book, &c.
As it was the Cuftom of Titian and the Cur
rackes. There are yet remaining in the
Hands of Tome, who are curious in Paint
ing, many Thoughts and Observations, which


at
mire great Mlen have made on Paper, and in
their Table-books, which they carried conti
nually about them.
Wine and good Chear are no great Friendit
Painting; they servs only to recreate the Mint
when it is oppreffed and spent with Labour, &c
During the Time (Jays Pliny) that Protogend
was drawing the Picture of Jalyfus, which wal
the beft of all his Works, he took no otber Nod
rishment than Lupines, mixed avifb a hitl
Water, which served him both for Meat and
Drink, for Fear of clogging his Imagination tf
the Luxury of his Food. Michael Angelo, whih
he was drawing his Day of Judgment, fed onl
on Bread and Wine at Dinner And Vasod
obferves in his Life, that he was to foboly
that he flept but litile, and that he often roll
in the Night to work, as being not diffarbed
by the Vapours of his thin Reparts.
Da


Art of Painting.
But delights in the Liberty which belongs to
the Batchelors Effate, &rc. We never fee large,
beautiful, and well-tafted Fruits, proceeding
from a Tree which is encompaffed round, and
choaked with Thorns and Briars. Marriage
draws a world of Bufiness on our Hands, fub-
jelts us to Law-Suits, and loads us with Mul-
titudes of domeffic Cares, which are as fo
many Thorns that encompats a Painter, and
hinder him from producing his Works in that
Perfection, of which otherwife he is capable.
Raphael, Michael Angelo, and Hannibal Car-
rach, were never married: And, amongst the
ancient Painters, we find none recorded for
being married, but only Apelles, to whom
Alexander the Great made a Prefent of his
own Miftrefs Campasse; which yet I would
have underffood, without Offence to the In-
Rifution of Marriage; for that calls down

many Bleffings upon Families, br_ Lare-

fulners of a virtuous Wife: If Marriage be
in general a Remedy againtt Concupifcence,
it is doubly fo in respect of Painters, who
are more frequently under the Occafions of
Sin than other Men, becaufe they are under a
frequent Neceffity of feeing Nature barefaced.
Let every one examine his own Strength
upon this Point; but let him prefer the In-
cret of his Soul, to that of his Art and of
his Forrune.
Painting naturally withdraius from Noise
and Tumult, &cc. I have faid, at the End of
the firtt Remark, that both Poerry and Pains-
ing were upheld by the Strength of Imagina.
on. Now there is nothing which warms
it more than Repose and Solifade; becaufe, in
that Ettate, the Mind being freed from all
sorts of Bufiness, and in a Kind of Sanctuary,
X4
undiffurbed


f 480.


155
 478.


156
F 484.
Petron. Ar-
biter.


Observations on the
undifturbed by vexatious Vifits, is more ca.
pable of forming noble Thoughts, and of
Application to its Studies.
Carmina secesum scribentis, ES otia quarum.
Good Verse Recess and Solitude requires;
And Eaje from Cares and undiffurb’d Defires.
We may properly fay the fame of Painting,
by reafon of its Conformity with Poetry, as
I have thewn in the firft Remark.
Let not the coverous Design of growing rich,
&c. We read in Pliny, that Nicias refuled
Sixty Talenis from King firatus, and rather
chofe to make a free Gift of his Picture to
his Country. I enquired of a prudent Man,
(Lays a grave Author) in swhat Times thes
noble Pictures avere made, avbich now we fee;

lelived him to explain to me some of their
Ante 
Subjects, which I did not aveil underfiand.I
asked him likewise the Reason of that great Nes.
iigence, which is now visible among sf Paintersy
and from awhence it preceeded that the most bean
tiful Arts vere now turied in Oblivion; and,
principally, Painting, a faint Shadow of which
is at present remaining to us. To which h
thus replied; that the immoderate Defire of
Riches had produced this Change; for of olde
when naked Virtue had ber Charms, the nobh
Arrs then fourished in their Vigour; and if
there was any Conteff amongft Men, it wall
only who should be the firft Discoverer of whal
might be of Advantage to Pefferity. Lyfppi
and Wyron, these renowned Sculptors, wh
could give a Soul to Brass, left no Heirs, 
Inberitance bebind them; because they wen
morr careful of acquiring Fame, than Richenl
Ba


Art of Painting.
But as for us, of this present Age, it seems,
by the Manner of our Conduct, that ave upbraid
Antiquity for being as corucious of Virtue, as we
are of Vice: Wonder not so much therefore, if
Painting has loft its Strength and Vigour, be-
cause many are now of Opinion, that a Heap
of Gold is much more beautiful than all the Pic-
tares and Starues of Apelles and Phidias, and
all the noble Performances of Creece.
I would not exact fo great an Act of Ab
finence from our modern Painters; for I
am not ignorant that the Hope of Gain is a
Wonderful sharp Spur in Arts, and that it
gives Induttry to the Artiff: From whence
II was, that Tavenal faid even of the Greeks
themfelves, who were the Inventors of Paint-
ing, and who firft underffood all the Graces
of it, and its whole Perfection,
Greculus esuriens, in Coclum, juferis, ibit.
A bungry Greck, if bidden, scales the Skies.
But I could heartily with, that the fame
Hope which flatters them, did not alfo cor-
rupt them; and did not fnatch out of their
Hands a lame imperfect Piece, rudely daubed
over with too little Reffection, and too much
Hate.
The Qualiries requisite to form an excellent
Painter, &cc. It is to be confeffed, that
very few Painters have thofe Qualities which
are required by our Author, becaufe there
are very few who are able Painters. There
Was a Time, when only they who were of
noble Blood were permitted to exercife this
Art; becaufe it is to be prefumed, that all
thele Ingredients of a good Painter are pot
K s
ordinarily


 487.


157


158


Observations on the
ordinarily found in Men of Vulgar Birth
And in all Appearance, we may hope, that
tho' there be no Edict in France, which takes
away the Liberty of Painting, from those to
whom Nature has refufed the Honour of
being born Gentlemen, yet at leaft that the
Royal Academy will admit henceforward only
fuch, who, being endued with all the good
Qualities, and the Talents which are re
quired for Painting, thofe Endowments may
be to them inflead of an honourable Birth.
It is certain, that which debafes Painting
and makes it defcend to the vileff and mot
despicable Kind of Trade, is the great Mut
titude of Painters; who have nerther noble
Souls, nor any Talent for the Art, nor eren
to much as common Senfe. The Origin of
this great Evil, is, that there have always
been admitted into the Schools of Painting
all Sorts of Children promifcuoully, without
Examination of them, and without obferving
for some convenient Space of Time) if they
were conducted to this Art by their inward
Difpofition, and all neceffary Talents, rather
than by a foolith Inclination of their own, or
by the Avarice of their Relations, who put
them to Painting, as a Trade, which they
believe to be fome: hat more gainful thas
another. The Qualitics, properly required,
are thefe fillowing.
A go:d Judgment that they may do no
thing againll reafon and Verifimility.
A docible Alind, that they may proft by
Infiractions, and receive, without Arrogance,
the Opinion of every one, and principally of
Knowing Men.
A noble Heart, that they may propott
Clory to themfelves, and Reputation, rathes
than Riches.
A Sub


Art of Painting.
A Sublimity, and Reach vf Thought, to
conceive readily, to produce beautiful Ideas,
and to work on their Subjects nobly, and
after a lofty Manner, wherein we may obferve
somewhat that is delicate, ingenious, and
uncommon.
A warm and sigerous Fancy, to arrive at
leatt to fome Degree of Perfection, without
being tired with the Pains and Study which
are required in Painting.
Healb, to refift the Diffipation of Spi-
fits, which are apt to be confumed by Pains-
taking.
Touth, becaufe Painting requires a great
Experience, and a long Practice.
Beauty or Handsomeness, becaute a Painter
paints himself in all his Pictures, and Nature
loves to produce her own Likeness.
A convenient Fortune; that he may give
his whole Time to Study; and may work
chearfully, without being haunted with the
dreadful lmage of Poverty, ever prefent to
his Mind.
Labour; becaufe the Speculation is nothing
without the Practice.
A Love for his Art; we fuffer nothing in
the Labour which is pleafing to us; or, if
it happen that we fuffer, we are pleafed with
the Pain.
And to be under the Discipline of a knowing
Maffer, &c. Becaufe all depends on the Be-
ginnings; and becaufe commonly they take
the Manner of their Mafter, and are formed
according to his Gulto; fee Verse 422, and
the Renart upon it. All thefe good Qua-
lities are infignificant and unprofitable to
the Painter, if fome outward Dispositions
are wanting to him. By which I mean, fa-
vourable


159


166


8 496.
Veget. de
Re Milir.
lib.2.


Observatiens on the
vourable Times; fuch as are Times of Peace,
which is the Nurfe of all noble Arts: There,
muft alfo some fair Occafion offer to make
their Skill manifeft, by the Performance of
some confiderable Work within their Power;
and a Protector, who muft be a Perton of
Authority; one who takes upon himfelf
the Care of their Fortune, at leaft in some
meafure; and Knows how to (peak well of
them, in Time and Place convenient. Iris.
of much Importance (Jays the younger Pling)
in what Times Virtue appears: And there is no
Wit, howfoever excellent it may be, which can
make itself immediately known. Time and Op
fortunity are neceffary to it; and a Person, wtho
can affift us with his Favour, and be a Wixce-
RAS to us.
And Life is so short, that it is not sufficienn
for so long an Art, &c. Not only Painting,
but all other Arts, confidered in themfelves,
require almoff an infinite Time to poffess
them perfectly. It is in this Senfe that Hip
pocrates begins his Aphorifins with this Say-
ing, That Art is long, and Life is sort. Bu
if we confider Arts, as they are in us, and
according to a certain Degree of Perfection,
fufficient enough to make it known that we
poffefs them above the common Sort, and
are comparatively better than moft others,
we shall not find that Life is too short on
that Account, provided our Time be well
employed. It is true, that Painting is an
Art which is difficult, and a great Undertak
ing: But they, who are endued with the
Qualities that are neceffary to it, have no
Reafon to be difcouraged by that Apprehen.
Lion. Labour always appears difficult before it
is tried. The Paffages by Sca, and the Know-
ledge


167
Art of Painting.
ledge of the Stars, have been thought im
posible, which notwithftanding have been
found and compaffed, and that with Eafe,
by thofe who endeavoured after them. Ir is
a shameful Thing (Lays Cicero) to be aveary of Lib. x. de
Fin.
Enquiry, when what ave fearch is excellent.

That which caufes as to lofe moff of our
Time, is the Repugnance which we natu-
rally have to Labour, and the Ignorance, the
Malice, and the Negligence of our Mafters.
Wewalle much of our Time in Walking and
Talking, to no Manner of Purpofe; in mak-
ting and receiving idle Vifits, in Play, and
other Pleafures which we indulge, without
feckoning thofe Hours which we lofe in the
100 great Care of our Bodies; and in Sleep,
which we often lengthen out, till the Day
is far advanced; and thus we pass that Life,
which we reckon to be fhort, becaufe we
count by the Years which we have lived, ra-
ther than by thofe which we have employed
fin Study. It is evident that they who lived
before us, have paried through all thofe Dib-
fculies, to arrive at that Perfection which
we difcover in their Works; though they
Wanted fome of the Advantages which we
pofiets, and none had laboured for them, as
they have done for us : For it is certain,
that thofe ancient Matters, and thofe of the
hal preceding Ages, have left fuch beauti-
Wul Patterns to us, that a better and inore
appy Age can never be than ours; and
thicuy under the Reign of our prefent King,
Who ci. courages all the noble Arts, and (pares
othing, to give them the Share of that Fe-
licity, of which he is fo bountiful to his
Kingdom; and to conduct them, with all
Manner of Advantages, to that fupreme De-
gree


162
f 500.
8f 509.


Observations on the
gree of Excellence, which may be worthy of
such a Matter, and of that fovereign Love
which he has for them. Let us therefore
put our Hands to the Work, without being
difcouraged by the Length of Time, which is
requifite for our Studies; but let us ferioully
contrive how to proceed with the beft Order,
and to follow a ready, diligent, and well un
derfool Method.
Take Ccurage therefore, O ye noble Vourhs!
you legitimate Ofspring of Minerva, who are
born under the Infiuence of a bappy Planet, &c.
Our Author intends not here to fow in a
barren, ungrateful Ground, where his Pre.
cepts can bear no Fruit. He (peaks to young
Painters, but to fuch only who are bon
under the Influence of a hazpy Star; that is
to fay, thofe who have received from Naiure
the neceffary Dispofitions of becoming great
in the Art of Painting: And not to those
who follow that Study through Caprice, or
by a fortifh Inclination, or for Lucre, who
are either incapable of receiving the Pre.
cepts, or will make a bad Ofe of them when
received.
Toy will do vell, &c. Our Author (peaks
not here of the firtt Rudiments of Defign, as
for Example, the Management of the Pencil,
the juft Relation which the Copy ought to
have to the Original, 65c. He fuppofes that
before he begins his Studies, one ought to
have a Facility of Hand to imitate the bef
Defigns, and the noblefl Pictures and Statues;
that (in few Words) he should have made
himself a Key, wherewith to open the Clotel
of Minerva, and to enter into that facied
Place, where thofe fair Treafures are to be
found in all abundance, and even offer them.
filves


Art of Painting.
selves to us, to make our Advantage of them
by our Care and Genius.
To begin with Geometry, &c. Becaute that
is the Ground of Perspective, without which
nothing is to be done in Painting. Be-
fides, Geomerry is of great Ufe in Archifec-
fure, and in all Things which are of its De-
pendence; 1t is particularly neceffary for
Sculpiors.
Set yourself on defigning after the ancient
Greeks, &c. Becaufe they are the Rule of
Beauty, and give us a good Gufto: For
which Reafon it is very proper to tie our.
selves to them, I mean, generally peaking;
but the particular Fruit which we gather
from them, is what follows. To learn by
Heart four feveral Airs of Heads; of a Man,
a Woman, a Child, and an old Man: I mean
thofe which have the moft general Approbr-
tion; for Example, thofe of the Afalle, of
the Venus de Medicis, of the little Nero (that
is, when he was a Child) and of the God 7i.
ber. It would be a good Means of learning
them, if when you have defigned one after
the Statue itfelf, you defign it immediately
after from your own Imagination, without
eing ir; and afterwards examine if your
own Work be conformable to the firtt De-
fgn. Thus exercifing yourfelf on the fame
Head, and turning it on ten or twelve Sides.
You mutt do the fame to the Feet, to the
llands, to the whole Figure. But to un-
derttind the Eeauty of thefe Figures, and
the fullness of their Ourlines, it will be ne-
When I speak of
ccffary to learn Anatomy.
four Heads, and four Figures, I pretend
not to hinder any one from defigning many
others after this firft Study; but my Mean-
ing


163
ff 509:
off 510.


164
 511.
8 514.


Observations on the
ing is, only to shew by this, that a great
Variety of Things, undertaken at the same
Time, diffipates the Imagination, and hin.
ders all the Profit; in the fame Manner as
too many Sorts of Meat are not eafily dis
gefted, but corrupt in the Stomach, inffead
of nourifhing the Parts.
And cease not Day or Night from Labour,
till by your continual Practice, &c. in the
firft Principles, the Students have not fo
much Need of Precepts, as of Practice. And
the antique Statues being the Rule of Beanty,
you may exercife yourfelves in imitating
them, without apprehending any Confequence
of ill Habits, and bad Ideas, which can be
formed in the Soul of a young Beginner. II
is not, as in the School of a Matter, whole
Manner and whofe Guffo are ill, and under
whofe Difcipline the Scholar fpoils himfelf,
the more he exercifes.
And awben afterwards your Judgment shal
grow fronger, &c. It is neceffary to have
the Soul well formed, and to have a right
judgment to make the Application of his
Rules upon good Pictures, and to take no.
thing but the good. For there are some
who imagine, that whatfoever they find in
the Picture of a Mafter, who has acquired
Reputation, muft of Neceffity be excellent;
and thefe Kind of People never fail, whep
they copy, to follow the bad as well as the
good Things; and to observe them to much
the more, becaufe they seem to be extraerdi-
nary, and out of the common Road of others;
to that at laft they come to make a Law and
Precept of them. Vou ought not alfo to
imitate what is truly good in a crude and
grofs Manner, to that it may be found out
in


Art of Painting.
Works, that whatfoever Beauties
in your
there are in them, come from fuch or fuch a
Malter. But in this imitate the Bees, who
pick from every Flower that which they find
moft proper in it to make Honey. In the
same Manner, a young Painter should collect
from many Pictures what he finds to be the
moft beautiful, and, from his feveral Collec-
tions, form that Manner which thereby he
makes his own.
A certain Grace wbich was wholly natural
and peculiar to him, Exc. Raphael, in this,
may be compared to Apelles; who, in praif-
ing the Works of other Painters, faid, that
Cracefulness was avanting to them; and that
without Vanity be might Jay, it was his own
peculiar Portion. See the Remark on the 218th
Verse.
ulio Romano (educated from his Child-
bood in the Country of the Muses, Exc.) Hie

5
1
Meane
ncing 1h ine Studies of the Bells Lettre, and
above all in Poefy, which he infinitely loved.
I appears that he formed his Ideas, and
made his Gufto from reading Homer; and in
that imitated Zenxis and Polygnoras, who
(as Maximus Tyrias relates) treated their
subjects in their Pictures, as Homer did in
his Poetry.
To thefe Remarks I have annexed the
Opinions of our Aurbor upon the beft and
chicfell Painters of the two foregoing ges.
He tells you candidly, and brieffy, what
were their Excellencies, and what their Fail-
ings.
I pass in Silence many Things which will be
more amply treated in the enfuing Commentary.
I is evident by this how much we lofe, and
What Damage we have fuftained by our Au-
thor's


16
f 520.
 522.
F 541.


5



162
f 544.


Observations, Ec.
thor's Death, fince those Commentaries had
undoubtedly contained Things of high Value
and of great Instruction.
To entruff with the Muses, &c. Thn
is to fay, to write in Verfe; Peetry being
under their Protection, and confecrated to
them.
PHE


T H E
UD G M EN T
0 F
CHARLES ALPHONSE DU FRESNOY
On the Works of the
PRINCIPAL AND BEST PAINTERS
OF THE TO LAST ACES.
AINTINC was in its Perfection amongft
the Greeks. The principal Schools were
at Sycion, afterwards at Rbodes, at Atbens,
and at Corinth, and at laft in Rome. Wars
and Luxary having overthrown the Roman
Empire, it was totally extinguiffed, together
with all the noble Arts, the Studies of Hu-
manity, and the other Sciences.
Ii began to appear again in the Vear 1450,
amongt fome Painters of Florence, of which
DOMENICO CHIRLANDAlO Was one, who
Was Mafter to Michael Angelo, and had fome
kind of Reputation, though his Manner was
Gotbic, and very dry.
MICHAEL ANCELO, his Difciple, ffourish-
in the Times of Julius the Second, Lco the
Tenth,


168


The Judgment of
Tenth, and of feven fucceffive Popes. He
was a Painter a Sculptor, and an Archiied,
both civil and military. The Choice which
he made of his Atticudes was not always
beautiful or pleafing; his Cufto of Defigh
was not the fineff, nor his Outlines the mot
elegant; the Folds of his Draperies, and the
Ornaments of his Habits, were neither noble
nor graceful. He was not a little fantaffical
and extravagant in his Compofitions; he was
hold, even to Rafhnets, in taking Liberties
againft the Rules of Perspective; his Colcur
ing is not over true, or very pleafant: He
Knew not the Artifice of the Lights and Sha-
dows; but he defigned more learnedly, and
better underffood all the Knittings of the
Bones, with the Office and Situation of the
Mufcles, than any of the modern Painters.
There appears a certain Air of Careatness and
Severity in his Figures; in both which he
has oftentimes fucceeded. But above the rel
of his Excellencies, was his wonderful Skill
in Archifecture, wherein he has not only far
paffed all the Moderns, but even the Ancients
alfo; the St. Perers of Reme, the St. Jolns
of Flovence, the Capitol, the Palazse Farniff
and his own House, are fufficient Tefimonies
of it. His Difciples were, Marcelle Venuft
11 Reffe, Georgie Vasari, Fra. Baffiane (Who
commonly painted for him) and many other
Florentines.
PIETRO PERYewo defigned with fuff.
cient Knowledge of Nature; but he is dry,
and his Manner little. His Difciple was
RAPHAEL SANTYo, who was born of
Good-Friday, in the Year 148z, and died of
Good-Friday, in the Vear 1520; to that he
lived only thirty feven Vears compleat. Iie
furpaffed


Charles Alphonfe du Frefnoy, Coc.
furpaffed all modern Painters, becaufe he pof-
feffed more of the excellent Parts of Painting
than any other: And it is believed, that he
equalled the Ancients, excepting only that he
defigned notnaked Bodieswithfomuchlearnr
ing as Michael Angelo; but his Gufto of De-
lign is purer, and much better. He painted
not with fo good, fo full, and fo graceful a
Manner as Correggio; nor has he any thing of
the Contraff of the Lights and Shadows, or fo
brong and free a Colouring as Tirian; but he
had a better Difpofition in his Pieces, without
Comparifon, than either Tirian, Correggie,
Michael Angelo, or all the reft of the fucceed-
ing Painters to our Days. His Choice of At-
Hudes, of Heads, of Ornaments, the Suitable-
ness of his Drapery, his Manner of Defigning;
his Varieties, his Contrafts, his Expreffions,
were beautiful in Perfection; but above all,
he poffeffed the Graces in fo advantageous a
Manner, that he has never fince been equalled
by any other.. There are Portraits (or fingle
Figures) of his, which are finifhed Pieces.
He was an admirable Architect.
He was
handfome, well-made, and tall of Stature,
civil and well-natured, never refufing
toteach
another what he Knew himfelf.
He had
many Scholars; amongtt others,
Tulio Ro-
mano, Pelydore, Gaudenxio, Gievanni
d Udine,
and Michael Goxis. His Graver
Was Mark
Antonio, whofe Prints are admirable for the
Correctness of their Outlines.
JULlo ROMANO was the moft excellent of
all Rupbact’s Difciples: He had Conceptions
which were more extraordinary, more pro-
found, and more elevated than even his Maf
ter himfelf; he was alfo a great Archicecd.;
his Guflo was pure and exquifite. He was a
Breat


169


170


The Judgment of
rreat Imitator of the Ancients, giving a clear
Teftimony in all his Productions, that hewas
defirous to reffore to Practice the fame Forms
and Fabries which were ancient. He had
the good Fortune to find great Perfons, who
committed to him the Care of Edifices; Vefi.
bules, and Portices, all Terrastyles, Liftes, Thea
fres, and fuch other Places as are not now in
Ofe. He was wonderful in his Choice of At
titudes. His Manner was drier and harder
than any of Raphael's School. He did notex
actly understand the Lights and Shadows, or
the Colours. He is frequently harth and un
graceful; the Folds of his Draperies are nei.
ther beautiful nor great, eafy hor natural
but all extravagant, and too like the Habis
of fantallical Comedians. He was very know.
ing in humane Learning. His Disciples were
Pirro Ligorio (who was admirable for ancient
Buildings, as for Towns, Temples, Tombs,
and Trophies, and the Situation of ancient
Edifices) Eneas Vice, Bonasone, Georgie Mar
Tuano, and others.
POLYDORE, a Disciple of Raphael, de.
figned admirably well as to the practical Part,
having a particular Genius for Freezes, as we
may fee by thofe of Whice and Black, which
he has painted at Rome. He imitated the
Ancients, but his Manner was greater than
that of Tulio Romano; nevertheleis Tulie feems
to be the truer. Some admirable Groupes
are feen in his Works, and fuch as are not
elfewhere to be found. He coloured very
feldom, and made Landicapes of a reafons
ble good Gufto.
Gio. BELLINO, one of the firft who was
of any Confideration at Venice, painted very
drily, according to the Manner of his Time.
He


Charles Alphonfe du Frefnoy, Coc.
He was very knowing both in Archirecture
and Perspective. He was Tilian's firft Maf
er; which may eafily be obferved in the firft
Painting of that noble Disciple; in which we
may remark that Propriety of Colours which
his Master has observed.
About this Time GEoRcrowE, the Co-
Hemporary of Tirian, came to excel in Por-
traits (or Face-Painting) and alfo in great
Works. He firft began to make Choice of
glowing and agreeable Colours; the Perfec-
tion and entire Harmony of which were af-
Herwards to be found in Tirian’s Pictures. He
deffed his Figures wonderfully well: And
it may be truly faid, that but for him, Tinan
had never arrived to that Height of Perfec-
tion, which proceeded from the Rivalship
and Jealoufy of Honour betwixt thofe two.
TITlAN was one of the greateff Colouriffs
who was ever Known: He defigned with
much more Eafe and Practice than Georgions.
There are to be feen Women and Children
of his Hand, which are admirable both for
tthe Defign and Colouring; the Gufto of
them is delicate, charning and noble, with
a certain pleafing Negligence of the Head-
Dreffes, the Draperies, and Ornaments of
Hlabus, which are wholly peculiar to him.
As for the Figures of Men, he has defigned
them but moderately well. There are even
ome of his Draperies which are mean, and
havour of a little Gulto. His Painting is
Wonderfully glowing, swect and delicate.
He made Portraits, which were extremely
noble; the Atticudes of them being very
graceful, grave, diverfified, and adorned after
ta very becoming Futhin. No Man ever
Painted Landfcape with to great a Manner.
To


177


272


The Judgment of
to good a Colouring, and with fuch a Refem.
blance of Nature. For eight or ten Veas
Space, he copied with great Labour and Ex,
actness whatfeever he undertook; thereby s
make himfelf an eafy Way, and to eftablif
some general Maxims for his fature Condult]
Befides the excellent Guhlo which he had of
Colours, in which he excelled all mortal
Men, he perfectly underffood how to give
every Thing the Touches which were mof
fuitable and proper to them; fuch as distip
guifhed them from each other, and which
gave the greateff Spirit, and the moft of
Truth. The Pictures which he made in his
Beginning, and in the Declention of his Agg
are of a dry and mean Manner. He lived
ninety nine Vears. His Difciples were, Paulf
Veronese, Giacomo Tintoret, Giacomo da Pord
BaJano, and his Sons.
PAULOVERONESE was wonderfully gracef
ful in his Airs of Women, with great Varicy
of fhining Draperies, and incredible Vivaciy
and Eafe; nevertheless his Compofition in
fometimes improper, and his Defign is und
correct: But his Colouring, and whatfoered
depends on it, is to very charming in his fict
tures, that it furprizes at the firft Sight, and
makes us totally forget thofe other Qualitin
which are wanting in him.
TINTORET was the Disciple of Tiiard
great in the practical Part of Delign, by
tometimes alfo fufficiently extravagant. Hf
had an admirable Genius for Painting, if h
had had as great an Affection to his And
and as much Patience in undergoing
Difficulties of it, as he had Fire and Virf
city of Nature; he has made Pictures, ao
interior in Beauty to thofe of Titian. If
Compofition


Charles Alphonfe du Frefnoy, Coc.
Compofition, and his Dreffes, are for the
mol part improper; and his Outlines are
not correct : But his Colouring, and the De-
pendencies of it, like that of his Mafter, are
mot admirable.
The BASSANs had a more mean and poor
Cuto in Painting than Tinterer; and their
Deligns were alfo less correct than his. They
had indeed an excellent Gufto of Colours,
and have rouched all Kinds of Animals with
an admirable Manner; but were notoriously
imperfect in the Compofition and Defign.
CORREGGlO painted at Parma two large
Cupola's in Frefco, and Tome Altar-Pieces.
This Arufl found out certain natural and
hnaffected Graces for his Madonna’s, his
Baints, and litrle Children, which were pecu-
great,
iar to him. His Manner is exceeding
Both for the Defign and for the Work, but
Withal is very uncorrect. His Pencil was
both eafy and delightful; and it is to be
Ackhnonledged, that he painted with great
Strength, great Heightening, great Sweet-
ness, and Liveliness of Colours, in which
hone furpaffed him.
He underftood how to distribute his Lights
in such a Manner, as was wholly peculiar to
himfelf; which gave a great Force and great
Roundness to his Figures. This Manner
centills in extending a large Light, and then
making it lofe itself infenfibly in the dark
Ghadowings, which he placed out of the
Maftes: And thofe give them this great
Roundness, without our being able to perceive
from whence proceeds fo much of Force, and
to vall a Plcafure to the Sight. It is proba-
Ole, that in this Part the relt of the Lombard
bibeel copied him. He had no great Choice
Of


2
175


174


The Judgment of
of graceful Attitudes, nor of Diftribution for
beautiful Groupes. His Defign oftentimes
appears lame, and the Pofitions are not much
observed in them : The Aspects of his Ri
gures are many Times unpleafing; but his
Manner of defigning Heads, Hands, Feet,
and other Parts, is very great, and well de¬
ferves our Imitation. In the Conduct and
Finishing of a Picture, he has done Wonders;)
for he painted with to much Union, that his 
greateft Works feemed to have been finished
in the Compats of one Day; and appear asf
if we faw them from 2 Locking-Glass. His
Landscape is equally beautiful with his fi
Fures.
At the fame Time with Correggio, lived and
Hourifhed PARMECLANO; who, befides hif
great Manner of well Colouring, excelledd
alfo both in Invention and Defign, with a Cet
nius fuil of Gentleness and of Spirit, having
nothing that was ungraceful in his Choiceof
Attitudes, and in the Dreffes of his Fighress
which we cannot fay of Gorreggio; there ar
Pieces of his to he feen, which are bot
beautiful and correct.
Thefe two Painters laft mentioned had
very good Difciples, but they are known oulf
to thofe of their own Province; and befided
there is little to be credited of what his Cout
trymen fay, for Painting is wholly extinguithed
amongst them.
I fay nothing of LEONARDo da Vined
becaufe I have feen but little of his; thoufh
he relored the Arts at Milan, and had man
Difciples there.
LUDOVico CARRACHE, Coufin of Had
nibal and Auguffine, Rudied at Parma ald
Correggio; and excelled in Defign and Cd
louring


Charles Alphonfe du Frefnoy, Eoc.
louring, with fuch a Gracefulness, and fo
much Candour, that Guide, the Scholar of
Hannibal, did afterwards imitate him with
great Succets. There are fome of his Pic-
tures to be feen, which are very beautiful,
and well underftood. He made his ordinary
Refidence at Bologna; and it was he who
put the Pencil into the Hands of Hannibal
his Coufin.
Hannibal, in a little Time, excelled his
Malter in all Parts of Painting. He imi-
tated Correggio, Titian, and Rapbael, in their
different Manners as he pleafed; excepting
only, that you fee not in his Pictures the No-
bleness, the Graces, and the Charms of Ra
sbacl; and his Outlines are nerther fo pure,
nor to elegant as his. In all other Things,
he is wonderfully accomplifhed, and of an
niverfal Genius.
AUOUSTINE, Brother to Hannibal, was
alfo a very good Painter, and an admirable
Graver. He had a natural Son, called Aw-
TONTO, who died at the Age of thirty five;
and who (according to the general Opinion)
would have furpafied his Uncle Hannibal.
for, by what he left behind him, it appears
that he was of a more lofty Genins.
Gvino chiefly imitated Indevice Carracbe,
yet retained always fomewhat of the Manner
which his Mafter, Denis Calvert the Fleming,
taught him. This Calvert lived at Bologna,
and was Competitor and Rival to Enrovico
Carrocbe. Guido made the fame Ufe of 41.
brt Durer, as Virgil did of old Ennins;
borrowed what pleated him, and made it af-
tewards his own; that is, he accommo-
dated what was good in Alters to his own
Manner; which he executed with to much
Lo 2
Gracefulneis


175


176


The Judgment of
Gracefulness and Beauty, that he alone got
more Money and more Reputation in his
Time, than his own Mafters, and all the
Scholars of the Carraches, though they were
of oreater Capacity than himfelf. His Heads
yield no manner of Precedence to thofe of
Raphael.
SIsTo BADOLOCCHT defigned the beft of
all his Difciples, but he died young
DOMENICHINO was a very Knowing Pain.
ter, and very laborious, but otherwife of no
great natural Endowments. It is true, he
was profoundly Kkilled in all the Parts of
Painting, but wanting Genius (as I faid) he
had less of Nobleness in his Works, than all
the reft who findied in the School of the
Carracbes.
ALRANI was excellent in all that belonged
to Painting, and adorned with Variety of
Learning
LANFRANC, a Mlan of a great and pright-
ly Wit, supported his Repatation for a long
Time with an extraordinary Gufto of Defign
and Colouring: But his Foundation being
only on the practical Part, he at length loll
Ground in Point of Correctness; to that
many of his Pieces appear extravagant and
fantallical: And after his Deceafe, the School
of the Carracbes went daily to Decay, in all
the Parts of Painting
Gro. Viol a was very old before he learned
Landfcape; the Knowledge of which was im-
parted to him by Hannibal Carracbe, who
took Pleafure to inflruct him; to that he
painted many of that Kind, which are won.
derfully fine, and well coloured.
If we caft our Eyes towards Germany and
the Lov-Countries, we may there behold
ALBERT


Charles Alphonfe du Frefnoy, Eoc.
BLBERT DURER, LUCAS VAN LEYDEN,
HOLREIN, ALDECRAVE, CSc. who were all
Cotemporaries. Amongt thefe, Albert Du-
ver and Helbein were both of them wonder-
fully knowing, and had certainly been of
the firtt Form of Painters, had they travelled
into fiaty; for nothing can be laid to their
Char,e, but only that they had a Gothic Guffo.
As for Holbein, he performed yet better than
Rappacl; and I have feen a Portraif of his
Painting, with which one of Tirians could
not come in Competition.
Amongt the Flernings, we had RUBENs;
who derived from his Birth a lively, free,
noble, and univerfal Genius: A Genins which
was capable not only of raifing him to the
Rank of the encient Painters, but alfo to the
highelt Employment in the Service of his
Country; to that he was chofen for one of
the mot important Embaffies of our Age.
His Guffo of Defign favours fomewhat more
of the Fleming, than of the Beauty of the
Antique; becaufe he Rayed not long at Rome.
And though we cannot but observe in all his
Paintings fomewhat of Great and Noble; yet
it muft be confefied, that, generally speak.
ing, he defigned not correctly: But, for all
the other Parts of Painting, he was as ab-
Colate a Mafter of them, and poffeffed them
all as thoroughly, as any of his Predecefiors
in that noble Art. His principal Studies
were made in Lombardy, atter the Works of
Pitian, Paul Veronese, and Tinteret; whofe
Cream he has skimimed (if you will allow the
Thrafe) and extracted from their feveral
Beauties many general Maxims, and infalli-
ble Rules, which he always followed, and by
which he has acquired in his Works a greater
I.
Facility


177





178


The Judgment, &c.
Facility than that of Tinan; more of Purity,
Truth and Science, than Paul Verenese; and
more of Majetty, Repofe and Moderation,
than Tintores. To conclude; his Manneris
to folid, to knowing, and to ready, tharn
may feem, this rare accomplifhed Genins was
fent from Heaven, to instruct Mankind in
the Arr of Painting.
His School was full of admirable Disciples,
amougt whom, VINDYKE was he who bef
comprehended all the Rules, and generd
Maxims of his Mafter; and who has even
excelled him in the Delicacy of his Colour
ing, and in his Cabinet Pieces; bur his Gutle
in the defigning Part, was nothing betr
than that of Rutens.


A
SHOR T ACC O UNT
Of the moft Eminent
P A I N T. E R S,
BO T H
ANCIENT AND MODERN,
Continued down to the
PRE S EN T T I ME S,
ACCORDINC TO.THE
Order of their Succeffion.
B V
RICHARD GRAHAM, Elq.
Pasiitur in vivis Liver poft fata quiefeir,
Cum Jaus ex merito quemque tuefur Henes.
OviD.
L. 4






T H E
P R E F A C E.
(T HE Title having only promised a thort
f Account of the moft Eminent Mafters,
ESc. the Reader muft expect to find very
litile more in the small Compass of these few
Sheets, than the Time when, the Place where,
by whole Instructions, and in what particular
Subject each of these great Nen became fa-
mous.
in the first Part, which. comprebends the
prime Mafters of Antiquity, I have followed
Pliny; yet not blindly, or upon his Authority
alone, but chiefly in those Places where I have
found his Evidence confirmed by the concurrent
Telimony of orber Writers. The Catalogue
of Fran. Junius I bave diligently pernsed, and
2
examined moft of the Records cited in it.
have also read over the Lives of the Four prin-
ipal Painters of Greece, written in Italian,
by Carlo Dati, of Florence, rogether witt his
learned Annotations upon them. And, in a
Word, have left notbing anregarded, that could
give me any Manner of ffittance in this pre-
Sem Undertaking.
in the Chronological Part, because 1 fore-
faw that the Olympiads, and the Vears of
Rome,
1. 5


182


P R E F A C E.
Rome, would be of little Use to the Genera-
lity of Readers, I have adjufted them to the
tavo Vulgar TEra’s, viz. the Creation of the
World, and the Birth of Chrift. The Greek
Talents I have likewise reduced into Englih
Money; but to justify my Account, muft ob-
serve, that here (as in moft Ruthors, where a
Talent is put absolutely, and without any other
Circumftance) the Talentum Atticum Minus
is to be underffood; wbich, according to the
neareft Computation, comes to about 1871. 10s.
of our Money; the Majus being about 621. 10s.
5OrE.
In the latter Part, which contains the Wist-
ters of greateft Note amengft the Nicderns, 1
have been equally diligent, not only in fearching
into all the mest considerable Writers, who have
left as any Memorandums relating to them;
but also in procuring from Rome, and other
Places, the beft Advice that poffitly. I could
get, concerning those Painters who are but latey
deceased, and whose Lives bave never yet af-
peared in Print. In Naly I bave taken juch
Guides, as I bad Recson to believe were beft
acquainted in that Country; and in France;
Germany, Flanders and Holland, have been
conducted by the Authors who base been moft
converfant in those Parts. For the Roman,
Flovenune, and some orber particular Mcf
rers, I have applied myself to the Vite de Pir
tori, ESc. of Glorgio Vafari, the Vite, Eo
of Cavalier Baglione, and Gio. Pietro Bel.
lori, and the Abcedario Pittorico of Antonio
Orlandi. For the Lonmbard School, I bavt
consistred the Maraviglie dell Arte of Cavalier
Ridoifi: For the Bolognefe Painters, the Fet
fina Pittrice of Conte Carlo Cefare Malvr
12


P R E F A C E.
ha: Forthose of Genoua, the Vite de Pittoris
6c. of Rafacle Soprani, Nobile Genouefe:
for the French Mafters, the Entretiens fur
les Vies, (Sc. of Felibien, the Abrege of De
Piles, and the Hommes Illuftres of Perrault:
for the German, Flemith; and Dutch Pain-
ters (of whom I have admitted but very feaw
into this Collection) the Academia nobiliffi-
me Artis Piltorix of Sandrart, and the Schil-
der-Boeck of Carel van Mander. For those
of our own Country, I am ashamed to acknow-
ledge how difficalt a Marter I have found it, to
fet but the leaft information rouching some of
those ingenious Wen, whese Works bave been
a Credit and Reputation to ir. That all our
Neighbours have a greater Valus for the Pro=
feffers of this noble Art, is jufficiently evi-
dent, in that there has bardly been any one
Malter of Colerabie Parts amongft them, but a
Crowd of Writers (nay, some Pens of Quality
100) have been employed in adorning his Life,
and in transmitting his Name with Honour to
Pofterity.
For the Characters of the italians of the firtt
Torn, I have all along referred the Reader to
the Judgment of Monfieur du PRESNOY, in
the preceding Pages. But for the reft I bave
from the Books above-mentioned, and the Opi-
mons of the Learned, briefly sevn, avberein
their diferent Talents and Perfections con-
pfed; chusing always (in the little Rcom to
which I bave been confined) to fet the best Side
forwards; especially where their few Faults bave
been overbalanced by rheir many Virtues.
By the Figures in the Margin it avill easily
appear, bow careful I have every where been
10


183


184


P R E F A C E.
to preserve the Order of Time; which indeed
was the Thing principally intended in these
Papers. Some few Mafters bovever muft be
excepted; whom yet I have placed next to their
Cotemporaries, though I could not six them in
any particular Vear.
If it should be objected, that several of the
Wiatters, berein after-mentioned, have already
appeared amongft us in an Englith Drets; 1
can only antwer, That as the Nicthod here mads
Use of, is more regular and quite different from
any thing that has been bitberfo published in
this Kind; so, avbesoever shall think it werrt
his wbile to compare these little Sketches wih
the Originals from which I have copied thems
will find, that I bave taken greater Cars in
Drawing them true, and that my Ourlines an
generally more correct, avbarever Defects may
be in the colouring Part.
177
NCIENT



A NCIEN T
M A S T E R S.
V whom, and in what particular Age,
 the Art of Painting was firft invented
 in Greece, ancient Authors are not
agreed. Arifforls afcribes the Honour of it
to EUcHIR, a Kinfman of the famous Dec-
dalus, who fourithed, Anno 1218, before the
Birth of Chrift: Theopbraffus gives it to Po-
LYCNOYUs the Athenian; Athenagoras to
SAURIAs of Samos. Some will have it be-
long to PHILOCLEs the Egyptian; and others
T0 CLEANTHEs of Corintb. But, howfoever
the Learned may differ in their Opinions
touching the Inventer they are all unani-
mous in this, that its firft Appearance among
the Greeks, was in no better a Drefs, than
what ferved juft to reprefent the bare Sba-
dow of a Man, or any other Body; which was
done merely by circumscribing the Figure they
had a Mind to express, whatever it was, with
a single Line only. And this fimple Manner
of Drawing was by them very properly called
Sciagraphia; and by the Latines afterwards,
Pittura Linearis.
The


A. Mun.
2730.
d


185


186


Ancient Masters.
The firff Step made towards the Advance
ment of Painting, was by Anvices the Co
rintbian, and TELEPHANES of Sicgon, of
CRATo of the fame City. Thefe began to
add other Lines (by way of Shaderwing) to
their Figures; which gave them an Appear-
ance of Roundness, and much greater Strengib.
This Manner was called Graphice. But the
Advantages it brought to its Inventers were
to inconfiderable, that they Kill found it
neceffary to write under every individual
Piece, the Name of whatever it was defigned
to reprefent, left otherwife the Spectators
should never be able of themfelves to make
the Difcovery.
The next Improvement was by Cizo-
PHANTUs of Corrnrb, who firtt attempted to
fill up his Ourhines. But as he did it with
one single Colour, laid on every where alike,
his Pieces, and thofe of HYCIEMON, Di
NiAs, and CHARMAs, his Followers, from
thence got the Name of Monocbromata, Viz.
Pictures of one Colonr.
EUMARUs the Hibenian began to paint
Men and Women in a Manner different
from each other, and ventured to imitate all
Sorts of Objects; but was far excelled by
his Disciple,
CIMON the Giconcan, who found out the
Art of Painting brfforically, defigned his Fi-
gures in Variety of Poftures, diffinguished the
feveral Parts of the Body by their Joints; and
was the firft, in whofe Pieces there was any
Notice taken of the Foids of Draperies.
In


Ancrent Masters.
in what Century the Mafters above-men-
tioned lived, Anriquity has given us no Ac-
count: Vet certain it 1s, that about the Time
of the Foundation of Rome, Anno 750 ante
Chr. the Grecians had carried Painting to
tuch a Height of Reputation, that Candan-
les, King of Lydia, firnamed Myrfilus, the
lat of the Heraclide, and who was killed
by Gyges, Anno quarto Clymp. 16. for a Pic-
ture made by Bularchus, reprefenting a Bat-
de of the Magnefians, gave its Weight in
Gold.
PANENUs of Atbens, lived Olymp. 83.
Anno 446 ante Cbr. and is celebrated for
having painted the Battle at Marathon, be-
tween the Atbenians and Perfians, to very ex-
allly, that Milriades, and all the eneral Of-
ficers on both Sides, were eafily to be Known,
and dillingurthed from each other in that
Piece.
PaiDias, his Brother, the Son of Char-
midas, Hourithed Clymp. 84. Anno 442 ante
Chr. and was fainous both for Painting and
Sentfur: but particularly in the latter fo
profoundly skilled, that his Statue of Jn-
fiter Clympins was by the Ancients etteemed
one of the feven Wonders of the World; as
his Minerva, in the Citadel of Arbens, made
of ivory and Gsold, was (by way of Emi-
Nence) called the beautiful Form. He was
very intimate with Prrictes, the Arbenian Ge-
heral; and to much envied upon that Ac-
count, and for the Glory he acquired by his
Works, that his Encimmes could never be at
Ref, till they had plotted him into a Prison,
and


18
A. Nun.
3198.
nd
A. Nun.
3502.

3506.
d


188
A. Myn.
3518.
d


Ancient Masters.
and had there (as fome fay) taken away his
Life by Poifon.
POLYCLETUs, a Native of Sicgos, and
the moft renowned Sculptor in his Time,
lived Olymp. 37. nno 430 ante Chr. and,
befides the Honour he gained by having
brought the Bass Relievo to Ferfection, is
commended for divers admirable Pieces of
Work; but chiefly for being the Auther of
that moft accomplifhed Niedel, called the
Canon. Which, by the joint Confent of the
moll eminent Artits then in being, as well
Painters as Sculptors, was handed down to
Potterity, for the Standard or infiltiole Rul
of true Beauty; as comprizing in itfelf alone
all the feveral Perfectrons, both of Feaurr
and Proportion, that are to be found in he
man Bodies.
In this Obmpiad alfo were WYRoN and
Scopas, both excellent in Sculprure; and
in fome Respects equa. even to Polychlns
himself.
PolyeNoTus the Thasian, was the Diky
ple of his Father Aglcophon, and particularly
famous for reprefenting Women; whom he
painted in lightfome and fhining Draperies,
adorning their Heads with Dreffes of fundy
Colours, and giving a greater Freedom to
his Figures, than had been ufed by any of
his Predeceffors. His principal Works were
thofe which he made graris, in the Temple
at Delpbi; and the grand Portico at Athen,
called the Varrons. In Honour of which
it was folemnly decreed, in a general Coun
cil of the Ampbictyons, that wherever he
should


Ancrent Majiers.
hould travel in Greece, his Charges should
be borne by the Public. He died fome time
before the goth Olymp. which was Anno 418
ante Cpr
APOLLowoRws the Arbenian lived Olymp.
94. Anno 402 ante Cbr. and was the firft who
invented the Art of mingling his Colours,
and of expreffing the Lights and Shadows.
He was admired alfo for his judicious Choice
of Narure; and, in the Beauty and Strength
of his Figures, furpaffed all the Mafters who
went before him. He excelled likewife in
Sculpture; but was nicknamed the Madman,
from a llrange Humour he had of deftroying
even his very beft Pieces, if, after he had
finished them, he could difcoverany Fault,
though never to inconfiderable.
LEUxIs of Heraclea, Hourithed Anno
quarte Olymp. 95. Anno 39½ ante Cbr. and
was famed for being the moff excellent Co-
lowift of all the Ancienrs; though Cicero,
Pliny, and other Authors tell us, there were
but four Colours then in Ufe, viz. White,
Vellow, Red, and Black. He was cenfured
by some, for making his Heads too big;
and by Arifforle, for not being able to ex-
prets the Manners and Paffions. He was
very famous notwithtanding, for the Helena
which he painted for the People of Cro-
sona; in the Composition of which he col.
lected, from five naked Virgins (the moft
beautiful that Town could produce) what-
erer he observed Nature had formed moft
perfect in each, and united all thofe admi-
jable Parts in one fingle Figure. He was
excolled likewife for feveral other Pieces
but


189
A. Mun.
3530.
d
3546.

A. Mun.
3553.



AEgodia.-
723.


190


Ancient Mafters.
but being very rich, could never be pre.
vailed upon to fell any of them, because he
thought them to be above any Price; and
therefore chofe rather to give them away
freely to Princes and public Societies. He died
(it is generally faid) of a violent Fit of
Laughter he was ferzed with, by looking
upon a comical old Woman'’s Picture, of his
own Drauing.
PARRHASIUs, a Native of Epbefus, and
Citizen of Arbens, was the Son and Disciple:
of Evenor, and the Cotemporary of Eearis,
whom he overcame in the noted Conteff be.
tween them, by deceiving him with a Cur-
tain, which he had painted fo excellently
well, that his Antagonift miftook it for the
Reality of Nature itfelf. He was the firt
who obferved the Rules of Symmerry in his
Works; and was much admired for the
Liveliness of his Expreffion, and for the
Gaiety and graceful Airs of his Heads; but
above all, for the Softness and Elegance of
his Ourlines, and for rounding off his Fir
gures, to as to make them appear with the
greater Strength and Relievo. He was won.
derfully fruitful of Invention; had a parti-
cular Talent in fmall Pieces, especially in
wanton Subjects; and finifhed all his Works
to the laft Degree of Perfection : But withal
was to extravagantly vain and arrogant, that
he commonly writ himself Parrbasius, the
fine Gentleman; went cloathed in Purple, with
a Crown of Gold upon his Head, pretended
to derive his Pedigree from Spollo, and ftiled
himself the Prince of his Proselsion. Vel. w
his great Mortification, he was humbled at
lat by
TIMAN


Ancrent Masters.
TMANTHES of Sicyon (or, as fome. fay,
of Cythnus) who, in a Difpute betwixt them,
was by the Majority of Votes declared the
better Puinter. And befides, was as eminent
for the fingular Modeity and Sweetness of
his Dispofition, as for the agreeable Variety
of his Invention, and peculiar Happiness in
moring the Paffions. His moft celebrated
Works were, the Sleeping Polyphemys, and the
Sacrifice of Ipbigenia, in both which (as in
all his other Performances) his dittinguiff-
ing Character appeared, in making more to
be underftood, than was really expreffed in
his Pieces.
in this Time alfo Houriffed Evrompus
of Sicyon, an excellent Artift; and whofe Au-
thority was fo very confiderable, that out of
the two Schools of Painting.
the Asiatic and
by dividing the
the Greek, he made a third
latt into the Arric and the
Sicjonian. His
beft Disciple was
PAMPHILus, a Native of Macedonia, who,
to the Art of Painting,
joined the Study of
the liberal Arts, especially the Marbematies;
and ufed to fay, that without the Help of
Geomerry, no Painter could ever arrive to Per-
fection. He was the firft who taught his Art
for fet Rates; but never took a Scholar forless
Time than ten Vears. What Reputation and
intereff he had in his own Counrry, and what
Ofe he made of them, for the Honour and
Advancement of his Profession, fee page 64.
PAUSIAS of Sicyon, a Disciple of Pampbi-
Ms, was the firtt who painted upon Walls and
Cielings;


197


192
A. Mun.
3536.

3594.

3618.



Ancrent Masters.
Cielings; and, amongtt many rare Qualities
was excellent at fore-sportening his Figures.
His moft famous Piece was, the Picture of
his Miftrefs Glycera, in a fitting Poffure,
compofing a Garland of Flowers; for a Copj
of which L. Lucullus, a noble Roman, gave
two Talents (375 lib.)
EUPHRANOR, the Ipbmian,
Hourifhec
Olymp. 104. Anne 362 ante Chr.
He was ar
univerfal Mufter, and admirably skilled bot
in Sculpture and Painting. His Conception
were noble and elevated, his Stile mafculing
and bold; and he was the firft who fignalires
himfelf, by reprefenting the Majefty of He
roes. He writ feveral Volumes of the Arie
Colouring, and of Symmetry; and yet nowwith
Randing fell into the fame Error with Learis
of making his Heads too big, in Proportior
to the other Parts.
PRAKITELEs, the famed Sculstor, parti
cularly celebrated for his Venus of Grids
and other excellent Performances in Marbl
was the Cotemporary of Eupbraner.
CYDiAs of Cytbans, lived Olymp. 106.
Anno 354 ante Cbr. and advanced his Regu
tation to much by his Works, that fferrengng
the Roman Orator, gave forty four Talet
(82se 4b.) for one of his Pieces, containing
the Story of the Argonants, and built a noble
Apartment on purpofe for it, in his Villas
Tusculum.
APELLEs, the Prince of Painters, was 1
Native of Goos, an Ifland in the Archipelage,
(now Known by the Name of Lango) and
Hlouriffied


Ancrent Masters.
Courithed Olymp. 112. Anno 330 ante Cbr.
He improved the noble Talent which Warure
ad given him, in the School of Pampbilus;
and akterwards by Degrees became to much
aEeem with Alexander the Great, that by
public Edict he itrictly commanded, that
o other Mafter should prefume to make his
Ertrait; that none but Lysippus of Sicgon
hould caft his Starue in Brass; and that Pyr-
wcles only should grave his lmage in Gems
nd precious Stones. And in farther Tedi-
pony of his particular Respect to this Artiff,
eprefented him even with his moft beauti-
fil and charming Milrefs Campappe, with
them spettes had fallen in Love; and by
thom, it was fuppofed, he copied his Venus
Anagumene) riting out of the Sea. Grace
tas his peculier Portion, as our Autbor tells
, p2ge 116, and 16s; in which, and in
nowing when he had done enough, he tran-
teaded all who went before him, and did not
hare his Equal in the World. He was mi-
hculoutly silled in taking the true Linea-
ents and Features of the Face; infomuch
hat (if Appion the Grammarian may be cre-
biel) Physiognomifts, upon the Sight of his
illures only, could tell the precife Time of
Ae Partys Death. He was admirable like-
til in reprefenting People in their laft Ago-
es. And, in a Word, to great was the Ve-
Kistionn paid by Antiguity to his Works, that
reral of them were purchafed with uneiti-
tated Ileays of old, and not by any cer-
hin Number or Weight of Pieces. He was
oreover extremely candid and obliging in
Ae Temper, willing to instruct all thofe who
tet his Advice, and generous even to his
of potent Rivals.
PROTO-


10
3


194


Ancrent Masters.
PROTOGENES of Caunus, a City of Caria,
subject to the Rbodians, was by the Ancients
efteemed one of the four beit Painters inf
Greece; but lived miferably poor, and venf
little regarded in his own Country, till Apelled
having made him a Vifit, to bring him into
Reputation, bought up feveral of his Pidures
at greater Rates than he alked for them; and
pretending that he defigned to fell them again
for his own Work, the Rbodians were glad id
redeem them upon any Terms. Whole Diff
ciple he was, is not certainly known; but if
is generally affirmed, that he spent the greatef
Part of his Life in painting Ships and Seat
Pieces only : Vet applying himfelf at latt 1f
nobler Subjects, he became an Arriff to well
accompliffied, that Apelles confeffed he uas
in all Respects (at lead) equal to himfelf
excepting only that never knowing when it
leave off, by overmuch Diligence, and 100
nice a Correctness, he often dispirited, and
deadened the Lifs. Hle was famous allo fof
feveral Figures which he made in Bross: Bof
his moft celebrated Piece of Painting, wil
that of Lalises, which coff him feven Veaf
Study and Labour, and which faved the Cit
of Rbodes from being burnt by Demerrins Pof
liorcetes. Vide page 65.
Of MELANTHrUs we have nothing cal
tain, but that he was brought up at Siegen (Ihl
bett School of Greece) under Pampbilus, at the
same Time with Apelles; that he contribun
both by his Pen and Pencil, to the Improrel
ment of his for; and, amongft many excell
lent Pieces, painted Ariffraims the Sicunal
Tyrant in a triamphal Chariot, attended of
Vid


Arcient Mafters.
Vilory, putting a Wreath of Lqurel upon
his flead; which was highly efteemed.
ARISTIDEs of Tbebes, the Dilciple of Enxe-
nidas, lived in the same Olympiad with Apelle:,
and was the firft who, by the Rules of Arr,
attained a perfect Knowledge of expreffing
the Paffions and Affections of the Mind. And
though his Colouring was fomewhat hard,
and not fo very beautiful as could be withed,
jet notwithflanding to much were his Pieces
admired, that after his Deceafe, Artalus King
of Persamus gave an hundred Talents (18750
1ib.) for one of them.
His Cotemporary was AscLEPIODORUS
the Libeman, equally skilled in the Arts of
Scupture and Painting; but, in the latter,
chicfly applauded for the Beguries of a cor-
relt Stile, and the Truth of his Proportion.
in which Apelles declared himfelf as much in-
terior to this Artiff, as he was to AMPHYON,
in the Ordering and excellent Disposition of
his Figures. The moll famous Pictures of 4-
depuderus, were thofe of the tavetve Gods, for
which Minajon, the Tyrant of Elatea, gave him
the Value of about 300l. Sterting a-piece.
About the same Time alfo were the feve-
tal Matters following, viz. THEOMNESTUS,
tamed for his admirable Talent in Portrairs.
NIcHHOMACHUs, the Son and Difciple of
Myiademus, commended for the ineredible
Pacility and Freedom of his Pencil.
NicOPHANEs, celebrated for the Elegance
of his Defign, and for his grand Manner and
Majcity


195


196
A. Mun.
2636.



Ancient Masters.
Majelty of Stile; in which few Maffers were
to be compared to him.
PYREICUs was famous for little Pieces
only; and from the fordid and mean Subjects
to which he addicted himself (fuch as a Bar.
ber’s or Sheemaker's Shop, the Stili-Life, Ani.
mals, Herbage, &ec.) got the Sirname of Rby-
Parograpbus. Vet tho' his Subjects were low,
his Performance was admirable; and the
Imallet Pictures of this Arriff were effeemed
more, and fold at greater Rates, than the
larger Works of many o her Maffers.
ANTiDoTUs, the Disciple of Eupbranor,
was extremely diligent and induffrious, but
very flow at his Pencil; which, as to the co
learing Part, was generally hard and dry. He
was chieffy remarkable for having been the
Master of
NicrAs of Arbens, who painted Women
in Perfection, and ffourifhed about the 114th
Olymp. Anno 322 ante Cbr. being univerfally
extolled for the greatVariety andnoble Choice
of his Subjects, for the Force and Relievo of his
bigures, for his great Skill in the Dillribi-
tion of the Lights and Shadows, and for his
wonderful Dexterity in reprefenting all Sons
of four-footed Anrmals, beyond any Mafter in
his Time. His moft celebrated Piece was that
of Homer's Hell; which, after he had refuled
Lixty Talents (11250 lb.) offered hm for it,
by King Prelemmy, the Son of Lagus, he fr
neroufly prefented to his own Country. He
was likewife much effcemed by all his Co.
temporaries, for his excellent Talent in Scup.
sure; and, as Plinng reports, by Praxitds
himfelf:


Ancrent Masters.
himself: But this feems highly improbable,
confidering, that by his own Account, there
were at leaff forty Vears betwixt them.
ATHENTON of Maronea (a City of Tbrace)
2 Dilciple of Glancion the Gorinthian, was
about this Time alfo as much in Vogue as
Nicias. And though his Colouring was not
altogether fo agreeable, yet in every other
Particular he was even fuperior to him, and
would have rifen to the higheft Pitch of Per-
fection, if the Length of his Life had been
but anfiverable to the great Extent of his
Geius.
FastUs, a noble Roman, painted the Tem-
fle of Health in Rome, Anno I. C. 450, ante
Chr. z01, and gloried fo much in his Per-
formances there, that he affurmed to himself,
for ever after, the Sirname of Pictor, and
thought it no Difparagement to one of the
mol illufrious Families in Rome to be distin-
suihed by that Title.
NEALCES lived Olymp. 132, Anne250 ante
Cbr. in the Time of Aratus the Sicyonian
General, who was his Patron and intimate
Friend. His particular Character was a
brange Vivacity of Thought, a finent Fancy,
and a fingular Happiness in explaining his In-
tentions, as appears page-11s. This Arriff is
fequently mentioned by Writers for a lucky
tht, which was indeed very wonderful. He
Was jult upon the Point of finithing a Horse,
and wanted only to express the Foam about
his Mouth and Bit: But, after many vain At-
tempis, perceiving he was atterly unable, in
iny meafure, to latisfy himfelf, quite weary
26
N


297.
A. Mun.
3647.

3698.
g


I





198
A. Mun.
3780.
ed
3797.

3901.



Hncient Masters.
at laft, and out of all Paticce, in a Fit of
despending Indignation, he threw away his
Pencil with great Vehemence full against the
Picture; when, to his Amazement, he found
his Rage had finifhed his Defign, much moge
happily than ever he could propofe to have
done it by the utmolt Labour of his 4rr.
METRODORus fourifhed Anno 168 ante
CBr. and lived in to much Credit and Repy-
tation at Atbens, that Paulus Emilins, after
he had overcome Persoas King of Macedon,
Anno 3 Olymp. 152. having defired the Aibe-
nians to fend him one of their moft learned
Pbilesopbers to breed up his Children, and allo
a Kilful Painter to adorn his Triumph, Mc.
Trodorus was the Perfon unanimoutly cholen,
as the fitteft for both Employments.
MARCUS PAcuviUs of Brundussum, the
Nephew of old Ennins was not only an emi-
nent Poer himfelf, and famous for feveral
Tragedies which he wrote, but excelled allo
in Painting: Witnefs his celcbrated Workst
at Rome in the Temple of Hercules, in the
Forum Boarium. He fourithed Anne U.C.
600, ante Cbr. 151, and died at Tarenlam,
almoff ninety Years of Age.
TIMOMACHUs of Byxantium (now Cor
Rantinople) lived Anne V. C. 704, ante Chr.
47., in the Time of Tulins Cafar, who give
him eighty Talents (15000 lib.) for his Pieces
of Gjax and Medea, which he placed in the
Temple of Venus, from whom he derived hisf
Family. He was commended alfo for hil
Oreffes and Ipbigenia; but his Mafter-piece
was the Gorgsh, of Medusa's Head.
About


Ancient Masters.
About the fame Tishe alfo Aktilits was
famous at Rems, being as much admired for
his excellent Talent in Painting, as he was
condemned for the fcandalous Ofe he made
of it; taking all his Ideas of the Goddeffes
from common Strampets; and placing his Mif-
trefes in the Heavens himoright the Gods, in
feveral of his Pieces.
Lvprus lived in great Reputation, under
Auguffus Cefar, who began his Reign Anno
U.C.710, ante Cbr. 41. He excelled in grand
Compositions; and was the firft who painted
the Fronts of Houfes in the Streets of Rome;
which he beautified with great Varicty of
Landscapes and pleafant Vieaus, together with
all other Sorts of different Subjects, managed
after a moft noble Mianner.
TURPILIUs, a Roman Knight, lived in
the Time of Vespasan, who was cholen Em=
peror, An. Dom. 69. And, tho' he painted
every Thing with his lest fland, was much
applauded for his admirable Performances at
Verona.
His Cotemporaries were, CokwELivs P:-
NUs and Acrivs PRiscUs, who with their
Pencils adorned the Temples of Honour and
Virtue, repaired by Vespafian: But of the
wo, Priscas came nearcit in his Stile and
Manner of Painting, to the Purity of the Gre-
cian Scbool.
And thus have 1 given the Reader a sort
Account of all the moft eminent Mafters who
Hourifhed in Greece and Rome, in the Compats
Of
M 2


189
AA. Mun.
3907.

A. Dom.
69.
Cg


200


H1. Dom.
580.



Ancrent Masters.
of more than a thousand Vears. It is true in
deed, that for a long Time after the Reigns
of Vespasian, and Titus his Son, Painting and
Sculprure continued in great Reputation in
fraty; nay, we are informed, that under their
Succeffors, Domitian, Nerva and Trajan; they
shined with a Luffre almoft equal to what
they had done under Alexander the Great.
It is likewife true, that the Roman Emperors,
drian, Antonine, Alexander Severus, Constan-
tine and Valentinian, were not only cenerous
Encouragers of thefe Arts, but alfo in the
Practice of them to well skilled, that they
rought feveral extraordinary Pieces with
their own Hands; and by their Example, as
well as their Patronage, raifed up many con-
fiderable Arufts in both Kinds. But the
Nanmes of all thofe excellent Men being un.
happily loft with their Works, we muft here
conclude our Catclogue of the ANCIENT
MASTRRS; and shall only take Notice,
that under that Title all thofe are to be com-
prehended, who practifed Painting or Sculp-
fure either in Greece or Rome, before the Vear
of our Lord 58o: At which Time the Latin
Tongue ceating to be the common Lanouage of
Lialy, and becoming mate, all the noble Arts
and Sciences (which, in the two preceding
Centuries, had been brought very low, and
by the continual lnvafions of the Norrbern
Nations reduced to the laft Extremities) ex-
pired with it: and, in the Reign of Phecas
the Emperor foon affer, lay buried together,
as in one common Grave, in the Ruins of
the Roman Empire.
MODERN


MODE R N
M A S T E R S.
YIOvANNI CIMARUE, nobly defcended,
7 and born at Florence, Anno 1240, was
the firft who revived the Art of Paint-
ing in Iraly. He was a Disciple of some
poor ordinary Painters, fent for by the Go-
vernment of Flerence from Greece; whom he
foon furpaffed, both in Drawing and Co-
louring, and gave fomething of Strength
and Freedom to his Works; to which they
could never arrive. And though he wanted
the Art of mannaging his Lights and Sha-
dows, was but litile acquainted with the
Rules of Perspective, and in divers other
Particulars but indifferently accomplifhed;
yet the Foundtion which he laid for fu-
ture improvement, entitled him to the Name
of the Fmber of the firft Age, or Infancy of
Modern Painting. Some of his Works are
yet remaining at Florence, where he was fa-
mous alfo for his Skill in Arcbifecdure, and
where he died very rich, Anno 1700.
Giorro, his Disciple, born near Florence,
Ance 1276, was a good Sculptor and Archi-
14l, as well as a better Painter than Cima-
1uc. He began to shake off the Stiffness of
the
M


20I

1240.
1E1.6o.
and

1276.


202


E1. Co.



Modern Masters.
the Greek Maffers; endeavouring to give
a finer Air to his Heads, and more of Na
ture to his Colouring, with proper Actions
to his Figares. He attempted likewife to
draw after the Lye, and to express the dif
ferent Pafhions of the Mind; but could not
come up to the Liveliness of the Eyes, the
Tenderness of the Flefh, or the Strength
of the Mufcles, in naked Figures. He was
fent for, and employed by Pope Benedicf XI.
at Rome, and by his Succeffor Clement V.
at Avignen. He painted feveral Pieces allo
at Padua, Naples, Ferrara, and in other
Parts of Iraly; and was every where much
admired for his Warks, but principally for
his Ship, of Mefaic Work, over the Gates
of the Pertice, in the Entrance of St. Pater's
Church in Rome; and for a Picture, which
he wrought in one of the Churches of Fler
rence, reprefenting the Dearh of the blesed
Firgin, with the Apoffles about her; the 4.
fitudes of which Story, N. Angelo Byonarah
afed to fay, could not be better defigned,
He ffourifhed in the Time of the famous
Dante and Perrarch; drew the Partrait of
the former, and was in great Efteem with
them both, and all the excellent Men in his
Age. He died June 1236; and, in Hos
nour to his Memory, had his Starne in Mar.
Se, erected over his Temb, by the City of
Florence.
ANDREA TArfi, and GaDDo GapDl
were his Cotemporaries, and the Refforers
of Mefaic Work in fraty; which the former
had learnt of Apollomns the Greek, and the
Patter very much improved.
A1


Modern Masters.
At the fame Time alfo was MARCAR:-
TONE, a Native of Grexxo in Tuscany, who
art invented the Art of Gilding with Leay-
Gold upon Bole-armenigc.
SIMONE MEMMI, born at Siena (a City
in the Borders of the Dukedom of Florence
Anno 1285, was a Disciple of Giotto, whofe
Manner he improved in drawing after the
Life; and is particularly celebrated by Pe-
warch, for an excellent Pertrair which he
made of his beloved Laura. He was ap-
plauded for his free and eafy Ingention, and
began to underfland the Decorum in his Com-
pohtions. Obiit Inne 1345
TADDRO GADDI, another Disciple of
Ciotte, born at Florence, Anno 1300, excelled
his Mafter in the Beauty of his Colouring,
and the Liveliness of his Figures. He was
alfo a very skilful Archifeel, and much com-
mended for the Bridge which he built
over the River Irue at Flerence. He died
AO 1350.
ToMASO, called GiorTiNo, for his 2f.
fetting and imitating Giorfo'’s Manner born
alfo at Fforeace; Anno 1324, began to add
Strength to his Figures, and to improve the
Art of Perspecfive. He died Anne 1356.
JoHANNES at Evk, commonly called
Joun of BRUCEs, born at Masieck, on the
River Maex, in the Low-Countries, Anne
1370, was a Difciple of his Brother Huberf,
and a confiderable Painter; but, above all
Things, famous for having been the happy
Inventex
M 4


203

1285.
El. 60.
d

1300.
El. S0.
d

1324.
El.32.
nd

1370.


204
El. 71.
d

1417.


Modern Masters.
Inventer of the Art of Painting in Oil, Axns
1410, (thirty Years before Printing was
found out, by John Guttembery, of Straf
burg). He died Anne 1441, having; fome
Years before his Deceafe, communicated his
Inventien to

ANTONELLO, of Micfina, who travelled
from his own Country into Flanders, on Pur-
pofe to learn the Secres; and, returning to
Sicity, and afterwards to Venice, was the firtl
who practifed and taught it in Rat. He
died Anno LEtat. 49.
In the preceding Century fourifhed fe.
veral other Maffers of good Repute: But
their Manner being the fame, or but very
little different from that of Giofro, it will be
fufficient to mention the Names only of fome
of the moft eminent; and tuch were, Andrea
Orgagna, Pieire Cavallino, Stefane, Bona-
mico Buffalmacco, Pietro Laurati, Lippe, Spi-
nello, Casentine, Pisano, &c. nd thus the
Are of Painting continued almoft at a Stand
for about an hundred Vears; advancing but
flowly, and gathering but little Strength, ill
the Time of
MASACCIO, who was born in Tuscam,
Anno 1417; and for his copious invention,
and true Manner of Defign; for his delight
ful Way of Colouring, and the graceful Ac
tions which he gave his Figures; for his
Loofenets in Draperies, and extraordinary
judgment in Perspective, is reckoned to
have been the Mafter of the second or middle
Age of Modern Painring; which, it is thought,
he would have carried to a much higher De-
P7Cl


Modern Mafters.
not fopped
gree of Perfection, if Death had
it was sup
him in his Career (by Porfon,
poied) Anno 1443.
GENTTEE, and Grovswwr, the Sons and
Dilciples of GlacoMO BELLINO were born
2t Venice, (Gentile,, Anno 1421) and were fo
eminent in their Time, that Gentile was fent
for to Constantinogle, by Mabomel II. Empe-
for of the Turks; for whom having, amongit
other Things, painted the Decollation of Sr
John Baptiff, the Emperor, to convince him
that the Neck, after its Separation from the
Body, could not be fo long as he had made
it in his Picture, ordered a Slave to be
brought to him, and commanded his Head
to be Rruck off in his Prefence; which fo
terrified Gentile, that he could never be: at
Re, till he got Leave to return Home;
which the Emperor granted, after he had
knighted him, and nobly rewarded him
for his Services. The moff. confiderable
Works of thefe Brothers are at Venice;
where Giovanns lived to the Age of ninety
Years, having very rarely painted any thing
but pripture Stories, and religious Subjects,
which he performed to well, as to be
cheemed the moft excellent of all the Bellins.
See more of him, page 170, 171. Gentits
Aed Anno 1501.
ANDREA MANTEGNN, born at Padua,
Anne 1431, and a Difciple of Tacopo Squar-
cient, was very correct in Defign, admirable
in Fore-sportening his Figures, well verfed
i Perspetive, and arrived to great Know-
ledge in the Anriquities, by his continued
Application to the Starues, Baso-Relievo'’s.
M S
E.C.


205
REl.26.


1421.
SEit. 80.
and

1431.


206
El. 86.


1432.
Xit. 56.
d


Medern Masters.
Lc. However, his Neglect of feafoning his
Studies after the Antigye, with the living
Beauties of Narare, has given him a Pencil
somewhat hard and dry: And befides, his
Drajery is generally Riff, according to the
Manner of thofe Times, and too much per-
plexed with little Folds. He painted fe-
veral Things for Pope Innocent VIll. and
for other Princes, and Perfons of Diftine
tion: But the beft of his Works (and for
which he was Knighted by the Marquis ln.
device Gonzaga, of Mantaa) are the Tri
umphs of Jubus Cafar, now at Hampion
Court. He died Anno 1517; having begn
one of the firft who practifed the 4r of
Graving in Italy: The Invention whereof is
Juftly ascribed to MAso FiNICUERRA, a
Goldimith of Flerence; who, in the Vear
1460, found out the Way of Printing of
upon Paper, whatever he had graved upon
his Silver-Plate.
NDREA VERROCCHiO, 2 Flerentine,
born Anno 1432, was well scilled in eome
1ry, Optics, Mufic, Architcclure, Sculpture,
and Painting; but left off the laft, becaute,
in a Piece which he had made of St. John
Captizing our Saviour, Lionarde da Vinci, one
of his Difciples, had, by his Order, painted
an Angel holding up fome Part of our Sa-
viour's Garments, which fo far excelled all
the reft of Andrea’s Figures, that, enraged to
be ourdone by a Vontb, he refolved never to
make Ofe of his Pencil any more. He was
the firft who found out the Art of taking
and preferving the Likeness of the Face, by
moulding off the Fearures in Plaifter of Parrt.
He died nno 1438.
LUcA


Madern Masters.
LUCA SIGNORELLL, of Certona, a City in
the Dukedom of Flaxence, born Anno 1439,
was a Diiciple of Fieino dal Borgo S. Sspal-
cro; and fo excellent at defigning naked Bo-
dies, that from a Piece which he painted in
2 Chapel of the great Church at Orvieto, M.
Angelo Pngnarruoti transferred several entire
Figures into his laff Judgment. He died very
ricn, Anno 1;21; and 1s faid to have had
such an abfolute Command of his Passions,
that when his beloved Son (a Fourh extreme-
ly handfome, and of great Hopes) had been
unfortunately Killed, and was brought home
to him; he ordered his Corps to be carried
into his Painting-Room; and having stripped
him, immediately drew his Picture, without
hedding a Tear.
PiETRo di COsIMo, a Florentine, born
Anno 1441, was a Dilciple of Cosimo Refelli,
Whofe Name he retained, and a very good
Painter; but fo ftrangely fantaftical, and full
of Caprices, that all his Delight was in paint-
ing Satyrs, Fawns, Harpies, Monfters, and
such like extravagant and whimfical Figures;
and therefore he applied himself, for the
molt part, to Bacchanalias, Masquerades, &c.
Obiit Anne 1521.
LioNARDO da Viwer, nobly defcended,
and born in a Cafile to called, near the City
of Florence, Anne 1445, was bred up under
Andrea Verrecebio; but fo far furpaffed him,
and all athers his Predeceffors, that he is
owned to have been the Maffer of the Third
He was
or Colden ge of Modern Painting.
in every Respect one of the completest Men
in


207

1439.
(El. 82.
d
a
1441.
Er.80.
d


1445.


208


Eit. 75.
d


Medern Masters.
in his Time, and the beft furniffied with all
the Perfections both of Body and Mind; an
excellent Sculpror and Arebifect, a Kilful Ma:
fician, an admirable Poet, very expert in
Anatomy and Chemiffry; and thoroughly learn.
ed in all the Parts of the Mathematics. He
was extremely diligent in the Performance
of his Works; and tho' it was the Opinion
of Rubens, that his chiefeft Excellence lay in
giving every thing its proper Character, yet
he was to wonderfully diffident of himself,
and curious, that he left feveral Pieces un-
finifhed, believing his Hand could never
reach that Idea of Perfection, which he had
conceived of them in his Mind. He lived
many Vears at Milan, Director of the Aca-
ettablifhed there by the
demy of Painting,
Duke; and highly effeemed for his cele-
brated Piece of our Savicur's laft Supper, and
some of his other Paintings. Nor was he
lets applauded for his Art in contriving the
Canal, that brings the Water from the River
dda to that City. He was a great Con-
tender with M. Angelo Buonarruori, and upon
account of the Enmity betwixt them, went
into France (Anno (Et. 70) where, after feve-
ral confiderable Services done for Francis l.
he expired in the Arms of that Monarch,
being taken (pecchlets the very Moment, in
which he would have raifed up himself, to
thank the King for the Honour done him in
that Vifit, Anno 1520. He left a Treatife
of the Art. of Painting behind him, written
by himfelf; of which R. du Frefne publiffed
a noble Edition at Paris, in 1651, with Fi-
gures by Nic. Pouffin.
PIETRO


Modern. Masters.
PIETRO PERUCYNO, fo called from the
Place where he was born, in the Ecclessaffi-
cal State, Anno 1446, was another Difciple
of Andrea Verrocchio. What Charatter he
had, fee page 158. He was fo very mifera-
ble and covetous a Wretch, that the Loss
of his Money by Thieves broke his Heart,
Anno 1524.
DOMENICO GHIRLANDATO, 2 Floren-
line, born Anno 1449, was at firtt delign-
ed for the Profeftion of a Goldsmith; but
followed his more prevailing Inclinations
of Painting with fuch Succets, that he is
ranked amongtt the prime Mafters in his
Time. See farther page 167. He died
Anne 1493.
FRANCESCO RArROLYNI, commonly call-
ed FRANCIA, born at Belgna, Anne 1450,
was at firtt a Goldsmith or Teaveller; after-
Wards a Graver of Coins and Medals; but at
latt applying himself to Painting, he ac-
quired great Reputation by his Works; and
particularly by a Piece of St. Secaffian, whom
he had drawn bound to a Tree, with his
Hands tied over his Head. In which Pi-.
gure, befides the Delicacy of its Colouring,,
and Gracefulucts of the Pollure, the Propor-
ton of iis Parts was to admirably juff and
true, that all the fucceeding Bolognese Pain-
urs, even Hannibal Carracbe himielt, Rudied
is Measures as their Rule, and followed them
in the fame Manner as the Ancrents had done
the Canon of Polyclerus. It was under the
Difcipline of this Mafter, that Marc. Anronie,
Raphacl’s bett Graver, learnt the Rudiments.
Of


209

1446.
El. 78.

n
1449.
LEt. 44.
yant

1450..


270
Et. 80.


1469.
1El. A8.


1471.


Miodern Masters.
of his Art. Count Matvafia affirms, he lived
till the Vear 1530; though, Kasari fays, he
died in 15 18, and will have the Occafion of
his Death to have been a Fit of Transpors
that feized him upon Sight of the famous St.
Cecilia, which Rapbael had painted, and fet
to him, te put up in one of the Churches
in Bologza.
FRA. BARTOLOMEO, born at Savignans,
a Village abour ten Miles from Flerence,
Anno 1469, was a Difciple of Cosimo Refell;
but much more beholden to the Works of
Lionardo da Vinci, for his extraordinary Skill
in Painting. He was very well verfed in
the Fundamentals of Defign; and befides,
had fo many other landable Qualities, that
Raj bael, after he had quitted the School of
Perngine, appired himfelf to this Mafer;
and, under him, ffudied the Rules of Per-
Bellive, together with the Art of managing
and uniting his Colours. He turned Domi-
ican Friar Anno 1500; and, after fome
Time, was by his Superiors fent to the Con
vent of St. Mark in Flerence. He painted
both Pertrairs and Hiffories; but his scrupy:
lous Confcience would hardly ever fuffer him
to draw naked Figures, though nobody under
Rood them better. He died Anno 1517; and
was the firtt who invented and made Ule of
2 Layman.
ALRERT DURE, born at Nurembere, of
Good-Friday, Anno 1471, by the Instructions
of his Father, a curious Fiaveller; the Pre-
cepts of Michact Wolgemath, a confiderable
Painter; and the Ruies of Geomerry, Arch
recture, and Perspective, became the moll er-
cellent


Medern Mosters.
cellent of all the Genman Mafters. And not=
withstanding that his Manner of Debign is ge-
nerally hard, iff and ungraceful, and his
Gulo entirely Gothic; yet he was otherwife
to very well accomplished, that his Prints
were had in great Esteem all over Iraty; co=
pied at Venice, by the famous Marc. Antonio;
and to much admired even by Rapbael him-
felf, that he hung them up in his own Cham-
ber, and ufed frequently to lament the Mif-
fortune of fo great a Cenius, to be brought
up in a Country, where nothing was to be
seen that might furnish him with noble Ideas,
or give him any Light into Things necesfary
for grand Cempositions. His principal Works
were painted at Prague, in the Palace of the
Emperor Marimilian I. who had fuch a Re-
gard for his fingular Merit, that he presented
him with a Coat of Arms, as the Badge of
Nobility. He was alfo much in Favour with
the Emperor Charles V. and for his falid,
good Senfe, as well as his modeft and agree-
able Temper, beloved by every body, and
happy in all Places, but only at home; where
the penurious and fordid Iinmours of a mi-
ferable Shrew, his Wife, shortened his Days,
Anno 1528. Sec page 73. And note far-
ther, that befides the Obligations we have
to this great Man, as a Painter and Graver,
we are much beholden to him as an Aurbor;
for the Treatife he wrote of Geomerry, Per-
Piclive, Fortification, and the Preportions of
Duman Bodies.
MIcHEL ANCELO BuoNARRUOTI,
nobly descended, and born near Flevence,
Aune 1474, was a Difciple of Domenico Ghir-
tandaio, and molt prefoundly Kkilled in the
Arts


4
Et. 31
od

14743


272


2I2
El. 90.


2477.


Modern Wasters.
Arts of Painting, Sculsture, and Architec.
fure. He has the Name of the greateft De-
figner that has ever been; and it is univer.
fally allowed him, that never any Painter
in the World underftood Anaromy to well.
He was alfo an excellent Poet; and not
only highly efteemed by feveral Popes fac-
ceffively; by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, by
the Republic of Venice, by the Emperor
Charles V. by King Francisl. and by most
of the Monarchs and Princes of Chriffendom;
but was alfo invited over into Turky, by So-
lyman the Magnificent, upon a Defign he then
had of making a Bridge over the Hellespont;
from Constantinople to Pera. His moft cele-
brated Piece of Painting is that of the laff
Judgment in the Pope's Chapel. He died in
great Wealth at Rome, from whence his
Body was tranflated to Flerence, and there
honourably interred, Anno 1564. See page
167, 168.
GioRcrO. del CaSTEL FRANCO, called
GloR CToNE, becaufe of his noble and
comely Aspect, was born at Trevifane, a
Province in the State of Venice, Anno 1477;
and received his firft Inftructions from Gro-
vanni Belliao: But, having afterwards fludied
the Works of Lienardo da Vinci, he foon ar-
rived to a Manner of Painting fuperior to
them both; defigned with greater Freedom,
coloured with more Strength and Beauty;
gave a better Relievo, more Life; and a no-
bler Spirit to his Figures; and was the firtt,
amongit the Lembards, who found out the
admirable Efiects of Arong Lights and Sha-
dows. He excelled both in Portrairs and
Heffories; but his moft valuable Piece in
Oit


Wiodern Masters.
273
Oil, is that of our Saviour carrying bis Cress,
now at Venice; where it is had in wonderful
Eeem and Veneration. He died young of
the Plague (which he got in the Arms of his
Millrels, who was infected with it) Annoi;ii: Er. 34.
having been likewife as famous for his Per-
formances in Mufic, as his Productions in
Painting. See page 171.
TITTANO, the moft univerfal Genins of
all the Lombard School, the beit Colouriff of
all the Mederns, and the moit eminent for
Hifferies, Landscapes, and Portraits, was born

at Cudre, in the Venerian Territories; Anno
1477.
1477, being defcended from the ancient
family of the Vecelli. He was bred up in
the School of Gio. Bellino, at the fame Time
With Grorgione; but improved himfelf more
by the Emulation that was betwixt him and
his Fellow-Disciple, than by the Inftructions
of his Matter. He was cenfured indeed by

M. Angelo Buonarruetr, for Want of Correct-
nets in Defign, (a Fault common to all the
Lombard Painters, who had not been ac-
quainted with the Anriquiries) yet that De-
feet was abundantly fapplied in all the other
Parls of a moft accompiithed Artiff. He
made three feveral Portraits of the Emperor
Charles V. who loved him to entirely, that
he honoured him with Kniobthood, created
him Count Palatine, made all his Defcend
ants Cientlemen, affigned him a confiderable
Pention out of the Chamber of Napler; and
what other remarkable Proofs of his Af
feltion he shewed him, fee page 66, 67.
and a Character of his Works, page 171.
172. He painted alfo his Son, Pbilip II.
Sityman Emperor of the Turks, two Popes,
three


214
Et. 99.



Modern Masters.
three Kings, two Empreffes, feveral Quees
and almoff all the Princes of Iraty, togethes
with the famed Lud. Arioffe, and Peter Are
fine, his intimate Friends. Nay, to great
was the Name and Reputation of Tilian
that there was hardly a Perfon of any Emi
nence then living in Enroge, from whom be
did not receive fome particular Mark of
Efteem; and befides, being of a Temper
wonderfully obliging and generous, his Houle
at Venice was the conttant Rendezvous of all
the Virtuofi and People of the beff Qualiy.
He was to happy in the Conttitution of his
Body, that he never had been fick till the
Fear 1576, when he died of the Plague, foll
of Honour, Glory and Riches; leaving be
hind him two sons and a Brother, of when
Pomponio, the eldelt, was a Clergymas, and
well preferred. Bur,
ORATiO, the youngeff Son, painted t
veral Portraits that might fand in Con)
petitien with thofe of his Father's Hand
He was famous alfo for many Hiffery Pica
which he made at Fenice, in Concurrent
with Paul Veronese and Tinteres. But, 
witched at laft with the Hopes of finding
the Philofopher's Stose, he laid afide h
Pencil; and, having reduced mott of wit
had been got by his Father into Smoke, dis
of the Plague foon after him, in the Flowd
of his Age.
FRANCESCO VECELLIO, Titian's Br
ther, was trained up to Arms; but, appi
ing himfelf afterwards to Painting, he h
came fo great a Proficient therein, that ]
sian grew jealous of him 1 and fearing,
is


Niodern Masters.
night in Time come to eclipfe his Reputa-
sion, fent him (upon pretended Bufiness) to
WPerdinand King of the Romans; and there
found fuch Means to divert him from Paint
ing, that he quite gave over the Study of it,
and never any farther attempted it, unlefs
t were to make a Portrait, now and then,
ot the Request of his particular Acquaint-
RCC.
ANDREA del SARTo, (to called, becaufe
ATayler'’s Son) born at Florence, Anno 1478;
Was a Difciple of Pictro di Cesimo, very care-
ful and diligent in his Works; and his
Colouring was wonderfully sweet : But his
filtures generally want Strength and Life;
swell as their Author; who was naturally
pild, timorous, and poor-spirited. He was
bat for to Paris, by Francis I. where he
hight have gathered great Riches; but that
his Wife and Relations would not suffer him
p continue long there. He lived in a mean
ind contemptible Conditian, becaufe he fet
yt a very liftle Value upon his own Per-
brmances: Vet the Flereatines had to great
a Efteem for his Warks, that, during the
ury of the popular Factions amongft them,
hey preserved his Pieces from the Flames,
then they neither spared Churches, nor
ny thing elfe. He died of the Plague,
Mno 1520.
RATAELLE da URSINO, born Anne 1483,
as one of the handfomest and best tem-
ored Men living. See some Account of him,
9e 168, 160; and add to it, That by the
heral Confent of Mankind, he is acknow-
dged to have been the Prince of the Mo-
dern


215

1478.
E1. 42.


1433.


216


SEt. 37.


1484.


Modern Masters.
dern Painters; and is ortentimes ftiled, i
Divine Raphael, for the inimitable Grace
of his Pencil, and for the Excellence of hi
Genins, which feemed to have fomething mor
than baman in 11s. Compofition: That he wa
beloved in the higheft Degree by the Pope
Julins II. and Leo . that he was admire
and courted by all the Princes and Stateso
Earege; and partic larly by Hery Vill. wh
would fain have obliged him to come ove
into England. That his Perfon was the Won
der and Delight of Rome, as his Works an
now the Glory of it: That he lived in th
greateff Stare and Splendor imaginable, mot
of the eminent Mafers in his Time being
ambitious of working under him; and tha
he never went abroad, without a Crowd of
Artifls and others, who attended and follow.
ed him purely out of Respect: That he de
clined Marriage (though very advantageou
Offens had been made him) in Hopes of 2
Cardinal’s Cap, which he expected; but fall
ing into a Fever in the mean Time, and con
cealing the true Caufe of his Diftemper from
his Phyicians, Death difappointed him of
the Reward due to his moft extraordinanf
Merits, Anno 1520.
Gro. AwTOwNO REOYLLO da PORDE
NoNE, born at a Place fo called, not faf
from Udine, in the Venetian Territories, Aand
1484, after some Time spent in Letters and
Music, applied himself to Painting; yer, wiall
out any other Guide to conduct him, befidg
his own prompt and lively Genius, and the
Works of Grorgione; which he studied at Ves
vice with to much Attention, that he foon aid
rived to a Manner of Colouring nothing inted
riod


Modern Masters.
for to his Pattern. But that which tended
ot more to his Improvement, was the con-
fioued Emulation, betwixt himfelf and Filian,
with whom he disputed the Superiority; and
foy Fear of being infulted by his Rival,
painted (while he was at Venice) with a Sword
y his side. This noble Jealouty inspired
in with an Elevation of Thought, quicken-
 his Invention, and produced feveral ex-
Rilent Pieces in Oil, Diftemper and Fresco.
from Venice he went to Genoa, where he un.
stook some Things in Competition with
Ciring del Taga; but not being able to come
ito the Perfections of Pierino's Pencil, he
Furned to Venice, and afterwards vifited fe-
fral other Parts of Lombardy, was Knighted
y the Emperor Charles V. and at laft being
ent for to Ferrara, was fo much etteemed
there, that he is faid to have been poifoned,
hne 1540, by fome who envied the Favours
Et. 56.
which he received from the Duke. He re-

founced his Family-Name, Licinio, out of
fatred to one of his Brothers, who attempted
murder him.

SEBASTIANO Aef PIOMRO, a Native of
o
inice, Anno 1485, took his Name from an
1485.
Oice given him by Pope Glement VII. in
he Lead Mines. He was defigned by his
lather for the Profeffion of Mussc, which
to practifed for fome Time with Reputa-
on; till following at laff the more power
WDillates of Nature, he betook himself ro
ainting, and became a Difciple of old Cro.
thno; continued his Studies under Crer-
on; and having attained his excellent Man-
b of Colouring, went. to Rome; where he
pinuaied himself to far into the Favour of
Michael.


217


218
LEt.62.

our
1487.


Medern Mafters.
Michael Angelo, by fiding with him and hi
Party againft Raphael, that, pleafed with the
Sweetnets and Beauty of his Pencil, he in
mediately furnished him with fome of hi
own Defigns, and letting them pass unde
Sebaffian’s Name, cried him up for the bel
Painter in Rome: nd indeed, fo univerts
was the Applaufe which he gained by hi
Piece, of Laxaras raifed from the Dead (I
Defign of which had likewife been given his
by Michael Angelo) that nothing but the fa
mousTransfguration of Raphaels could ecdipl
it. He has the Name of being the firt wh
invented the rt of preparing Plaiffer-vall
for Oil-painting (with a Composition of Pird
Maffic, and Quick-lime) but was general
to flow and 1. 2y in his Performances, the
other Hands were oftentimes employed i
finishing what he had begun. He dif
Anno 1847.
BARTOLOMEC, (in the Tuscan Diald
called Baccio) BANDINELLI, a Flerenli
Painter and Sculptor, born Anne 1487, wi
a Difciple of Gio. Francesco Ruffici; and
by the Help of Anaromy, joined with h
other Studies, became a very excellent an
correct Defigner; but in the colouring Pa
was to unfortunate, that after he had head
Michael Angelo condemn it, for being has
and unpleafant, he never could be prevaild
upon to make any farther Ife of his Pencil
but always engaged some other Hand in d
louring his Desipns. However, in Scupind
he fucceeded betrer; and for a Descem pr
the Cross, in Mexxo-Relieve, was knighted
the Emperor He was likewife much in Il
your with Francis I. and acquired great Re
putatid


Medern-Mafters.
218
putation by feveral of his Figures, and Abund
ance of Drawings; which yer are more ad-
mired for their true Outline and Proportion,
than for being either graceful or gentile. He
Et. 72.
died Anne 1559.
d

GULIO ROMANO; born Anno 1492, was
the greateft Artiff, and moft univerfal Pain-
1492.
ter, of all the Difciples of Rapharl; beloved
by him as if he had been his Son, for the
wonderful Sweetness of his Temper, and
made one of his Heirs, upon Condition
that he should affift in finishing fuch Things
as he had left imperfect. He was profound=
ly learned in all the Parts of the Antiquities;
and by converfing with the Works of the
molt excellent Poets, particularly Homer, had
made himself an abfolute Mafter of the Qua-
lifications neceffarily required in a grand De=
fener He continued for some Vears at Romb;
after the Death of Raphael; and, by the Dis
tections of Pope Clement VII. wrought feve=
fal admirable Pieces in the Hall of Confian=
ine, and other public Places. But his prin-
cipal Performances were at Maniun; where
he was fent for by the Marquis Frederire Gon¬
saga; and where he made his Name illuf-
ious by a noble and ftately Palace, built
after his Model, and beautified with Variety
of Paintings after his Defigns. And indeed
in Arcbirecture he was fo eminently silful,
that he was invited back to Roms, with an Of-
for made him, of being the chief Archirect
of St. Peters Church: But whilit he was de=
bating with himself, whether or no he should
accept of this Opportunity of returning glo=
rioully into his own Country, Death inter-
Er. 54.
poted, Anno 1546. Sec pare 169; 170.
JACOPO 


220

1493.
Er. 63.


1494.


Modern Mesters.
JaCAPO. CARUCr,,, called:PUNTORC,
from the Place of his Birth, Anno 1493.
frudied under Lionardo da Vincis, Mariolio
Albertinelli, Pietre di Cosime, and Andrea dd
Sarto; but chietly followed the Manner of
the lat, both in Defign. and Cojouring. He
was of fo unhappy. 2. Temper, of Mindf
that though his Works had ffood the Teff
even of Raphael and Michael, Angelo (Thc
beft judges) yet he could never order then
to as to pleafe himfelf; and was fo. fa
from being fatisfied with any thing he hadl
ever done, that he was in great Danger off
lofing. the Gracefulness of his own Mand
ner, by imitating that of other (inferior)
Mallers, and particularly the Stile of 4
bere Durer in his Prints. He spent moft off
his Time at Fiorence, where he painted the
Chapel of St. Laurence; but was to wonder
fully redious about it, that in the Space of
eleven Vears he would admit nobody to feaf
what he had performed. He was alfo of fof
mean and pierful a Spirit, that he chofe ray
ther to be employed by ordinary People fof
inconfiderable Gains, than by Princes and
Noblemen at any Rates; to that he diedf
12
pour, Anno 1556.
GIovANNY DUPINE, to named from
the Place where he was born (being tha
Metropolis of Frioal) Anno 1494; was ing
ructed by Giergione at Venice, and at Komp
became a Disciple of Rapbael; and is ce
lebrated for having been the Reviver of
Stucco Work (a Compofition of Lime and
Marble-powder) in Ofe among the anciet
Remans, and difcovered in the fubterrancan
Vaulle


Modern Masters.
224
Vauits of Tirns's Palace; which he reftored
to its original Splendor and Perfection. He
was employed by Rapbael, in adorning the
Apartments of the Parican; and afterwards
by feveral Princes and Cardinais, in the chief
Palaces of Rome and Flerence; and by the
agreeable Variety and Richness of his Fancy,
and his peculiar Happinets in exprefting all
Sorts of Animals, Fruity Flowers, and the
Still Life, both in Baffo-Reliese and Colours,
acquired the Repatation of being the best
Matter in the World, for Decorations and
Ornaments in Stacco and Grorefque. He died
Anne 1564; and was buried, according to Er. 70.
his Dehire, in the Rotunda, near his dear
n
Matter Rajbael.
ANTONIO ALLECRI, called CoRRECClO,

fom the Place where he was born; in the
Dukedom of Modena, Anno 1494, was 2
1494.
Man of fuch admirable natural Parts, that
nothing but the Unhappiness of his Educa-
tion (which gave him no Opportunities, ei-
ther of Rudying at Rome or Flerence, or of
confulting the Ardiquities, for perfecting him-
ilf in Design) hindered him from being the
mokt excellent Painter in the World: Ver,
fevertheless he had a Genins to fublime, and
Was Maner of a Pencil fo wonderfully foft,
under, beautiful and charming, that Tule
Rimans, having feen a Leda and a naked
tins, painted by him for Fredrick Duke of
edina (who intended them a Prefent for
the Emprror) declared, he thought it impof
ble for any thing of Colours ever to go be-
and them. His chief Works are at Mlodena
nd Parma; at the latt of which Places he
pent moft of his Life, poor, and litle taken
Notice


22.2
El. 40.


1494.


Modern Masters.
notice of, working hard to maintain his Fa.
mily, which was fomewhat large. He was
extremely humble and modeft in his Eeha.
viour, lived very devoutly, and died mach
lamented in the Year 1534; having thrown
himfelf into a Fever, by drinking cold Water
when his Body was overheated, with bring.
ing home fome Copper Money (to the Value
of fixty Crowns) which he had received for
one of his Pieces. See ore, page 17½
and 174.
BATTISTA FRANCO, his Cotemporary,
a Native of Venice, was a Difciple of Mi
chael Angelo; whofe Nianner he followed fol
clofe, that, in the Correetness of his Out
line, he furpaffed moft of the Maffers in
his Time. His Paintings are pretty nume!
rous, and difperted all over Iraty, and others
Parts of Exrope; but his Colouring being
very dry, they are not much more efteemed
than the Prints which he erched. He died
Anno 1561.
LUCAS Dan LEYDEN, to called from thd
Place where he was born, Anno 1494, wal
at firft a Disciple of his Father, a Painted
of Note, and afterwards of Cornelins Engel
bere; and wonderfully cried up in Holtant
and the Low-Coumries, for his Skill in Paint
ing and Graving. He was prodigiouly id
borious in his Works, and a great Emd
lator of Albers Durer; with whom he becant
at length fo intimate, that they drew ead
others Picture. And indeed, their Manb
and Stile are in all Respects to very matt
alikce, that it feemed as if orie and the fa
Soul had animated them both. He was nay
nifte


Modern Masters.
nificent both in his Habit and Way of Liv-
ing; and died Anne 15
3. after an Inter-
view betwixt him and fome other Painters
at Middleburgh. Where difputing and fall-
ing out in their Cups, Lncas, fancying they
had porfoned him, languifhed by Degrees,
and in fix Vears Time pined away, purely
with Conceit.
OUiNTIN MATSYs, of Antavers, was
the Cotemporary of Lncas; and famous for
thiving been transformed from a Blacksmith
to 2 Painter by the Force of Love, and
for the Sake of a Miffrefs, who difliked
this former Profeffion. He was a painful
and diligent imitator of the ordinary Life,
had much better at reprefenting the De-
fels, than the Beauties of Narare. One of
his bett Pieces is a Descent from the Cress,
in a Chapel of the Cathedral at Anraverp
for which, and a Mulatude of other Hif-
Jories and Portraits, he gained a great Num-
per of Admirers; especially for his labo-
hoas Neatness, which in Truth was the
principal Part of his Character. He died
Wnne 1529.
befide the two Mafters laft mentioned,
here were feveral other Hiffory-painters, who
burifhed in Germany, Flanders and Holland,
bout this Time. But their Manner being
enerally gotbic, bard and dry; more like
be Stile of Cimabne, in the Dawning of the
br of Painting, than the Gufto of Raphael,
iis meridian Lufre: We shall only give
by the Names of some of the moft noted;
ad luch were Mabase, aldegraef, Scbeorel,
N 2
Frans


223
Et. 39.
d


224
and
1495.


Modern Masters.
Frans Floris Martin Hemskerck, Chrif.
Schwarts, &c.
POLIDoRO, of Caravaggio (in the Dutchy
of Milan) was born Anno 1495; and, til
eighteen Years of Age, brought up to no
better an Employment than carrying Stouw
and Mortar in the neaw Buildings of Popt
Leo X. But being tempted at last by the
Performances of Gio. d Udine, to try his
Talent in Design; by the Affiftance of one
of his Scholars, and his own indefatiges
ble Application to the Antiquiries, in a lit
the Time he became fo skilful an Arcillf
that he had the Honour of contributing
much to the finishing thofe glorious Works
in the Vatican. He affociated himfelf bol
in the Study and Practice of his Art, wiif
one MATURINO, a Flerentine; and theif
Genias being very confermable, they livef
together like Bretbers, working in Frefd
upon feveral Fremisprices of the moft nol
ble Palaces in Rome. Whereby they act
quired great Reputation; their Inventied
being the richeff, and their Disign the eal
fieff, that could any where be feen. Bu
Mlajurino dying about the Vear 1527, and
Rome being then in the Hands of the spd
niards; Polidoro retired to Naples, and from
thence to Mefina. Where his excelient 7
lent in Architecture alfo being highly comf
mended, he was ordered to prepare the td
amphal Arches, for the Reception of the Enl
peror Charles V from Tairs; for which I
was nobly rewarded : And being afterward
defirous of feeing Rome once more, in H
Return thither was murdered by his sd
vant and Accomplices, for the Sake of M
Mione)


Medern Masters.
225
Money, and buried at MeGina, Anno 1543. Et. 48.
See page 170.

Rosso, (to called from his red Hair) born

at Flerence, Anno 1496; was educated in
1496.
tthe Study of Philesephy, Music, Poeiry, Ar-
chitecture, &c. and having learned the firft
Ruaiments of Deson from the Cartoons of
Michael Angelo, improved himfelf by the
Kelp of Anaromy; which he underffood fo
very well, that he composed two Books upon
that Subject. He had a copious Invention,
fear Skill in the Mixture of his Colours,
lad in the Distribution of his Lights and
Bbadows; was very happy alfo in his naked
figures, which he expreffed with a good
Relievo, and proper Artitudes; and would
have excelled in all the Parts of Painting,
had he not been too licentious and extrava-
fant fometimes, and suffered himfelf rather
to be hurried away with the Heat of an un-
pounded Fancy, than governed by his own
Judgment, or the Rules of Art. From Flo-
Wace his Curiofity carried him to Rome and
Viice, and afterwards into France. He was
Perfon well accomplifhed boch in Body and
ind; and by his Works in the Galleries
M Fountainblean, and by feveral Proofs
Which he gave of his extraordinary Know-
Edge in Archicecture, recommended himfelf
Deffectually to Francisl. that he made him
iperintendant-General of all his Buildings,
littures, CSc. as alto a Canon of the Chapel
loyal, allowed him a confiderable Penfion,
ad gave him other Opportunities of grow-
8 to valtly rich, that for fome Time he
ed like a Prince himself, in all the Splen-
for and Magnificence imaginable; till at
N 3
latt,


226
Et. 45.


Modern Masters.
laft, being robbed of a confiderable Sum of
Money, and fuspecting one of his intimate
Friends (Francesco Pellegrino, a Florentine)
he caufed him to be imprifoned, and put
to the Torture, which he underwent with
Courage: And having in the higheff Extre.
mities maintained his Innocence, with to
much Conflancy, as to procure his Releafe;
Reft, partly out of Remorfe for the barba
fous Treatment of his Friend, and parrlyout
of Fear of the ill Confequence of his juf
Refentment, made himfelf away by Poifon,
nno 1541.
FRANCESCO PRIMATICCro, 2 famous
Painter and Arcbiteef of Belogna, fucceeded
Reso in the Honours and Employments,
which he enjoyed by the Favour of Fran
cis I. and befides, being very well defcended,
was made Abbot of St. Martin de Trayes, in
Champagne. He finithed all the. feveral
Works begun by his Predeceffor at Fours
rainblean, by the Affiftance of Nicoto dill
ABBATE, an excellent Artiff, his Disciples
and cnriched that Palace with Abundance of
noble Starses, and other Pieces of Antif
quity, which he brought purpofely from
Haly, by the King's Order. He had been
bred up at Manina, under Tulio Remand
as well to Stacce Work, as Painting; and
by Rudying his Manner, together with the
Performances of other great Mafters, bl
came perfect in the Art of Design, and
well verfed in grand Compositions. He cont
finued in France during the Remainder O
his Days; lived in Pomp and State, mort
like a Nobleman than a Painter; and hay
ing been very well efteemed in four fevern
Reighs


Modern Masters.
Reigns, died in a good old Age, about the
Vear 1570.
Dow GrUlro CLovro, the celebrated
Limner, born in Sclavenid, Anno 1498, 2t
the Age of eighteen Years went to Naly;
and, under the Conduct of Julio Romane, ap-
plied himself to Miniature, with fuch admi-
rable Success, that never did ancient Greece,
or modern Rrme, produce his Fellow. He
excelled both in Pertraifs and Hiffories; and
as Vafari, his Cotemporary, reports) was
another Titian in the one, and a second Mi-
chael Angelo in the other. He was enter-
fained for fome Time in the Service of the
King of Hangary; after whofe Deceafe he
returned to Faty; and, being taken Pri-
foner at the Sacking of Rome, by the Spa-
siards, made a Vow to retire into a Con-
vent, as foon as ever he should recover his
Liberty: Which he accordingly performed,
not long after, in Mantya; but upon a Dit-
pentation obtained from the Pope, by Car-
dinal Grimani, foon laid afide the religious
Habit, and was received into the Family of
that Prince. His Works were wonderfully
elleemed throughout Exrope; highly valued
by several Popes, by the Emperors Charles V
and Maximilian 1I. by Philip King of Spain,
and many other illuftrious Perfonages 
graved by Alberr Durer himfelf; and to
much admired at Rome, that thofe Pieces
which he wrought for the Cardinal Farness
(in whofe Palace he spent the latter Part of
his Life) were, by all the Lovers of Art,
reckance in the Number of the Rarities of
that City. Ob. Anne 1578.
HANS
H4


Et. 80.



227.
t
1498.


El. 86.
d


228

1498.


Modern Masters.
HANS HOLREIN, born at Bafif in Savit.
Zerland, nno 1498 was a Difciple of his
Father; by whofe ffittance, and his own
Indutry, he made a wonderful Progress in
the Arr of Painring; and acquired fuch a
Name by his Piece of Death’s Dance, in the
Town-hall of Bafl, that the famous Eref
mus, after he had obliged him to draw his
Ficture, fent him over with it into England,
and gave him Lerters recommendatory to Sir
T Bomas Mocre (then Lord Chancellor) who
received and entertained him with the greated
Refpect imaginable; employed him in mak-
ing the Portraits of himself and Family; and
with the Sight of them fo charmed King
Henry Vill. that he immediately took him
into his Service; and, by the many fignal
Inftances which he gave him of his royal Fa-
your and Bounty, brought him likewife into
Efteem with all the Nobility, and People of
Eminence in the Kingdom. One of his bef
Pieces, was that of the faid King with his
Qncen, (Gc. at Whitehall; which, with di
vers other admirable Portraits of his Hand,
(some as bir and others lets than the Lise,
and as well in Water-Colours, as in Fresse
and Oil) may challenge a Place amongft those
of the moft famed Iralian Mafterst See pags
177. 178. He was eminent alfo for a rich
Vein of Invention, very confpicuous in a Mul
titude of Defigns, which he made for Gravers,
Sculpters, Tewellers, &rc. and was particularly
remarkable for having (like Yurgilins, the
Roman) performed all his Works with his
left Hand. He died of the Plague, at ben
don, Anne-1;54.
Cotemporary


Modern Masters.
Cotemporary with thefe Mafters was Vco
da CARPI, a Painter upon no Account con-
fderable, but only for having, in the Vear
1500, found out the Art of Printine in Chi-
rescure; which he performed by Mieans of
o Pieces or Plates of Box- One of which
terving for the Ourlines and Sbadows, the
other Hamped off whatever Coloar was laid
upon it; and the Plate being cut out, and
hollowed in proper Places, feft the white
Paper for the Lights, and made the Print ap-
pearas if it had been heightened with a Pencil.
This Invention he afterwards improved, by
alding a third Plate, which ferved for the
middle Tints; and made his Stamps to con-
plete, that feveral famous Mafters, and,
among them, Parmegiane, published a great
many excellent Things in this Way.
PIERINo del Vaca, was born at Florence,
Smolgeo, of fuch mean Parentage, that his
Mother being dead at two Months End, he
was afterwards fuckled by a Gear.
The
Name of Vaga he took from a Country Pain-
ler, who carried him to Rome; where he left
him in fuch poor Circumftances, that he was
forced to spend three Days of the Week in
Working for Bread, but yet ferting apart the
other three for his Improvement: In a little
Time, by Audying the Antigue, together with
tthe Works of Rapbael, and Michael Angelo,
the became one of the boldeft and moft grace-
hl Defigners of the Roman School; and un-
erlood the Mrjcles in naked Bodies, and
of the Difficulties of the Art to well,
that
hapbact took an Affection to him, and,
CIm-
ploying him in the Pope's Apartments, gave
N
him


229

1500.

1500.


238
El. 47.
d

1504.


Medern Mesters.
him a lacky Opportunity of dilinguithing
himself from his Fellow-Difciples, by the
marvellous Beauty of his Colouring, and his
peculiar Talent in Decorarions and Grotzfquc.
His chief Works are at Genoa; where he
grew. famous likewife for his Skill in Archi-
tecture; having defigned a noble Palace for
Prince Doria, which he alfo painted and
adorned with his own Hland. From Ganee,
he removed to Pifa, and afterwards to feve-
ral other Parts of Iraty; his rambling Hu-
mour never fuffering him to continue long in
one Place: Till at length returning to Rome,
he had a Penfion fertled on him, for looking
after the Pope's Palace, and the Casa Far-
nese. But Pierrne, having (quandered away
in his Vouth, that which should have been
the Support of his old Age, and being con-
ftrained at laft to make himfelf cheap; by
undertaking any little Pieces for a small Sum
of ready Money, fell into a deep Melancholy,
and from that Extreme into another as bad,
of Wine and Women, and the next Tum
was into his Grave, Anne 1547.
FRANCEsco MA22vOLI, called PARME
ClANO, becaufe born at Farma, Anno 1gop
was brought up under his two Uncles, and
an eminent Parmer when but fixteen Vearst
old; famous all over frats at ninetecn; and
at Twenty-three performed fuch Wonders,/
that when the Emperor Charles V had taken
Rome by Storm, fome of the common Sol
diers, in facking the Town, having, brokel
into his Apartments, and found him (likef
Protogenes of old) intent upon his Work, were
to attonished at the charming Beaury of hisd
Pieces, that, instead of Plundes and Deffruc
C0B


Modern Mafters.
tion, which was then their Bufiness, they re-
solved to profeet him, as they afterwards did,
from all manner of Violence. But, befides
the Perfections of his Pencil (which was one
of the genrileff, the moft graceful, and the
moft elegant of any in the World) he de-
lighted much in Masic, and therein atto ex-
celled. His principal Works are at Parma,
where, for feveral Vears, he lived in great
Reputation; till falling unhappily into the
Sudy of Chymiffry, he walted the moft con-
fderable Part of his Time and Fortune in
Search of the Philesophers Stons, and died
poor, in the Flower of his Age, Anne 1540.
See farther, pags 171: and note, that there
are extant many valuable Prints, made by
this Maller, not only in Chiare-fcure, but
allo in Agua Forfis, of which he is faid to
have been the Inventor, or at leaft the firft
who practifed the Art of Eiching in Iraly.
GiACOMO FAL MA, Senior commonly
called PALMA VECcHYo, was born at Seri-
nata in the State of Venice, Anno 1508, and
made fuch good Ufe and Advantage of the
instructions which he received from Tilian,
that few Mafters are to be named, who have
Thewn a nobler Fancy in their Compositions,
better Judgment in their Designs, more of Na-
tre in their Expression, and irs of Heads,
or of Art in smishine their Warks. Venice
was the Place where he ufually refided, and
where he died, Anno 1596. His Pieces are
not very numerous, by reafon of his having
pent much Time in bringing thofe which
he has left behind him to fuch wonderful
Perfection.
DANIELE


237
Et. 36.


1508.
E). 48.
d


232

1509.
Et. 87.


1510.


-


Modern Masters.
DANIELE RICCTARELLr, firnamed &c
VOLTERRA, from a Town in Tuscany, where
he was born, Anne 1509, was a Perfon of a
melancholy and heavy Temper, and feemed
to be but meanly qualified by Nature for an
Artift; yet by the Intructions of Balshafar
da Siena, and his own continued Application
and Induftry, he furmounted all Difficulties;
and at length became fo excellent a Designer,
that his Descent from the Cross, in the Church
of the Trinity on the Mount, is ranked amongtt
the principal Pieces in Rome. He was chosen
by Pope Pal IV. to cloath fome of the Na-
diries in Michael Angelo's laft Judgment; which
he performed with good Success: He was as
eminent likewife for his Chifel as his Pencil,
and wrought feveral confiderable Things in
Sculpture. Ob. Anne 1566.
FRANCESCO SALVIATI, a Flerentine, born
Anno 1510, was at firft a Difciple of Andrea
del Sarto, and afterwards of Baccio Bandinelli;
and very well efteemed both in Iraty and
France, for his feveral Works in Fresio, Dis
temper and Oil. He was quick at Invention,
and as ready in the Execution; graceful in his
naked Figures, and as gentite in his Draperies;
yet his Palent did not lie in grand Compes-
sions. And there are fome of his Pieces in
two Colours only, which have the Name of
being his beft Performances. He was natu-
rally to fond and conceited of his own Works,
that he could hardly allow any body elfe a
good Word: And it is faid, that the Jealouty
which he had of fome young Men, then
growing up into Reputation, made him to
uncafy, that the very Apprehenfions of their
proving


Medern Masters.
proving better Artifts than himself, haftened
his Death, Anne 1563.
PIRRO LICORlO, a noble Neapolitan,
lived
him-
in this Time; and though he addreffed
felf chiefly to the Study of Archifecture,
and
for his Skill in that Art was employed,
and
highly encouraged by Pope Paul IV. and his
Succeffor Pins IV. yet he was withal an ex-
cellent Defigner; and, by the many famous
Cartoons which he made for 7 apefries, &cc.
as well as by his Writings, gave fufficient
Proof, that he was more than indifferently
learned in the Antiquities. There are feve-
ral Volumes of his Designs preferved in the
Cabiner of the Duke of Savey; of which
some Part confifts in a curious Collection of
all the Ships, Galleys, and other Sorts of Vef-
fel, in Ule amongft the Ancients. He was
Engineer to Alpbonfus II. the laft Duke of
Frrara; and died about the Year 1573.
See page 170.
GiacoMo da PONTE da EASSANO, To
called from the Place where he was born, in
the Marca Trevifand, Anne 1510, was at firit
aDifciple of his Father, and afterwards of
Renifacio, a better Painter, at Venice; by
whofe Affiftance, and his own frequent co-
pying the Works of Tisian and Parmegiano,
he brought himfelf into a pleafant and moft
agrecable Way of Colouring: But returning
into the Country upon the Death of his Fa-
ther, he applied himself wholly to the Imi-
lation of Nature; and from his Wise, Cbil-
din and Servants, took the Ideas of moll of
his Figures. His Works are very numerous;
all the Stories of the Old and Neaw Teffament
having


233
Et. 53.
d

1510.


234
El.82.



Modern Mafters.
having been painted by his Hand, belides a
Maltitude of other Hiftories. He was fa-
mous alfo for feveral excellent Porfraits; and
particularly those of the celebrated Wits, En.
dovico Arioffo, Bernarde Taffo, and Forquaw
his Son, the Prince of modern Poets. In a
Word, to great was the Repuratien of this
rtiff at Venice, that Tirian himfelf was glad
to parchafe one of his Pieces (reprefenting
the Entrance of Noah and his Family into the
Ark) at a very confiderable Price. He was
carneftly follicited to go over into the Service
of the Emperor; but to charming were the
Pleafures which he found in the quiet Enjoy-
ment of Painting, Music, and good Books, that
o Temptations whatfoever could make him
change his Cottage for a Courr. He died
Anno 1592; leaving behind him four Sons;
of whom,
FaANcEsco, the eldeff, fettled at Venice;
where he followed the Manner of his Father,
and was well efteemed for divers Pieces,
which he made in the Ducal Palace, and
other public Places, in Conjuntion with Panl
Veronese, Tintores, &c. But his too clofe Apa
plication to Painting, having rendered him
unfit for all other Bufiness, and ignorant even
of his own private Affairs, he contracted by
Degrees & deep Melancholy, and at latt be.
came fo much crazed, that fancying Serjeants
were continually in Purfuit of him, he leaped
out of his Window, to avoid them, as he
imagined, and by the Fall occafioned his
own Death, Anno 1594. Er. 43.
LEANDRO, the third Son, had to excel
lent a Talent in Face-painting (which he
Principall)


Medirn Masters.
principally findred) that he was knighted for
a Pertraif he made of the Doge Marin Gri=
mani. He likewife finiffed leveral Things
left imperfect by his Brother Francesco; com-
pofed tome Hiffary-pieces alfo of his own; and
was as much admired for his Perfection in
Musse, as his Skill in Painting. Obiit Anne
1623. Et. 6s.
Gio. BATTISTA, the second Son, and
GiROLAo the joangeff, applied themfelves
to making Copies of their Father's Werks;
which they did fo very well, that they are
ofentimes taken for Originals. Gio. Bartiffa
died nne 161z, Fr. Ge; and Girolame, Anne
1622, Er. 62. See more of the Bafans,
Dage 173.
GiAcoMo RORUSTI, called TINTo-
RETTO, becaufe a Dyer'’s Son, born at Ve-
nice, Anno 1g12, was a Difciple of Tirian;
who, having observed fomething very extra-
ordinary in his Genius, difmiffed him from
his Family, for Fear he should grow up to
rival his Mafter: Vet he Kill purfued Trrian's
Way of Cilouring, as the moft natural; and
Audied Michael Angelo's Gulto of Defign, as
the moft correct. Verice was the Place of
his conftant Abode, where he was made a
Citizen, and wonderfully beloved and efteem-
ed for his Works; the Character of which,
kee page 172. He was called the Furions
Tineret, for his bold Manner of Painting,
with frong Lighrs and deep Sbadoaus, for the
Rapidity of his Genins, and for his grand Vi-
vacity of Spiris, much admired by Paul Ve-
roness. But then, on the other Hand, he was
blamed by him, and all others of his Pro-
feftion,



1512.


235


236
PEr. 82.



Modern. Masters.
feffion, for undervaluing himself and his Are,
by undertaking all Sorts of Bufiness for any
Price; thereby making fo great a Difference
in his feveral Performances, that, as Hanni-
bal Carracbe obterved, he is fometimes equal
to Titian, and at other Times inferior even
to himfelf. He was extremely pleafant and
affable in his Humour; and delighted fo
much in Painting and Masic, his beloved Sta-
dies, that he would hardly fuffer himfelf to
cale any other Pleafures. He died Anne
1594. having had one Daughter and a Son;
of whom the eldeff,
MARIETTA TINTORETTA, was to well
inftructed by her Father, in his own Profef
fion, as well as in Musse, that in both Arts
the got great Reputation; and was particu-
larly eminent for an admirable Stile in Per-
trairs. She married a German, and died in
her prime, Anno 1590, equally lamented both
by her Hulband and her Father; and fomach
beloved by the latter, that he never would
confent the should leave him, though the had
been invited by the Emperor Maxrmilian, by
Pbilip II. King of Spain, and by feveral other
Princes, to their Courts.
DOMENICO TINTORRTTO, his Son, gave
great Hopes in his Vouth, that he would one
Day render the Name of Tinfores yet more
illuftrious than his Father had made it; but
neglecing to cultivate by Study the Talent
which Nature had given him, he fell shore
of thote mighty Ihings expected from him;
and became more confiderable for Portrains,
than bifferical Compositions. He died June
1637, Es. 75.
PAxls


Wiodern Mufters.
PARTS BoRDOWE, well defcended, and
brought up to Lersers, Mafic, and other gen-
tile Accomplifhments, was a Dirciple of 7i.
tan, and ffourithed in the Time of Tinfortt;
bit was more commended for the Delicacy of
his Pencil, than the Purity of his Ourlines.
te was in great Favour and Efteem with
Francis L. for whom, befides Abundance of
Iiffories, he made the Porfraits of feveral
Court Ladies, in to excellent a Wianner, that
the eriginal Narure was hardly more charm-
ing. From France he returned home to Ve-
ie, laden with Honour and Riches; and,
having acquired as much Reputation in all
the Parts of Iraly, as he had done abroad,
ted Anne Er. 75.
GioRc1O VASARI, born at Arexse, a
City in Tuscany, nne 1514. equally fa-
mous for his Pan and Pencil, and as emi=
rent for his Skill in Arcbitegfars, was a Dif=
ciple of Michael Angele and Andrea del Sarte;
and by his indefatigable Diligence in Rudy-
ing and copying all the best Pieces of the
mot noted Artifts, improved his Invention
and Hand to fuch a Degree, that he artained
swonderful Freedom in both. He fpent the
molt confiderable Part of his Life in travel-
ing over Iraly, leaving in all Places Marks
of his Induttry, and gathering every where
Materials for his History of the Lives of the
moft excellent Painters, Sculfters, Arcbitetts,
&c. which he firft publifhed at Florence, in
to Volumes, Anno 1550, and reprinted in
1568, with large Additions, and the Heads of
mott of the Mafters: A Work, undertaken
ot the Request of his Patron, the Cardinal
86



1514.


237


228
Er. 64.


1519.
Lit. 56.
d


Medern Mastirs.
de Medicis; and, in the Opinion of Hannibal
Caro, ritten with great Veracity and Judg-
ment; though Felibren, and others, tax him
with fome Faults, and particularly with far-
tering the Mafters then alive, and with Par
tiality to thofe of his own Country. He
died Anno 1578.
ANTONIO MORE, born at Urrecbr in the
Low-Countries, Anno 1519, was a Diciple of
John Schoorel; and in his younger Days had
feen Rome, and fome other Parts of Hal.
He was recommended by Cardinal Granvill
to the Service of the Emperor Charles V.
and, having made a Portrait of his Son Pbi.
Lip II. at Madrid, was fent upon the fame Ac
Queen, and Princess of
count to the King,
Portugal; and afterwards into England, to
draw the Picture of Qucen Mlary. From
Spain he retired into Flanders, where he be
came a mighty Favourite of the Duke of
Ava (then Governor of the Leav-Conntries).
And, befides the noble Prefents and Ap.
plaufe which he gained in all Places by his
Pencit, was as much admired for his extraos.
dinary Address, being as great a Courtier as
a Painter; his Talent lay in defigning very
juftly, in finithing his Pieces with wonderful
Care and Neatness, and in a moft natural
imitation of Fless and Bloed in his Colouring.
Vet after all, he could not reach that noblef
Srrength and Spirir, fo vifible in the Works
of Titian, and to which Vandyke has fincs
arrived. He made feveral Attempts alfo in
Hiffory Pieces, but underftood nothing of
grand Compositions; and his Manner was tame
hard and dry. He died at Antwerp, fnnelf7f
PAOlO


Modern Mlasters.
239
PAOLO FARINATO, of Verona, was, it
is faid, cut out of his Mother's Belly, juft rar
1522.
dead in Labour, Anno 1522. He was a
Difciple of Nicolo Golfino, and an admirable
Defigner; but not altogether fo happy in
his Colouring: Though there is a Piece of
his Painting, in St. George's Church at Ve-
rona, to well performed in both Parts, that
it does not feem to he inferior to one of
Paul Veronese's Hland, ich is placed next
to it. He was famou:, iam Marte quam Mer-
cario; being an excellent Savordsman, and
a very good Orafor He was cenfiderable
likewife for his Knowledge in Sculpture and
Archirecture, especially that Part of it which
relates to Fortifications, CSc. His laft Mo-
ments were as remarkable as his firtt, for
the Death of his neareft Relation. He l2y
El. 84.
upon his Death-bed, Anno 1606; and his
d
Wife, who was fick in the same Room, hear-
ing him cry out, He avas going; told him,
She would bear him Company; and was as good
as her Word, they both expiring the very
Same Minute.

ANDREA SCHIAVONE, fo called from
the Country where he was born, Anno 1522.
1522.
was fo very meanly defcended, that his
Parents, after they had brought him to V-
nice, were not able to allow him a Mafter;
and yet by great Study and Pains, together
with fuch Helps as he received from the
Prints of Parmegiane, and the Paintings of
Grorgions and Tirion, he arrived at last to a
Degree of Excellence very furprizing. It is
true indeed, that being obliged to work for
his daily Bread, he could not pare Time
sufficient


240
EI. 60.
d

1528.


Rodern Mafters.
fufficient for making himfelf thoroughly per-
feet in Defign; but however, that Defect was
to well covered with the fingular Reauty and
Sweetnets of his Colours, that Tintoret ufed
oftentimes to fxy, No Painter ought to be
without one Piece, at leatt, of his Hand.
His principal Works were compoted at Ve.
ice; tome of them in Concurrence with
Tintoret himfelf, and others by the Directions
of Tilian, in the Litrary of St. Mark. Bat
to malicicus was Pox u. to poor ndrea, that
his Pictures were hiis Etcle valued in his
Life-time, and he never was paid any other.
wife for them, than as an ordinary Painter;
though after his Deceafe, which happened
nno 1582, his Works turned to a much
better Account, and were efteemed antwer-
able to their Merits, and but little infe.
rior to thofe of his moft famous Cotempe.
Taries.
FanERico BaROccI, born in the City
of Urbin, Jnne 1528, was trained up in the
Art of Defign by Battiffa Venetiane; and,
having at Rome acquired a competent Know.
ledge in Geometry, Perspective, and Archites.
sare applied himself to the Works of his
moff eminent Predeceffors; and, in a parti-
cular Manner, Audied his Countryman Ro
pbacl, and Gorreggio; one in the charming
Hirs, and graceful Ourlines of his Figures;
and the other in the admirable Union, and
agreeable Harmony of his Colours. He had
not been long in Rome, before some mali-
cious Painters, his Competitors, found Means
(by a Dofe of Poifon, conveyed into a Sallet,
with which they treated him) to fend him
back again into his own Country, attended
with


Modern Mafters.
with an Indifpofition fo terribly grievous,
that for above fifty Vears together it feldom
permitted him to take any Repofe, and never
allowed him above two Hours in a Day to
follow his Painting. So that expecting, al
molt every Moment, to be removed into an-
other World, he employed his Pencil al-
together in the Hiffories of the Bible, and
otherreligious Subjects; of which he wrought
a confiderable Number, in the short Inter-
vals of his painful Fits, and, notwithland-
ing the Severity of them, lived till the Vear
1612, with the Charalter of a Man of Honour
and Virtue, as well as the Name of one of
the most judixious and graceful Painters that
has ever been.
TADDEO TUCCHERO, horn at St. An-
gelo in Fado, in the Durchy of Urtin,
Anno 1529, was initiated in the Art of
Painting, at home, by his Father; and at
Rome, instructed by. Gio. Pietro Calabro.
but improved himfelf moft by the Study
of Anatomy, and by copying the Works of
Rupbael. He excelled cureffy in a forid
inveation, a gentile Manner of Defign, and
in the good Disposition and Oeconomy of his
Pices; but was not fo much admired for
his Cokuring, which was generally unplea-
fint, and rather refembled the Statses than
the Life. Rome, Tiveli, Flerence, Capra-
ila, and Venice, were the Places where he
ditinguished himfelf; but left many Things
aalinished, being fnarched away in his Prime,
dine 1566.
PAOLO CALLARI VERONESE, born Anne
1532, was a Disciple of his Uncls Anronie
Badife:


247
E1. 84


1529.
E1. 37.
d

1532.


2.42.


El. 56.



Modern Masters.
Badile; and not only efteemed the moft ex-
cellent of all the Lambard Painters, but for
his copious and admirable Insention, for the
Grandeur and Majerty of his Compesition,
for the Beauty and Perfection of his Drape.
ries, together with his noble Ornaments of
Archifecture, &c. is. Kiled by the Iralians,
11 Pitter felice, the happy Painter. Hie twet
moft of his Time at Venice; but the beff of
his Works were made after he returned thi
ther from Rome, and had Hudied the An
Tigue. He could not be prevailed upon, by
the great Offers made him by Pbilip 1I.
King of Spain, to leave his own Country;
where his Reputation was fo well eftablished,
that moft of the Princes of Enrope fent to
their feveral Ambaffadors, to procure themf
tomething of his Hand at any Rates. He
was a Perfon of a fublime and noble Spirit,
ufed to go richly dreffed, and generally were
12 gold Cbain, which had been prefented him
by the Procurators of St. Mark, as 2 Priss
he won from feveral Artiffs, his Competitors.
He was highly in Favour with all the prin¬
cipal Men in his Time; and to much admi
red by all the great Maffers, as well his Co
temporaries, as thofe who fucceeded him,
that Tirian himfelf ufed to fay, he was the
Ornament of his Profefsion; and Guide Renis
being afked which of the Maffers, his Prede.
ceffors, he would chufe to be, were it in hisl
Power, after Raphael and Correggie, named
Paal Veronefe, whom he always called his
Paclino. He died at Venice, nne 1588½)
leaving great Wealth behind him to his wol
Sons,
GABRLELLE and CAxLo, who lived
Ve17


Aodern Masters.
very happily together, joined in finishing
teveral Pieces left imperfect. by their Fa=
ther, and followed his Manner fo clofe in
other excellent Things of their own, that
they are not exfily diftinguithed from thote
of Paulo's Hand. Carle would have per-
formed Wonders, had he not been nipt in
the Bud, Anno-1796, Es. 26: After whofe
Deceafe, Gabrielle applied himfelf to Mer-
thandizing; yet did not quite lay afide his
fencil, but made a confiderable Number of
Pertraits, and Jome Hiffery Pieces, of a
very good Gufto. Obiit Anno1631, Er. 6z.
BENEDETTO CALYARI lived and fudied
with his Brother Paule, whom he loved en=
trely; and frequently affitted him and his
Nephews, in finithing feveral of their Com-
uptions; but especially in painting Hrebi-
alure, in which he chieffy delighted. He
practifed for the moft part in Frefco; and
tome of his beft Pieces are in Cbiaro-fcure.
He was, befides, Mafter of an indifferent
Stock of Learning, was poetically inclined,
and had a peculiar Talent in Sarire. He
died Anno 1598, Er. Co. See more of Paule,
Jage 172.
GIOSEPPE SALVYATY, a Venetian Painter,
was born Anno 1535, and exchanged the
Name of Porra, which belonged to his Fa-
mily, for that of his Mafter Francesco Sal-
viais, with whom he was placed very young
at Rome, by his Uncle. He Spent the
greatcft Part of his Life in Venice, where he
applied himfelf generally to Fresco; and was
lientimes employed in Concurrence with
Paule Veronese and Tinterer. He was well
cRecined



1535.


248


Modern Masters.
244
effeemed for his great Skill both in Disson
and Golouring: was- likewife well read in
other Arts and Sciences; and particularly fof
good a Marbemarician, that he writ feveral
Treatifes, very judicioufly, on that Subjed.
He died Anne 1585.
Eit. 50.
n
FEDERICO ZUcCHERO, born in the

Dutchy of Urbin, Anne 1543, was a Difci-
1543.
ple of his Brother Taddeo, from whom hel
differed but very little in his Stite and Man.
ner of Painting; though in Sculpture and Ar.
chireclure, he was far more excellent. Hel
Hed into France, to avoid the Pope'’s Difples.
fure, which he had incurred, by drarwing
some of his Officers with Affer Ears, in a Piecel
he made to reprefent Calumny or Slander.
From thence paffing through Flanders and
Hilland, he came over into England, drew
Qucen Elizaberb'’s Picture, went back to lrat;
was pardoned by the Pope, and in a litilef
Time fent for to Spain, by Philip II. and em=
ployed in the Epurial. He laboured very
hard at his Return to Rome, for eftablithing
the Academy of Painting, by virtue of a Brief
obtained from Pope Gregory KIIl. Of whichf
being chofen the firll Prince himself, he builf
a noble Apartment for their Meeting, went
to Venice to print fome Books he had comd
pofed of that Art, and had formed other De
ligns fire its farther Advancement, which jed
were all defeated by. his Death, at Ancenay
nno 1609.
E.1. 66.

GIACOMO PALMA, Turior, Commonlf
called CIOvANE PALMA, born at Venief

1544. Anno 1544, was the Son of Antonio, th
Nephew of Palma Vecchio.. He improved
1


Modern Masters.
the Instructions which his Father had given
him, by copying the Works of the moft emi-
rent Maffers, both of the Roman and Lom=
bard Schools; but, in his own Compositions,
chiefly followed the Manner of Tirian and
Tintoret. Hle fpent fome Vears in Rome;
and was employed in the Galleries and Lodg-
ings of the Varican: But the greateft Num-
ber of his Pieces is at Venice, where he stu-
died Night and Day, filled almoft every
Place with fomething or other of his Hand;
and, like Tinforet, refufed nothing that was
offered him, upon the leaft Prospect of Gain.
He died Anno 1628, famous for never having
let any Surrow come near his Heart, even
upon the fevereft Trials.
BARTHOLOMEW SPRANGHER, born at
Antwerp, Anno 1546, and brought up un-
der Variety of Mafters, was chief Painter to
the Emperor Maximilian 1l. and fo much
respected by his Succeffor Rodolpbas, that he
prefented him with a gold Cbain and Medal,
allowed him a Penfion, honoured him and
his Pokterity with the Title of Nobility,
odged him in his own Palace, and would
Wuffer him to paint for no body but him-
ll. He had spent fome Part of his Vouth
10 Rome, where he was employed by the
Cardinal Farnese, and afterwards preferred
to the Service of Pope Pras V but for want
Of Judgment in the Conduct of his Srudies,
brought little with him, befides a good Pen-
1l, from lraly. His Ourline was generally
if, and very ungraceful; his Pasures forced
nd errravagant; and, in a Word, there ap-
lared nothing of the Roman Guito in his
effns. He obtained Leave from the Em-
peror,


245
Et. 84.
nd

1546.


246

1550.
El. 34.
d

1552.


Modern Masters.
peror, after many Vears Continuance in his
Court, to vifit his own Counfry; and ac
cordingly went to Antaverp, Amfferdam, Haer.
tem, and feveral other Places, where he was
honourably received: And having had the
Satisfaction of feeing his own Works highty
admired, and his Manner almoft univertally
followed in all thofe Parts, as well as in Gen
many, returned to Prague, and died in a good
old Age. In the fame Form with Sprangher,
we may place his Cotemporaries, John san
Ach, and Toseph Heimts, both Hiffory-painters
of Note, and much admired in the Empe.
Fors Court.
MATTHEW BRIE, was born at Antavery
Anno 1550, but Htudied for the moft Partaf
Rome; and was eminent for his Performf
ances in History and Landscape, in the Galle
ries of the Varican, where he was employed
by Pope Gregory KIIl. He died youngt
Anno 1584.
CHERUBINO ALBERTI, born Anne 15½d
was a Difciple of his Father, and equall
excellent both in Graving and Painting. Hl
Performances in the latter are mottly in Frf
co, and hardly any where to be seen outt
Rome. But his Prints after M. Angelo, Pol
dore, and Qacchero, being in the Hlands ofd
the World; as they have done Honour
thofe Mafters, fo they secured a latting ke
putacion to himself. He spent a great Pd
of his Life in the happy Enjoyment of th
Fruit of his Labours. But a confideraf
Eftate unluckily falling to him, by the Dis
of his Brother, he laid aside his Pencil, gd
melancholy; and in a strange, unaccountal
Whih


Modern Masters.
Whimfy of making Cress-Roaws (fuch as wers
uted in War by the Ancients, before Gunporw-
der was Known) fooled away the Remainder
of his Days, and died Anno 1615.
PAUL BAYL, of Antwerp, born Anno 1554.
followed his Brother Martherw to Rome;
painted feveral Things in Conjunction with
him, and, after his Deceafe, brought him-
self into Credit by his Landicapes; but eipe-
cially by thofe which he composed in his lat-
ter Time (after he had Hudied the Manner
of Hannibal Carracbe, and copied fome of
Titian's Works in the fame Kind) the Inven-
tion in them being more pleafant, the Dispo-
stien more noble, all the Parts more agree-
able, and painted with a better Gufto than
thofe in his former Days. He was much in
Favour with Pope Sixtes V. and for his Suc-
ceffor, Clement Vill. painted the famous Piece
about fixty eight Feet long) wherein the
Saime of that Name is reprefented cafl into
the Sea, with an Anchor about his Neck.
Hie died at Rome, Anno 1626.
ANTONIO TEMPEST A, born at Florence,
Anno 1555, was a Difciple of John Strada,
2 Fleming. He had a particular Genius for
Battles, Calvacades, Hantings, and for de-
tigning all Sorts of Animals; but did not fo
much regard the Delicacy of Colouring, as
the lively Expresson and Spirit of thofe
Things which he reprefented. His ordinary
Refidence was at Rome; where, in his younger
Days, he wrought feveral Pieces, by Order
of Pope Gregory XfII. in the Apartments of
the Valican. He was full of Thought and
Invention, very quick and ready in the Exe-
0 2
cution;


247
LEt. 63.
d
a
1554.
E1.72.


1555.


248
Et. 75.
d

1555.
Et. 64.
nd

2557.


Modern Mafters.
cation; and confiderable for a Multitude of
Prints, etched by himself. He died Anno
1630, much commended alfo for his Skill
in Musie; and to famous for his Veracity,
that it became a proverbial Exprettion to
Lay, It is as true as if Temperta himself had
Spaken it.
LODOUIco CARRACCT, the Coufin-Ger.
man of Auguffine and Hannibal, was born at
Bologna, Annolsss, and under his firft Maf-
ter, Prospero Fontana, difcovered but an in-
different Genius for Painring; but however,
Are fupplied the Defects of Nature, and, by
his obstinate Diligence in Hudying the Works
of Parmegiane, Correggio, Titian, and other
great Men, he brought himfelf at laft to a
Degree of Perfection hardly inferior to any
of them. He affitted his Coufins in found
ing and fertling the famous Academy of De-
fign at Bologna; and afterwards in painting
the Palaxso Farnese at Rome; and, having
survived them both, died Anno 1619. See
page 174. 175.
ACOSTINO CARRACCI, a Bolognese allo,
was born Anne 1587, and by the Care and
InRtructions of Domenico Tebaldi, Alefandre
Minganti, and his Couln Ludovico, became
not only a very good Designer and Painter,
but in the Art of Graving furpafied all
the Maffers in his Time. He had an In-
fight likewife into all the Parts of the Ma-
thematies, natural Philesopby, Rbetoric, Musse,
and moll of the liberal Arrs and Sciences.
He was befid is an admirable Poer; and, in
all other Particulars, extremely well accom-
plithed. From Bologna he went to Venie,
Where


Modern Masters.
where he contracted an intimate Friendship
wirh Paule Veronese, Tintoret, and Basfan;
and having graved a confiderable Number
of their Works, returned home, and foon
atterwards followed his Brother Hannibal to
Rume, and joined with him in finithing fe-
veral Stories in the Farnese Gallery. But
some little Difference arifing unluckily be-
wixt them, Augustine removed to the Court
of the Duke of Parma, and in his Service
died, Anno 1602. See page 17s. His moft
colebrated Piece of Painting, is that of the
Communion of St. Jerom, in Bologna; a Pic-
thre, to compleat in all its Parts, that it was
much to be lamented, the excellent Author
of it should withdraw himfelf from the Prac-
tice of an Art, in which his Abilities were to
very extraordinary, to follow the inferior
Profeftion of a Graver.
ANNIRALE CARRACCI, born likewife at
Belogna, nno 1560, was a Difciple of his
Coulin Ladovico; and, amongtt his other ad-
mirable Qualities, had to prodigious a Mie-
mory, that whatever he had once feen, he
never failed to retain, and make his own;
to that at Parma, he acquired the Saveerness
and Purity. of Correggio; at Venice, the
Strength and Distribution of Colours of Ti-
an; and at Rome, the Correctness of Defign,
and beautiful Forms of the Antique: And,
by his wonderful Performances in the Pa-
1az2O Farnese, foon made it appear, that all
the feveral Perfections of the molt eminent
Matters, his Predeceffors, were united in him-
telf alone. In his Converfation he was friend-
&. plain, boneff, and open-bearted; very com-
municative to his Scholars, and to extremely
3
kind


249
CEt. 45.


156e.


250


LE1. 49.



Miodern Masters.
kind to them, that he generally kept his Mo.
ne) in the fame Box with his Colours, where
they might have Recourfe to either, as they
had Occafion. But the Unhappiness of his
Temper inclining him naturally to Melan.
choly; the ill Ufage which he received from
the Cardinal Farness (who, through the Per-
fuafions of an ignorant Spaniard, his Domef
tic, gave him but a little above 200 l. Srerl.
for his eight Years Study and Labour) to con-
firmed him in it, that he refolved nevermore
to touch his Pencit; and had undoubtedly
kept his Refolution, had not his Necefficies
compelled him to refume it. Ver, notwith-
Randing, to far did his Chagrin by Degrees
gain upon him, that at certain Times it de.
prived him of the right Ofe of his Senfes;
and at laft betrayed him into fome Irregula-
rities, which, concealing from his Phyficians,
he met with the same Fate as Raphael, in the
like Cafe, had done before him; and feemed
to copy that great Maffer, as well in the Man.
ner of his Dearh, as he had imitared him all
his Life-long in his Works. Nay, fuch was
the Veneration he had for Rugbael, that it
was his Dearh-bed Requeft to be baried in the
very fame Tomb with him; which was ac
cordingly done in the Pantbeon (of Refanda)
at Rome, Anno 1609. See more, pagt 175:
and befides take Notice, that there are extant
feveral Prints of the blefed Virgin, and of
other Subjects, etched by the Hland of this
incomparable Arfift.
ANTONIO CARRACCI, the atural Sof
of Anguffine, was brought up under the Cart
and Tunion of his Uncle Hannibal; afid
whofe Deceafe, he applied himfelf to fuct
cetsfull


Modern Masters.
ectifully to the Study of all the capital Pieces
in Rome, that he would have furpafted even
Hannibal himself, if Death had not prevented
hum, Anno 1618, Et. 35.
CAMILLO. GIULTO CESARE, and CaRE
ANTCNlO, the Sons and Disciples of Ex-
COLE PROCACCINT, Hourifhed in this Time.
They were Natives of Bologna; but, upon
some Mifunderffanding between them and
the Carraches, removed to Milan, where they
spent the greateft Part of their Lives, and
let up an Hcademy of Defign, famous for
producing a great many excellent Painters.
Of thefe Brothers,
CAMILLo, the eldeff, abounded in Inven-
tion and Spirit; but was a great Manneriff.
and rather Rudied the Beauty, than Correcr-
ness of his Defigns. He lived very gallantly,
kept his Coach, and a numerous Retinue;
and died Anne 1628, (Et. 8o.
Gvilo CESARE was both a Sculpfor
and Painter; and famous in Rome, Medera,
Venice, Genea, Bologna and Milan, for fe-
veral admirable Things of his Hand. He
was the beft of all the Procacein, and fur-
pafted his Brother Camillo in the Trurb and
Purity of his Outlines, and in the Strength
and Boldness of his Figures. He lived 78
Vears.
CARL ANTONTO was an excellent Ma.
frian, and as well skilled in the Harmony
of Colours, as of Sounds; yet not being able
to come up to the Perfections of his Bro=
thers in bifferical Compositions, he applied
himfelf
4


257


252

1560.
TEP. 30.
od


Modern Masters.
himfelf wholly to Landscapes and Flowers,
and was much effeemed for his Performances
that Way.
ERCOLE, the Son of Carl Antonio, was
a Diiciple of his Uncle Tuho Cefare, and fo
happy in imitating his Manner that he was
fent for to the Court of the Duke of Savey,
and highly honoured and nobly rewarded by
that Prince for his Services. He was befides
an admirable Lateniff; and died So Years
old, Anno 1676.
GlOsEPPE DARPINO, commonly called
Casaher GIOsEPPiNo, born in the King-
dom of Naples, Anno 1560, was carried very
young to Rome, and put out to fome Pain
ters, then at Work in the Varican, to grind
their Colours; but the Quickness of his Ap.
prebension having foon made him Mafter of
the Elments of Defign, he had the Fortune
to grow very famous by Degrees. And, be.
fides the Respect thewn him by Pope Gre.
Gory KIII. and his Succeffors, was to well
received by the French King, Leavis KIIl.
that he made him a Knight of the Order of
St. Michael. He has the Character of a fforid
Invention, a ready Hand, and a good Spirit,
in all his Works; but yet having no fure
Foundation, either in the Study of Narure,
or the Rules of Arr, and building only upon
thofe Chimeras and fantaftical Ideas, which
he had formed in his own Head, he has run
himfelf into a Multitude of Errors, and been
guilty of thofe many Extravagancies, necef
farily attending fuch as have no better Guide
than their own capricious Fancy. He died
at Rome, Anne 1640.
Cavaliet


Medern Masters.
Cavalier FRANCESco VANNI, born at
Siena, in the Dukedom of Tuscany, Anng
1563, was a Difciple of Arcangelo Salimbeni,
his Godfather, and afterwards of Frederico
Qucchero; but quirted the Manner he had
learned from them, to follow that of Ba-
rocci, whom he imitated in his Choice of
religious Subjects, as well as in his Guffo of
Painting. The moft confiderable Works of
this Mafter, are in the feveral Churches of
Suna; and are much commended both for
the Beauty of their Colouring, and Correctness
of their Design. He died Anno 1610, having
been Knighted by Pope Clement VIII. for his
Jamous Piece, of the Fall of Simon Magus,
in the Vatican.
HANS ROTTENHAMER, was Dorn at
Munich, the Metropolis of Bavaria, Anno
1564, and after he had fiudied fome Time
in Germany, under Donawer, (an ordinary
Paimer) went to Venics, and became a Dif-
ciple of Tinfores. He painted both in Fresco
and Oid, but his Talent lay chieffy in the
latter; and his peculiar Excellence was in
litde Pieces. His Invention was free and
iaf, his Defign indifferently correct, his 41-
litudes genrile, and his Colouring very agree-
able. He was well effeemed both in Traty
and his own Country, and, by his Profeffion
might have acquired great Wealth; but was
to wonderfully extravagant in his Way of
living, that he confumed it much fafter than
I came in, and at laft died to poor, that his
friends were forced to make a Purfe to bury
him, Anno 1604.
MI-
0 5


253

1563.
Et. 47


1564.
Et. 40.



254
ou
1565.


Nedern Masters.
MICHELANCELO MERTCT, Dorn Aune
1569, at Caravaggio, from whence he de-
rived his Name, was at firft (like his Coun.
tryman Pelydore) no better than a Day-la-
bourer till having feen fome Painters at
Work, upon a Brick-wall which he had
prepared for them, he was fo charmed with
their Art, that he immediately addreffed
himself to the Study of it; and, in a few
Years, made fo confiderable a Progress, that
in Venice, Rome, and feveral other Parts of
Iraty, he was cried up and admired by all
the young Men, as the Aurbor of a new Stile
of Painting. Upon his firft coming to Rome,
his Neceffities compelled him to paint Flowers
and Fruir, under Cavalier Giofeppino; but,
being foon weary of that Subject, and return.
ing to his former Practice of Hifforres, with
Figures drawn to the Middle only, he made
Ofe of a Method quite different from the
Conduct of Grofeppine, and running into the
contrary Extreme, followed the Life as much
too clofe, as the other deviated from it. He
affected a Way, particular to himfelf, of deep
and dark Shadows, to give his Pieces the
greater Relevo; and; defpiting all other
Help but what he received from Narure alone
(whom he took with all her Faults, and co.
pied without Judgment or Discretion) his in.
vention became to poor, that he could never
draw any thing without his Model before hist
Ryes; and therefore underffood but little,
either of Design or Decorum, in his Compes.
sions. He had indeed an admirable Colbur
ing, and great Strenert in all his Works:t
But thofe Pictures which he made in Imifation
of the Manner of Georgione, were his betl
becauld


Modern Masters.
becaufe they are more mellow, and have no-
thing of that Blackness in them, in which he
afterwards delighted. He was as fingular in
his Temper, as in his Gulto of Painting; full
of Detraction, and to ftrangely contentions,
that his Pencil was no fooner out of his Fland,
but his Severd was in ir. Rome he had made
too hot for him, by killing one of his Friends
in a Dispute at Tennis; and it was believed
his Voyage to Malta was taken with no other
View, but to get himself Knighted by the
Grand Mafter that he might be qualified to
fight Cav. Giefe, pine, who had refuted his
Challenge, becaufe he was a Knight; and
ould not (he faid) draw a Sword againft his
Inferior. Bat in his Return home (with the
Popes Pardon in his Pocker) a Fever put
an End to the Quarrel and his Life, in
1609; a Vear fatal to Painting, by the Death
of Frederico Lucchero allo, and Hannibal Car-
racbe.
FILIPPO DANCElI was a Roman, born
about this Time; but called NAPOLTTANO,
becaufe his Father carried him to Naples,
when he was very young. At his Return
to Rome, he applied himfelf to the Antigni-
ses; but unhappily left that Study too foon,
and followed the Manner of his Cotempo-
rary M. Angelo da Caravaggio. He prac-
tifed for the moft part in Bartfes and Land-
sapes, with Figures finely touched; was every
where well efteemed for his Works, and em-
ployed by several Princes, in many of the
Churches and Palaces of Rome, Naples, and
Vence; at the laft of which Places he died,
Anno (Er. 40.
JAN


El. 40.
a


255


256
a
1569.
El. 56.
d

1574.


Medern Masters.
JaN BRUECHEL, the Son of old Peser,
and the younger Brother of Helfen Brueghel,
was born in Brufels, Anne 1569; and called
FLUWEELEN, becaufe of the Velver Gar-
menis, which he generally affected to wear.
He began his Studies at home, under Peter
Goekindt, and continued them in Italy, with
such Succets, that of all the German, Dutch
or Flemish Matters, Elpeimer only was equal
to him in Landscapes and Hiffories with imall
Figures. He painted both in Water-Colours
and Orl, but in the latter chieffy excelled;
and especially in reprefenting Wakes, Fairs,
Dances, and other frolickfome and merry
Meetings of Country People. His Invention
was eafy and pleafant, his Ourlines firm and
fure, his Pencil loofe and free; and in short,
all his Compofitions were fo well managed,
that Nature, in her plain Country Dress, was
always to be feen in his Works. He died
Anno 1825.
ADAM ELSHETMER, born at Franckfort
upon the Mayn, Anno 1574, was at firft 2
Difciple of Philip Uffenback, a German; but
an ardent Defire of Improvement carrying
him to Rome, he foon became a moft excel.
lent rust in Landscapes, Hiffories, and Night
Pieces, with little Figures. His Works are
very few; and for the incredible Pains and
Labour which he beflowed upon them. va.
lued at fuch prodigious Rates, that they are
hardly any where to be found, but in the
Cabinets of Princes. He was a Perfon by
Nature inclined to Melancholy, and, through
continued Study and Thoughtfulnets, to far
fertled in that unhappy Temper, that, neg
lecling


Modern Masters.
lecting his own domeffic Concerns, Debrs
came thick upon him, and Imprisonment fol-
lowed; which Hruck fuch a Damp upon his
Sprits, that though he was foon releafed, he
did not long furvive it, and died in the Fear
1610, or thereabout.
GUino RENI, was born at Belogna, Anno
1575; and, having learned the Rudiments
of Painting, under Denis Cabvert, a Flemish
Maffer, was refined and polifhed in the School
of the Carraches; and to what Degree of Ex-
cellence he arrived, fee page 175. He ac-
quired some Skill alfo in Mufie, by the In-
Aructions of his Father, an eminent Profeffor
of that Art. Great were the Honours he re-
ceived from Pope Paul V from all the Car-
dinals, and Princes of Italy; from the French
King, Leavis Kill. from Pbilip IV. of Spain;
and alfo from Uladiflans, King of Peland and
Sweden; who, befides a noble Reward, made
him a Compliment, in a Letter under his
own Hand, for an Europa he had fent him.
He was extremely handfome and graceful in
his Perfon; and to very beautful in his
younger Days, that his Mafter Endovico, in
painting his Angels, took him always for his
Model. Nor was he an Angel only in his
Looks, if we may believe what Cavalier G:o-
seppino told the Pope, when he alked his Opi-
mon of Guido's Performances, in the Capelfa
Quirinale. Our Pictures ((aid he) are the
Wark of Mens Hands; but these are made ly
Hands divine. in his Behaviour he was mo-
dift, gentile, and very obliging, lived in
great Splendor both at Bolegna and Rome;
and was only unhappy in his immoderate
Love of Gaming, to which, in his latter Days,
he


257
El. 36.
ed

1575.


258
PEt. 67
d
oy
1575.
SEt. 64.
d


Medern Masters.
he had abandoned himfelf fo entirely, that
all the Money he could get by his Pencit, or
borrow upon Insereff, being too little to fup-
ply his Loffes, he was at laft reduced to to
poor and mean a Cendition, that the Confi-
deration of his prefent Circumftances, toge-
ther with Reffections on his former Reputa-
tion, and high Manner of Living, brought a
languithing Diftemper upon him, which oc-
cafioned his Death, Anne 1642. Note, That
there are feveral Defigns of this great Mater
in Print, etched by himfelf.
MARCELLO PROVENTALE, of Cento, born
Anno 1575, was a Man of fingular Probity
and Virtue, very regular in the Conduct of
his Life, an able Painter, and in Mosaic
Works fuperior to all Mankind. He was a
Disciple of Paulo Referti, and his Coadjutor
in thofe noble Performances in St. Peters
Church in Rome. He refitted the famous
Ship, made by Gibiro, and added to it fe-
veral curious Figures of his own. He re-
Rored alfo fome of the ancient Mesaies,
broken, and almoff ruined by Time, to
their primitive Beauty. But nothing got
him a greater Name than his Portrait of
Pope Paulo V in the Palaxse Borghese; a
Piece wrought with fuch exquifite Art and
judgment, that, though it was composed of
innumerable Bits of Stone, the Pencil even
of Tirian hardly ever carried any thing to a
higher Point of Perfection. He died in
Rome, Anne 1629, of Discontent, it was feared,
to find himfelf fo poorly rewarded, in his
Life-time, for thofe glorious Works, which
he forefaw would be inefimable after his
Deccafe.
G10.


Miodern Masters.
Gio. BaTTiSTA Victa, a Bolognese, born
Anne 1576, was a Difciple of Hannibal Car-
rache; by whofe Affiftance he arrived to an
excellent Manner in Landscape-painting, which
he chieffy Rudied, and for which he was well
efteemed in Rome, and feveral other Parts of
Naly.. But Pope Gregory XV. having made
him Keeper of his Palace, and given him a
Penfion of five hundred Crowns per Ann. to
reward him for the Services which he had
done for him, when he was Cardinal, he
quitted his Pencil, and practifing Music only,
wherein he alto excelled, died foon after,
Anno 1622.
Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS, born at Co-
logn, Anno 1577, was the Prince of all the
Flemish Mafters; and would have rivalled
even the moft celebrated Italians, if his Pa-
rents, instead of placing him under the Tui-
uon of Adam van Noort, and Otbo Venins,
had bred him up in the Roman and Lombard
Schools : Vet notwithftanding he made to
good IIfe of the Time he spent in thofe Places,
that perhaps none of his Predeceffors can boaft
2 more beautiful Colouring, a nobler Inven-
tion, or a more lukurious Fancy, in their Com-
pofitions; of which fee a farther Account,
page 177. But befides his Talent in Painting,

and his admirable Skill in Arcbitedure (very
eminent in the feveral Churches and Palaces,
built after his Defigns at Genoa) he was a Per-
fon pofieffed of all the Ornaments and Ad-
Vantages that can render a Man Valuable;
Was univerfally learned, (poke feven Lan-
ghages very perfectly, was well read in Flif.
1ory, and withal to excellent a Staresman, that
he


259

1576.
El. 46.
d

1577.


260


Er. 63.



Modern Masters.
he was employed in feveral public Negotia.
tions of great Importance, which he managed
with the moff refined Prudence and Conduct;
and was particularly famous for the Charac-
ter with which he was fent into England, of
Ambaffador from the Infanta Wabella, and
Pbilip IV. of Spain, to King Charles I. upon
a Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns,
confirmed Anno 16z0. His, principal Per-
formances are in the Banquetting-house at
Whitehall, the Escurial in Spain, and the
Luxemburgh Galleries at Paris, where he was
employed by Qucen Mary of Medicis, Dow-
ager of Henry IV. and in each of thofe three
Courts, had the Honour of Knightbood con-
ferred upon him, befides feveral magnificent
Prefents, in Teflimony of his extraordinary
Merits. His ufual Abode was at Anraverp;
where he built a spacious Apartment, in Imi-
tation of the Rotunda at Rome, for a noble
Collection of Pictures which he had purchafed
in Iraty; fome of which, together with his
Statues, Medals, and other Antiquities, he
fold, not long after, to the Duke of Bucking-
Bam, his intimate Friend, for ten thoufand
Pounds. He lived in the higheft Efteem,
Reputation and Grandeur imaginable; was
as great a Patron, as Mafter of his Art; and
to much admired all over Enrepe, for his
many fingular Endowments, that no Stran-
gers of any Quality could pass through the
Low-Countries, till they had firft feen Rubens,
of whofe Iame they had heard to much. He
died Anno 1640, leaving vait Riches behind
him to his Children; of whom Alberr, the
eldeff, fucceeded him in the Office of Secre-
tary of State in Flanders.
ORATIO


Modern Masters.
ORATiO GENTiLEsenI, a Native of Pifa
(a City in Tuscany) and a Disciple of Aurelio
Loms, his Half-Brother, flourithed in this
Time; and after he had made himself known
in Flovence, Rome, Gened, and other Parts of
Naly, removed to Savey, from thence went
to France; and at laft, upon his Arrival in
England, was to well received by King
Charles I. that he appointed him Lodgings
in his Court, together with a confiderable Sa-
lary, and employed him in his Palace at
Greenwich, and other public Places. He
made feveral Attempts in Face-painting, but
with litle Success; his Talent lying altoge-
ther in Hiffories, with Figures as big as the
Life; in which Kind fome of his Compofi-
tions have defervedly met with great Ap-
plinfe. He was much in Favour with the
Duke of Backingham, and many others of the
Nobility; and, after twelve Years Continu-
ance in this Kingdom, died Anno Erat. 84,
and lies buried in the Queen’s Chapel in So-
merset-house.
ARTEMISIA GENTILESCHI, his Daugh-
ter, excelled her Father in Pertrairs, and was
but little inferior to him in Hiffories. She
lived for the moft part at Naples, in great
Splendor; and was as famous all over Enroge
for her Gallantry and Love-Intrigues, as for
her Talent in Painting.
FRANCESCO ALRANI, 2 Bolognese, born
Anno 1578, imbibed the firft Principles of
Design (with his Friend Guide) in the School
of Denis Galvert; but being afterwards ad-
fanced to that of the Carracbes, he foon be-
Came



1578.


28F


262
El.82.
nd

1579.
n
1581.


Modern Masters.
came Mafter of ohe of the moft agreeable
Pencils in the World. He was well verfed in
polite Lirerature, and excellent in all the Parts
of Painting; but principally admired for his
Performances in 4rrle. He had a particular
Genius for naked Figures; and, the better to
accomplish himself in that Study, married a
beautiful Lady of Bologna, with little or no
Fortune, by whom, upon all Occafions, he
ufed to defign naked Venus's, the Graces,
Nymphs, and other Goddeffes; and by her
Children, little Capids playing and dancing
in all the Variety of Pottures imaginable. He
Spent fome Time at Rome, was employed alfo
by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, but compoted
moft of his Works in his own Country; where
he died, Anno 1660.
FRANCIS SNYDERS, born at Antaverg,
Anno 1579, was bred up under Henry ven
Balen, his Countryman; but owed the moft
confiderable Part of his Improvement to his
Studies in Iraly. He painted all Sorts of
wild Beafts, and other nimals, Huntings,
Fih, Frair, exc. in great Perfection: Was
often employed by the King of Spain, and
several other Princes, and every where muck
commended for his Works.
DOMENICO LAMPIERI, commonly called
DOMENICHINO, well defcended, and born
in the City of Bologna, Anno 1581, was at
firft a Difciple of D. Calverr, the Fleming:
But foon quitted his School, for a much bet
ter of the Carraches; being instructed at Bo-
loona by Lndovice, and at Rome by Hannibal,
who had fo great a Value for him, that he
took him to his Affittance in the Farnese Gal
1017.


Modern Masters.
tory. e was extremely laborious and flow
in his Productions, applying himfelf always
to his Work with much Study and Thought-
fulness, and never offering to rouch his Pencil,
till he found a kind of Enthussafm or Inspird-
tion upon him. His Talent lay principally
in the Correttness of his Stile, and in expref-
ting the Passions and Affections of the Mind:
in both which he was fo admirably judicious;
that Nicolo Pouffin and Andrea Saccbi uted to
(ay, his Communion of St. Ferom (in the Church
of the Charity) and Raphael's celebrated Piece
of the Trensfguration, were the two best Pic-
tures in Rome. He was made the chief Ar-
chirect of the Apoffolical Palace, by Pope Gre-
fory XV. for his great Skill in that Art. He
was likewife well verfed in the Theory of
Musse, but in the Practice of it had little
success. He had the Misfortune to find Ene-
mies in all Places, wherever he came, and
particularly at Naples was fo ill treated by
thofe of his own Profeffion, that having agreed
among themfelves to disparage all his Works,
they would hardly allow him to be a tolera=
ble Mafter; and were not content with hav.
ing frighted him, for fome Time, from that
City, but afterwards, upon his Return this
ther, never left perfecuring him, till by their
Tricks and Contrivances they had quite wea-
ried him out of his Life, Anno 1641, not
without Sufpicion of Poifon. See page 176.
His Cotemporary and moft malicious Enemy,
GIOsEPFE RYRERA, a Native of Valencia
in Spain, commonly Known by the Name of
SP.CNOLETTO, was an Artift perfect in De-
Sfn, and famous for the excellent Manner of
Colouring, which he had learned from Michael
Angelo


Er. Co.



263


264



1581.
E1.66.
d


Modern Masters.
Angelo da Caravaggio. His Way was very
often in Half-Figures onle; and, like his
Mafter, he was wonderfully sriet in fol-
lowing the Life; but as ill-narured in the
Choice of his Subjects, as in his Behaviourto
poor Dominichino; affecting generally fome-
thing very terrible and frightful in his Pieces,
fuch as Prometbens with the Vulture feeding
upon his Liver, Cato Utucencis weltering in
his own Blood, St. Bartholomew with the Skin
payed off from his Body, &cc. but however, in
all his Compofitions, Warure was imitated
with fo much Art and Judgment, that a cer-
tain Lady, big with Child, having acciden-
tally caft her Eyes upon an Ivion, whom he
had repretented in Torture upon the Wheel, re-
ceived fuch an Impreffion from it, that the
brought forth an Insans, with Fingers dif
torted, juft like thofe in his Picture. His
ufual Abode was at Naples, where he lived
very (plendidly, being much in Favour with
the Viceroy, his Countryman; and in great
Reputation for his Works in Painting, and
for feveral Prings etched with. his own
Hand.
Cavakier GlOVANNI LANFRANCO, born
at Parma, on the fame Day with Demeni-
chine, Anno 1581, was a Difciple of the Car-
racbes, and befides a zealous imitator of the
Works of Raphael and Correggio; his Cha
ratter, fee page 176. He was highly ap.
plauded at Napler for feveral excellent Pieces
which he wrought there; and was much
estcemed in Rome, that, for his Performances
in the Vatican, he was knighted by Pope Ur.
ban VIII. He died Anno 1647.
SIST0


Modern Masters.
SISTO EADALOCEHI, his Fellow-Difci-
ple, was of Farma alfo; and, by the In-
Aructions of the Carracbes at Rome, became
one of the belt Defigners of their School. He
had alfo many other commendable Qualities,
and particularly Facility, but wanced Dili-
gence. He joined with his Countryman
lanfranc, in Erching the Hiffories of the
Bible, after the Paintings of Kaphael, in the
Vatican, which they dedicated to Hannibal,
their Mafter. He practifed moftly at Bo-
togna, where he died young.
StMON VOUET, born at Paris, Anne 1582,
was bred up to Painting under his Father,
and carried very young to Conftantinople, by
Monlicur de Sancy the French Ambaffador to
draw the Picture of the Grand Seignier; which
he did by Strength of Memory only. From
thence he went to Venice, and afterwards fet-
ding himself at Rome, made fo confiderable
aProgress in his Art, that befides the Fa-
vours which he received from Pope Ur-
ban Viil. and the Cardinal his Nephew, he
was cholen Prince of the Roman Academy of
St. Luke. He was fent for home, Anno 1627,
by the Order of Lervis Kill. whom he served
in the Quality of his chief Painter He prac-
ited bock in Porrraits and Hiffories; and fur-
nithed fome of the Aparrments of the Louvre,
the Palaces of Luxemburob and St. Germains,
the Galleries of Cardinal Ricbelien, and other
public Places, with his Works. His greateft
Pertection was in his agreeable Colouring,
and his brifke and lively Pearrl, being other-
wile but very indifferently qualified. He
had no trenius for grand Compesitions, was
unhappy



1582.


265


266
PEt.59.
d
a
1582.


Modern Mosters.
unhappy in his Invention, unacquainted with
the Rules of Perspective, and underffood but
little of the UUnion of Colours, or the Dectring
of Ligbts and Shadows: Vet nevertheless,
he brought up feveral eminent Disciples;
and had the Honour to instruct the KiNc
himfelf in the Art of Defign. He died
Anno 1642.
DAvID TENTERs, called the Elder, was
born at Antverp, Anno 1582. He received
the first Rudiments of his Art from the fa-
mous Rubens, who foon perceived in him the
happy Advances towards excelling in his Pro-
feffion, that raifed him to the Head of the
School. The Mafter was affonished at his
Success; and though he followed the Man-
ner of Brower Ruvens looked on him as his
moft deferving Disciple, by the Brightness
of Genius that appeared in his Defigns. On
leaving the School, he began to be much
employed; and in a little Time was in a
Condition to travel to Rome, where he fixed
himfelf with Adam Elpeimer who was then
in Vogue. A happy UUnion of the Merits of
tuch eminent Matters, produced in him a
Manner, as agreeable as diverting. His
chief Talent lay in painting finall Piduresf
filled with Figures of Persons drinking,, Che
mifts, Fairs, and Merry-makings; with a
Number of Countrymen and Women: The
Demand for them was univerfal; even the
penetrating judgment of the great Rubennf
thought them an Ornament to his Cabinet
He always employed himself in copying afief
Narure; and taught his two Sons to follow
his Example, who were the only Disciplest
we know, of David Teniers the Elder. Th
Distinciod


Mndern Mafters.
Diftinction between the Works of the Fa-
ther and Son, is, that in the Sons is dif-
covered a finer Touch, and a frether Pencil,
greater Choice of Attituder, and a better
Difpofition of his Figures. He died at Ant-
werp, Anno 1649.
DAviD TENIERs, the younger born Anne
1610, was a Difciple of his Father, and nick.
named; the Ape of Painting; for there was
no Manner of Painting but he imitated, fo
perfectly as to deceive the niceil Judges. He
improved to much on the Talents and Merit
of his Father, that Fortune, confcious of
his Deferts, favoured him with the Protec-
tion of the Archduke Leopold-William, who
made him Mafter of his Bed-chamber; Count
Fuensaldegna, Don John of Austria, the King
of Spain, and William Prince of Orange, ho-
noured him with their Friendship and Pro-
tection, fetting a great Value on his Pic-
tures; Rubens likewife affifted him with his
Advice, as being a Son of his Difciple.

His pricipal Talent was in Landscape,
adorned with imall Figures; Men drinking
and smoaking, Chemiffs, Elaboratories, Corps
de Garde, &cc. his small Pictures are fuperior
to his large ones. He dilplays the greatest
Lafe in Execution, the Leating of his Trees
is light, his Skies admirable; his small pr-
gures have an exquifite Expresfion, and a
most lively Touch, and his Cbaracters mark-
ed with the greateff Truch. He died at nt-
wirp, Anno 1694, Er. 8a.
PETER van LAER, commonly called
BAMROccro, upon account of his difagree-
able Figure, with long Legs, a fhort Body,
and


267
(Et.67.
d


268

1584.
El. 60.
ed

1589.
Et. 35.
d


Modern Masters.
and his Head funk down into his Shoulders,
was born in the City of Haerlem, Anne 1584;
and after he had laid a good Foundation in
Drawing and Perspective at home, went to
France, and from thence to Rome; where,
by his earnef Application to Siudy, for fix-
teen Vears together, he arrived to great
Perfection in Hiffories, Landscapes, Grottes,
Hantings, c. with little Figures, and Ani-
mals He had an admirabie Gufto in Co-
louring, was very judicious in the ordering
of his Pieces, nicely juft in his Proportions;
and only to be blamed for affecting. to re-
prefent Narure in her worf Drefs, and fol-
lowing the Life too clofe, in moft of his
Compofitions. He returned to Amperdam,
Anno-1639; and, after a fhort Stay there,
spent the Remainder of his Days with his
Brother, a noted Schoolmafter, in Haerlem.
He was a Perfon very ferious and concem-
plative in his Humour, took Pleafure in no-
thing but Painting and Musie; and, by in-
dulging himself too much in a melancholy
Retirement, is faid to have shortened his
Life, Anno 1647.
DOMENICO FETTr was bred up under
Lodovico Crvoli, in Rome, where he was
born, Anne 1569; but attending Cardinal
Ferdinand Gonxaga, afterwards Duke of
Manrad, to that City, by fudying the
Works of Juho Romane, he became an ex-
collent lmitator of that great Mafter. From
thence he went to Venice, to enlarge his
Notions, and improve himself in Colouring
but broke his Conflitution fo much by dift
orderly Courfes, that he died in his primes
Anne 1624.
CORNELIU


Modern Masters.

CORNELTUS POELENRURCH, born at
Uirecht, Anno 1590, was a Disciple of Abra-
ham Blomaerf, and afterwards, for a long
Time, a Student in Rome and Florence.
His Talent lay altogether in small Figures,
naked Boys, Landscapes, Ruins, &&c. which
he exprefted with a Pencil very agreeable
as to the colouring Part; but generally at-
tended with a little Staffness, the almoft in-
Peparable Companion of much Labour and
Neatness. However Rubens was to welt
pleafed with this Pictures, that he defired
Sandrare to buy fome of them for him. Hey
came over into England, Anno 1637; and,
after he had continued here four Vears, and
been handsomely rewarded by King Charlesl.
for several Pieces, which he wrought for him,
returned into his own Country, and died
Anno 1667.
Cavalier Gio. FaANCESCO BARBIERI
de CENTO, commonly called GUERciwo,
becaufe of a Caft he had with one of his
Eyes) was born near Belogna, Anne 1596,
and bred up under Benederto Gennari, his
Countryman; by whofe Intructions, and
the Dictates of his own excellent Genins,
he soon learned to defign. gracefully, and
with Correetness; and by converfing after-
wards with the Works of Micbael Angelo dix
Caravaggio, and the Carracber, became an
idmirable Colouriff; and befides, very fa-
nous for his happy invention, and Freedom
Of Pencil; and for the Strength, Relievo,
and becoming Boldness of his Figures. He
began, in the Declenfion of his Agc. to
tter his Stile in Painring; and (to pleafe
the


269

1590.
LEt. 77.
d

1590.


276
Et.76.


1590.


Modern Masters.
the anthinking Multitude, rather than him:
felf) took up another Manner, more say,
neat, and pleafant; but by no Means to
grand and fo natural as his former Gufto.
He was fent for to Rome, by Pope Gregery XV
and after two Vears spent there, with ani-
verfal Applaufe, returned home; and could
not be drawn from thence, by the moff
Powerful Invitations, either of the King of
England, or the French King; nor could
Chriffina, Queen of Savedes, prevail with him
to leave Bologna, though, in her Paftage
through it, the made him a Vifit, and would
not be fatisfied till she had taken him by the
Hand, Tbat Hand (the fard) that had painted
106 Altar-pieces, 144 Pictures for People of
the first Quality in Europe; and besides, had
composed 10 Books of Defigns. He received
the Honour of Knighthood from the Duke
of Mantua; and for his exemplary Piey,
and Morality, was every where
Prudence,
as much efteemed, as for his Knowledge in
Painting. He died a Batchelor, Anne 1666,
notwithffanding the great Sums
very rich,
of Money he had expended in building Cha.
pels, founding Hofpituls, and other Acts of
Charity.
FRANK HALs. This great Portrait-pain
fer (born Anne 1590) Vandyks alone has fard
pafied, few others have equalled. His Pict
teres were painted with a frong Refemblance)
in a beautiful Manner, and with great An
He marked out his Figures with great Ext
altness, his Colours were tenderly mixed
but he knew how to give them Force by the
bold Strokes of his Pencil. He did the famb
by his Lights; and being asked the Realod


Modern Masters.
of this Bractice, antwered, Recause be warked
for his Repatatian; a. Mafter ought to conceal
the servile Labour and painful Exactness, that
Portrait-painting requires, Vandyke uted fre-
quently to. fay (berween. whom and our
Artiff there was great Intimacy) that Hals
would have been the greateft Pertrait -pain—
for the World ever produced, if he would
have given more Tenderness to his Colours;
for he did not know any one thatwas to per-
fectly Mafter of his Pencil; nor are there
any Pictures that have a greater Force, or
more lizely Exprestion than his. He died
Anno 1656.
NIcOLO PussINo, the French Raphael,
was the Defcendant of a noble Family in
Picardy, but born at Andely, a Town in Nor-
mandy, Anno 1594. He was feafoned in
Literature at home, inftructed in the Rudi-
ments of Design at Paris; learned the Prin-
ciples of Geometry, Perspective, and Anatomy,
at Rome; practifed after the Life in the Aca-
demy of Domenicbino; and Rudied the Anti-
guitres, in Company with the famous Sculp-
tor, Francesco Fiamminge, who was. born in
the same Vear, and lodged in the same Houfe
with him. His Way, for the moft part, was
in Hiffories, with Figures about two or three
feet high; and his Colouring inclined rather
to the antique Marble, than to Nature: But
in all the other Parts of Painting, he was
prefoundly excellent; and particularly, the
beauty of his Genius appeared in his nice
and judicious Observation of the Decorum in
his Compofitions; and in expreffing the Paf-
sons and Affections with fuch incomparable
Skill, that all his Pieces feem to have the
vary
P 2


27
El. 76.


1594.


272
Et.7I.

u
1596.


Modern Masters.
very Spirit of the Action, and the Life and
Soul of the Perfons they reprefent He had
not been in Rome above fixteen Vears; before
his Name became to univerfally celebrared;
that Cardinal Ricbhea, refolving to advance
the noble Arts in France, prevailed upon him
(by Means of an obliging Letter, written to
him by Lewis KiIl. himielf; Anno 1639) is
return to his own Country; where he was
received with all poffible Demonttrations of
Efteem, was declared firff Painter to the
King, had a confiderable Pention appointed
him, was employed in feveral public Works,
and at laft undertook to paint the grand Gat
tery of the Lonare. But the King and Car.
dinal both dying, in the Time that he went
back to fettle his Affairs in Naly, and bring
his Family from thence, he quire laid afide
the Thoughts of returning any more to France
and ended his Days in Rome, Anno 1667;
having, for some Vears before his Deceafe,
been to much subject to the Palty, that the
Effects of his unfleady Hand are wifible in

feveral of his Defigns.
PIETRO BERETTINY, of Cortong in Tuf
cany, was born Anno 1596; brought up ir
the Houfe of Sachsiti, in Reme; and a Dif
ciple of Baccio Crarpi. He was univerfall)
applauded for the vait Exrent of his Genius
the Vivacity of his Imagination, and an in
credible Facility in the Execution of Ki
Works. His Talent lay in grand Orden
nances; and though he was uncorrect in hi
Defign, injudicious in his Expreffion, an
irregular in his Draperies, yer thofe Defed
were to happily atoned for by the Magni
ficence of his Compofitions, the fine Airso
1i


Rlodern Mlasters.
his Figures, the Nobleness of his Decora-
ions, and the furprizing Beauty and Grace-
tulness of the whole together, that he is al-
lowed to have been the moft agreeable Man-
eriff that any Age has produced. He prac-
cifed both in Fresco and Oit; but it was in
the fird he chiefly excelled, though admira-
ble alfo in the other. His principal Per-
formances are on the Cielings and Walls of
the Churches and Palaces of Rome and Flo-
rence. And for thofe few Things of his
Hand, that adorn the Cabinets of the Cu-
vious, they are beholden to his ill State of
Healch for them; becaufe he hardly ever
made an Easelpiece, but when a Fit of the
Gont confined him to his Chamber. He
was handfome in his Perfon; and, to his
extraordinary Qualities in Painting, joined
thofe of a perfectly honeit Man. He was
in great Efteem with Pope Urben VIll. In-
secent X. and moft of the Perfons of prime
Quality in Iraly, for his confummate Skill
in Arcbiteture,, as, well as for his Pencil;
and, having received the Honour of Knight-
hood from Pope Alexander VII. died nno
1669.
JOHN VAN GORVEN, the Son of Toseph,
was born at Leyden, Anne 1596. His Fa-
ther firft placed him with Scbilperoor, 2
landscaps-painter, whom he quitted to enter
himfelf under M. John Nicolar, a Burgo-
maller, and good Painter; but he, being of
a fickle Dispofition, left his Mater, for de
Man and Henry Klock, and at laff fetled
with William Gerrets at Hoorn, with whom he
lived two Vears; in, this Time, keeping
lolc to Bufinefs, he made fuch a Progreis,
P
that


TEt. 73.
d

1596.


273


274
Et. 60.


599.


Modern Mafters.
that he foon found he was able to work for
himself; which he did for a few Years, and
then vifited the moft principal Cities in
France From hence he returned to his Pa.
ther; who, being a Lover of Drawing him.
self, and convinced his Son only wanted the
Inftruction and Affiftance of an able Artif,
went with him to ffaerlem, and placed him
under Haiah Vandervelde, and had the Sauf.
faction of feeing him become a great Maf
ter. His Stile of Painting is quite natural;
his Landscapes much varied, reprefenting Ri-
evers, Beats with Fishermen or Peasants return.
ing from Markes. His Pidures have all a
greyith Caft, owing to his making Ofe of a
Blue, then much in Vogue, called Blle ij
Haerlem.. On his leaving Vanderwelde; he
fixed at Leyden, where he married, and some
Time after removed to the Hague; at which
Place he died, Anne 1656.


Sir ANTHONY VAN DYcx was born a
Antwerg, Anno 1599, and gave fuch: early
Proofs of his moft excellent Endowments
that Rubens; His Mafter, fearing he would
become as univerfal as himfelt, to diverf
him from Hiffories, ufed to commend his Ta
lent in painting after the Life, and took fucl
Care to keep him continually employed i
Bufinets of that Nature, that he refolved a
laff to make it his principal Study; and fof
his Improvement went to Venite; where he
attained the beautiful Colouring of Titiart
Paulo Veronese, &c. and, after a few Vead
spent in Rome, Genea, and Sicily, returne
Nome to Flanders, with a Manner of Paint
ing, to noble, natural and eaty, that Titial
himfelf was hardly his Superior, and at
oflid


Modern Masters.
other Mafter in the World equal to him for
Pertraits. He came over into England, foon
after Rubens had left it, and was entertained
in the Service of King Charles I. who con-
ceived a marvellous Efteem for his Works;
honoured him with Knighthood, prefented
him with his own Picture fet round with
Diamonds, affigned him a confiderable Pen-
fon, fat very often to him for his Portrait,
and was followed by moft of the Nobility
and principal Gentry of the Kingdom. He
was a Perton low of Stature, but well-pro-
portioned; very handsome, modeft, and ex-
tremely obliging; a great Encourager of all
tuch as excelled in any Art or Science, and
generous to the very laft Degree. He mar-
rned one of the faireff Ladies of the Engliffs
Court, Daughter of the Lord Ruthen, Earl
of Goaury, and lived in State and Grandeur
anfverable to her Birth; his own Carb was
generally very richy his Coaches and Equi-
pare magnificent, his Retinue numerous and
gallant, his Table very fplendid; and fo
much frequented by People of the beft Qua-
lity of both Sexes, that his Apartmentsfeemed
father to be the Court of a Prince, than the
Lodgings of a Painter. He grew weary, to-
wards the latter End of his Life, of the con-
inued Trouble that attended Face-painting;
and, being defirous of immortalizing his
Name by some more glorious Undertaking,
went to Paris, in Hopes of being employed
in the grand Gallery of the Lowvre; but not
ucceeding there, he returned hither, and
proposed to the King (by his Friend, Sir
Kenelm Digly) to make Cartoons for the
Banquetting-bouse at Whiteball, the Subject
of which was to have been the Infrention of
P 4
60


275


276
Et. 42.



Modern Masters.
the Order of the Garter, the Procesfion of the
Knights in their Habits, with the Ceremong
of their Instalment, and St. Georgg's Feaft:
But his Demands of Fourfcore Theusand
Pounds being thought unreafonable, whilt
the King was upon treating with him for a
lets Sum, the Gout, and other Diltempers,
put an End to that Affair, and his Life,
Anno 1641, and his Body was interred in St.
Pants Church. See farther, page 178. and
note, that amongft the Portraits of Ilinfricus
Persons, &c. printed and publithed by the
particular Directions of this great Mafter,
tome were etched in Aqua-fortis, with his
own Hand.
G1o. BENEDETTO CASTICLIONE, a Ge.
neefe, was at firtt a Difciple of Bartifia Pagos
36
and Ferrari, his Countrymen; improved
himfelf afterwards by the Instructions of
Vandike (as long as he gontinued in Genea)
and at laft became an imicafor of the Man-
ner of Nicolo Pouffin. He was commended
for feveral very good Prints of his own Etch-
ing; but in Painring his Inclinations led him
to Figures, with Landicapes and Animals;
which he touched up with a great deal of
Life and Spirit; and was particularly re-
markable for a brifk Pencil, and a free Hand-
ling in all his Compofitions. He was a Per
fon very unfettled in his Temper, and never
loved to ftay long in one Place; but, being
continually upon the Ramble, his Works lie
fcattered up and down in Genea, Rome, Na
ples, Venice, Parma, and Mantua; at which
laft Place he died.
VIvlaN9


Modern Mafters.
277
m

sniy 7

ViviANO ConA22O, generally called
ViviaNO dalle PROSPETTIVE.,. Was Dorn

at Bergame, in the Venetian Territories,
Ano 1599s and, by the Instructions of
1599.
Auguftino. Tafo, his Matter,arrived to a
moft excellent Manner of painting Build
ings, Ruins,, &c. His ordinary Refidence
Was at. Rame, where he died, Anno 1674,
Et. 75
5

and was buried in the Church of St. Lorense.
in Lucina. He had a Son called Nicolo, who
purfued his Father'’s Steps, and died at Ge-
nea, in great Reputation for his Perform-
ances in Perspective.
MARIO NU22I, commonly called Ma- ar
Rio dai Fioxr, born at Orra, in the Terra
1599.
di Sabina, was a Difciple of his Uncle To-
mass Salini, and one of the moft famous
Mallers in his Time for painting Fleavers.
He died in Rome, where he had spent great
Part of his Life, and was atfo buried in St.
Lorenso's Church, Asno 1672.
El. 73.
id
f
MICHELANCELO CERQvO22I, was born
1600.
in Rome, nno 1600, and bred up in the
School of Antonio Salvatti, a Bolognese. Fie
was called dalle BATTACLIR, from his ex-
cellent Talent in Batrles; but, befides his
great Skill in that particular Subject, he
was very fuccessful in all Sorts of Figures,
and painted Frait incomparably beyond any
Maker in his Time. He was buried in
the Choir of St. Mary’s Church, in Rome,
Er. Co.
Anno 1660.


CLAUDIO GILLR of LORAIN, born Anno
1600.
1600, was by his Parents fent very young
t0
P S


278


El. 82.
ia

1600.


Miodern Masters.
Rome: and after he had been grounded in
the Elements of Defign, and the Rules of Per-
Bective, under Auguffine Tafe, he removed
his Study to the Banks of the Tyber and
into the open Fields, took all his Lesfons
from Nature herfelf, and, by many Years di-
ligent Imitation of that excellent Mitress,
climbed up to the higheft Step of Perfection
in Landscape-painting; and was univerfally
admired for his pleafant and moft agreeable
Invention, for the Delicacy of his Colouring,
and the charming Variety and Tenderness of
his Tints; for his artful Diftribution of the
Lights and Sbadoaus, and for his wonderful
Conduct in difpoting his Figares for the Ad¬
Vantage and Harmony of his Compofitions.
He was much commended for several of his
Performances in Frefce, as well as Oit; was
employed by Pope Urban VIII. and many of
the fration Princes, in adorning their Palaces;
reat many
and having by his Pencil (and 2
Prints, etched with his own Hland) made his
Name famous throughout Exrope, died ung
1682, and was interred in the Church of
Trinita de Monti, in Rome.
GASFARO DUcHET was of French Ex-
traction, but born in Rome; Anno 1600.
He took to himself the Name of Poussiw,
in Gratitude for many Favours, and parti-
cularly that of his Education, which he re-
ceived from Nicolo Poufin, who married his
Sifter. His firft Employment under his Bro-
ther-in-Law, was, in looking after his Co-
lours, Pencils, toc. but his excellent Genins
for Painting foon difcovered itfelf; by his
own Induttry, and his Brother's Inffractions,
was to well improved, that in Landscapes,
which


Miedern Masters.
which he principally fiudied, he became one
of the greateff Mafters in his Age; and was
much in Requett for his easy Invention, Jolid.
Judgment, regular Disposition, and true Re-
Temblance of Nature, in all his Works: He
died in his great climatterical Vear, 1663,
and was burred in his Parifh-Church of St.
Sujanna, in Rome.
ANDREA SACCHIT, born in Rome, Anne
1601, was the Son of a Painter, but under
the Conduct of Cavalier Greseppino, a Maf-
ier of greater Fame, by incredible Diligence
he made fuch Advances, that, before he
was twelve Years of Age, he carried the
Prize, in the Academy of St. Lake, from all
his (much older) Comperitors. With this
Badge of Honour, they gave him the Nick.
name of Andrenccio, to denote the diminu-
tive Figure he then made, being a Boy.
And though he grew up to be a tall, grace-
ful, and well-proportioned Man, yet he Htill
retained the Name of Lirtle Andrerw, almoft
to the Day of his Deach. His Application
to the Chiaro-fcares of Polydore, to the Paint-
ings of Raphael, and to the antique Marbles;
together with his Studies under Albanr, and
his Copies after Correggie, and others, the
bet Lombard Mafters, were the feveral Steps
by which he raifed himself to mighty Perfec-
tion in bifforical Compositions. The three
firft gave him his Correciness, and Elegance of
Design; and the laft made him the beft Co-
louriff of all the Roman School. His Works
are not very numerous, by reafon of the In-
frmities that attended him in his latter
Vears; and more especially the Gour, which
often confined him to his Bed for feveral
Months


278
E). 63.


1601.


280
1
E1.60.
d

1605.


Modern Masters.
Months together: And befides; he was at
all Times very flow in his Performances; be-
caufe he never did any thing, he faid, but
what he propoted should be teen by Rapbacl
and Hannibals which laid a Reftraint upon
his Hand, and made him proceed with the
atmolt Precaution. His firff Patrons were
the Cardinals Antonio Barberini, and del
Monte, the Protector of the Academy of Paint.
ing. He became afterwards a great Fa-
vourite of Pope Urban VIIl. and drew a Pic-
fure of him, which (with some other Things
he painted after the Lise) may fland in Com-
petition with whatever has been done by the
moft renowned for Portrairs. He was a Per-
fon of a noble Appearance, grave, prudent,
and in Converfation very entertaining. He
was moreover an excellent Arcbifeet, and for
many other rare Qualities, died much lar
mented, Anno 1661.
PADRE GIacOMO CORTESt; commonly
called the BoRcOCNONE, from the Coun-
try where he was born, about the Vear
160., was highly applanded for his admi-
Table Gufto, and grand Manner of painting
Battles. He had for feveral Years been
converfant in military Affairs, was a con-
fiderable Officer in the Army, made the
Camp his School, and formed all his excel-
lent Ideas from what he had feen performed
in the lield. His Stile was roughly noble,
and, Soldier-like, full of Fire and Spirits,
as is fufficiently evident even in the few
Prints which he erched. He retired, to-
wards the latter End of his Life, into the
Convent of the Tefuirs in Rome; where he was
forced to take Sanctuary, they fay, to rid
his


Modern Masters.
his Hlands of an ill Bargain, he had got in
a Wife; but, happily furviving her, he lived
till after the Year 1675, in great Efteem and
Honour.
GUCLIEL MO CORTEsI, his Brother, was
alfo a Painter of Note; and, having been
bred up in the School of Peter Cortona,
shewed how well he had spent his Time
there, by his Performances in feveral of the
Churches and Palaces of Rome.
REMERANDT VAN RYN, born near Ley-
den, Anno 1606, was a Difciple of Lasman
of Amfterdam. He had an excellent Difpo-
fition for Painting; his Vein was fruirful,
and his Thoughts fine and lively. But hav-
ing fucked in, with his Milk, the bad Taffe
of his Country, and aiming at nothing be-
youd a faithful Imitation of the living
(heavy) Nature, which he had always be
fore his lyes, he formed a Mlanner entirely
new, and peculiar to himself. He prepared
his Ground with a Lay of fuch friendly Co-
lours, as united, and came ncaret to the
Life. Upon this, he touched in his Virgin
Tints (each in its proper Place) rough, and
as litrle disturbed by the Pencil as poffible;
and with great Maffes of Lights and Shadows
founding off his Figures, gave them a Force
and Freshness that was very furprizing. And
indeed, to do Julice to the predominant
Part of his Character, the UUnson and Har-
mony in all hi Compofitions is fuch, as is
trely to be found in other Matters. He
drew abundance of Portrerts, wich wonderful
Strength, Sweetnets, and Refemblance; and
even in his Erching (which was dark, and as
particular


28½

1606.


282
Et. 62.



Modern Masters.

particular as his Stile is Painting
eery in-
dividual Stroke did its Part, and expreffed
the very Fleth, as well as the Spirit of the
Perfons he reprefented. Agreeable with all
the reft was the Singularity of his Behaviour.
He was a Man of Senfe and Subftance; but
a Humouriff of the firft Order. He affected
an old-fathioned, flovenly Dress; and, de-
lighting in the Converfation of mean and
pitifal People, reduced his Forcunes at laft
to a Level with the pooreft of his Compa-
nions. He died Anno 1668, for nothing
more to be admired, than for his having
heaped up a noble Treafure of Ialian Prints
and Drawings, and making no better UUfe
of them.
GEERART Dov, born at Eryden, was a
Difciple of Rembrandt; but much pleafanter
in his Stile of Painting, and fuperior to him
in listle Figures. He was erteemed in Hol-
land a great Mafter in his Way; and though
we muft not expect to find in his Works
that Elevation of Thought, that Correttness of
Defign, or that noble Spirit, and grand Cuffe,
in which the Iralians have diftinguished them-
selves from the reft of Mankind; yet it muff
be acknowledged, that he was a careful and
juft Imitator of the Lifs, exceedingly happy
in the Management of his Pencil, and in
finifhing his Pieces curious, and patient be-
youd Example. He died about the Vear
1674. leaving behind him many Scholars:
Of whom,
FRANCTS MIERIs, the chief, purfued his
Mafter's Steps very clofe, and in Time fur-
paffed him; being more correct in his Our-
Sints


Nisdorn Mafters.
lines, more bright in his Colouring, and
more gracefyl in his Compofitions. Won-
derful Things were expected from his pro-
mifing Genins; but Intemperance, and 2
thoughtlefs, random Way of Living, cut
him off, in the very Flower of his Age, nno
1682. As for the reft of the Difciples and
Followers of Don, their Works having no-
thing to recommend them, but only an ela-
borate Nearness, we may properly place them
in the fame Form with the cunning Feots.
mentioned page 103.
GoDrRIDUs ScHALCKEN, however, muft
be excepred out of this Number; who, in
mall Night Pieces, and Representations of the
Low-Life by Candle-light, hath ourdone all
the Mafters that have gone before him in
that School.
JOHN FRANCIS GRIMALDI is beholden
to the City of Bologna for his Nativity, Anno
1606. He Hudied under the Carracbes, to
whom he was related, and his Progress shewed
his natural Difposition; he foon became dif-
ringuished for his Landfcapes, and defigning
Figures. When he arrived at Rome, he co-
pied all the beautiful Things that prefented
themfelves, and was encouraged by feveral
great Men; Pope Innocent K. Prince Pam-
16li his Nephew, Cardinal Masarini, and
others, employed him in many capital
Works, in all which he fully antwered
their moft fanguine Expectations. His Co-
bouring is vigorous and tresh, his Touch beau-
tiful and light, His Lights pleafant, his Presce
admirable, his Leafing enchanting, his Land-
hapes, in the Tale of Carracbe, may ferve
for



1606.


283


Modern Mesters.
284
for Models
to thofe who intend to apply to
that Branch of Painting, yer they are fome-
times too green. He underitood Archirec-
ture; and has engraved, in Aqua-fortis, forty
two Landscapes, in an excellent Manner, five
of which are after Titian. As to his Perfon,
he was well-made, with a Behaviour that in-
clined every body to love him; he was ge
hnerous without Profufion, respectful to the
Great without Meanness, and very charita-
ble to the Poor: Being feized with the
Dropfy, he fubmitted to the common Fate
El. 75. of Mortals, at Rome, in the Year 1680.

JOnN PETIToOT fo emiment in Enameling,
that he was juftly tiled the Raphael in Enamel,

was born at Geneva, Anno 1607. His Father
1607.
was a Sculsfor and Arcbited, who defigned
our Artiff for a Teveller and, by the fre-
quent Employment in Enameling, acquired
to fine a Tafte and fo precious a Tone of Co-
louriff, that Mr. Berdir advifed Pefitot to
attach himself to Porirair; and though they
both wanted feveral Colours, which they
could not bring to bear the Fire, yet they.
fucceeded to Admiration: Peritor did the
Heads and Hands; Bordier painted the Hair,
the Draperies, and the Ground. Thefe two
infeparable Friends agreed to well in their
Works and Prejects, that, to improve their
Abilities, they fet our for fraty, and from
thence to England; where, by convening
with eminent Chymiffs, they arrived at an
amazing Degice of Perfection, which was in
some meafure owing to the friendly Inftruc-
tions of Vancyke. While in England, King
Charles l. took great Pleafure in feeing them
work; bur, after his tragical End, they ffed,
With


Miodern Mafters.
with his Son, to France, between whom a
great Intimacy fubfifted : But at the Reffo-
ration, Lervis Kiv. obferving their Merir,
retained them at his Court by a Penfion;
when they married two Sifters, acquired a
large Fortune, and were fuch difinterefted
Friends, that a Mifunderflanding never hap-
pened between them in the Space of fifty
Years. Petitor was excellent both as a Co-
firft and Designer; he painted Lervis KIV.
Mary- Ann his Mother, and Mary-Tberifa his
Wife, feveral Times; yet, at the Revoca-
tion of the Edict of Nantz, being a zealous
Proteffant, and not gaining the King's Per-
miffion to reure to Geneva, Lervis cruelly
arrefied him, and confined him at Fort
PEveque: But neither the Threats of the
King, nor the Horrors of a Dungeon, could
make him recant; till the King, being at
latt overcome by the Solicitations of his
Friends, and the affecting Petitions of a Man
worn out in his Service, and now nnear. 80,
permitted him to be releafed; when, terri-
fed at what he had fuffered, he fied with his
Wife to Genoa, on his Return to his native
City, notwithfanding his Age, continued
to labour with his Pencil; and his Pieces, to
the End of his Life, deferve the Efteem of all
Connoiffeurs. He was about the Picture of
his Wife, when a Diftemper attacked him,
which carried him off in one Day, in the
Year 1691.
ADRIAEN BROUWER was born in the
City of Haerlem, Anno 1608; and, befides
his great Obligations to Nature, was very
much beholden to Frank Hals, who took
him from begging in the Streets, and in-
Aructed


E). 84.
d

1608.


285


286
Et.30.
d

1609.


Modern Mafters.
structed him in the Rudiments of Painting;
And to make him Amends for his Kindness,
Brosaver, when he found himself fufficiently
qualified to get a Livelihood, ran away from
his Mafter into France, and after a thorr
Stay there, returned and fettled at Antevers.
Humear was his proper Sphere; and it was
in little Pieces that he ufed to reprefent
Boors, and orbers, bis Pot-Companions, drink-
ing, smoaking Tebacco, gaming, fighting, &c.
with a Pencil to tender and free, fo much of
Narure in his Expreffion, fuch excellent
Drawing in all the particular Parts, and
good Keeping in the Whole together, that
none of his Countrymen have ever been
comparable to him in that Subject. He was
extremely facetious and pleafant over his
Cups, fcorned to work as long as he had any
Money in his Pocket, declared for a short
Life, and a merry one; and, refolving to
ride Poft to his Grave, by the Help of Wine
and Brandy, got to his Journey's End,
Anne 1638, to very poor, that Contribu-
sions were raifed to lay him privately in the
Ground: From whence he was foon after
taken up; and, it is commonly faid, very
handfomely interred by Rubens, who was
a great Admirer of his happy Genius for
Painting.
PizR -FRANCESCO MOLA, of Lnsane,
born Anne 1609, was Difciple of Albam,
whofe agreeable and pleafant Stile of Paint-
ing he acquired; excepting only that his Co-
fouring was not altogether fo brilliant : But
as his Conceptions were lively and very
warm, to he defigned with great Spirit and
Liberty of Pencil, fometimes perhaps more
than


Modern Masters.
than was srictly allowable. He was in fuch
Effeem, however, for Abundance of his fine
Performances in Rome, that his fudden Death,
Anno 1665, was much regretted by all the
Lovers of rt.
Gro. BATTISTA MOLA was his Brother
and Fellow-Difciple: And though he could
not attain to the Perfection of Albam in his
Figures (which in Truth were a little hard
and cutting) yet in Landscapes he came fo
very near him, that his four large Pieces in
Duke Salviati's Palace at Rome, are generally
taken for his Mafter's Hand.
SAMUEL COoPEk, born in London, Anno
1609, was bred up (together with his elder
Brother Alexander) under the Care and Dif
cipline of Mr. Hokeins, his Uncle; but de-
rived the moft confiderable Advantages from
the Observations which he made on the
Works of Fandyke. His Pencil was gene-
rally confined to a Head only; and indeed;
below that Part, he was not always to fuccess-
ful as could be withed; but for a Face, and
all the Dependencies of it, viz. the graceful
and becoming Sir the Strengtb, Relieve, and
noble Spirit, the Softness, and render Liveliness
of Flesh and Blood, and the loose and gentils
Management of the Hair, his Talent was fo
extraordinary, that, for the Honour of our
Nation, it may without Vanity be affirmed,
he was at leaft equal to the moft famous Ira-
bans, and that hardly any one of his Prede-
ceffors has ever been able to thew to much
Perfection in to hnarrow a Compals. Answer.
able to his Abilities in this Art, was his Still
in Musse; and he was reckoned one of the
beft


287
El. 86.
nd

1609.


288
SE.1.63.


1610.


Nirdern Masters.
beft Lurenifis, as well as the moff excellent
Limner in his Time. He spent feveral Years
of his Life abroad, was perfonally acquainted
with the greatelt Men of France, Holland, and
his own Country, and by his Works more
univerfally known in all the Parts of Chrif-
tendom. He died Anno 1672, and lies bu-
ried in Pancras Church in the Fields..
WILLIAM LOBSON, a Gentleman de-
fcended of a Family very eminent (at that
Time) in. St. Elbans, was born in St. An.
drews Parith in Holborn, Anne 1610. Who
firft instructed him in the Ofe of his Pencil,
is uncertain; of this we are well affured,
that he was put out very early an Apprentice
to one NIr. Peake, a Stationer and Trader in
Pictures;, and that Nature, his bett Mistress,
inclined him fo powerfully to the Praltice of
painting after the Life, that had his Educa=
tion been but antwerable to his Genius, Eng-
land might juftly have been as proud of her
Dobson, as Venice of her Titian, or Flanders
of her Vandyke. How much he was be-
holden to the latter of thofe great Mep, may
eafily be feen, in all his Works; no Painter
having ever come up to near to the Perfection
of that excellent Mafter, as this his happy
Imitator. He was alfo farther indebted to
the Generofity of Vandyke, in prefenting him
to King Cbarkes I. who took him into his im:
mediate Protection, kept him in Oxford all
the while his Majetty continued in that City;
fat feveral Times to him for his Picture, and
obliged the Prince of Wales, Prince Rupert,
and moft of the Lords of his Court, to do
the like. He was a fair, middle-fized Man,
of a ready Wit and pleafing Converfation,
V23


Modern Masters.
was fomewhat loofe and irregular in his Way

the many
of Living
: and, notwithftanditig
1
Opportunities which he had of making his
1
Fortunes, died very poor; at his Houfe in St.
Martik slane, Anno (647.
MICHELANCELO PACE, born Anno 1610,
and called di CamPiDOCLiO, becaufe of an
Office he had in the Capitol, was a Disciple
of Fiaravanti, and very much eftcemed all
over Iraly, for his admirable Talent in paint-
ing Fruit and the Srill-Lige. He died in
Rome, Anno 1670, leaving behind him two
Sons; of whom, Gro. Batriffa, the eldeft, was
brought up to Hifory-painting, under Frain-
cesco Mold, and went into the Service of the
King of Spain. But the other, called Pierro,
died in his prime; and only lived jutt long
enough to thew, that a few Years more would
have made him one of the greatell Mallets in
the World.
ABRTAN VAN ORTADE, was born at L4-
bec, Anno 16i0: He came to Haerlem, very
young, to Hudy under Fronk Hals, who was
then in Efteem as a Painter; under whom
he formed a good Talle in Colouring, adopted
the Manner of the Country, and fettled there.
Nature guided his Pencil in every Thing he
undertook; he diverted Hintfelf with Clowns
and Drunkards, whofe, Geftures and mort
trilling Actions were the Subject of his
decpett Meditations. The Composition of
his little Pictures are not more elevated than
thofe of Teniers, Brower, and the other
Flemings; they are always Smoakings, flc-
benses, or Kirchens. He is perhaps one of
the firft Durch Maffers, who beft underffood
the


289
Et. 37.


1610.
TEt. 6o.


1610.


299
LEit. 78.
d
oar

1611.
E1. 82.



Medorn Mafters.
the Chiare-fcaro. The Approach of the
French Troops to Haerlem, obliged him to
think of quitting his Situation, when he re-
folved to return home; but, meeting with a
Lover of Painting at Amfferdam, he refided
there till his Dearh, which was very fudden
and unexpected, in the Year 1685.
PIETRO TEsTA was born at Lucca, in
the Dukedom of Flerence, Anno 1611.s and,
having laid the Foundations of Painting at
home, went very poor to Rome, and spent
Some Time in the School of Domenicbine,
but afterwards fixed himself in that of Peter
Cortona. He was fo indefatigable in his Stus
dies, that there was not a Piece of Arcbifec-
ture, a Statue, a Bass-Relief, a Monument,
of the leaft Fragment of Antiquity, in or
about Rome, that he had not designed and got
by Heart. He was a Man of a quick Head,
a ready Hand, and a lively Spirit, in moft
of his Performances; but yet for Want of
Science and good Rules, to cultivate and
Rrengthen his Genins, all thofe hopeful Qua-
lities foon ran to Weeds, and produced lirle
cHfe but Monffers, Chimeras, and fuch like wild
and extravagant Fancies: See p.76,77. He
attempted very often to make himfelf per-
feel in the Art of Colouring, but never had
any Success that Way; and indeed, was only
commended for his Drawings, and the Prints
which he etched. He was drowned in the
Tyber, Anno 16g0: Some fay, he acciden-
tally fell off from the Bank, as he was en-
deavouring to recover his Hat, which the
Wind had blown into the Water; but others,
who were well acquainted with the morofe
and melancholy Temper of the Man, will
have


Miedern Masters.
have it to have been a voluntary and preme-
ditated Act.
CHARLES, ALPHONSE Ly FRESNOY, born
at Paris, Afno 1611, from his infancy gave
such extraordinary Proofs of his Attachment
to the Muses, that he would undoubtedly
have been the greatest Poet in his Time, if
the Art of Painting, a Miftrets equally be-
loved, had not divided and weakened his
Talent. He was about twenty Vears of
Age, when he learned to defign under Per-
rier and Voiier; and in 1634, went to Rome,
where he contracted an intimate Friendship
with M. Mighard, as latting as his Life.
He had a Soul not to be fatisfied with a fr-
perficial Knowledge of his Art, and there-
fore he refolved to go to the Root, and ex-
tract the very Ouinrefcence of it: He maie
himfelf familiar with the Greek and Latin
Poeis; Rudied Anafomy, and the Elements of
Geometry, with the Rules of Perspective and
Architeture; defigned after the Life, in the
dcademy; after Rapbael, in the Vatican; and
after the Antiguities, wherever he found them;
and making critical Remarks, as he gained
Ground, drew up a Body of them in La-
in Verfe, and laid the Pian of his incom-
parable Poem, De Arte Graphica. in Con-
formity to the Principles therein eftablifhed,
he endeavoured to put his own Thoughts in
Execution; but as he never had been well
instructed in the Management of his Pencil,
his Hand was extremely flow; and befides,
having employed moft of his Time in a pro-
found Attention to the Theery of Painting,
he had fo little left for Practice, that his
Performances, exclufive of his Copies after
others,


292

1611.


292
Et. 54.
d

1612.


Modern Masters.
others, do not exceed fitty bifforical Pieces.
Of all his Compositions, his Poem was his
Favourite, being the Fruit of above twenty
Years Study and Labour. He communi-
cated it to the Maners of greateff Note, in
all Places where he went; and particularly
to Aliani and Guercinr, at Belogna. He
confulted alfo the Men of Lerters, and the
beft Authors on Painting, as well as the
Works of the moft celebrated Profefiors of
the Arr, before he par his laft Hand to it.
Upon his Return home from Iraty, in 1676,
he feemed very inclinable to give it to the
Public; but, whether he was perfuaded that
a Tranflation would make it of more gene
ral Ufe, or, upon second Thoughts, was
unwilling it should go abroad without the
Commentary,, which he promifed us in his
Poem, it was not printed till after his Death,
which happened inno 166s. He had a par-
ticular Veneration for Tirian, as the moff
perfect Imifafor of Nature, and followed him
in his Manner of Colouring; as he did the
Carrackes, in their Guffo of Defign. Never
did any French Miffer come fo near Titian,
as du Frefnoy  But, whatever may be want-
ing in his Pencil, to make him famous in
After-ages, his Per has abundantly fup.
plied; and his Prem upon Painting will
Keep his Name alive, as long as either of
Thofe Arts shall find any Elleem in the
World.
G1o. FRANCESCO ROMANELLI, born at
Viterbo, Anne 1612, was the Favourite Dif
ciple of Peter Cortona; in whofe School
there was hardly any one equal to him for
Correetness of Defign, or for lmitation of the
C


Medern Masters.
293
new Stile of Painting, introduced by that fa-
mous Maffer. His Works are in all Places
well ekeemed, but more especially at Rome;
where his Presentation of the bleffed Virgin
painted in the Vatican) is by Strangers
judged to be of Peter Cortona's Hland. Obiir
(Et. S0.
Anno 1662.


SALVATOR ROSA, a Neapolitan, born
1614.
nno 1514, in both the Sifter-Arts of Poefy
and Painting, was efteemed one of the moft
excellent Mafters that Iraly has produced in
this Century. In the firft, his Province was
Satire; in the lawer, Landscapes, Battles, Ha-
vens, &c. with little Figures. He was a Dif-
ciple of Daniele Falconi, his Countryman,
an Artift of good Repute; whofe Inftruc-
tions he very much improved by his Study
after the Antiquiries, and the Works of the
molt eminent Painters who went before him.
He was famed for his copious and forid In-
vention, for his solid Judgment in the order-
ing of his Pieces, for the gentile and uncom-
mon Management of his Figures, and his ge-
neral Knowledge in all the Parts of Paintine:
But that which gave a more particular
Stamp to his Compofitions, was his inimira-
ble Liberty of his Pencil, and the noble Spirit
with which he animated all his Works.
Rome was the Place where he spent the
greateff Part of his Life, highly courted and
admired by all the Men of Note and Qua-
lity, and where he died, Anne 1673; having El. 59.
etched abundance of valuable Prints with yn
his own Hland.
CARLO (commonly called CARLINO) ar
DOLcY, a Flerentine, born Arno 1616, was 1616.
2 Dif-


294
Et. 70.

o
1617.


Medern Mafters.
a Disciple of Tacopo Vignali, and a Man
of Condicion and Subftance. He had a
Pencil wonderfully foft and beautiful, which
he confecrated to divine Subjects; having
rarely painted any thing elfe, excepting
only some Portraits, wherein he fucceeded
to well, that he was fent for into Ger-
many, to draw the Empress's Picture. His
Talent lay in finithing all his Works
to a Degree of Neatness infinitely furpri
2ing; but his fland was fo extremely flow,
that, if we may believe Tradition, he had
his Brain turned, upon feeing the famous
Luca Giordano difparch more Bulinels in
four or five Hours, than he himself could
have done in fo many Months. Obict
Jinno 1686.
Sir PETER LELY was born Anno 1617,
in Westphalia, where his Father, being a
Captain, happened to be then in Garrifon.
He was bred up for fome Time in the
Hagse; and afterwards committed to the
Care of one de Grebber, of Haerlem. He
came over into England, Anno 1641, and pur-
fued the natural Bent of his Genius in Land
Scapes with small Figures, and bifferical Com-
fesssions; but finding the Practice of paint-
ing after the Life, generally more encou¬
tazed, he applied himself to Porrrairs, with
such Success, as in a little Time to furpalst
ill his Cotemporaries in Enrope. He was
very carnelt in his younger Days to have fit
nithed the Courfe of his Studies in Nayi
bat the great Bufiness in which he was per
petually eugaged, not allowing him to much
Lime; to make himself Amends, he re-
folved at lafl, in a numerous, but well-chofed
Collectiol


Modern Masters.
Collection of the Dravings, Prints, and
Paintinos of the moft celebrated Mafters, to
bring the Reman and Lombard Schools home
to him. And what Benefit he reaped from
this Expedient, was fufficiently apparent in
that admirable Stile of Painting, which he
formed to himself, by daily converfing with
the Works of thofe great Men; in the Cor-
reliness of his Drawing, and the Beauty of
his Colouring; but especially in the grace-
ful Airs of his Figures, the pleasing Variety
of his Poffures, and his gentile Negligence,
and loose Manner of Draperies; in which
Particular, as few of his Predecefiors were
equal to him, to all fucceeding Artifts muft
Rand obliged to his happy Invention, for
the noble Pattern which he has left them
for Imitation. He was recommended to the
Favour of King Charles I. by Pbilip Karl
of Pembroke, then Lord Chamberlain; and
drew his Majetty's Picture, when he was
Prifoner in Hampfon-Court. He was alfo
much in Efteem with his Son, Charles II.
who made him his Painter conferred the
Honour of Knigbtbood upon him, and would
oftentimes take great Pleafure in his Con-
verfation, which he found to be as agree-
able as his Pencil. He was likewife highly
respected by all the People of Eminence in
the Kingdom; and indeed, fo extraordinary
were his natural Endowments, and to great
his acquired Knowledge, that it would be
hard to determine, whether he was a besfer
Painter, or a more accomplished Gentleman;
or whether the Honours which he has done
his Profeffion, or the Advantages which he
derived from it, were the moff confiderable.
But as to his Art, certain it is, that his latt
Picces
2
2


295


296
Et. 63.


1619.
El. S4.


1620.


Nicdern Masters.
Pieces were his bet; and that he gained
Ground, and improved himfelf every Day,
even to the very Moment in which Death
fnatched his Pencil out of his Hand, in an
apoplectic Fit, Anno 1680.
Of all the Disciples of Sir Peter Lely, the
moft excellent was JonN GREENHILL, 2
Gentleman well descended, and born in Sa-
lisbary. He was finely qualified by Narure,
for both the Sifter-Arts of Painting and Poe-
try; but Death, taking Advantage of his
loofe and unguarded Manner of Living,
Inatched him away betimes, and only fuf-
fered him to leave us juft enough of his
Hand, to make us with he had been more
careful of a Life, fo likely to do great Hlo-
hour to his Country.
SEBASTYAN BOURDON, a Frenchman,
born at Montpellier, Anno 1610, udied feven
Years in Rome; and acquired to much Re-
putation by his Works, both in Hiffory and
Landscape, that, upon his Return to France,
he had the Honour of being the firft who
was Rector of the Royal Academy of Painting
and Sculfture, at Paris. He spent two Vears
alfo in Sweden; where he was very well
elteemed, and nobly prefented, by that great
Patroness of Arts and Sciences, Qucen Chri-
fina, whofe Portrait he made. He died
Anno 1673.
CHARLRS L BRwN was born in Parie,
Anno 1620; and came into the World with
all the happy Difpolitions neceffary to form
a great Alaffer. He began his Studies un-
der Simon Voust, and finithed them at Roms,
by


Niodern Masters.
by the Favour of Monfieur, the Chancellor
Seguier, who fent him thither, with a con-
fiderable Penfion, for three Years. The
firft Proofs of his Abilities, after his Re-
turn home, were the Prize-Pictures he made
two Years fuccetlively, for the Church of
Nerre-Dame. nd his Performances foon
afterwards, in feveral of the fine Houfes in
France, gave fuch a Luffre to his Pencil,
that the King (upon the Recommendation
of Monficur Colberr) made him his chief
Painter, ennobled him, and honoured him
with the Order of St. Michael. He had a
Genias lively, penetrating, and equal to
every Thing he undertook; his Invention
was eafy, and his Talent (excepting in Land-
Scapes only) univerfal. He was not indeed
admired for his Colouring, nor for his Skitl
in the Distribution of the Lights and Sta-
dows; but for a goed Guffe of Defign, an ex-
cellent Cboice of Aititudes, an agreeable Mc-
nagement of his Draperies, a beautiful and juft
Expression, and withal a Hriet Obfervance of
the Decorum, his Compofitions will com-
mand the Attention and Admiration of the
nicet Judges. His capital Works are the
Cielings of the Gallery, and grand Stair-
case of. Verfailles; and his five large Pieces,
containing the Hiftory of Alexander the
Great; the Prints of which are alone fuffi-
cient to render his Name famous to Pofic-
rity. He compofed a curious Treatife of
Physiognomy, and another of the Characters
of the Passions. He procured feveral Advan-
tages for the Royal Academy of Painting and
Sculpture in Paris; formed the Plan of ano-
ther, for the Students of his own Nation, in
Rome; and there was hardly any thing done,
for
23


297


298
Et. 70.


1620.
El. 48.
d

1623.
7.1.68.



Medern Masters.
for the Advancement of the poble Arts,
wherein t Brun was not confulied. He
had the Superintendency of the Manufac
tures at the Gobelines given him; and, hav-
ing for fome Years governed all the King's
Artificers, like the Father of a Family, ex-
ceedingly beloved and honoured, died a-
mongtt them, Anno 1690.
PHILTP VOUUEEMAN was born at Haer-
tem, Anno 1620, of a Father named Pavi
WoUVERMAN, a middling Hiftory-painter;
who was not his Makter, as Ienoraken af-
ferted. Pbilfy learned the firft Principles of
his Art under John Wynan, an excellent
Painter of that City : Houbraken did not
teem to love this famous Artiff, notwith-
standing his Works have all the Excellencies
we could wifh. His Talent was in painting
Landscapes, that were generally enriched with
Huntings, Halts and Encampments of Armies;
which, for high Finishing, Correciness, agree-
able Compefition, and a Tofte for Colouring
1 ined with a Force that approaches to the
Carrackes. It does not appear he ever was
in Iraly, or even quitted the City of Hder-
lem, where he died, Anno 1668.
Cavalier ClAciNTO ERANDI, born at
Poli, in the Eclefiaffical Estaie, Anne 1623,
was one of the belt Mlaffers that came out of
the School of Lanfranc. And his Perform-
ances in the Cupolas and Cielings of feveral
of the Roman Churches and Palaces, are fuffi-
cient Evidence, that there was nothing want-
ing, either in his Head or Hand, to merit
the Reputation and Honour he acquiged.
Obirt Anso 1691.
PILIPfO


Modern Masters.
FiLIPPo LAURo was born in Rome, Anno
1623, and trained up to Painting under his
Brotherin-Law Angelo Corefelle, whom he
affifted in a great many of his Works;
and always acquitted himself with defer-
yed Applauie: But, upon leaving his Maf-
ter, he purfued his own Genins, in a Stile
quite different from him; and, contract-
ing his Talent into a narrower Compats,
confined his Pencil to small Figures, and Hij-
tories in lirils. He lived for the moft part
in Rome; highly valued for his rich Vein
of Invention, and accurate Judgment, for
the Purity of his Ourline, the Delicacy of
his Colouring, and the graceful Spirit, that
brightened all his Compotitions. Obris
Anno 1694.
PETER PAUL PUcuer, bern at Mar-
Scilles, Anne 1627, retembled in his Manner
Michasl Angele, but was more natural and
delicate. Like him, he reunited the Ta-
lents of Painting, Sculprure, and Arebifcc-
fure; not content with animating Marcfc,
and rendering it in Appearance flexible as
Fieth itfelf. When he was called upon to
exert his Skill, he raifed and adorned Pa-
laces, in a Manner that proved him to be a
great and judicious Architect; and when he
committed the charming Productions of his
Imagination to Canves, he painted fuch
Pittures, as the delighted Beholder was never
fired with viewing. He died at the Place
of his Nativity, Aune 1695.
NIcHOLAS BERCHERN, falfely called
CORNELiUs, Was horn at Amfferdam, Anne
1624:
24


299

1623.
Er. 77.
d

1023.
RE1.72.
d

1624.


300


E1. Co.
ed

1625.


Modern Wafters.
1624; his Father, named Klaafe, was but
a middling Painter, who foon found him-
self incapable of cultivating the excellent
Difpofition he obferved in his Son; there-
fore placed him with wan Gorven, Nicholas
Mjaart, Peter Grebber, John Wils, and,
lattly, with Tobn-Baptiff Weenin. All thefe
Wafters affifted to form a moft excellent and
dittinguithed Painter. Ruman Figures, Ani-
mals, and Landfcafes, he painted, with equal
Truth and Beauty: His Figares have great
Ease in their Actions; and though his Sub-
jects were chieffy of the low and familiar
Kind, he gave them all the Elegance their
Natures were capable of admitting. His
Groupes are well difpoted, his Landscapes ad-
mirable; the Leapng of his Trees light, and
well touched; his Skies clear, his Clouds
flow with amazing Thinness; even the Time
of the Day, the Season of the Tear, are ad-
mirably marked our in his Pictures; that in
Thort, the Brightness, Warmib, and Glow of
Colouring, that appears in his Landscapes,
has never been excelled. He paffed the
greatefft Part of his Life in the Castle of Bin-
theim, and died at Haerlem, Anne 1683.
CARLO MARATTI was born at Camorane,
near Ancend, Anne 162s. He came a poor
Boy to Rome, at eleven Years of Age; and,
at twelve, recommended himfelf to advan-
lageoutly to Andrea Saccbi, by his Designs
alter Rapbael in the Vatican, that he took
him into his School; where he continued
his Studies five and twenty Years, to the
Death of his Meffer. His graceful and
bedutiful Ideas were the Occafion of his
being generally employed in painting Ma-
HOnnAS


Modern Masters.
donnas and Female Saints; hence Salvator
Refa faurically nicknamed him Carluccro
della Madenne. This he was to far from
reckoning a Diminution of his Character,
that in the infcription on his Monument at
Termini (placed there by himself, nine Vears
before his Deceafe) he calls it gloriesum Cog-
nomentam, and profeffes his particular Devo=
tion to the blefed Virgin. No Man ever
performed in a better Stile, or with greater
Rlegance of Handling, and Correstness of Out-
line From the finet Starnes and Pictures,
he had made himself Mafter of the perfecteft
Forms, and mott charming firs of Heads;
which he kerched with as much Eafe and
Grace as Parmegiano, excepting that Au-
thor's Proples, which indeed tranfcend all
human Performance. He has produced. a
nobler Variety of Drageries, more artfully
managed, more richly ornamented, and
with greater Propriety, than even the beft
of the Moderns. He was inimitable in
acdorning the Head, and in the Dispofal of
the Hair; and his elegant Forms of Hands
and Feet, to truly in Character, are hardly
to be found in Rapbacl himfelf. mong the
many excellent Talents which he poffeffed,
Gracefulness was the moft confpicuous: And
to him may be applied, what Panjanias tells
us was to ppelles, That fuch and fuch a Maf
fer furpafted him in tome Particulars of the
Art, but in Gracefulness he was superior to
them all. It is endlets to recount the cele-
braied Pieces of this great Man; which yet
might have been much more numerous, had
he been as intent upon acquiring Riches as
Fame. He executed nothing Hlightly, often
changed his Dipgn, and almoft always for
the
25


201
5


362


EP.88.



Moaern Mlasters.
the better, and therefore his Pictures were
long in Hand. It has been objected by
fome Critics, That his Works, from about
the feventieth Year of his Age, were faintly
and languidly coloured: But he knew by
Experience, that Shadows gain Strength,
and grow deeper by Time; and lived long
enough to fee his Pieces confute their Error.
By the Example of his Mafter, he has made
feveral admirable Portraits of Popes, Cardi-
nals, and other People of Diftinction, from
whom he received the highet Teftimonies of
Efteem; as he likewife did from almoft all
the Monarchs and Princes of Enroge in his
Time. In his younger Days, for Subfiff-
ence, he eiched a few Prints, as well as of
his own Invention, as after others, with
equal Spirit and Correctness. He was ap-
pointed Keeper of the Paintings in the Popes
Csapel and the Vatican, by Innocent XI.
confirmed therein by his Succeffors; and
merited the additional Honour of Knight-
Beod from the prefent Pope. He erected
two noble Monuments for Rephael and Han-
nibal, at his own Expence, in the Pantbeon:
And how well he maintained the Dignity of
his Profeffion, appears by his Antwer to a
Roman Prince, who taxed him with the ex-
coffive Price of his Pictures; he rold him,
there avas a oaft Debt due from the Werld to
The Jamens Artifts, his Predeceffors; and that
He, as their rightful Succefor was come to
claim these Arrears. His bilities in Paint-
ing, were accompanied with a great many
Chriflian and moral Virtues; and particu-
farly with an extenfive Charity, which crown-
ed all the reft. Obiit Anne 1713.
Flis


Miodern Masiers.
His chief Difciples were, Nicoto Br-
RETTONI, who died long before him; and
GIUSEPPE CHIARI, who furvived him.
The former carried Colouring to a great
Height, especiall; in his Frefcos at Alrieris
Palace. It is faid indeed, his Mafter was
his conftant Coadjutor; and his Works have
fucceeded the better for it.
PAUL POTTER, born at Encbuysen, Anno
162s, was the Son of Peter Potter under
whom he received his firit Rudiments; but
if the Genins of the Son had not made
Amends for the Poorness of the Fathers Ta
lones, he had never been able to diftinguith
himself from the Crowd of Painters. The
fine Pictures that adorn the Cities of Amfer-
dam and the Hague, induced him to ferle at
the laft mentioned Place; where he married
the Daughter of an Arcbifer of fome Repu-
tation, whofe Connections foon raifed his
Reputation, and gained him the Efteem of
the Connoiffeurs. His Skies, his Trees and
Diffances, are painted very negligently; but
his Animals are highly finithed, and touched
up with great Spirit. His great Applica-
tion to Bufiness shortened his Days; he be-
came confumptive, and died at Amperdam,
nno 1654.
LUcA GoRDANO was born at Naples,
Anno 1626; and, by his Studies under Spag.
nolet at home, and Pictro da Cortend at Rome,
joined with his continued Application to
all the noble Remains of Antiquiry, became
one of the beit accomplifhed Matters in his
Time. He was wonderfully skilled in the
practical


303

1625.
Er. 29.
t

1626.


04



Niodern Mafters.
practical Part of Deen; and, from his in-
credible Facility, and prodigious Difpatch,
was called by his Fellow-Painters, Enca fa
prefto. He was befides very happy in imi-
tating the different Stiles of other great
Men, and particularly followed the Manner
of Titian, Baffan, Tinforet, Guide, Ec. to
clofe in feveral of his Pieces, that it is not
every Pretender to Painting that can dittin-
guith them from Originals of thofe Hands.
He was famous for his many excellent Per-
formances in Rome and Florence and being
continually employed in working for Princes
and People of the firft Quality all over En-
roge, grew fo vaftly rich, that, at his Re-
turn to Nrples, he purchafed a Dutchy in
that Kingdom, married and lived (plendidly,
Kept a noble Palace, and a numerous Re-
finne, with Coaches, Litters, and all other

imaginable State. Beino
grown old, he
was earneftly prefted by the Viceroy to go
over into Spain, and ferve the King his
Mafter: He had no Fancy for the Veyage,
and therefore raifed his Terms very high;
Was not content with taventy thoufand Crowns
paid him down, and the goldin Key, given
him as Groom of the Bedchamber but befides
having heard, that by the Statutes of St. Tage,
and the other milicary Orders of Spain, it
was exprefly provided, that no Painter should
he admitted into any of them, becaufe their
Profeffion was genera:ly looked upon as me-
chanic, he refolved, for the Honour of his
Art, not to Hir a Foot, till he himself was
first mode a Knight of St. Tago, and his two
Sons Knights of Afcantara and Calatrava.
All which being granted, he fet out for Ma-
drid, where he was received very Kindly by
the


Modern Masters.
the King; and, having adorned the grand
Stair-case of the Escurral with the Story of
the Battle of St. Quintin, (which is perhaps
one of the beft Things in its Kind that has
been any where performed in this Age) he
fell to Work upon the great Church belong.
ing to that Palace : But the Climate being
too fevere for his Conffitution of Body, and
his Mind not fo well fatisfied, as at Waples,
he returned home, and died in a good old
AgE.
CIRO FERRI, a Roman, born Anno 1628,
was a true and faithful imitator of Perer
Cortona, under whom he had been bred;
and to whom he came fo near in his Ideas,
his Invention, and his Manner of Painting,
that he was chosen, (preferably to Peier
Teffa and Remanell, his Fellow-Difciples)
to finith thote Pictures, which his Mafter
left imperfect at his Death. He had an ex-
cellent Tafte in Arebifecture, and drew fe-
veral Designs for the Public. He made Car-
toons for fome of the Mofaic Works in the
Varican; and having, in a great many no-
ble Performances, diffinguished himself by
the Beauty and Fertility of his Genins, died
nno 1690.
CARLO CIGNANI, born at Bologna, Anno
1628., His Father, Pompeo Cignani, ob-
ferving his Son defign after the best Pictures
in his Cabinet, readily forefaw the Ability
he would one Day difplay in that Art;
and Bapriffa Cairo, a Bolognefe Painter, firft
cultivated this fprouting Genins, which grew
up in the School of Albano, who always
loved him as his own Son, and declared
ever


305

1628.
Et. 62.
d
f
1628.


306


Er. 91.
aed

1631.


Modern Masters.
every where,
that he would be the greateff
Support of his School. His. Reputation
being now raifed, he was fent for to Leg-
Bern, Rome and Parma, and many other
Places, where he was honoured with the
Protection of many Noblemen and others;
Duke Francis Farnefe preffed him to receive
the Title of Count and Knighthood, which,
through Modefty, he had refuted the Pope
and feveral other Princes. In his Works
are found a Freshness and Force of Pencil, a
Ligbtness of Hand, an admirable Composition,
2 Correltness of Besign, Gracefulness, Mellow-
ness, Fertility of Gemus, an Ease in Ipread-
ing his Draperies; in a Word, he may be
reckoned among the molt graceful Painters.
Above all Things, he attached himself to
exprets the Paftions of the Soul in his Cha=
racters. The new Manner he had formed,
was from Guido and Caravaggie, without
lofing Sight of the Graces of Correggio. He
is reproached with finithing his Pictures fo
much, that he deftroyed the Spirit of them;
that his Colouring was too Rrong, and gave
his Figures fo much Relief, that they were
not united with the Grounds. He was alfo
generally looked upon as properer to paint
Virgins and balf Figares, tran bifforical
Subjects. His Death happened at Forli,
nno 1719.
ADRIAN VANDER RABEL was born at
the Cattle of Ryfwick, near the Hogue,
Anno 1631. Tobn van Gerven, a KKilful
Painter of Landscape, had the Charge of
cultivating arian's happy Talents for aint-
ing; who, by the Quickness of his improve-
ment, foon began to anfwer his Matters
Expectations.


Modern Masters.
Expectations. Adrian took great Delight in
painting Sea-Views and Animals, without
neglecting human Figures, which he de-
figned in a good Tafle. His Inclination to
Travel foon enabled him to improve on
the different Plans of thofe Pieces he had
an Opportunity of inspecting. The nice
Flemisss Tafle never engaged him; but his
Manner, which is grand and free, ap-
proaches to the Italian. His Trees, and his
small Figures, are very correct and well
touched; and his Animals, which are often
the principal Object of his Pictures, are
equally excellent. He painted dead Game
very well; on which Sort of Pictures he
took Care to fpend much Time, under Pre-
tence of receiving freth Game from his Cuf-
Tomers: For, being of debancked Manners
in private Life, he would take fuch Prefents
to the Tavern, and enjoy them with his
Pot-Companions; yet the Quantity of his
Works muft thew him to have been induf-
trious. He died at Lyons, Anno 1695.
LUDOLF BACKHUYSEN was born at
Embden, Anno 1631. His Father was Se-
cretary of the Stares, who kept him to his
Studies till he was fixteen, when he fent
him to Anfferdam to learn Commerce, which
he foon quitted for Painting. At that Age,
he defigned Sea-Treres, without having learnt
in a Manner, to new and beautiful, that his
Designs have feethed one bundred Florins. On
which Success, he was advifed to take up
the Palles. The Painter whom he found
moft communicative, and from whom he
moft improved, was Henry Dubbels. As
toon as a Storm arofe, he embraced the
critical


El. 64.
d

1631.


2
50
34


308
EI.78.
od

1534.


Modern Masters.
critical Minute, and put to Sea, where he
ketched out with his Pencil, the Forms of
the Clouds, the formy Skies, and their dif-
ferent Effeets on the agitated Water; the
Breaking of the Waves againft the Rocks, and
the Frith and Foam of the Sca. On his Re-
turn, he thut himfelf up in his Painting-
Room; and, from his Sketches, exprested
on his Canvas the Objects that even then
Rrongly painted on his Imagination. This
Painter reprefented Narure jult as he Law it,
Tometimes in too fervile a Manner; yet his
Pictures, for the beautiful Agreement of all
Their Parts, deferve a Place in the moff cu-
rious Cabinets. He exercifed his Talents
to the laff, in Spite of the Stone and Gravel,
though they brought him at length to his
latt home, Anno 1709.
ANTHONY-FRANCTS VANDER MULEN;
born at Brufels, Anno 1634. As his incli-
nation for Painring difcovered itfelf early.
the Instructions of an able Maffer, joined
with the Bent of his own Genins, feon
taught him to excel. The Conquels of
Levis KIV. to rapid at that Time, opened
2 wide Field for his Pencil; he followed the
King, and received Orders from him every
Day, and defrayed all his Expences. Bar-
tles being the Subjects he chieffy delighted
to paint, and in which he moft excelled, by
following the Camp, he furnished himself
with many Defigns thefe Opportunities af
forded. As he was above imitating, he
formed his orn Manner; Nature alone was
his Guide, and his Study of her was infis
nite and continual: He defigned his Figures
well, especially Herses; his Landscape is
light


Medern Wlafters.
light and fresh; his Touch and Leafing are
very lively; his Colouring is not Rrong,
after Borgognone, and Parracel the Father,
but much fofter, and to fome more pleaf-
ing.
He applied himfelf principally to
paint Battles, Sieges, and Huntings; nor has
any body expreffed the Effects of Nature
with greater Truth than he, in the Pic-
tures he has given us of thofe Places which
were the Objects of the military Exploits
of the Monarch that employed him, and
from whom he was continually receiving
freth Favours; till at laff, the happy Sun-
shine of his Affairs was overcall by domef-
te Troubles, which prejudiced his Health,
and brought him to the Grave, at Paris,
Anno 1690.
MELCHTOR HOWDICOOTER was born at
Urrecbf; Anno 1636; and was instructed till
the Age of feventeen, by his Father Gosbert,
who was a tolerable Painter: Gilles, his
Grandfather, painted live Birds admirably;
but chieffy Cocks and Hens in pleafant Land-
scapes, in the Tatte of Savery and Vincaboon.
Melcbior foon became Malter of his Art,
abandoned himself to his Genius; and;
after his Father's Death, worked alone, yet
was frequently affifted by the Advice of his
Wncle Weening. He was an excellent Pain-
ter of Animals; and his Pencil feemed to
give Life to the Peacocks, and other large
Birds, that he placed in high finished Land-
Scapes. He had the Happiness of acquir-
ing a Number of Friends, with whofe Af
fiftance he hoped to pass through Life
comfortably; but his marrying a Terma-
gant difturbed his Repofe, and made Home
to


309
Et. 96.
d

1636.


370
Et. 59.


1640.
K1. 41.
d


Modern Masters.
fo difagreeable, as to feek Refuge in a Ta.
vern. This libertine Kind of Life drew
him into many Scrapes; though, the Day
after his Franks, he constantly promifed
Amendment, and to be more on his Guard:
He took his Paller, and fet to work, to re-
turn to his Bottle at Night; to that between
his Works and his Pot Companions, he en-
joyed a continual Round of Drinking and
Painting. He died at UUrrecbt, Anno 1695.
JACos RUYSDALE, born at Haerlem,
Anno 1640, (though he refided at Amper-
dam). His Father was a Worker in Ebony,
and brought up his Son Yaccb as a Sur-
geon; yet the Inclination that Nature had
implanted in him for this lovely Art, broke
through all his other Employments. Hou-
braken relates, that before he profeffed him-
felf a Painter, he had performed several
chirurgical Operations, which had given
him great Credit in that Art; but he foon
after acquired a much greater by his beau-
tiful Landicapes: They confitt of Sea-Vierus,
Water-Falls, a fformy Sea breaking on the
Rocks; in expreffing which, Nature had
hardly greater Force than his Pencil. Au-
thors do not name either the School or Mas.
for that formed him: Narure alone fupplied
their Place. His Trees, his Fore-grounds,
and his Skies, leave us nothing to with:
As he did not fucceed fo well in his Fin
gures, Ortade, Vandervelde and Wowverman,
sent him their Affiftance. He went to Rome
for Improvement; and, after fome Years
Stay, returned to Haerlem, where he died in
the Flower of his Age, Anne 1681.
ECLON


Modern Masters.
ECLON VANDERNEER was born at Am-
terdam, Anno 1643. His Father Arnold,
to well known by his excellent Moon-lights,
and the Beauty of his Landscapes, gave the
Same Tafe to his Son; but, as he chofe
painting Figares, he was, at twelve Vears
old, placed under the Direction of Tacob
Jan Loo, a Portrait-painter. Having per-
feeted himself in that Branch, he went to
France, at the Age of twenty; and was re-
ceived by Count de Donba, Governor of
Orange, as his Painter, with whom he lived
three or four Years; and then returned to
Holland, where he married in Rotation three
Wives, two of whom were excellent Minia-
ture-printers. He employed himfelf in paint-
ing Landscapes with Plants, which he copied
after Nature, likewife Portraits both large
and small; and fomerimes he painted 4/.
temblies of Persons drefied in the modern Fassion,
after the Manner of Tenbury gallant Converfa-
sions; Landscapes, in which he incroduced
naked Women; and lattly, thofe amiable
Pictures, fo fought for by the Lovers of
Painting. He died at Dufelderp, having
been married to his laft Wife fix Years,
Anno 1703.
JohN RILEY born in the City of Lon.
don, Anno 1646, was instructed in the firft
Rudiments of Painting, by Mr. Eouff and
Mr. Fuller; but left them, whiltt he was
very young, and began to practife after the
Lifes yet acquired no great Reputation, till
upon the Death of Sir Peter Lep, his Friends
being defirous that he should fucceed that
excellent Maller, in the Favour of King
Charles


317

1643.
E1. 60.


1646.


312


Wiodern Masters.
Charles II.

engaged Mr. Cbifincb to fit to
him for his Pictare; which he performed to
well, that the King, upon Sight of it, fent
for him; and having employed him in
drawing the Duke of Grafton'’s Portrait, and
soon after his own, took him into his Ser-
vice, honoured him with feveral obliging
Testimonies of his Elleem, and withal gave
this Character of his Works, that he painted
both Inside and Ourfide. Upon the ccettion
of King William and Queen Mary to the
Crown, he was fworn their Majefties prin¬
cipal Painter; which Place he had not en-
joyed in the preceding Reign, though King
James and his Queen were both pleafed to
be drawn by his Hand. He was very dili-
gent in the Imitation of Nature; and, by
Rudying the Life, rather than following any
particular Manner, arrived to a pleafant and
moft agreeable Stile of Painting. But that
which eminently diffinguithed him from all
his Cotemporaries, was his peculiar Excel
lence in a Head, and especially in the colour-
ing Part; wherein some of his Pieces were
to very extraordinary, that Mr. Riley him-
felf was the only Perfon who was not charf:-
ed with them. He was a Gentleman er-
tremely courteous in his Bchaviour, engag-
ing in his Converfation, and prudent in all
his Actions; he was a dutiful Son, an af=
feltionate Brother, a Kind Mafter, and a
faithful Friend. He never was guilty of a
Piece of Vanity, too common amongst Artiffe,
of faying mighty Things on his own Behalf,
but contented himself with letting his Works
speak for him; which, being plentifully dif-
perfed over other Nations, as well as our
own, were indeed every where very eloquent
in


Modern Masters.
in his Commendation. He had for feveral
Years been violently perfecuted by the Gout;
which, after many terrible Affaults, flying
up at latt into his Head, brought him to
his Grave, Anno 1691, exceedingly lamented
by all fuch as had the Happiness of being
acquainted, either with his Perfon or his
Works.
FRANCTS SOLIMENE, of an ancient Fa-
mily, originally of Salerno, was born at the
City of Nocera de Pagani, in the Territory
of Naples, Anno 1657; his Father Angelo,
who was a good Painter, and a Man of
Learning, difcovered in him a Genins fit
for every Science.
Francis Spent whole
Nights in the Studies of Poctry and Pbilo-
Sophy; and, unknown to his Father, de-
figned fo judiciouly in Chiaro-feuro, that
his Performances furprized all that Law
them. It was with fome Difficulty that
Cardinal Orfini, at a Vifit, could gain Leave
of the Father to let his Son follow the Bent
of his Inclination, he having originaily de-
figned him for the Siudy of the Law. Two
Years he ftudied under his Father, when he
vifited Naples, and put himself under the
Direction of Francefcr Maria; his Mafter,
pointing out to many Difficulties in the
Art, to much difcouraged and difgalled So-
timene, that he quitted him in a few Days,
to follow his own Inclination. He guided
himself by the Works of Lanfranc and Ca-
labrose, in Rudying Composition and Chioro-
scuro; thofe of Pictro Cortond and Luca for-
dano, were the Compass by which he flcered,
to arrive at his Tone of Colouring; and,
Mar-
lastly, he confulted Guido and Carle
raltis



33
(Et. A5
nd

1657.


314


Modern Masters.
ratti, for their beautiful Manner of Dra-
pery : By a well-managed Study of thefe
Mafters, Solimene formed himfelf a fure Gout.
Every Subject of Hiffory that rofe in his Ima-
gination, he immediately committed to Pa-
per, and often coloured his Designs while he
was at the fcademy; but after some Time
he very confiderably improved himself, and
was much admired for his great Tafte in
painting his Glouds, Sty, Ground and Trees:
for the admirable Freshness of his Tints, the
Hermony of the whole, and the tender
Union, and great Force of his Colouring:
Thefe Excellencies gained him very con-
fiderable Reputation, which was now raifed
to a great Height. The mott eminent Men
in Irab, and feveral crowned Heads, ho-
houred him with their Protection, and even
Friendship; nor was he unworthy of it, for
it is affenithing how Solimens fucceeded in
every Undertaking; his Pictures have equal
Merit, both great and small, in Orl and
Frisce, in Hiffory, Portrait, Landscape, Ani-
mals, Flowers, Fruit, Perspective and Archi-
seclure. His extenfive Talents prevented
his ever being under a Neceffity of calling
in the Affittance of another Hand to his
Hiffery-painting. He was one of those Ge-
niufes that furmounted the common Courfe
of Nature, and preferved his Fire amidlf
the Froft of old Age; though he at laft fub-
mitted to the Fate of Mortals, at la Barra,
one of his Seats, fituated about four Miles
El.88.
from Naples, Anne 1747.

ADRIAN VANDERWERF fo eminent for
n his bigh Finishing, was born at Retterdam,
1659. Anno 1659. His Father placed him un
der


Miedern Masters.
der Picolet
the Pertrait-painter, and Eglon
with whom he worked four
Vanderneer,
Vears. In 1687, he married a Relation
of Govert Flink, a Painter, who had col-
lected feveral Pictures and Defigns of the
bet Mafters of Iraly. Our young Pain-
ter followed thofe Models, and reformed his
Tafe of Defign, by plaifter Models after
the Antique: t Amfferdam, having Accets
to the beft Cabinets, he made folid Re-
flectrons on what he obferved, which turned
greatly to his Advantage. He was much
emplryed in painting Portraits, of the Size
of thofe of Nerfchar; and had painted his
own Wife and Family as big as the Life:
But this Manner difgufting him, he en-
tirely attached himself to the painting of
Hiftory in Miniature. His Pictures are fi-
nithed to a furprizing Height; his Pencil
is tender; his Figures have an admirable
Roundness and Relief; his Defign 1s fuf-
ficiently correct; but the Carnations of his
Figures are not lively; they refemble Ivory,
and have too yellow a Caft: The Time he
was about his Works, took off their Spirit;
and the Scarcity of them raifed their Value
to an extravagant Price. The Elector Pa-
latine, pafting by Rotferdam, was to pleafed
with his Works, that he took him under
his Protection, and conferred on him Riches
and Honours; and whofe Friendship he
enjoyed till Death called him hence, in the
Year 1727.
Sir JAMES THORNHILL, the Son of a
Gentleman of an ancient Family and Eltate
in Derseishire, was. born dune 1676. His
Fathers ill Conduct having reduced him
10


El. 68.


1676.


325


76


Modern Masters:
to fell his Effate, the Son was under the
Neceffity of feeking a Profeffion that might
support him. The famous Sydenham (his
Uncle) fupplied him with the neceffary Af-
fiftances. for Hudying under a middling
Painter; whofe limited Talents being of
little fe to his Difciple, he truffed to his
own Judgment, while Genius and Taffe fups
plied the Place of a Maffer; and, by the
Strength of which, he made a furprizing
Progreis in the enchanting Art of Paint-
He travelled France, Flanders; and
ing.
Holland, for Improvement; but had he feen.
Irely, his Works would have had more De-
licacy and Corregtness. Thornbill’s Merir
foon pread his Character, and raifed his
Reputation to the higheft Pitch: Oncen
ne appointed him to paint the Dome
of St. Panl’s, with feveral other public
WWorks, particularly at Hampton-Court and
Greenwich-Hospiral, which will. ever be latt-
ing Monuments of his great Abilities; by
thefe Works, and the Oeconomy he prac-
tifed, he raifed fo confiderable a Fortune,
as to repurchafe the Effates his Father had
fold, and built a beautiful Country-houfe
for his own Refidence. His Genius, to
well turned for Hiffery and Allegory, wis no
lets to for Portraits, Landscapes, and Ar-
chifecture; he even practifed the laft Science
as a Man of Bufinefs, having built feve-
ral Houfes. He was knighted by King
George 1I. but, by the Iniquity of the Times,
he was turned out of his public Employ-
ments, in Company with the great Sir
CBriffepber Wren; which ill Treatment was
fupposed to have fo impaired his Health,
that,


Modern Masters.
that, after a Vear’s Sickness, he died in the
Country, in the Year 1732.
JoHN VAN HUYSUM, born at Amfter-
dam, Anno 1682, arrived to to great Per-
feetion in reprefenting the Beauty of the
Flowers, and the Down and Bloom on the
Frait he painted, that no Man ever at-
tained fo great Perfection in that Branch.
He had great Freedom and Tenderness, with.
Mellownets and Vigour of Colouring; the
Superiority of his Touch, the Delicacy of
his Pencil, his furprizing Exactness, his
bigh Finishing, has traced Nature through
all her Refinements, and shewn that it was
poffible to exceed all that went before him,
in the Manner of exprefting thofe beauti-
ful Productions of the Earth. His Father,
who was a middling Painter, taught him to
paint Screens, Figures and Vases on Wood;
Landicape, and fometimes Flowers; but his
Experience teaching him, that to work in
every Branch was to excel in none, he con-
fined himfelf to Flowers, Fruit and Land-
Sirpe; which lat, after fome Time, he
likewife declined. He was fo jealous of
his Art, that he did not even
permit his
Brothers to fee him work, nor would he in-
Rruct any Diiciple. His great Genius raifed
hs Reputation to fuch a Height, that all the
Curious in Painting fought his Works with
great Eagerness; which encouraged him to
advance his Prices to much, that his Pictures
at laft grew out of the Reach of any but
Princes, and Men of the greatelt Fortune:
Vet it is furprizing, the trifling fortune he
left when he died, which happened at Aen-
Rerdam, in the Year 1749.
SEt.S
ANTHONT n
R


317
(El. 56.
d

1682.


318

1684.


Modern Masters.
ANTHONY WATTEAv born at Valen-
ciennes in Flanders, Anne
1684. His Fa-
ther put him to a forry Painter in that
Town; but the Son, foon finding his Maf.
ters Deficiency, left him to fudy under
another, who had a Talent for theatrical
Decorations, with whom he went to Paris
but his Mafter, having a Call to work at
the Opera, returned home, and left him be-
hind. His being in a ftrange Place, with-
out Friends, drove him to many Shifts for
a Subfiffence; but fortunately meeting with
one Gillor, who delighted to find a young
Painter that trod in the fame Steps with
himself, lodged him in his Houfe, and gave
him all the Instructions in his Power, by
which Means he foon equalled his Mafter
Gillot, fenfible of this, to improve him, placed
him under Claude Audran, a famous Painter
of Ornaments. Wattean, employed in paint-
ing the Figares in his Works, received new
Lights from the good Tafle of his Mafter;
and, at the fame Time, tudied the Colour-
ing and rich Composition of the Gallery of Ru-
bens, which was to near him. fter fome
Time he gave up the Manner of Gillor, which
dropped infenfibly; a better Tone of Colour-
ing, a finer, more correct, and Hudied Man-
ner of Defign, had taken its Place. He was
emboldened to paint for the Prise at the
Hcademy, which he carried; and shewed, in
his Picture, Sparks of that beautiful Fire,
which never after decayed. His great Ap-
plication rendered him melancholy, though
1t dees not appear in his Pictures; in them
you find a deal of Gaiety, a lively and pe-
netrating Spirit, a natural Judgment, a
Corrccincts


Modern. Mafters.
Correctness of Defign, a Truth of Colour-
ing; a flowing Pencil, and the fineff and
lighteff Touch imaginable; nothing can ex-
ceed the firs of his Heads for a true Cha-
racter of Nature. To all thefe Excellencies,
he jorned a beautiful Landscape, and back
Grounds, that deferved to be admired for
the Beauty of their Colours: He not only.
excelied in rural and gallant Subjects, but
allo in Marches and Halrs of Armies. It is
perhaps a Loss to the Public, that he neg-
lected Hiffory, of which he feems to have
been very capable; the Tafte he has fol-
lowed, is rather in the droll Stile, and
does not agree with ferious Subjects. He
died Anno.1721.
Sir GoDrREY KNELLER was born at In-
beck, Anno 1646, of a Father no ways wanting
in Care or Expence to finifh his Education.
He fent him to the Univerfity at Leyden,
to Rudy the Languages and Mathematies; but
his Genius leading him Rrongly to drawing
Figures after the bifferical Manner, he foon
made great Improvements in it, fo as to be
much taken Notice of, and encouraged.
From this City he was removed to Amffer-
dam, and placed for his better Instruction
under the Care of Rembrandt; but, not
content with that Gufto of Painting, where
exacl Design and frue Proportion were want-
ing, his Father fent him into Trap, at the
Age of feventeen, and committed him to
the Care of a near Relation. He fudied
at Rome, under the favourable Inffuence of
Carlo Maratii and the Chevalier Bernini,
and began to acquire Fame in Hisfory-
painting; having firtt Rudied Arcbitecdure
and
R 2


329
5
Et. 37.


1646.


320


Niodern Mafters.
and Anatomy, the latter aptly difpoting him
to relith the anrique Starues, and to improve
daily by them. By the Importunity of fome
Friends, he was prevailed on to come into
England, where his Skill and Merit foon
made him Known; and gained him the
Friendship of King Charles II. who, after
sitting for his own Picture, fent him to
draw that of the French King, where he
had likewife the Honour of drawing moft of
the Royal Family; for which he received
some confiderable Prefents; but this Success
did not influence him to Hay long in that
Kingdom. At his Return, King Charles
dying in his Abfence, he was well received
by King James II. and his Qucen. At the
Revolution, he was appointed principal
Painter to King William, who conferred on
him the Honour of Knightbood. The great
Elleem his Merit gained him, cannot be
more confpicuous than by obferving, that
no lets than Ten Growned Heads did him the
Honour of fitting in Perfon to him, befides
divers Elecfors and Princes. From feeing
and Rudying many noble Works of Ru-
bens’s, he began to change his Stile and
Manner of Colouring, imitating that great
Matter, whom he judged to have come
neareft to Narare of any other. His Draught
is moff exact; no Painter ever excelled him
in a fure Outline, and graceful Dispofition
of his Figures; nor took a better Refem-
blance of a Face, which he feldom failed to
express in the moft handfome or agreeable
Turn of it. He always lived in the greatest
Efteem and Reputation, abounding no less
in Wealth than Splendor; in both furpaf-
sing any of his Predeceffors. He spent the
latter


Modern Masters.
322
Latter Part of his Life at Whitton; and died Et.77.
d
Anno 1723.

WILLLAM HOCARTH was born in the
Parith of St. Bartholomew's, London, in the
1693.
Year 1698, and was put Apprentice to an
Engraver in Sitver-plare, after the Death of
his Father, a Perfon of good Learning,
though fmall Fortune. The Son probably
chofe this Occupation, as it required fome
Skill in Drawing, to which his Genins was
particularly turned. Accordingly, having
made fome Progrefs in the Art during his
Apprenticeship, he profecuted it with inde-
fatigable Diligence, till at length he ac-
quired a complete Miaftership therein, and
that without any foreign Affiftance. His
uncommon Tafents brought him into the
Notice of Sir James Tbornbill, whofe Daugh-
ter he married a litile before her Father's
Death. In the mean Time, not content
with mere Drawing, he proceeded to finifh
his Defigns with Colouring, in which he like-
wife fucceeded to Admiration. He had oc-
cafionally been a Benefactor to his Parish,
and prefented that Hospital with a capital
Piece, the Pool of Bethefda, in 1736, when
he was chofen a Governor of it. The De-
pon of this Piece furnifhed him with an Op-
portunity of difplaying his particular Ta-
lent in Expresion. The Difeafes of the Af-
flicted attending that Pool, are marked in
the Rronged Manner; nor is the Figure of
Chrill less dillinguished by the Son of Man.
When the Foundling-Hespital was finithed,
our Painter enriched it with another Piece,
upon a like religious Subject, Moses brought
10.
R 3


322


Modern Masters.
to Pharacb’s Daughter. Hitherto he was feen
in grave Hiffory-paintings, a Walk in which
he had many Competitors; but in the mean
Time he launched out into an unbeaten
Track, in which he became inimitable. It
is faid, that the firff Inlet to his Excellence
in Burlesque, was the being employed to
draw Defigns for a new Edition of Huditras:
However that be, it, is certain, that in co-
mic Life-painting, he exceeded all that went
before him ; though it is unjuft to give his
Life-pictures of this Kind the Character of
fince both the one
Burlefque or Grotesque.
to as 2 Departure
and the other convey
Hogarth almoft al-
from Nature, to which
The ingenious Ab-
ways Arictly adhered.
bot dn Bes has often complained, that no
Hiffory-painter of his Time went through
the Series of Actions and Misfortunes of an
Hero, from his Cradle to his Grave: What
du Bos withed to fee done, Hogarth per-
formed. That Work in this Tafle which
firff appeared, was his Harlor’s Progress;
where he launches out his young Adven-
turer, a fimple Girl, upon the Town; and
conducts her through all the Viciffitudes of
Wretchedness, to a premature Death. This
was painting to the Reafon and to the Heart;
none had ever before made the frr fubler-
vient to the Purpofes of Morality and Inffruc
sion. A Book like this is fitted to every Soil
and every Obferver, and be that runs may
read. The Rake's Progress fucceeded the for-
mer; which, though not equal to it, yet
came thort only of that fingl. Excellence, no
other could come near him in that Way.
His great Excellence confifted in, what we
may term, the Furnisure of his Pieces: For,
111


Miodern Masters.
in Subjects and Hiffory Pieces, the fewer little
Circumftances there are to divide the Spec-
tator’s ttention from the principal Figures,
is reckoned a Merit; to in Life-painting, the
greater Variety there is of thofe little do-
meftic lmages, it gives the whole a greater
Degree of Force and Refemblance. Thus,
in the Harlor’s Progress, we are not difpleated
with James Dalson'’s Wig-bex on the Bed-teafter
in her Lodgings in Drury-Lane; particularly
too, if it be remembered, that this James
Dakon was anoted Highwayman of that Time.
in the Fieces of Marriage-a-lamode, what
can be more finely or faturically conceived,
than his introducing a goary Lord, who car-
ries his Pride even in his Infirmities, and has
his very Grutches marked with a Coronet
Soon after the Peace of Hix-la-Chapelle, he
went to Paris; the Confequence of which
was, his humorous Print of the Reaft Beef of
Old England, carried into Calais by a jolly
Friar While our Painter was sketching,
for this Purpofe, one of the Gates of the
Town here introduced, he had like to have
been taken into Cuffody as a Spy; in Re-
membrance of which he has inferted his own
Face in a Corner of the Print, with a Serjeant
clapping him on the Shoulder. About the
Veari7so, he publifhed his Analysis of Beauty,
in Gyarre; which, though rongly attacked
in Regard to fome of his Notions, yet is re-
plete with thofe Strokes that ever characterize
the Works of Genins. In 1757, his Brother.
in-Law refigned the Place of King's Seryeant-
Painter in his Favour. He had fome Time
before bought a Houfe at Chifwick, near
London; where, having now facrificed enough
to his Fame and Fortune, he ufually pafied
the
R 4


323


324


Miodern Mlasters.
the greatell Part of the Summer Seafon, yet
not without vifiting occafionally his Houfe
in Leiceffer-Fields. About the Year 1762, he
complained of an inward Pain in some of his
Vitals; which continuing, brought on 2 ge-
neral Decay, that proved incurable. On
October 25, 1764, he was brought from Chij-
wick to Leiceffer-Fields, in a very weak Con-
dition, yet was remarkably chearful; and,
receiving an agreeable Letter from a Friend
in Pensylvania, he drew up the rough
Draught of an Answer to it; but going to
Eed, he was feized with a Vomiting, upon
which he rung his Bell, and was found in
fuch a Condition, that he expired two Hours
after, in the 67th Vear of his Age; his
Corple was afterwards conveyed to Chifwick,
and interred there. He left a very confider-
able Fortune behind him, which is come
into the Poffeffion of his truly mournfal Wi-
dow; who had, during their Marriage, lived
with him in the utmoft Harmony and Hap-
piness, and rendered excellent by a peculiar
chearful Dispofition, fweet Temper, and
pleafant Humour, which endeared him to all
his Friends and Acquaintance. The follow-
ing is an exact Lift of his Prints, as they are
bound together in a Book, with their Prices:
1o 5. d.
0 3 0
A. Frontispiece,
1 Harlots Progress, in fix Prints, 1 1 0
2 Rake's Progress, in eight Prints, 2 2 0
3 Marriage-a -la-Mode, in Six
y
1 11 6
Prints,
4 Four Times of the Day, in four
 6 0
Prints,
0
5 8
5 Before and After, in two Prints,

0
6 Midnight Converfation,
7 Dir


Modern Masters.
7. Distreffed Poet,
8 Enraged Mufician,
9 Soutbwark Rair,
1o Mr. Garrick, in the Character
of King Richard III.
11 Calais, or the Roaft Beef of Old

England,

12. Paul before Felix,
-1.3 The fame, with Alterations,
14. Moses brought to Pharaob's

Daughter,

15 March te Fintbley,
16 Strolling Atreffes dreffing in 2

Barn,
17 Four Prints of an Election,
18 Bithop of Wincheffer
19. The Effects of Idleness and In-
duffry, in twelve Prints,

20 Lord Lowat,
21 Sleeping Congregation,
22 Country Inn Church-yard,
Paul before Felix, in the Wan-
23
Rer of Rembrandt,
Various Character of Heads,
24
in five Groupes,
25 Columbus breaking the ice,
26 The Bench,
27 Beer-Street and Gin-Lane, two
Prints,
28 Four Stages of Cruelty, four
Prints,
20 Two Prints of an Invafion,.
30 The Cock Match,
31 The Five Orders of Perriwigs,

22 The Medley,

33 The Times,

34 MIr. Wilkes,
R S.


to 3o di
0 3 0

3 0
0
3 0
0 7 6
S
7
0
0. 6. 0
0. 7 8
0 10: 6
3 3 0
2 2 0
0. 3 0
0 12. 0
0 1 0
0 1 a
0 1 0.
0 5 0
0 2 6
0 1 0
0 1 6:
0
3 0
0 6 0
0 2 0.
0 3 0
0 1 0
5 0
0 2 0

0 1
35 The


325


326


Nisdern Maffers.
1. 5. d.

0 2. 6
The Bruifery
35


0 2. 6
36 Finis,
To which may be added, the Au-

thor's Treatife, entitled, The
Analyfis of Beauty, ato, with two
0 15 6
Explanatory Prints,
In this Catalogue is omitted the Figure of
the late Mr. Churchill, the Satiriff, occa-
fioned by a Quarrel between our Painter and
the Poet; and lukewife his famous Sigifmunda,
weeping over her Lover’'s Heart.


rl
47
4 2  
7

5
& e

3
T

5
7


5
5

9
24 ny
5

7

5E
5

ANCIENT



ANCTEN. MASTER S
CONTAINED IN THE
PRECEDING ACCOUNT
.

CTTUS Prifous,
Page
199

£ 4 Amphion,
4
194

196
Antidotus,
pelles,
292
Apollodorus,
189
Ardiree,
286
Arellins,
299
friffides,
195
Afclepiodorus,
195
Athenion,
197
B.
Bularchus,
187
C.

186
Charmmas,

186
Cimon,

185
Cleanthes,

186
Cleophantus,
199
Cornelins Pinus,

186
Crato,
192

2
Erdias,
D.


5





T N D E R.
D.

Dinids,
E.

Enchir,
Eumarus,

Euphranor,
Engompus,
F.

Fabins Pictor,

H.

Hygiemon,

Ei.
Endius,.

NF.
Marcus Pacuviis,

Melanthius,
Mctrodorus,

Myron,



IV.

Nealces,
r
Nici2s,
Nichomachus,
Nicophanes,








1


Page 186

185
186
292
191.
197
18
1


49
1


9


Pamphilus,
Panenus,
Parrhafius,
Paufias,
Phidias,
Philocles,
Polygnotus
Polycletus,
Praxiteles,
Protogenes,
Pyreicus,
Saurias,
Scopas,
Telephanes,
Theomneffus,
Timanthes,
Timomachus,
Turpilius,
LCUNIS,


P N D E X.
P.







Athenienfis,

Thafius,
S.

T.



2.

























Page
19F
1.87
190
192
7
28
185
185
188
188
292
194
196
185
188
136.
195
197
198
199
189
MODERN


MODERN MASTER S.
A.
Page 267
L B A NI (Franceico)
1d Albert Durer,
270

Alberfi (Cherubino)
246
-
Andrea
Mantegna,
205
Sacchi,
279
del Sarto,
215
Schiavone,
239
Talli,
202

206
Verrocchio,
Annibale
249
Carracci,
204
Antonello da Meffina,
250
Antonio
Carracci,
227
da Correggio,
More,
238
Tempelta,
247
26
Artemifia Gentileschi,
Agoffino Carracci,
24
B.
Backhuyfen
(Ludolf
30
Badalocchi (Sitto)
26 
218
Bandinelli (Baccio)
Bamboccio,
26
Barocci (Federico)
240

Bartolomeo (Fra.)
210
Baffano Francefco,
234

Giacomo,
233

Gio. Battifta,
23
Girolamo,
235
Leandro,
234
Battaglie
277
(M. Angelo)
Battilfa
Franco;
22.2
Bellino
Gentile,
205
Giovanni,
205
Benedetto Caliari,
243
276
Calliglione,
Berchern

Nicholas
299
Berettoni
Nicolo)
303
Bordone (Paris)
2.37


I. N D E X.
Bergognone,
Bourdon (Sebaftian)
Brandi (Gracinto
Brueghes (Finweelen)
Bril Mathew,
Paul,
Browwer,
Brun (Charles le
Buonarruoti (MI. Angelo)
C.
Caliari Benedetto,
Carlo,
Gabrielle,
Paolo,
Camillo Procaccint,
Campidoglo (M. Angelo)
Carl’ Antomo Procaccint,
Carlo Cignani,
Doici,
Carpi (Uoa da)
Carracci
Annibale,
Antonio,
goftino,
Lodovico,
Carravaggio (MI. Angelo)
Caftrolione
Benedetto)
Cimabue,
Ciro Ferri,
Claudio Gille (Lorain)
Cooper (Samuel)
Correggio,
D.
Daniele da Volterra,

Dobion,

Domenichino,
Domenico
Fetti,
Ghirlandrio,
Tintoretto,
Dou,
Durer (Albert











-








Page 280
296
298
256
246
247
285
296
277
243
24.2
242
247
257
289
257
305
293
229
249
2.50
248
248
254
276
691
305
277
287
228
232
288
263
268
209
236
282
210


I N D E X.
E.

Eltheimer
Ercole Procaccini,
F.
Farinato (Paolo)
Federico Barocci,
LucChero,
Fetti (Domenico
d Angelis
Filippo
Lauro,

Franceico Albanl,
Barbierl,

Baffano,

Francia,
Nazzuoll,
Primaticcio,
Salviati,.
Vanni,
Vecellio,
Franco (Battifta)
Frefnoy (Charles Alphonfe du)
3.
Gaddi, Gaddo,
Taddeo,
Gasparo Pouffin,
Gentilefchi, Artemifia,
Oratio,
Ghirlandaro (Domenico)
Giacomo Baffano,
Cortefi,
Tintoretto,
Gio. Battiffa Baffano,
Glorgione,
Glorgio Vafarr,
Giordano (Luca)
Giofeppe Ribern,
Salviati,
Gioleppine,














Pa


I. N D E X.
Giottino,
Giotto,

Girolamo Baffano,
Grulio Cefare Procaccin:,
Clovio,

Romano,
Gorven (John van)
Greenhill,
Grimaldi (John Francis)
Quercmo da Cento,
Gughelmo Cortefi,
Gurdo Reni,
H.
Hals (Frank)
Hans Holbein,
Hogarth (William
Hondicooter (Melchior)
Huyfum (John van)
I.
John of Bruges,
E.
Kabel (Adrian van
Kneller Sir Godfrey
L.

Lanfranco,
Lauro (Filippo)
Leandro Eaffano,
Lely (Sir Peter
Lonardo da Vinci,
Lodovico Carracci,
Luca Giordano,
Signoreili,
Lucas Van Leyden,
M.
Mantegna (Andrea
Marath (Carlo)























Pase 202
207
235
251
2.2.7
229
273
296
283
269
281
257
270
22.8
325
309
317
203
306
319
264
299
234
294
207
248
303
207
222
205
300


I N D E X.
Marcello Provenzale,
Miargaritone,
Marietta Tintoretta,
-
Marro dai Fiorl,
Malaccio,
Matthew Bril,
Wlaturino,
delle Battaglie,
Nrichelangelo
Buonarruoti,
di Campidoglio,
de Caravaggio,
Mieris,
Mola, Francefco,

G1o. Battilla,
More (Antonio
Mulen (Anthony Francis vander)
N.
Napolitano (Filippo)
Nicolo dell Abbate,
Puffino,
0.
Oratio Gentiletchi,
Vecellio,
Ortado (Adrian van)
P.
Palma Glovane,
Vecchio,

Paolo Farinato,
Veroneie,
Paris Bordone,
Parmegiano,
Paul Bril,
Peter Van Laer,
Petitot (John)
Piermo del Vaga,
Picire da Cortona,
di Cofimo,
Perugino,





-


Pase


I N D E X.

Pietro Teft2,
Pirro Ligorio,
Poelenburch,

Polidoro,

Pordenone,
Potter (Paul)
Primaticcio,
Camillo,
Procaccint,
Carl’ ntonio,
Ercole,
yiulio Cefare,
Peter Paul
Pughet
Carucl)
Puntormo
Gafparo,
Puffino,
Nicolo,
Re
Quintin Mattys,
R.
Rafaelle da Urbino,
Rembrandt,
Ricciarelli (Daniele)
Riley (John)
Romanclli,
Roffo,
Rottenhamer,
Rubens,
(Jacob)
Ruyfdale
S.
Sacchi (Andrea
Rofr,
Salvator
Franceico,
Salviati,
Ciofeppe,

Sarto (Andrea del
Schalcken,
Schiavone (Andrea,
Scballan Bourdon,
Schaffino del Prombo,
Signorill (Lucr)
Simone Riemin,
Sitto Eadalocchi,
Syders,










-















Puse 290
233
269
224
226
303
2.2.6
25X
252
252
25E
299
2.20
278
278
223
225
287
232
312
292
225
253

259
310
279
293
232
24.3
215
283
239
296
277
207
203
265
62


I
I N E X.
Solimene (Francis)
(Ribera)
Spagnoletto

Spraugher,
T.
Taddeo Qucchero,
Taffi (Andrea
Tempeita (Antonio
Teniers (David, Father and Son,
Teita (Pietro
(Sir James
Thornhill
Marietta
Tintoretts
Domenico,
Tintoretto,
Giacomo,

Titiano,
Tomafo,
8.
(Eglon)
Vanderneer
Vanderwerf (Adrian
Van Dyck,
Vanni (Franceico
Vafari (Grorgio
Udine (Grovanni da
Vecellio, Franceico,
Dratio,
Veronefe (Paolo
Verrocchio (Andrea)
Ugo da Carpi,
Vinci (Lionardo da
Viola,
Viviano,
Volterra (Danicle da
Voucl (Simon
Vouverman (Philip)


Watteau (Anthony
2.
Lampieri (Domenico)
Federico,
TuCCaerO,
Taddeo,
N
F
1
it
1.



Fo

4
5
3


44
4


1 S.





-


Pal


5


7


2



