GEORGE R.
GEORGE the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain,
France, and lreland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting :
WhEREAS our trusty and well-beloved Thomas Bardwell, of the Parisn of St.
George Hanover-Square, in our County of Middlesex, hath, by his Petition, humbly
represented to Us, That he hath, after a great many Years Application, Care,
Study, Industry, and Expence, composed a Book, in Quarto, which is now ready
for the Press, intituled, THE PRACTICE OP PAINTING AND PERSpEc-
TIVe MADE EASY, with Copper-Plates ; which he apprehends will be of the
greatest Use in instructing Our Subjects in the Art of Painting: And being de-
sirous of reaping the Fruits of his great Expence and Labour, most humbly prays
Us to grant him Our Royal Licence and Protection, for the sole Printing, Publish-
ing, and Vending, the said Work, in the same manner as has been done in Cases of
the like Nature : We being willing to give all due Encouragement to this Under-
taking, are graciousty pleased to condelcend to his Request; and We do by these
Presents, so far as may be agreeable with the Statute in that Behalf made and pro-
vided, grant unto him the said Thomas Bardwell, his Executors, Administrators,
ind Assigns, Our Licence for the sole Printing, Publishing, and Vending, of the
said Work, for the Term of Fourteen Years, to be computed from the Date
hereof ; strictly forbidding all Our Subjects within Our Kingdoms or Dominions
to reprint or abridge the same, either in the like, or in any other Size or Manner
whatsoever; or to import, buy, vend, utter, or distribute, any Copies thereof
reprinted beyond the Seas, during the aforesaid Term of Fourteen Years ; without
the Consent and Approbation of the said Thonas Bardwell, his Executors, Admini-
strators, and Assigns, under his or their Hands and Seals, first had and obtained,
as they will answer the contrary at their Peril ; whereof the Commissioners, and
other Officers of Our Customs, the Master, Warden, and Company of Stationers,
are to take Notice, that due Obedience may be rendered to Our Pleasure herein
declared. Given at Our Court at St. James’s the z9th Day of January 1756, in
the Twenty-ninth Year of Our Reign.
By His MAJESTY'S Command.
H. FOX.




DRATR OP BIR JOHN R. MILBANKE HUSKISSON,
Bart.-- Information of the death of the above diplo-
mat:o servant of the Crown has bee reecived 2è the
Foruign-ofioe. Sir John Ralph Milbanke Haakisaon died
on the soth ult., af Ertham House, Bazsex, after a ahort
illnezz. The deceased waz the only son of Bir John
Peniston, seventh baronet, by his wifs, Eleanor, voungest
daughter of Mr. Julines Hering, and waa born November
5, 1800. Me married. July 13. 1843. Emily, third daughter
o4 the late Mr. John Manafeld, of Digxwall Honsz. Hertz,
by whom Be leaves asvaral children. The lats Sir Johm
entered. the diplomatio aervice in the antumn of 1823,
and, after probationary sorvice at the Foruign-office, wae
appointed secretary of legation at Frankfort, in Septem-
ber, 1628, and durmg his reaidence there had occrsion to
fill the post of chargé d’affaires. He was transferred to
the embaesy a8 St. Petersburg in 1235, where he was
minister ad interin from June, 1287, till October, 1838.
when Be was transferred to Vienna where he remained
but a sbort time, and was thon appointed en voy axtraor-
dinary and minister plenipotentiary to the King of Bavaria
in Nov., 1813. In Oct., 1862, he was appointed envoy extra¬
ordinary and miniater plenipotentiary at the Hague. Bir
John succeeded to the baronetcy on the derth of his fathar,
the eeventh baronet, in July, 1850, and in March. 1806,
in compliance with the will of Eliza Emily Huakisson,
late of Ertham, widow of the Right Hon. William Hus¬
kiason, he obtained warmiszion to take the namo of
°' Huakisson" after Milbanke, and to bear the afma of
Huakizson quarterly with hie own. He is zucceeded aa
ninth baronet by his son, John Peniston, born at Munioh
in 1847. The axth baronet of this family, Sir Raljib, on
marrying the Hon. Judith Noel, danghter of dir Edward
Noel, Bart., Viscount Wentworth, assumed the name of
Noel, and was the father of Anna Isabella, wife of the
l poet, Lord Byron.




THE


Practise of painting
and
Perspective




MADE EASY;
In which is contained,
The ART of PAINTING in OIL,
WITH THE
METHOD Of COLOURING,
Under the HEADS of
FIRSt PAINTING, Or DEAD-   Painting BACK-GROUNDS;
COLOURING;
On COPYING;
SECOND PAINTING;
DRAPERY-PAINTING;
THIRD Or LAST PAINTING; J LANDSCHAPE-PAINTING;
A N D
A new, short, and familiar Account of the Art of PERSPECTIVE,
illustrated with Copper-Plates, engraved by Mr. Vivares.
By THOMAS BARDWELL, PAINTER.


LONDON;
Printed by S. Richardson;
For the Author; And Sold by Him, at the Golden Lamp, in Lower
Brook-Street, Grosvenor-Square ;
And by A. MiLLAR, in the Strand; R. and J. Dodslev, in Pall-mall; and
J. and J. RIvinGToN, in St. Paul's Church-yard.
M.DCC.LVI.
Price, stitched in Blue Paper, Half a Guinea.


N.B No Copy of this Work is genuine that bas not my Name,
in my own Hand-writing, affixed to it, on the Back of the.
Title ,














TO
The RIGHT HONOURABLE
TH E
EARL OF ROCHFORD

GROOM of the STOLE tO His MAJESTY
A N D
One of his MajESTv’s Most Honourable PRIVY-COUNCIL.
My Lord,



THE fine Arts seem to have a natural Claim to:


the Patronage of those, whom. Taste and Genius
inspire with the Love of them, and whose Rank


and Fortunes may afford that Support and En-
couragement, without which, they would languish and droop-
in Shade and Obscurity.









DEDICATION.
The Want of this Encouragement, is, possibly, one Reason
why these Arts have never flourished among uncivilized uncul-
tivated Nations who, confined by too exact an Equality to
the sole View of procuring the Necessaries of Life, have nei-
ther Inclination nor Leisure to pursue and cultivate Ornaments
and Elegancies that distinguish the polite Parts of the World.
An easy Situation, and Freedom from the Distresses of Neces-
sity, depressed with which, the strongest natural Genius strug-
gles in vain to exert itself, are only to be found in the Favour
and Protection of the Noble, the Wealthy, and the Powerful.
To this Cause, perhaps, Europe owes its Superiority over
Climates equally blest with that happy Temperature, which
might naturally inspire the noblest Inventions, and excite and
animate the Ambition of excelling.

Let this Reason, my Lord, excuse the Presumption of beg
ging Leave to shelter this Work under your Lordship s
Patronage. Your Love for the Art of Painting will, I hope,
dispose you to favour an Attempt to restore that essential
Branch of it which is the Subject of the ensuing Treatise; the
Decline of which has been universally acknowleged and
lamented; and at the same time, your Judgment, formed on
a Knowlege of its Principles, and Conversation with the best
Works of the greatest Masters, must prove à sufficient Pro-
tection and Recommendation to the World.
Here, my Lord, might l indulge the Warmth of my Heart,
I could be tempted to expatiate on a Character, that would
employ



employ the utmost of the Painter’s Skill, without incurring
the Imputation of, what we are so often accused of, Flattery.
But I drop the Pencil, though I pretend to some Skill in
Colours: Mine are all too faint for the Subject; and I
will not daub. what l cannot adorn.
The many Favours and Benefits your Lordship has heaped
upon me, make this but an Offering of Gratitude most strictly
due; and upon this Topic l can never say enough; nor no-
thing should induce me to be inclined, but as l am sure it
would be disagreeable to your Lordship to hear à Repetition
of those Favours, your Generosity made it a Pleasure to
confer.
May you be long haf
, in the pleasing Power of making
others so; and may every Object of your Beneficence retain the
same grateful Sense of it, and make the same Return, in a
sincere Devotion to your Service, with.
My LORD,
Tour Lordsbip s
Most obliged,
Moft bumble,
and Most obedient Servant,
T. BARDWELL.
















THE
Practise of painting - Introduction
Tis an Observation of Pliny's, that the Ancients painted
with four Colours only, and out of them made all their
Teints. Monsieur De Piles is of Opinion, that it was

out of these they made their Grounds, or what we call
the Dead-colouring.

How it really was, Time has put it out of our Power to determine :
But if we suppose those four principal Colours in Perfection, then, Ithink,
it can be no longer doubted, but that from them might be made all the
various Colours in Nature. For my part, I cannot believe, that the four
capital Colours of the Antients would mix to that surprising Perfection
we see in the Works of Titian and Rubens. And if we have no certain
Knowlege of their Method of Colouring who lived in the last Century,
how should we understand theirs who lived near Two thousand Years
ago ; And why the Method and Practice of Colouring, which was so




INTRODUCTION.

well known to Rubens and Van Dyck, should not be continued down to
the present Masters, is to ine surprising.
l must confess, Ihave often thought, and still believe, that those Painters,
who had acquired so sine a Manner of Colouring, might, if they pleased,
have communicated it to Posterity in Writing: But l never heard, that
any Attempt was made towards it ; tho’ ’tis probable there might be some.
It is astonishing, nevertheless, all Europe should suffer alike at the same
time, for want of that noble Franknefs and generous Spirit, which might
have been expected from those Masters; and which would have done the
World more Service than their Pictures.
It is plain, from the Works of their Pupils, that they knew it, because
in their Pictures we see the same Sort of Colours and Colouring: And
from the little Variety of capital Colours, and Sameness of Method used
by them, it is not to be doubted but the Whole was contained in a few
Principles, neither difficult nor tedious.
If we trace the Art through its several Declensions, we shall find
Rembrandt, who was Master of all the Parts of Colouring in the highest
Degree, lived to the Year 1668. Next to him was Zoust, who died in
England about eight Years after. Lely lived to the Year 1680. Reily,
who was Zouff’s Disciple, survived them, and was left the best Colourist
we had. Mr. Richardson, who died about the Year 1745, was his Pupil ;

but, in my Opinion, in point of Merit much his Inferior. Reily, l think,
declined in the same Proportion to Zoust, that Zoust did to Rembrandt.
As all these Masters, from Rembrandt, sunk gradually below each other
in the Art of Colouring, we may with Certainty date the Declension of
that Art from him.
l cannot attribute this gradual Degeneracy in the Knowlege of so charm-
ing an Art to any thing but Inability, or want of that Generofity I have
before mentioned, or both. Tho’ these Gentlemen were not able to give
us so perfect an Account, as the Great Masters, yet they might have com-
municated what they learned from them; and if it was against their own
private Interest to have published it whilst they practised, they should, out
of a general Regard to Men of Taste, and to the Art itself, have left it







behind them, to have given to Posterity an Opportunity of reaping the
Benefit of their Studies,
I flatter myself that the following Sheets, compiled originally for my
own Use, contain something that may be of Consequence in studying this
Art; and hope the practicable Method of Colouring here laid down,
which has been the Result of much Study, and long Experience, and
which l now use, will be found both useful and agreeable.
In the Course of studying this Part of my Art, as l could have no
Assistance from the Living, I found myself obliged to make my Court
to the Dead; I mean their Works. And tho I have had very little Op-
portunity to study even them ; yet from the few I have copied, I have,
after a tedious Course of Mistakes, at last, by mere Dint of Labour, and
the Assistance of Genius, such as it is, found the following Method of
Colouring very easy and expeditious.
Painters, says De Piles, spend many Tears in the Search of Knowlege,
wbich they might bave attained in a little time, bad they bit at first upon the
right Path. This Truth I have experienced ; and confess, that the Works
of Van Dyck and Rembrandt are the surest Guides to Nature. It is out of
these most excellent Masters, that I have established my Method : It is
from their Pictures l have found the first Lay of Colours; and from them
I have learned the Virgin Teints, and finishing Secrets ; tho l have always
applied them to Practice from Nature.
In the Method of my Work, I begin with a short and plain Account
of the principal Colours used in the Flesn : Next l follow with the
principal TeInts.
FIRST PAINTING, OT DEAD-COLOURING.
SECOND PAINTING.
THIRD, Or LAST PAINTING.
Of Painting BACK-GROUNDS.
Some Remarks on COPVING.
Of DRAPERY-PAINTING.
Of LANDSCAPE-PAINTING.
A new, short, and familiar Account of the Art of PERSPECTIVE.








All these Particulars I have endeavoured to make familiar, clear, and
instructive, without Design to flatter or offend; and thro’ the whole
Course of the Work I have had the utmost Regard to Truth.
The Motive of my Publishing is solely the Benefit of the Art. Such
as are born with a happy Genius, tho destitute of a Master or Guide,
may, from these Instructions, acquire a competent Knowlege of Colour-
ing, alinost without studying. Here the Lovers of Painting, who study
for their Pleasure and Amusement, may be conducted easily, step by step,
to the Secrets of that Art, which, of all the designing ones, affords per-
haps the greatest Pleasure to the Mind.
It may be objected to me by some, That my own Works do not shew
I have either acquired or revived that Art, which, according to my own
Confession, has a long time lain dormant. I am not the proper Person
to answer this Objection ; Nevertheless, l have some Copies by me, that I
will leave to Judges to compare, in this Point, with any Painting that has
been done for the last sixty or seventy Years. And I believe l could con-
vince any Artist, even at twice painting a Head from the great Masters,
that my Method will certainly answer to all their Variety of Colouring.
And sure every sensible Painter will grant, that that Method which comes
nearest to Van Dyck and Rembrandt, will certainly be the nearest Way to
Nature.
Since lI have establissied myself in these Principles, I must inform the
Reader, that l find no Difference in the Method of the Working between
Copying, and painting from Nature. Had l known, at my first setting out,
as much as l have since learned, I should have approached much nearer to
those great Masters. Others, who have the Advantage of Youth, may, I
am persuaded, attain the End I propose. It is for them that l write; and
most sincerely wish the Rules l lay down may contribute to restore so
divine an Art.
Monsieur De Piles says, Titian and Rembrandt prepared their first Lay,
er Grounds, very near alike; and with Colours that kindly united, and were
as near to tbe Life as possible; on which they laid their Virgin Teints with
light Strokes of the Pencil , and thus they imitated the Force and Fresbness of
Nature.



Nature. - They were convinced that there were certain Colours, wbich
destroyed each other, if they were mixed to Excess, and that they should be
as little shaken as possible by the Motion of the Pencil.
lt would be Folly in any Man, at this present Time, to assume so much
Knowlege in the Art of Painting, as Monsieur De Piles really had ; who
was a Man of Genius and Learning, that made Painting his principal
Study, and travelled on purposo to complete his Knowlege in that delight-
ful Art; was intimately acquainted with thie Painters in his time, who
assisted him in studying the Works of the Great Masters, which he care-
fully examined; and from which he made his Reflections, and judicious
Remarks. This was when the Works of Van Dyck and Rembrandt were
more in Perfection, and in an Age when Painting was better understood.
Is it poffible for any thing to be more plain and intelligible, than these
two most excellent Remarks of Monsieur De Piles; which contain the
principal Matter and Foundation of Colouring: This is vastly different from
theirs, whose Colouring is, as they pretend, to change and wear to the
Complexion : Tho’ this may answer their Purposes, yet none that study
the Art of Colouring will, I hope, believe it. It is certainly true, that
the Great Masters imitated Nature in their First Painting or Dead-colour-
ing, so far as they could without dirtying the Colours, omitting only the
finishing Touches and Colours, that should come last; which I design to
shew in the Course of this Work, in the most intelligible manner l can;
and exactly to the Rules and Method of my present Practice.
Some Painters imagine the Great Masters had Colours, which we have
no Knowlege of; and it is probable they might : Yet l confess, l see none
in the Pictures of Van Dyck and Rembrandt, but what are common to
Painters ; only some of them are better than ours, which would be reme-
died, if that Art was more encouraged by the Painters. Those we have;
l am convinced, would appear much finer, if they were laid on proper
Grounds.
A Painter should have as great a Regard to his First Lay, as he has to
the succeeding Parts of his Work. Sir Godfrey Kneller, in Lelys time,
studied his Manner, and prepared his Grounds, and- First Lay of Colouts,



INTRODUCTION.
on such Cloths as Lely used: But after his Death he soon fell into a slighter
manner, which was more agreeable to his Genius and Inclination, and
invented the cold grey-coloured Cloths, on which he established his slight
cxpeditious manner. Then was the Time, when the Painters exposed
their Understanding, in neglecting the charming Stile of Van Dyck, to
follow Kneller. But tho Colouring was not his Talent, yet he was in his
time the best Face-painter in Europe ; Nor has there been an Artist since
him, whose Heads can stand any Comparison with his. Aster him, Co-
louring hunig here for some time between the Manners of Mr. Richardson
and Rosalba; the Followers of the latter failing in Oil, established her
Method.
Having traced the Art of Painting thro’ its several Declensions, I will
venture to give my Opinion on it, as it stands at this present time, in
regard to Portraiture ; and hope to do it in such a Manner, as to offend
no-body that may differ from me. If I may be allowed to judge from
the Pictures brought home by Gentlemen from abroad, as the Works of
ghe most eminent living Masters, I may, without Partiality, affirm, that
Face-painting is no-where so well performed as in England, notwithstand-
ing the Prejudices of some in favour of Foreigners: Nor is it at all sur-
prising it should be so, since, where there is the greatest Encouragement
to an Art, thither the most eminent Masters in that Art will resort, and
there it will be improved to its greatest Height. It is well known, that
no Nation in the World delights so much in Face-painting, or gives so
generous Encouragement to it, as our own; and it is equally known, that
no Country affords such Helps in regard to beautiful Nature. We have
also the greatest Number of Van Dyck’s Pictures, and the rest of the best
Face-painters (Rembrandt excepted), of any People : And it seems rea-
sonable, from these Observations, which are founded on Matter of Fact,
to infer, that England is preferable to all other Nations whatsoever in this
respect, and the best Place for studying the Art of Face-painting.
I cannot but indulge a fort of Compassion for those Artists, as l do for
other mistaken Men, who conceive it absolutely necessary to traverse Italy
and other Countries, wasting thatTime abroad, which, in my humble Opi-
nion, may be employed at least as well at home, in studying the Works of
Van Dyck, and the inimitable Beauties of the English Ladies, which I




think as much preferable to the Antiques, as the animated Beauties of
Nature are to the cold Imitations of her in Stone.
I am informed there is a Scheme on Foot to establish an Academy for
Painting and Sculpture : l wish it may succeed, as it must probably in
time improve those Arts to the highest Perfection, and will of course do
Honour to the Nation, and to the Nobility, who will, from frequenting
it for their Amusement, learn the Principles of those Arts, and so become
real Judges.











Of the principal CoLoues used in the Flesh, from wbich all
tbe Teints are made.
LAKE-WHITE, OFINE WHITE, is the very best White we

have. This Colour should be ground with the finest Poppy Oil
than can be made. At present our White is bad, on account of the Oil,
which is not really Poppy. White is a friendly working Colour, and
comes forward with Yellows and Reds, but retires with Blues and Greens.
It is the Nature of all Whitee to sink into whatever Ground they are laidt.
on ; therefore they should be laid on white Grounds.
2. IVORY-BLACK is the best Black we have : It is a Colour which-
sympathizes and mixes kindly with all the others. It is a true Shade for
Blue. lvory-Black and a little Indian Red make the best general Shadow-
colour that can be. It is ground with Linseed Oil, and used with drying
Oil. Black is a cold retiring Colour.
3. ULTRAMARINE is the finest Blue in the World. It is a tender
retiring Colour, and never glares; and is a beautiful glazing Colour : lt is
used with Pop
Oil.
4. PRUSSIAN is a very fine Blue, and a kind working Colour. It is
ground with Linseed Oil, tho' l think Nut Oil is more proper. It should.
never be used. in the Flesh, but in the green Teint, and the Eyes.






5. LIGHT OXER is a friendly mixing Colour, and of great Use in
the Flesh : lt is usually ground with.Linseed Oil, but Nut Oil is better-
All Yellows are strengthened with Reds, and weakened with Blues and
Greens.


6. LIGHTREp is nothing but fine light Oker burnt : This and White
in mixing produce the most perfect Flefh-colour that can be made. It is
a beautiful, clean, kind, -working Colour; but too strong for the White ;
and therefore will grow darker. It should be ground and used with Nut
Oil.
7. NOVERMILLION, but what is, made of the true native Cinnabar,
should ever be used. It will not glaze; but is a fine Colour when it is
glazed. It is ground with Linseed Oil, and should be used with-drying
Oil.
8. CARMINE is the most beautiful Crimson that can be : It is a middle
Colour between Lake and Vermillion ; is a fine working Colour; and
glazes delightfully. It should be ground with Nut Oil, and used with
drying Oil.
9. LaKE is a tender, sympathizing, deep Red; but of no strong Body;
therefore it should be strengthened with Indian Red. It is the beft
glazing Colour that can be used. It is ground with Linseed Oil, and used
with drying Oil.
I0. IINDIAN REp is à strong, pleasant, working Colour ; but will not
glaze well; and when mixed with White, falls a little into the Lead. It
is ground and used as the Lake.
II. BrOWn Pink is a fine glazing Colour; but of no strong Body :
dn the Flesh it should never join, or mix with the Lights ; because this
Colour and White antipathize, and mix of a warm dirty Hae; for which
Reason their Joinings should be blended with a cold middle Teint. In
glazing of Shadows, it should be laid before the other Colours, that are to
enrich it: It is one of the finisning Colours, and therefore should never be
used alone in the First Painting. It is strengthened with burnt Umber,



TEINTS.

and weakened with Terraverte ; ground with Linseed Oil, and used with
drying Oil.
12. BURNTUMBER is a sine warm Brown, and a good working strong
Colour : lt is of great Use in the Hair, and mixes finely with the warm
Shade.
Of the Principal Teirts that are absolutely necessary for
painting Fiesn, all wbich are made from the principal
Colours.
1. LIGHT RED TEiNT is made of Light Red and White : It is the

 most kind and best conditioned of all Colours, for the general
Ground of the Flesh. With this Colour, and the Shade-Teint, we
should make out all the Flesh, like Claro Obscuro, or Mezzontinto. We
should also remember, that this Colour will grow darker ; because it is in
its Nature too strong for the White; therefore we should improve it ;
that is, mix some Vermillion and White with it, in proportion to the Fair-
ness of the Complexion : And tho’ it is thus mixed, yet Ishall call it the
Light-red Teint in all the Course of the Work ; because l would not have
the Vermillion Teint confounded with it, as if there was no Difference.
2. VERMILLION TEINT is only Vermillion and White, mixed to a
middle Teint : lt is the most brilliant Light-red that can be: It agrees
best with the White, Light-red, and Yellow Teints.
3. CARMINETEINT is Carmine and White only, mixed to a middle
Teint : It is of all Colours the most beautiful Red that can be for the
Cheeks and Lips : It is one of the finishing Colours, and should never
be used in the first Painting, but laid upon the finishing Colours, without
mixing.
4. ROSE Teint is made of the Red Shade and White, mixed to a
middle Degree, or lighter: It is one of the cleanest and most delicate Teints





that can be used jà the Flesh, for clearing up the heavy dirty Colours ;
and therefore, inschanging, will sympathize and mix kindly.
5. YELLOW TEINT is often made of Naples Yellow and White ;
but I make it of light Oker and White, which is a good working Colour.
Remember the Oker is too strong for the White; therefore we should
make à little Allowance in using it. It follows the Light-red Teints, and
should always be laid before the Blues. If we lay too much of it, wt
may recover the Ground it was laid on with the Light-red Teints.
6. BLUe Teint is made of Ultramarine and White, mixed to 2
lightisni Azure : It is a pleasant working Colour: With it we should blend
the Gradations. It follows the Yellows; and with them it makes the
Greens; and with the Red it produces the Purples. No Colour is so.
proper for blending down, or softening the Lights into keeping.
7. LEADTEINT is made of lvory-Black and fine White, mixed to a
middle Degree : It is a fine retiring Colour; and therefore is of great Use
in the Gradations, and in the Eyes.
8. GREENTEINT is made of Prussian, light Oker, and White : This
Colour will dirty the Lights, and should be laid sparingly in the middle
Teints. It is most used in the Red Shadows, where they are too strong:
It is of a dirty antipathizing Nature.
9. SHADE-TEINT is made of Lake, Indian Red, Black, and White,
rixed to a beautiful Murrey Colour of a middle Teint : This is the best
Colour for the general Ground of Shadows ; for which Reason l call it the
Shade-Teint : It mixes with the Lights delightfully, and produces a
pleasant clean Colour, a little inclined to the redish Pearl. As all the four
Colours of its Composition are of a friendly sympathizing Nature, so conse-
quently this will be the same; and therefore may be easily changed, by
the Addition of any other Colours.
10. Rep ShADE is nothing but Lake and a very little Indian Red :
It is a charming working Colour, and a good Glazer: lt strengthens the
Shadows on the Shade-Teint; and receives, when it is wet, the Green and
Blue Teints agreeably. It is a good Ground for all dark Shadows.





II. WARMSHADE is made of Lake and Brown Pink, mixed to a
middle Degree : It is a fine Colour for strengthening the Shadows on the
Shade-Teint, when they are wet or dry. We must take care that it does
not touch the Lights, because they will mix of a dirty Snuff-Colour; and
therefore should be softened with a tender cold Teint.
12. DARK SHADE is made of lvory-Black and a little Indian Red
only. This Colour mixes very kindly with the Red Shade, and sympa¬
thizes agreeably with the middle Teints in the Dead-colouring. It is a
charming glazing Colour for the Eye-brows and darkest Shadows. It is
of all the most excellent Shadow-Colour, and one of the finest working
Colours we have.

FIRST PAINTING.
The Colours and Teints that are necessary for the First Painting
of the Flesh.

I. FINE White.
2. Light oker---and its two Teints.
3. Light Red - and its two Teints.
4. Vermillion ---—and its Teint.
5. A Teint made of Lake, Vermillion, and White.
6. Rose Teint.
7. Blue Teint.
8. Lead Teint.
9. Green Teint.
10. Half-shade Teint--- is made of Indian Red, and White.
1. Shade-Teint.
12. Red Shade.
13. Warm Shade.
The finishing Pallet for a fine Complexion requires six more ; viz,
Carmine and its Teint, Lake, Brown Pink, lvory-Black, and Prussian
Blue.





FIRST PAINTING.
The First Painting, or Dead-colouring, I divide into Two Parts: The
First, I call the First Lay, or Ground ; the Second, the Laying on the
Virgin Teints.
The first Lay of Colours consists of Two Parts: The one is the Work
of the Shadows only, and the other that of the Lights.
The Work of the Shadows is to make out all the Drawing, very cor-
rectly, with the Shade-Teint, in the same manner as if it was to be done
with this Colour only; and remember to drive or lay the Colour sparingly.
The Lights should be all laid in with the Light-red Teint, in different De-
grees, as we see them in Nature : These two Colours united produce a
clean tender Middle Teint ; for, mixing with the Shade-Teint, they turn
to a pearly Hue; and by strengthening them with the Light-red, we may
work to a very good Resemblance. In uniting the Lights and Shades,
we should use a long Softener, about the Size of a large Swan’s-quill ;
which will help to bring the Work into Character, and leave the Colour-
ing more delicate ; then go over the darkest Shadows with the Red or
Warm Shade, which will finish the first Lay.
The Warm Shade being laid on the Shade-Teint, improves it to a¬
warmer Hue; but if laid instead of the Shade-Teint, it will dirty and
spoil the Colours it mixes with; and if the Red Shade be laid first, inftead.
of the Shade-Teint, the Shadows would then appear too red and bloody ;
therefore, notwithstanding these two Colours are the best that can. be for
the Shadows, yet they are too strong to be laid alone; which is a Proof of
the great Use and Merit of the Shade-Teint. Here we may observe, that
the Shade and Light-red Teints are so friendly and delicate in their Natures,,
that they will not dirty tho we are continually changing them: How
proper then, and agreeable to our Purpose, are they, for making the most
principal Part of the Likeness, when in altering and changing they always
produce a clean Colour of the inviting pearly Hue ?
The Second Part of the First Painting.
In order to finish the First Painting, improve the Reds and Yellows to-
the Complexion, and after them the Blues ; observing, that the Blues on
the Reds make the Purple, and on the Yellows produce the Green. The





same Method is to be understood of the Shadows ; but be sure to leave
them clean, and not too dark : Therefore Allowance should be made in
their Grounds with the Light-red ; because glazing them will make them
darker. When the Cloth is of a dark or bad Colour, there must be a
strong Body of Colour laid all over the Shadows, such as will not sink into
the Ground; but appear warm, and a little lighter than the Life, so that
it may be of the same Forwardness to finish, as if it had been a light Ground.
Therefore the Business of Dead-colouring is, that we leave it always in
the same Order for-finishing, tho’ the Colour of the Cloth be quite the
Reverse.
l am convinced by Experience, that the Grounds of Shadows, in what
we call the Dead-colouring, should be such as will support the Character
of the finishing Colours; which Ground must be clean, and a little lighter
than the finishing Colours ; Isay, a little lighter, because the Finishing of
Shadows is glazing; and no other Method but glazing can leave such
Brilliancy and Beauty as they ought to have : For l find, that glazing the
Shadows in the First Painting is not so proper as laying a Body of Shadow-
colours, that are very near to the Life, tho’ a little lighter : These may be
glazed and touched upon, when dry, with a great deal of Ease: But if we
begin the First Painting with glazing, we shall find it will stare, and be of
no Use;, and the solid Colours which. are. laid on it, will look heavy and
dull; therefore all Shadows and Colours, that are to be glazed, should be
done with Colours of a clean solid Body; because the Glazing is more
lafting, and has the best Effect, on such Colours. Remember to leave no
Roughness; I mean such as will appear rough, and interrupt or hurt the
Character of the finishing Colours ; which, by examining the Work whilst
it is wet, with a soft Tool, or when it is dry, with aKnife, may be. avoided,
as it will easily take. off the Knots and roughest Parts..
The Light-red and White improved is superior to all other Colours for
the first Lay or Ground ; which should be always done with a full Pencil
of stiff Colour, made brighter than the Life, because it will sink a little
in drying. The greater the Body and Quantity of Colour, and the stiffer
it is laid, the less it will sink: Every Colour in drying will sink, and
partake, in proportion to its Body, of the Colour it is laid on : Therefore
all the Lights of the Flesn, if not laid on a light Ground, must conse-





quently change a little from the Life, if there is no Allowance made. The
Shade-Teint for the Shadows should fall into the Rose Teint, as the Com-
plexion grows delicate; all which should be lightly united, with a soft long
pointed dsog-toel, to theLights, making out the Whole like Mezzotinto.
I believe the great Masters very seldom sweetened or softened the Co-
-lours, but in uniting the first Lay, they were very careful in preserving
the Brightness of their Colours, and therefore did not work them below
the Complexion. For to force or keep up a Brilliancy in the Grounds, can
only be done with the Whites, Reds, and Yellows ; which Method will
make up for the Deficiency of the White Grounds: Therefore, the First
Paieting should be left bright and bold, and the less the Colours are broken
the better. We should forbear using any Colours that will prejudice them,
and be contented to add what is wanted the next Painting; where if we
fail, a clean Rag will restore the first Ground.

SECOND PAINTING.

THE Second Painting begins with laying on the least Quantity that
can be of Poppy Oil; then wipe it aliost all off, with a dry Piece

of a Silk Handkerchief.
Tlie SecondPainting is also divided into Two Parts: One I call the first
Lay of the Second Painting; which is scumbling the Lights, and glazing
the Shadows : The other, finishing the Complexion with theVirgin Teints,
and improving the Likeness, as far as we can, without daubing.
SCUMBLING, is going over the Lights, where they are to be changed,
with. the Liglit-red Teints, or some other of their own Colours, such as
will always clear and improve the Complexion, with short stiff Pencils ;
but such Parts only as require it; otherwise the Beauty of the first Painting
will be spoiled, and we make ourselves double Work.
The Light-red Teint improved, is the very best Colour that can be for
Scumbling, and improving the Complexion in general. Where the Shadows
and




and Drawing are to be corrected, we should do it with the Shade-Teint, by
driving the Colour very stiff and bare, that we may the- easier retouch and
change it with the finishing Teints. Some Parts of the Shadows should be
glazed with some of the transparent Shadow-Colours, such as will improve,
and come very near to the Life; but be sure not to lay on too much of itafor
fear of losing the Hue of the first Painting, the Ground of which should
always appear through the Glazing. Be very careful, in uniting the
Lights and Shades, that they do not mix dead and meally ; for the more
the Lights mix with the Shades, the more meally those Shades will appear.
Thus far the Complexion is prepared and improved, in-order to receive
the Virgin Teints and finishing Touches.
The Second Part of the Second Painting

ls to go over the Complexion with the Virgin Teints : These are the
Colours which improve the Colouring to the greatest Perfection, both in
the Lights and Shadows. This should be done in the same manner as we
laid them in the second Part of the firft Painting ; that is, with the Reds;
Yellows, and Blues ; blending them with delicate light Touches of the
tender middle Teints, without softening. We should leave the Teits and
their Grounds clean and distinct, and be content to leave off whilst the
Work is safe and unsullied, leaving what is farther required for the next.
Sitting; for, in attempting the finishing Touches before the other is dry,
we lose the Spirit and Drawing, and dirty where-ever we touch.

The THIRD PAINTING or;. FinishinG.
Tis to be supposed the Complexion now wants very little more than a
K. few light Touches; therefore there will be no Occasion for oiling.
Begin with correcting all the Glazing; first, where the Glazing ferves
as a Ground or under Part ; then we should determine what should be done
the Part with one Stroke of the Pencil. By this Method, we preserve
both.


BACK-GROUNDS.
16
both the Glazing and the Teints; but if it happens that we cannot lay
such Variety of Teints and finisning Colours as we intended, it is much
better to leave off while the Work is safe and in good Order ; because
those few Touches, which would endanger the Beauty of the Colouring,
mapeasily be done, if we have Patience to stay till the Colours are dry ;
and then, without oiling, and those Finishings with free light Strokes of
. the Pencil.
I believe that Rembrandt touched upon his best Pictures a great many
Times, letting them dry between : It was this Method, most certainly,
which gave them that surprising Force and Spirit, which is so inimitable.
I find it much easier to soften the over-strong Teints when they are dry,
than when they are wet ; because we may add the very Colours that are
wanting, without endangering the dry Work. If any of the Colours of
the Pallet want to be a little changed to the Life, when we are painting,
it is much better to do it with the Knife on the Pallet, than with the
Pencil ; because the Knife will mix, and leave it in good Order for the
Penci.

Of BACK-GROUNDS.
VAN Dyck made out the Keeping in his Back-grounds more from the
different Opposition and Harmony of the Colours, than from his
Knowledge of the Claro Obscuro. I confess l cannot find in his Pictures
that Intelligence of Light and Shade, which is so striking and beautiful in
Rembrandt’s : Van Dyck’s general Method was to be very still and mellow,
and to break the Colours of the Ground with those of the Drapery. This
will certainly produce Harmony, the Principles of which Method belong
only to the Art of Colouring: But it is the Knowlege of Light and Shade
which gives that surprising Force and Strength, which, at first Sight, we
find in Rembrandt’s Works. I have seen a Picture of a Lady, where he has
made the Ground just light enough to shew her Complexion and Hair,
which was a dark Brown, in the greatest Perfection : The Ground was a
Wall, which, near to the Face, was lighter than the Shadows of the Flesh,





and the Light diminished so artfully in the Gradations, that though the
Part round the Head was much darker, yet it appeared to be of the same
Colour with that near the Flesn. I must own, I like this Method of
relieving the Head from the Ground, better than Van Dyck’s Method, where
he has made the Ground almost of the same Colour with the Hair; and
though I admire his Way of breaking the Colours of the Ground with
those of the Draperies, yet l am not so much plcased, where there appears
too near a Sameness, as I have seen in some of his Pictures, where he has
carried this Principle so near, that it is almost imperceptible. In Rembranct 's
Pictures at Yarmouth, the Lights and Shades are as visible as those in his
Prints, and are remarkably broad, clear, and still ; the Shadows are very
warm and thin, and look as if they were painted all at once, with a
Plenty of Colour, which appears transparent: Which Transparency was
done by Glazing the dead Colouring.
The principal Colours that are necessary for painting of Back-grounds in
Portraiture, as Walls, Buildings, or the like, are White, Black, Indian
Red, Light and Brown Oker, Prussian, and burnt Umber, from which
the eight principal Teints are made, as follows :
I. PEARL is made of Black, White, and a little Indian Red.
2. LeAD, of Black and White, mixt to a dark Lead Colour.
3. YELLOW, of Brown Oker and White.
4. OLIVE, of Light Oker, Prusfian, and White.
5. FLESH of Indian Red and White, mixt to a Middle Teint.
6. MURREY, of Indian Red, White, and a little Black, mixt to a kind
of Purple, of a Middle Teint.
7. STONE, of White, Umber, Black, and Indian Red.
8. DARK-SHADE, of Black and Indian Red only.
Here the Lead Teint serves for the Blues ; the Flefn Teint mixes agree-
ably with the Lead; and the Murrey is a very good blending Colour, and
of great Use where the Olive is too strong. The Umber, White, and
Dark Shade, will produce a fine Variety of Stone Colours: The Dark
Shade and Umber, used plentifully with drying Oil, make a charming
warm Shadow-Colour. All the Colours should be laid with drying Oil
only, because they mix and fet the better with the Softener.






Where the Marks of the Trowel are so strong in the Priming of the
Cloth, that one Body of Colours will not be sufficient to conceal it, we
should lay a Colour to prevent it ; which should be dry, before we begin
with those Parts that we expect to finish at once Painting.
Tiie Method of Painting Back-grounds, I divide into two Parts.
The First Part is the Work of the First Lay : The Second is to follow
on that with the Finishing Teints.
Of the First Lay.
We should always begin from the shadowed Side of tiie Head, and paint-
the Lights first; from them go into the Gradations and Shadows, which
should be done with a large stiffisn Tool, very sparingly, with the dark
Shade and White, a little changed with the Colours that will give it more
of the required Hue, but very near in regard to Tone and Strength; leaving
them like Mezzotinto.
The dark and warm Shadows should be laid before the Colours that
join them : This we should do with the dark Shade and Umber, drove
with drying Oil : I say, before the Colours that join, them, because, if
those Colours were laid on first, they would interrupt and spoil the Trans-
parency, which is their greatest Beauty. The more the First Lay is drove,
the easier and better we may change it with the finishing Teints; there-
fore we may lay them with the greater Body.
The Second Part is to follow directly, whilst the First Lay is wet,
with those Teints that we think are most proper to harmonize and finish
with.
Begin with the Lights first; and remember, as we heighten and finish
them, we do it with warmer Colours ; and let those be accompanicd with
fine tender cold Teints. The lightest Part of the Ground is always nearest
to the shadowed Side of the Head : This is the Part which govefhs all the
rest; and should be painted with aVariety of light, warm, clear Colours,
which vanisn, and lose their Strength imperceptibly, in the Gradations.
These




These should be laid with a kind of cloudy Touch, rather than spotted ;
and we must take care that we do not cover too much of the First Lay,
but consider it as the principal Colour.
From the Lights we go to the Gradations and Shadows ; for when the
Lights are well adapted to produce and support the Head, it is easy, l think,
to fall from them into whatever kind of Shadows we shall find most pro-
per for our Work: Then soften and blend the Whole with a long large
Hog-tool ; which, with the Strength and Body of the drying Oil, will melt
and sweeten all together, in such a flattering Manner, as will seem surprise-
ingly finisned. Remember the Teints will sink, and lose a little of their
Strength and Beauty in drying. All the Grounds, as Walls, &c. should be
finissied at once Painting; but if they want to be changed, we may glaze
them with a little of the dark Shade and drying Oil, drove very bare; on
which, with a few light Touches of the Colour that is wanting, we may
improve their Hue. The dark Shadows may also be strengthened and im-
proved by Glazing, which should be done after the Figures are near
finished, for fear of making them too strong.
l see Rembrandt’s Grounds are rather brighter in the Lights, and have
more Variety of Teints, than any other Painter’s: And to be sure he had
observed, and justly too, that those Teints diminish in Proportion with the
Lights: Therefore his Shadows have but a faint Appearance of Teints. He
understood the Gradations in Perfection, by mixing and breaking the First
Lay of Colours, so artfully, that they flatter us in regard to their real
Strength.
Fresnoy says, Let the Field or Ground of the Picture be pleusant, free,
tranfient, light, and well united with Colours which are of a friendly Nature
to each otber, and ef such a Mixture, as that there may be sometbing in it ef
every Colour that composes your Work, as it were the Contents of your Pallet.
De Piles says, Variety of Teints, very near of the fame Tone, employed
in the same Figure, and often upon the fame Part, with Moderation, contri-
bute much to Harmony.
All the Curtains should be dead-coloured when we paint the Ground ;
and should be done with clean Colours, of a near Hue to the intended
Curtain;





Curtain; such as will support the finishing Colours. Do it with a tender
sort of Keeping, and near in regard to their Tone in the Lights, but
much softer in the Shadows. All which should be mixed and broken with
the Colours of the Ground ; and, as Fresnoy says, Bodies that are back in
the Ground, should be painted with Colours allied to those of the Ground itself.
It will often happen, for want of the Life, or some Design, that we
cannot make the Folds the first Painting ; we should then leave the Massés
of Light and Shadow, in regard to the Keeping of the Picture, broad
and well united together, such as may seem easy to finish on. The
Colours of the Landskip, in Back-grounds, should be broke and softened
also with those of the Parts which join them. This Method brings them
into Keeping, which will make all the Parts of the Ground as it were
of one Piece, so that the different Parts do not stare, nor cut at their Extrea-
mities.
The Sky should be broke with the Lead and the Flefh Téints : The
Murrey Teint is of great Use in the Grounds of distant Objects; and the
Umber and Dark Shade in the near Grounds: The Greens should- be more
beautiful than we intend them, because they will fade and grow darker.
After all is painted, we should go over the Whole very lightly with the
Softener, as we did the Grounds, which will make it look agreeably finished.







On COPYING.


THE Author of the Analyfis of Beauty has given his Opinion of
Copying in his true Spirit and Genius ; treating with Ridicule one
of the most useful Parts of Painting. This I impute to his Want of
Skill in this Branch of the Art, or to a most ill-grounded Prejudice : For
is it reasonable to believe, that a Painter, who understands the true Merit
of Copying, would treat that Part of the Art with Contempt, which the
greatest Masters have always practised and esteemed ; Men of common
Sense know, that the Artists in all Ages have copied and studied each
either, in whatever they found most for their Purpose, and for the Advance-
ment


COPYING.

ment of their Art: Was it not for this, the Art itfelf would soon dwindle
and decay; and Fwisn this has not been the Case with us.
Rubens studied principally the Works of Titian, Paul Veronese, and
Tintoret ; that is, he copied such of their Pictures as he thought most
worthy his Imitation, and kept them for his own Use.
Van Dyck copied Titian, and all the Venetian School; or, in De Piless
Phrase, saimmed their Cream. Teniers is celebrated for transforming him-
self into as many Masters as he copied ; which he did so exactly, that it is
hard to distinguisn the Copies from the Originals. Hanneman’s Copies of
Van Dyck are taken for the Originals of that great Master. I have seen
Copies by Stone, sold at great Prices for undoubted Originals, notwith-
standing they were divested of that free Pencilling, and charming Variety
of Teints, which are so apparent in Van Dyck. Buckshorn was one of the
last good Copiers we have had in England; the-rest that followed him and
his Master Lely, soon dwindled to Half-Artists. There is a Copy of Buck-
sborn’s Painting after Van Dyck, which I like much better than any of
Stone’s : l mean the Picture of the Earl of Strafford and his Secretary, in-
the Marquis of Rockingham’s Collection, which is well painted, and de--
servedly esteemed.
I believe every one, that has heard of Andrea del Sarto’s Copy of Leo
the Tenth, painted by Rapbael and Julio Romano, will be convinced of
the great Use and Merit of an Art, to which is owing that great Number
of Originals now abounding in every Country. By Originals, I mean
Pictures imposed as such, by our ingenious and honest Dealers, to adorn
the Cabinets of the Virtuosi and Connoisseurs,
It is surprising, that since the Age of these great Masters, we have not
had a Man able to make a fine Copy from any one of their Pictures : And
Ibelieve, if such a Genius should hereafter arise, it is to be feared the De-
stroyers of the Art, if they are suffered to go on, will scour off the Remains
off their Beauties, so that very little will be left for him to study; and by
the End of this Century there will be none fit for Copying.
It


COPYING.

It is in vain for a Man to think of making a fine Imitation of any
of the Great Masters, without being thoroughly acquainted with the
Nature of Colours and of Colouring; and without being clearly con-
vinced, at Sight of the Picture hie is going to copy, of the Method and
Principles on which it was painted. It is the Want of this Knowlege and
Conviction which leads us into so many Errors and Mistakes.
A Painter, that has acquired any Sort of Manner, will always tincture
his Copying with the same. Now-a-days we are too apt to fall into a
Manner, before we understand the Nature of Colours ; which is the Case,
where some predominant Colour or Hue appears in all the Complexions
alike. For this Reason a Painter, whose Carnations are too red, will cer-
tainly make his Copies blushi : Or if his Colouring and Shadows be heavy,
they will of course fall into the Obscuro. By the same Rule, whatever
Teints infect his Colouring, the same will unavoidably taint his Copying ;
 for which there is no Cure, because he himself is infected.
Monsieur De. Piles says, It is very rare to change a bad Manner in Colour-
ing for a better: That Raphael, Michael Angelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Julio
Romano, and other great Masters, spent their wbole Lives without truly
understanding good Colouring. And tho Colouring is the principal Excel-
lence in Copying, yet it is necessary that every Artist should avoid a
particular Manner with his Pencil, otherwise it will certainly be seen in
his Work.
From what has been, said on this Subject, l apprehend, it appears, that
the Art of Copying, which was practised by the Great Masters, in order
to catch each other’s Excellencies and Perfections, and by which their
noble Works have been so often repeated, and as it were renewed, is so
so far froin deserving Contempt, that it ought to be encouraged, as a thing
highly useful, and worthy of Esteem.
or





Of Painting DRaPERiEs.
IN order to understand the Nature, and different Degrees, of Colours
or Teints used in painting Draparies, I first determine how many Di-
visions are absolutely necessary to make the First Lay of Colours, and, after
that, the Reflects and Finishing Teints.
The right Method of painting Draperies or Sattins in general, is, to
make out the Whole, or what I call the First Lay, with three Colours
only ; viz. the Lights, Middle Teint, and Shade-Teint.

For the Lights, I mean the Colour of all the High Lights. The
Middle Teint should be very near to the general Hue of the Sattin, &c.
and of an exact middle Degree between the High Lights and the Shade-
Teint. The Shade-Teint l would have dark enough for the general Hue
of all the Shadows ; for which reason I call it the Shade-Teint.
We should observe, that the Lights should rather incline to a warmissi
Hue; and the Middle Teint should be made of friendly working Colours,
such as will always mik of a clean tender coldish Hue. The Shade-Teint
should be made of the same Colours as the Middle Teint, only with less
Light; therefore this Teint will also mix of a tender clean Colour. It is
with these three Colours we should make out the Whole like Mezzotinto;
and we should understand, that all the Beauty and Character of the Folds,
the Shape, Attitude, and principal Lights and Shades, are all to be con-
fidered, and made with these three Colours only ; which should be done
to our Satisfaction, before we add any of the Reflects or finishing Teints.
The Reffects of Drapery and Sattins are generally Productions of their
own, and are always lighter than the Shadows on which-they are found ;
and being produced by Light, will consequently have a light warm Colour,
mixed with the local Colour that receives them. Here it will be necessary
to


DRAPERIES.

to observe the general Method and Secret in managing the Colours of the
First Lay, and those of the Reflects and sinishing Teints.
In the First Lay, the High Lights should be laid with a Plenty of stiff
Colour, and then shap’d and soften’d into Character with the Middle Teint,
very correctly. Where the Gradations of the Lights are slow, as in the
large Parts, it will be proper to lay the Middle Teint first at their Extre-
mities, with a Tool that will drive the Colour, and leave it sparingly ; be-
cause the Lights will mix and lie the better upon it. Next is, to make
out all the Parts of the Shadows with the Shade-Teint drove bare. After
this comes the Middle Teint, which fills up, and serves as the second Lights
and Gradations, and should be managed together very nicely, to character
without touching any of the High Lights which finisn the First Lay.
The Reflects and Finishing Teints are in general the Antipathies of the
First Lay : They will, without great Care, poison and dirty the Colours on
which they are laid ; and therefore should be laid with a delicate light
Touch without softening. If it is over-done, we must remember to
recover it with the Colour of the Part on which it was laid : This may
be done directly, or when it is dry. We should also observe, whether the
Reflects proceed from the same Colour, or any other, that the Method
of using them is the same.
Before I proceed to the particular Colours, it will be proper to make
some Observations on their Grounds.
It often hapens, that the Colour of the Cloth is very improper for the
Ground of the Drapery ; and when it is so, we should change it with
those Colours which we think are most proper to improve and support the
finishing Colours. This Method of Dead-colouring must consequently
preserve them in their greatest Lustre. In Dead-colouring we should lay
the Lights and Shades in a Manner, so as only to shew a faint Idea of them,
with regard to the Shape and Roundings of the Figure. If we have a
Design to work from, then it will be proper to make all the large and
principal Parts in their Places; which should always be done with a
Colour that is clean, and lighter than the intended Drapery, tho in gene-
ral of tlie same Hue: And let the Shadows be no darker than a Middle
Teint :


White Sattin.
DRAPERIES.

Teint : These should be mixd and broke in a tender manner, and then
soften’d with a large Tool, so that nothing rough or uneven be left to
isiterrupt or hurt the Character of the finishing Colours.
WHITE SATTIN.
All Whites should be painted on white Grounds, laid with a good
Body of Colour, by reason this Colour sinks more into the Ground than
any other.
There are Four Degrees of Colours in the First Lay to White Sattin :
The First is the Fine White for the Lights ; the Second is the First Teint,
which is made of fine White and a very little lvory-Black, mixed to an
exact middle Degree between the White and Middle Teint. This Co-
lour follows the White; and it is with this we should shape the Lights
into Character, before we lay on any other : And take care that this First
Teint appear distinctly between the White and the Middle Teint, other-
wise the Beauty and Character of the Sattin will be spoiled.
The Middle Teint should be made of White, Black, and a little Indian
Red : These three Colours are very friendly, and mix to a beautiful clear
Colour of a pearly Hue, which has the true Brightness and Warmth of
the general Hue of the Sattin. Remember to allow for the Red Hue
changing à little to the Lead. If there is Occasion to mnake any Part in
the Middle Teint lighter, we should do it with the First Teint only. This
Colour should also be laid sparingly before the White, in all the little
Lights that happen in the Middle Teints and Shadows ; on which we
should lay the White with one light Touch; and be sure not to cover all
the Part that was made with the First Teint: lf we do, it will spoil the
Character, and look like a Spot, for want of the softening Edge or Bor-
der, which must be between the White and the Middle Teint. The
Shade-Teint should be made of tlie same Colour as the Middle Teint;
but with less White, so that it be dark enough for the Shadows in gene-
ral ; with which we should make out all the Parts of the Shadows nicely
to Character: Which is the Work of the First Lay.





Next come the Reflects and Finishing Teints.
Brown Oker, mixet with the Colour of the Lights, is the most useful
Colour in general for all Reflects in Draperies that are produced from their
own Colours. All accidental Reflexes are made with the Colour of the
Parts from which they are produced, and the local Colours that receive
them. There are but two Reflecting Teints wanted for Draperies in
general ; I mean to any one particular Colour: One should be lighter
than the Middle Teint, the other darker. These Colours may be a little
changed on the Pallet with the First and Middle Teints, as Occasion
requires, or lightly broken on the Part that receives them : But this last
Method is not so safe as the other. The Teint sufficient for blending the
dark Shadows to the mellow tender Hue, is made with the Shade-Teint
and a little Brown Oker; which should be laid on very sparingly, with
soft light Touches, for fear of making them dull and heavy. If it should
be over-done, we may recover it with the Colour it was laid upon.
We often see a little Blue used in the First Teint of White Sattin. Van
Haecken, who was the best Drapery-painter we ever had in England, did
so ; and sometimes, instead of the Blue, he used Blue-black, till he found
it to be a pernicious Colour, and was therefore obliged to use Blue ; be-
cause his Middle Teint, which was made only of Black and White, was
so very cold, that no other Colour but Blue would make a colder Teint:
Yet he managed these cold Colours, in all the Lights and Middle Teints,
so agreeably, and so light and easy was his Touch, that we cannot help
admiring, and may learn something from him. Tho he was not so lucky
in his Shadows, which were generally of a heavy dirty Hue, this was
owing to the Colours he used, and the Method of using them; which
will always have such an Effect, when a warm or dirty Colour is mixed
with a clean light one ; for, being mixed together, they will form a dirty
Colour, that muit consequently appear so in the Work : But if his Lead
or Shade-Teint had been mixed with Indian Red instead of the Oker, and
then followed with a few light blending Touches of the Oker-Teint, it
would have left them clean and mellow It is the Want of the Red Hue
which makes the White Sattins appear so often like Pewter.


BLUE SATTIN.
Blue Sattin is made of Prussian Blue and Fine White.
The best Ground for Blue is White for the Lights, and Black and
White for the Shadows.
The First Lay of Colours for Blue is divided into three Degrees or
Teints.
We should first make the Middle Teint of a beautiful Azure; then
mix the Colour for the Lights about a middle Degree between that and
White. Make the Shade-Teint dark enough for the Shadows in gene-
ral. All the broad Lights should be laid with a Plenty of Colour, and
shap’d to Character with theMiddle Teint, before we lay on any other
Colours. Remember, the lefs the Colours are mixed, the better they
will appear and stand; for the Lights of Blue should be managed with
as much Care as those of White Sattin. Next is to follow with the rest
of the Middle Teint, and then make out all the Shadows. The more
we drive the Shade-Teint, the better it will receive the Reflects and
Finishing Teints. The Shadows should be strengthened and blended
with lvory-Black and some of their own Colour, which will mix with
them into a tender mellow Hue.
The Reflects are iade as those of White Sattin; that is, with Oker
and some of the Lights; which should be perfectly done, as we intend it,
at once Painting. The Shadows, when dry, may be a little improved,
if there is Occasion to alter them, with the Colours they were made with.
The Prussian proper to be used, is that which looks of the most beautiful
Azure before it is ground; and the sooner it is used after it is ground,
the better it will work and appear.
Velvet may be painted at once. The Method is, to make out the First
Lay with the Middle Teint and Shade-Teint; on which we should lay
the High Lights with light Touches, and finisn the Shadows as we did
those of the Sattin: But the nearest Imitation of Velvet we can make,
is dène by glazing; which is to prepare a Ground or Dead-colouring
with



with such Colours as will, when dry, bear out and support the Glazing
Colour in its highest Perfection. The Nature of the Glazing Colour is,
to be of a fine transparent Quality, and used simply with Oil only ; so
that whatever Ground it is laid on, the Whole may appear distinctly thro’
it. The best Ground for Blue is made with White and lvory-Black :
The White is for the High Lights, wliich, with the Middle Teint and
Shade-Teint, makes out the First Lay, like Mezzotinto. Remember to
make the Middle Teint lighter in Proportion to the Glazing, because
that will make it the darker. It is often necessary to cover all but the
High Lights with a thin Glazing: l do not mean with a Plenty of Oil in
the Colour, but laid with less Quantity than if it was to be done once
only. If any of it touch the Lights, we should wipe it off with a clean
Rag. The very high Lights should be improved, and made of a fine
White, and left to dry. The Glazing Colour is Prussian, ground very
sine with Nut Oil; and should be laid with a large stiffisn Tool, that
will drive the Colour, as Occasion requires. It is on the last Glazing;
we should strengthen and finish the Shadows.

The greatest Fault in the Colouring of Drapeties, is, the painting the
chadows with strong glaring Colours, which destroy the Beauty of the
Lights. This is not only the Reverse of Art, but of Nature, whose
Beauty always diminishes in Proportion with the Lights: For this Rea-
son we should take care to blend and soften the Shadows with such
friendly Colours as will agree with their local Character and Obscurity.
Here we may observe, that glazing the Middle Teint, which is made of
Black and White, will not produce a Colour so Blue, as if it had been
prepared with Prussian and White; yet this Colour will preserve the
Beauty of the Lights in the highest Perfection, by reason of its tender
obsoure Hue, when the Blueness of the other would only diminish them.
This Method of glazing the Blue is tlie general Rule for all Glazing.
When we are glazing Blue, the Lights may be glazed with UItra-
marine, tho all the other Parts are done with Prussian. This Methed
saves a great Quantity of that valuable Colour, and answers our Purpose
as well as if it had all been done with Uitramarine.





Though this general Method of Painting Sattins, is to make the first
Lay of CSlours with three Degrees or Teints ; yet we should understand,
in using them, that they produce two more : For the mixing of two dif-
ferent Colours together on ge Cloth, will make another of a middle
Teint between them: So it is with the Lights and Middle Teint; and with
the Middle and Shade-Teint; The first answers to the first Teint in White
Sattin; and the last will consequently be a sort of Gradating, or Half-Shade.
If the Lights and Middle Teint mix to a beautiful clean Colour, of a
middle Hue between both, there will be no Occasion for a Colour to go
between them, as in the Blue Sattin: But if in mixing, they produce a Teint
inclining to a dirty warm Huc, then there must be another found of a
sympathizing Nature, which should be laid between them, in order to
preserve the Beauty of the Lights, as the first Teint in the White Sattin;
for if it was not so, the Red, in the Middle Teint, would certainly dirty
and spoil the White.
It is highly necessary to understand these Principles of the first Lay of
Colours, in order to have a perfect Knowlege of the general Rule of Co-
louring, on which the Principles of Colouring depend.
SCARLET and CRIMSON.
A light Yellow-red, made of light Oker, Light-red, and White, is the
proper Ground for Scarlet; the Shadows are Indian Red, and, in the
darkest Parts, mixed with a very little Black.
The second Painting should be a little lighter than we intend the Finish-
ing Colour. I mean in proportion to the Glazing, which will make it
darker.
The High Lights, are Vermillion and White for Sattin and Velvet, and
Vermillion for Cloth: The Middie Teint is Vermillion, with a very little
Lake or Indian Red: The Shade-Teint is made with Indian Red and Lake,
with the Addition of a little Black in the darkest Shadows. The Difference
between Scarlet and Crimson is, that the HighLights of Crimson are whiter,
and the Middle Teint is made darker. Their Reslects are made with.
Light


Light-red and Vermillion. The High Lights should be laid and managed
in the same Manner as those of the Blue, for fear of dirtying them; and
sometimes they require to be touched over the second Time, before we
glaze them. The more the Colours of the second Painting are drove, the
easier and better they may be managed to Character: But the High Lights
should have a good Body of Colour, and be left with a delicate light
Touch. After it is well dry, we should finisn with Glazing the Whole
with sine Lake, and improve the Reflects and Shadows. Remember that
the Scarlet requires but a very thin Glazing; and it is better to glaze the
Crimson twice over, then lay too much at once Painting.
PINK-COLOUR.
There are two different Methods of Painting a Pink-colour: One is by
Glazing; the other is done with a Body of Colours at one Painting. The
sane Grounds do for both; which should be a whitish Colour, inclining to
a Yellow, for the Lights; and Indian Red, Lake, and White, for the
Shadows.
The second Painting for the Glazing Method, is done with the same
Colours and a little Vermillion, for the Reflects; and Vermillion and
White for the High Lights: When it is dry we should glaze it with fine
Lake, and then break and soften the Shadows into Character and Har-
mony directly.
The other Method is, to make the High Lights with Carmine and
White; the Middle Teint with Lake, White, and a little Carmine; and
the Shadows with Lake and Indian Red, with a little Vermillion for the
Reflects. But remember the Shadows will require to be broken with some
tender obscure Teint.
YELLOW.
The Ground for Yellow should be a yellowish White for the Lights,
and a Mixture of the Okers for the Shadows.



There are the fame Number of Teints in the Yellow as there are in the
White Sattin; the Method of using them is the very same. The Lights are
made with King’s Yellow, ground with clean goed drying Oil. The first
Teint is Light Oker, changed with a little of the Pearl Teint made with the
Dark Shade and White; which should be laid and managed as the first
Teint in White Sattin. The Middle Teint is a Mixture of the Light and
Brown Oker, softened with the Pearl Teint. The Shade-Teint is made with
Brown Pink and Brown Oker. These belong to the first Lay.
The Reflects are Light Oker; and sometimes, in the warmest Parts,
mixed with a little Light-red: The Shadows are strengthened with Brown
Pink and burnt Uinber.
These Colours, well managed, will produce a Yellow very like Van
Dyck’s; but if we leave out the King’s Yellow, which is the high Lights
only, then it will be one of Lely s favourite Yellows.
GREEN.
The proper Ground for Green is a Light-yellow Green; which is
made of Light Oker, a little White, and Prussian, for the Lights; and
the Okers, Brown Pink, and Prussian, for the Shadows.
The finest Green we have, for Drapery, is made of King’s Yellow,
Prussian, and Brown Pink. The High Lights are King’s Yellow and a
very little Prussian; the Middle Teint has more Prussian; and the Shade-
Teint is made with some of the Middle Teint, Brown Pink, and more
Prussian: But the darkest Shadows are Brown Pink and a little Prussian.
The Lights and Middle Teint should be managed in the same manner
as those of the Blues. The Shade-Teint should be kept intirely from the
Lights, because the Brown Pink that is in it, will, in mixing, dirty
them, as the Black does those of the Blues. Remember to allow for
their drying à little darker; and that the King’s Yellow should be ground
with good drying Oil ; for the longer it is dWying, the more it will change
and grow darker: And the sooner it is used, the better it will stand. It is
proper to have two Sorts of King’s Yellow : l mean one to be very light,
which will do best for the High Lights of Velvet.







Changeable Colours are made with four principal Teints, viz. the High
Lights, Middle Teint, Shade-Teint, and Reflecting Teint.
The greatest Art lies in finding the exact Colour of the Middle Teint;
because it has more of the general Hue of the Silk than any of the others.
The Shade-Teint is of the same Hue with the Middle Teint, though it is
dark enough for the Shadows. The High Lights, though often very dif-
ferent from the Middle Teint, should be of a clean, friendly, working
Colour, that will, in mixing with it, produce a Teint of a clean sympa- -
thizing Hue.
The Method of painting Silks is to make out the Folds with the Shade
Teint, and then fill them up in the Lights with the Middle Teint. This
is what l call the first Lay, which should be done to our Satisfaction before
we add any other Colours; and the stiffer the Middle Teint is used, the
better the High Lights may be laid upon it. The Reflecting Teint falls ge-
nerally upon the gradating Half-Shades, and should be laid with tender
Touches, sparingly, for fear of spoiling the first Lay.
This Method of Painting answers to all the colcured Silks, as well as
Changeable, with this Differeuce only, that the plain Colours require not
so much Art in matching the Teints, as the Changeable do. The last
Part of the Work is the finishing, and strengthening the Shadows with an
obscure Teint, a little inclining to a mellowish Hue; such as will not catch
the Eye, and interrupt the Beauty of the Lights.
BLACK.
The best Ground for Black is Light-red for the Lights; and Indian Red
and a little Black for the Shadows.
The finishing Colours are, for the Lights, Black, White, and a little
Lake. The Middle Teint has less White, and more Lake and Black.


The Shade-Teint is made of an equal Quantity of Lake and Brown Pink,
with a very little Black.
The Method of painting Black is very different from that of other
Colours ; for as the principal Thing in them, is to leave their Lights clean
and brilliant, so in Black, it is to keep the Shadows clear and transparent.
Therefore we should begin with the Shade-Teint, and glaze over all the
Shadows with it. Next, lay in the darkest Shadows with Black, and a
little of the Shade-Teint, very correctly. After that, fill up the whole
Breadth of Lights with the Middle Teint only. All which should be
done exactly to the Character of the Sattin, &c. and then finisn with the
High Lights.
Here we may observe, the Ground, being Red, will bear out and sup-
port the Reds, which are used in the finishing Colours: The Lake in the
Lights takes off the cold Hue, and gives it à more beautiful Colour. If
the Shade-Teint was of any other Colour than a transparent warm Hue,
the Shadows would consequently be black and heavy ; because no other
Colours can preserve the warm Brilliancy, which is wanting in the Shadows
of the Black, like Lake and Brown Pink. Black is of a cold heavy Nature,
and always too strong for any other Colour ; therefore we should make
an Allowance in using it. There will be a few Reflects in Sattin, which
should be added as those of other Colours; but they should be made of
strong Colours, such as burnt Umber, or Brown Oker, mixt with a little
of the Shade-Teint.
Though the Grounds which I have mentioned for the Draperies, are
absolutely necessary for the principal and nearest Figures in a Picture, such
as a single Portrait, or the like; yet l do not intend them so for Figures,
which are placed more into the Picture. Such as are behind the principal
or front Figures, their Grounds should always be fainter, in proportion
to their local finishing Colours.
LINEN.
The Colours used in Linen are the same as those in White Sattin, except
the first Teint; which is made of White and Ultramarine Ashes, instead
of the Black, and mixt to a very light blueish Teint.
In


In the Dead-colouring we should take particular Care, that the Grounds
be laid very White and broad in the Lights: The Shadows are made
with Black, White, and a little Indian Red, like the Middle Teint of
White Sattin. These should be left very light and clean, in order to sup-
port the finishing Colours.
The second Painting begins with Glazing all the Lights, with a stiff Pen-
cil and fine White only, drove bare, without using any Oil : The Shadows
may be scumbled with Poppy Oil, and some of the Colour they were made
of. This is the first Lay, on which we are to follow with the finishing
Colours directly. The Middle Teint of White Sattin is the best Colour for
the general Hue of the Shadows. With this and White, in different
Degrees, we should make out all the Parts to Character, with free light
Touches, without softening. Then with a large long-pointed Pencil, and
fine White, lay the High Lights very nicely, with one Stroke. After
this comes the fine light blueish Teint, which should be mixed-light, and
laid in the tender Gradations very sparingly and lightly, without silling
them up.
Remember the first Lay should be left clear and distinct; the more it
appears, the better. It is the overmixing, and joining all the Colours toge-
ther, which spoils the Beauty of the Character; therefore it is better to let
it dry before we add the Reflects and finishing Teints.
The Method of letting the beautiful clear Colours dry, before we add
the warm, reflex, and harmonizing Teints, prevents them from mixing
,
and dirtying each other.
The principal blending Colours used in the Reflects, are the Yellow
Teint, Green Teint, and the Rose Teint ; which last is made of Lake,
Indian Red, and White. I find glazing the Pearl and Lead Colours with
White, though it seems to answer our Purpose when it is done, will cer-
tainly sink, and be lost in the Grounds on which it is laid; therefore we
should make the Dead-colouring as white as we intend the Finishing
Colours, by reason they will sink a little, in proportion to the Colour of
the Cloth, which the Glazing with pure White only will recover.





LANDSCHAPES.

THE principal Colours used in Landschapes, are,
I. Fine White.
2. Common White.
3. Fine Light Oker.
4. Brown Oker.
5. Brown Pink,
6. Burnt Umber.
7. lvory Black.
8. Prussian Blue.
9. UItramarine.
10. Terra-vert.
II. Lake.
12. Indian Red.
13. Vermillion.
14. King’s Yellow.
The Principal Teints used in Landschapes, are,
I. Light Oker and White.
2. Light Oker, Prussian, and White.
3. Light Oker and Prussian.
4. The same, darker.
5. Terra-vert and Prussian.
6. Brown Pink and Prussian,
7. Brown Pink and Brown Oker.
8. Brown Pink, Oker, and Prussian.
9. Indian Red and White.
10. lvory Black, Indian Red, and Lake.
The Colours necessary for Dead-colouring, are Common White, Light
Oker, Brown Oker, Burnt Umber, Indian Red, lvory Black, and
Prussian.






The principal Colours and Teints for painting the Sky, are fine White,
Uitramarine, Prussian, Light Oker, Vermillion, Lake, and Indian Red.
The Teints are a fine Azure, lighter Azure, Light Oker and White,
Vermillion and White, and a Teint made of White, a little Vermillion,
and some of the Light Azure.
LANDSCHAPES should be painted on a fort of tanned Leather Colour,
which is made of Brown Oker, White, and Light-red. This Colour
gives a Warmth to the Shadow Colours, and is very agreeable and proper
for Glazing.
SKETCHING, or rubbing in the Design, is the first Work of the
Picture.
This should be done with burnt Umber, drove with drying Oil, and a
little Oil of Turpentine, in a faint, slight, scumbling, free Manner,
as we shade with Indian Ink and Water ; leaving the Colour of the Cloth
for the Lights, as we do that of the Paper. Remember, in doing it, we
leave no Part of the Shadows so dark as we intend the First Lay, or Dead-
Colouring, which is to be lighter than the Finishing Colours. And though
the Foliage of the Trees is only rubbed in, with a faint sort of Scumbling,
yet the Trunks and Bodies should be in their proper Shapes, with their
Breadths of Light and Shadow. All kinds of Buildings should be done in
the same Manner, leaving the Colour of the Cloth for their Lights: The
Figures on the Fore-ground, if they are determined, should also be
sketched in the same Method, and then left to dry.
Of Dead-colouring.
Let the Firft Lay or Dead-colouring be without any bright, glaring,
or strong dark Colours; so that the Effect is made more to receive and pre-
serve the Finishing Colours, than to shew them in the First Painting.
The Sky should be done first; then all the Distances; and so work
downwards to the middle Group, and from that to the Fore-ground, and
nearest



nearest Parts. Remember all the Parts of each Group, as Trees, Buildings,
or the like, be all painted with the Group they belong to.
The greatest Secret in Dead-colouring, is to find the two Colours,
which serve for the Ground of the Shadows in general, the Sky excepted,
and the Method. of ufing them with the Lights: The first of which is the
Dark-Shade with a little Lake in it; the other Colour is only burnt Um-
ber. These should be a little changed to the natural Hue of the Objects,
and then laid and drove with drying Oil, in the same Manner as we shade
with Indian Ink, which is a scumbling kind of Glazing; and as such
they should be left ; for otherwise they will be dark and heavy, and there-
fore would be intirely spoiled for the finishing Glazing. Both these Colours
mix and sympathize agreeably with all the Lights, but should be laid
before them.
When the Landschape is designed, begin with the Sky, wnich should
be laid with a good Body of Colours, and left with a faint Resemblance of
the principal Clouds; and this we fhould do more in the Manner of Claro
Obscuro, than with Finishing Colours: The whiter it is left, the better it
will bear out and support them. The Distances should be made out faint
and obscurely with the Dark-Shade, and some of their Lights in different
Degrees; and laid so, as best to find and shew their principal Parts. As
we come more into the middle Group, we fall by Degrees into the burnt
Umber in the Shades: All the Grourds of the Trees should be laid
or rubbed in, enough only to leave an Idea of their Shapes and Shadows
faintly. The Ground of their Shadows must be clean, and lighter
than their Finishing Colours, such as will support their Character,
and seem easy to finish on.
In painting the Lights, it is better to incline more to the Middle Teint,
than to the very High Lights; and observe to leave them with a sufficient
Body of clean Colours, which will receive and preserve the Finishing
Colours the better; all which may be done with a few Teints. After this,
go over the Whole with the Sweetener very lightly, which will soften and
mix the Colours agreeably for Finishing.




Second Painting
Begin with the Sky, and lay in all the Azure and Colours of the Hori-
zon; then soften them : After that lay in the general Teint of the Clouds,
and finisn on it with the High Lights, and the other Teints that are want-
ing, with light tender Touches; then suften the Whole with the Sweetener
very lightly. Remember the Finishing of the Sky should be done all at
once Painting, because the tender Character of the Clouds will not do so
well as when the Whole is wet. Observe, that the stiffer the Azure and
Colours of the Horizon are laid, the better the Clouds may be painted
upon them.
The greatest Distances are chiessy made with the Colour of the Sky ;
and as they grow nearer and darker, we should glaze and scumble the Parts
very thin, with such glazing Shadow-Colours as come nearest to the
general Hue of the Group the Objects are in : This Glazing should be
understood of a darkish Hue, and that the First Painting or Dead-colour
should be seen through it distinctly. On this Lay or Ground we should
add the Finishing Colours.
Now supposing this glazed Ground is properly adapted to the Object
and Place, I think then it will be easy to find the other Colours which
are wanted for the Lights and Finissiings of the same. But in laying thein,
we must take great Care that we do not spoil the Glazing; therefore we
should be very exact in making those Colours on the Pallet, and then be
sure to lay them with light free Touches.
Before I proceed any farther, it will be proper to say something of the
most useful glazing Colours.
Lake, Terra-vert, Prussian, and Brown Pink, are the four principal.
The more we manage them like Indian Ink, and the more distinctly we
leave them, the better their transparent Beauty will stand and appear, pro-
vided we do it with good drying Oil. After these four glazing Colours,
burnt Umber is a very good glazing warm Brown, and of great Use in
the broken Grounds and nearest Parts; but the most agreeable Colour for
the




the darkest Shadows, is the dark Shade improved with Lake. It is a fine
warm Shade, when it is drove with drying Oil; No Colour in the World
is so sweet and sympathizing; it mixes harmonioussy with all the Lights,
as well as the Shadows, and is a charming Colour in the Trunks and
Bodies of Trees, and in all kind of Buildings.
We should make out all the Ground of the Objects with such glazing
Shadow-Colours, as seem nearest to the natural Hue of the Object, in
that Situation: But as the principal glazing Colours themselves are often
too strong and glaring, they should therefore be a little changed, and
softened with such Colours as are of a near Resemblance to themselves
and the Objects: Thus, ifit is in the Distances, the Terra-vert and Azure,
which are their principal glazing Colours, may be improved and made
lighter with some of the Sky Teints : And as the Distances come nearer,
with the Purple. As we get more into the middle Group, the Terra-
vert and Prussian may be changed with some of the Green Teiats, such
as are made without White; for White is the Destruction of all glazing
Colours. As we approach the first Group, there is less Occasion for change-
ing them; but the Fore-ground and its Objects require all the Strength
and Force of Glazing which the Colours are capable of producing.
After this glazing Ground, we should follow with strengthening the
same in the Shadows and darkest Places, in such Manner as will seem
easy to finish; which is the First Lay of the Second Painting:
The Colours that come next for Finishing, are in the Degree of Middie
Teints: These should be carefully laid over the greatest Breadth of Lights,
in such Manner as not to spoil and cover too much of the Glazing. Do it
with a good Body of the Colour, as stiff as the Pencil can agreeably
manage to character. Remember, the Colours of the Middle Teint should
be of a clean beautiful Hue. According to these Methods, l think it will
be easy to finisn all the Second Painting as we work down, from the Skys
through the middle Group. As we come to the first Group, where all the
Objects should appear perfectly finisned, we should finish their under or
most distant Parts, before we paint any of the other which appear nearer.
Observe this Method dovn to the last and nearest Objects of the Picture.;
and where it so happens, that Painting one Tree over another does





not please, forbear the second, until the first is dry. Thin near Trees, of
different Colours, will do better, if we let the under Parts dry before we
add the Finishing Colours.
The Third and Last Painting-
If Oiling is necessary, lay the least Quantity that can be; which should
be done with a Stump-tool, or Pencil, proportioned to the Place that is to be
oiled, so that we may oil no more than is wanted : Then wipe the whole
Place that is oiled, with a Peice of Silk Handkerchief: By this Method, we
leave no more Oil than is proper for our Purpose.
When we are going to finisn any Objects, we should remember to use
a great Variety of Teints, very near of the same Colour; but most of all,
when we are finishing Trees: This gives a Richnefs to the Colouring, and
produces Harmony. I find by Experience the Greens will fade, and grow
darker; therefore it is highly necessary to improve and force them, by
exaggerating the Lights, and making an Allowance in using them so much
the lighter: For the same Reason, we should take great Care that we ldo
not overcharge and spoil the Beauty of the Glazing; for if we do, it will
be dull and heavy, and therefore will consequently grow darker.
The Method for Painting near Trees, is to make the First Lay very
near to Nature, though not quite so dark, but more in the Degree of a
Middle Teint, and follow it with strengthening the Shadows; then the
Middle Teints; and last of all, lay the High Lights and Finishing Colours:
But all this cannot be done as it should be at once Painting. Therefore,
the best Way is to do no more than the First Lay with the faint Shadows,
and leave it to dry.
Then begin with improving the Middle Teints and Shadows; and let
them dry.
The Third and Last Workis adding all the Lights and Finishing Colours,
in the best manner we are able. This Method of leaving the first
and second Part to dry separately not only makes the whole much easier
and more agreeable, but leaves the Colours in the greatest Perfection ;




because most of the Work may be. done with Scumbling and Glazing,
and some Parts without Oiling. The Lights also may be laid with a
better Body of Colour, which will not be mixed and spoiied with the wvet
Ground: What I have said of Trees, answers the same to all Kinds of
Shrubs and Bushes.
The Figures in a Landschape are the last Work of the Picture ; those in
the Fore-ground should be done first, and those in the Distances next : For
after the Figures in the first and farthest Group are painted, I think it will
be much easier to find the Proportions of those in the middle Parts of the
Picture. And we should observe, that the Shadows of the Figures should
be of the same Hue or Colour with those of the Group, or Place they
are in.





































INTRODUCTION.
WE are much obliged to the Learned in the Mathematicks,



who in the Beginning of this Century made such great Im-

provements in the Principles of Perspective, and who have

done their utmost to render them useful : But for want of

 
understanding the Art of Painting, and the Practice of Design-
ing, they are intelligible only to those Readers who have a sufficient Fund
of Geometry to comprehend all their Schemes and Examples. They
found that all Planes were alike in Geometry ; and followed their geo-
metrical Genius, which led them into such Constructions as they thought
would explain their Properties in general, and, as they said, give a new
Turn to Perspective. Indeed, their Schemes are so intricate, that none
but those, who are well acquainted with the Mathematicks, can under-
stand them. Dr. Taylor neglected the Horizontal Plane; and in his
Book made no Difference between that Plane and any other whatsoever.
Here it is that l am quite of the reverse Opinion to that learned Gentle-
man, and believe, that the Term-of Horizontal Line should confine our
Notions to the horizontal Plane: And I think, that That Plane, which
represents the Earth on which we live, enjoys some particular Privileges,
which makes the Figures in it more easy and more convenient to be
described, notwithstanding all Planes are alike in Geometry : For which
Reason
s


PERSPECTIVE.

Reason I have followed Nature, and have united the old and new Prin-
ciples: And, believing that Objects are best understood fivin their natural
Appearance, I have given the Horizontal Plane to all my Woik, with
the Vanishing Line, in its proper Position. Here I found it absolutely
necessary to confider the Subject in a Manner as yet unattempted, and
which should require no mathematical Knowlege to understand it. TEis
obliged me to find one general Method for the whole Work : And find-
ing the Principles few and simple upon which the Art depends, and that
there are no more than three Planes, and six different Lines, required to-
be understood, in order to represent any Ohject whatsoever ; l composed
such a Variety of Objects, as l conceived would draw on the Knowiege
of Perspective; and which, I think, cannot fail of rendering the useful
Principles of this Art general and intelligible.
Most Gentlemen that have studied the Mathematicks, whom I have
talked with on Perspective, are for having a mathematical Demonstration
of all the lineal Parts of a Picture; and will not allow that any thing
can be right, but what is done according to the strictest Rules: And Dr.
Taylor says, a Painter ought to govern himself intirely by the Rules of
Perspective, and not to take any Liberties whatsoever. I confess l am of
their Opinion, and believe they are most certainly right, provided the
Picture was only the Projection of any of the five Solids. Were we
to follow the Rules, in projecting the Base and Capital of a Column, we
should find those useless Operations too tedious and difficult for human
Patiencé. And how we are to represent all Sorts of Objects according to.
the Rules of Perspective, is to me as surprising as impossible.
A Painter is not to be confined strictly to the Rules of Perspective ; but
to make them subservient to his Purposes. Nothing should tie up his
Hands: He should not have his Genius imprisoned; but be at Liberty to
express his Idea, like Gyofto, with one Stroke of his Pencil ; and, as
Fresnoy says, let the Compasses be ratber in his Eyes than bis Hands : Thete
let him measure distinctly every Object by Comparison; which is the
principal Talent of a Painter. If he is well acquainted with the Prin-
ciples of his Art, he will not stop at the dry Rules of Geometry, wlailst
his Fancy is sketching all the principal Parts of the l’icture : Ile will









preceed with the Whole; and then, after the Design is fixed, correct such
Parts as are requisite with the Rules of Perspective.
I design not to trouble the Reader with a Multitude of Examples; but
to explain the general Rules of Perspective in such a manner as may be
intelligible to him. All my Schemes are limited to six Plates only ; which
are the Suliject of the six different Sorts of Lines that represent all Objects
whatsoever; and which are adapted to such Objects as are easy to be
anderstood. And though I design to take the Reader out of the common
Road, I will not lead hiin any round-about tedious Bye-ways, as is often
the Case. I shall conduct him directly into some beautiful Garden, where
he may entertain himself with a pleasing Variety of Objects, as Buildings,
Aventies, Walks, and Visto’s, terminated with agreeable Views of distant
Prospects; and, that he may enjoy them to his Wish, I have intermixed
no Figures that might interrupt or divide his Attention.






PLATE I FIGURE I.
N order to explain the general Rules of Perspective, let us suppose
Twe see the real Objects; as Part of a Garden, with some distant
Prospects; and, between them and the Spectator’s Eye, let us imagine a
transparent Plane, as Glass, to be placed perpendicularly on the Ground,
at the nearest Part of the Objects, on or thro’ which Plane we see their
Representations : And it is with the Assistance of this imaginary Plane
that we are to understand the Principles, and are supposed to produee the
perspective Projection or Representation.
The Seat, or Line, on which this Plane stands, is called the Base-Line,
as ZY.
The Line HI, at the Horizon, is called the Horizontal Line. The
Height or Distance this Line is from the Base-Line, is always equal to
the Height of the Eye of the Spectator, and is always drawn parallel to
the Base-Line.
The




The Distance which we are from the imaginary Plane, when at the
Station where we propose to take the Perspective View, is the Distance
of the Picture,
The Point of Sight is the principal Point in a Picture. It is that Point,
where a Line from the Spectator’s Eye cuts the imaginary Plane at right
Angles; and which I always distinguisn with the Letter S.
The Line SO, is equal to the Distance of the Picture, and cuts the
Horizontal Line at right Angles, as the principal Ray does the imaginary
Plane : Therefore O is the Eye-point ; because it represents the Eye
transferred from its first Position, or Point of View, to the imaginary
Plane.
The next thing we are to consider is the Ground-Plane.
The Ground-Plane is that Part which is below the Base-Line Zy : lt
is the Plane whereon the Plans of the geometrical or original Objects are
drawn.
Though we are obliged to have the Ground-Plane below the Base-
Line, yet the Parts which are in it will be produced by the Rules above
it, and, as it were, beyond it, at a Distance in a Perspective Proportion,
as those in the Ground-Plane are distant from the Base-Line.
We should remember, that, in order to represent any Objects in Per-
spective, it is necessary that we understand their geometrical Plan, Eleva-
tion, Profile, and Section, before we attempt the Perspective Projection.
In the Beginning of the Work, we should first draw the Base-Line :
Then asfume a Point for the Point of Sight, and draw the Horizontal
Line through it.
Make SO equal to the Distance of the Picture, and design the geo-
metrical Plan of the Object in the Ground-Plane.
Here the geometrical or original Object is the Point A: The Repre-
sentation of which is required to be found in the imaginary Plane or
Picture.





First draw a Line from the given Point, to cut the Base-Line in any
Direction at Pleafure, as AB : Parallel to that draw a Line from the Eye-
point to cut the Horizontal Line, which gives the Vanishing Point for the
Representation of the Line AB. Here the Line OS is parallel to the
Line AB; therefore S will be the Vanishing Point. Draw the Lines BS
and AO, the Intersection of which is a, the Representation sought. The
Linc Ba is also the Representation of its Original BA.
We may find the Representation of the Seat or Place where the Pine-
tree grows, without using the Original in the Ground-Plane, thus :
Bring down the Distance 8O to the Horizontal Line, as SD; and bring
up BA to the Base-Line, as BC; which makes BC and SD parallel :
then a Line drawn from Cto D will cut the Line BS in a: Therefore,
if we suppose the imaginary Plane to be the Picture, and having assumed
the Line BS, in which we suppose the Pine-tree, make BC, on the
Bottom of the Picture, equal to the Distance we suppose or know the Tree
is beyond the imaginary Plane (which Distance is commonly called the
required Distance), then the Line CD will intersect BS; which gives the
Representation sought.
S is the Vanisning Point of the original Line AB; because the Line AB
vanissies in that Poift.
The Representation a, depends on the Parallelism of the Lines OS and
AB: For were they parallel in any other Direction, they would then project
the Point a, in the very same Place.
Nowv after this Explanation of the First Figure, we should remember,
that the imaginary Plane is to be understood and called the Picture.
Fi6. 2. Let a, 6, c, d, e, be five original Points given in the Ground-
Planc: To find their Representations.
ZY is the Base-Lipe, DV the Horizontal Line, 8 the Point of Sight,
and 80 the Distance of the Picture.
Instead of drawing the Lines from the Points in any Direction, we
may draw two parallel Lines thro four of the Points to the Base-Line, as







cg, and df; which will shorten the Work : Then draw their Parallel
OV, from the Eye-point O, to cut the Horizontal Line, which will give
the Vanishiing Point V: DrawgV and ƒV, and intersect them with the
Rays 8O, CO, and dO, which give the Representations 1,2,3,4. The
Points a, and e, are in a Line that is parallel to the Base-Line; the
Representation of which must be parallel to the Base-Line also ; which
being intersected by the Ray eO, gives the Point 5. Then will the
Points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, be the Representation of the original Points a,6, c, d,e,
the Projection sought.
We may find their Representation, without using the Ground-Plane,
thus: Bring down the Distance of the Vanishing Point V to the Hori-
zontal Line, as v, and bring up the Lines côg, and daf; to the Basc-
Line ; then draw Lines from them to the Point v, which will intersect the
Lines gV, and ƒV, in the same Points, as may be seen by the Line vh.
All Circles and curve-lined Figures are represented by finding several
Points in them, and then joining them neatly by Hand. Therefore we
should assume in the original Lines only so many Points as are absolutely
necessary, and in such manner as may be easy for the Work of the Pro-
jection.
FIG. 3. Is the Method of dividing the Visual Line ES, into any
Number of Parts, as the Trees, &c.
Let ZY be the Base-Line, S the Point of Sight, SO the Distance of the
Picture, and SD that Distance brought to the Horizontal Line; and let
the Line ES be required to be divided into a given Number of Parts
equal to FE.
First, bring up the given Space FE to the Base-Line, as IE, and draw
the Line 1D, which intersects ES, in the Point 2, or the Seat of the first
Tree. Instead of continuing the Divisions on the Base-Line, we may
draw aLine from 1, the first Division, to the Point of Sight, and by making
the Line 2 3, parallel to E1, we have a new Scale of the Space, at its
Place in the Picture ; therefore all the rest are found by this Repetition.




PLATE II FIG. 4.
ALL Lines that interfect or cut the Picture at right Angles, are
called direct Lines; which Lines will vanish in the Point of Sight:
Therefore we see Rows of Trees, or the like, which are in parallel Lines,
contract themselves, and seem to grow more and more narrow, the far-
ther they are extended froin the Eye.
The Representations of direct Lines are called Visual Lines or Rays.
Here the Lines AB, and ƒg, are direct Lines, whose Representations
are the Visuals BS and g S, which vanish in the Point of Sight, as do also
both the green Walls, the Walk, and the Sides of the Buildings that are
parallel to them. The Side of the Building at l has its Parts, as the Base
and Frize, parallel to the Base-Line: But those in the Side where the
Windows are, and which are perpendicular to the first, vanish in the
Point of Sight. The same holds with respect to the Pavilion.
FiG. 5. ZY is the Base-Line, S the Point of Sight, DE the Horizon-
tal Line, and SO the Distance of the Picture : a, 6,c, d, e, f,g, b, are
directLines, the Representations of which vanisn in S, the Point of Sight.
In order to understand the Nature of the generating Lines and Angles,
and the Distance of the Picture being placed above the Horizontal Line;
Suppose they were turned or lifted upon their Axis, the Vanishing Line
DE, till the Eye-point O is directly opposite to the Point of Sight; then
they would be in a visual Plane, which passes from the Spectator’s Eye,
parallel to the Ground-Plane: The Intersection of which Plane with the
imaginary Plane or Picture is the Vanishing Line of that Plane, or Hori-
zontal Line.
Lines which are dravn from the Exe-point to the Horizontal Line,
producing the Vanishing Points, are called generating Lines. They are
also the Parallels of original Lines. In the first Figure, Plate 1. OS is





the Parallel of the Line AB. In the second, OV is the Parallel of the
Lines cg and df. In the third, the principal Ray is the Parallel of the
Line FE. And in the fourth Figure, Plate Il. it is the same to the Lines
Ab, and fg.
The Generating Line OE, being parallel to the Diagonal eL, gives E
the vanishing Point of that Line: And Dis the Vanishing Point of the other
Diagonal dK. The Line OP, is also the Parallel of the original Line le.
Therefore Pis the Vanishing Point of that Line.
The Lines that generate the Vanishing Points of two original Lines,
make the same Angle at the Spectator’s Eye, or Eye Point, as the original
Lines do with each other.
Here the Generating Angle SOE is equal to that of dLe, and produces
that of SLE. And the Angle DOS is equal to that of dKe, and pro-
duces that of DKS. The Angle POS is also equal to that of elf, and pro¬
duces the Angle PIS.
lf we consider the Plane of the Picture as a Ceiling, these Objects which
are laid on the Ground, will then appear perpendicular to the Plane of the
Ceiling. This fort of Perspective is easy, because the Representation of
Objects which are parallel to the Plane of the Ceiling, are similar to their
Originals; and therefore will retain their geometrical Forms.

PLATE III.
LL Representations of Objects parallel to the Picture, are parallel
4 to its Original. Therefore those Lines that are parallel to the
Picture have no Vanissiing Points; because the original Lines, which should
produce the Parallel, are also parallel to the Picture.
Lines that are parallel to the Picture, are called Transverse Lines.











FiG. 6. ZY is the Base-Line, Hl the Horizontal Line, S the Point
of Sight, and SD the Distance of the Picture in the Horizontal Line,
which is a Point just behind the Tree.
In this Picture all the Objects, but the approaching Walk, and the green
Wall, are parallel to the Picture. Here l have given the Plans of the four
Trees, and the Grafs-plot, and BZ, the Distance the Wall is from the
Picture ; which Distance is found by the Intersection of a Line from B.
to the Point D, and the Visual ZS, as A in the Base-Line of the Wall.
Make n6, equal to nm, and draw the Vifual nS. Intersect that with.
the Line D6, which will give the Corner of the Grass-plot, C3, is the
Distance the Trees are from the Picture : The Intersection of the Line
SD and the Visual 3S, will give the Representation of the Seat of the
Tree, whose Plan is C; through which Point draw a Line parallel to the
Rcaae, in which te Line will be the Seat of four Trees, and the End of
the green Wall. The rest of this Figure needs no Explication.
Fi6. 7. My is the Base-Line, S is the Point of Sight, SD the Hori-
zontal Line and Distance of the Picture.
Planes that are perpendicular to the Horizontal Plane, are called vertical
Planes. Therefore the imaginary Plane or Picture is a vertical Plane,
whose Intersection with the Ground Plane is the Base-Line. The Objects,
whose Sides are MNRD, are in the Plane of the Picture;, and those of A
and B are in a Plane parallel to the Picture. The Line OG, is the Vanish-
ing Line of a vertical Plane, which cuts the Picture in that Direction.
The Distance of any Vanishing Line, which passes through the Point of
Sight is equal to the Distance of the Picture ; therefore GS, and OS, are
equal to SD.
In order to project the Object E, draw the Visual fS for thg upper Side.
Then draw the two Diagonals NO, and fG, and the Sidehl, which will
complete the whole Square. b in the Plane of the Picture, is the geome-
trical of a, the End of the Beam.
In




In this seventh Figure it is obvious, after the Vanishing Lines, their
Centers, and Distances are fixed, that the Rules for drawing the Appcar-
ance of Objects upon the vertical or perpendicular Planc, are the sanie as
those for representing them on the Horizontal Plane; which Rules will
answer the same to inclined Planes.
The Line which passes through OL, is the Vanishiing Line of an inelined
Plane, which inclines to the Picture in the Direction of the Line DO, and
OL is the Distance of that Vanisning Line, it being the Length of DO;
which last is the Parallel of the inclined Plane. More will be said on this
Subject, when we come to the inclined Plane.








PLATE IV. FIG. 8.
yY is the Base-Line, HI the horizontal Line, S the Point of Sight,
& and SO the principal Ray, or Distance of the Picture.
The two direct Lines CA, and KL are Part of the Originals, whose
visual Lines As and LS terminate this agreeable Walk. My Design
in this Picture, is chiefly to shew the Representation of a Line, which is
perpendicular to the Ground Plane, whose original Seat is C; the Pro-
jection of which is the Intersection of the Visual AS, and the Ray CO,
as à.
The Object which I have made choice of for the perpendicular Line,
is the Fust of the Gothic Column; the Axis of which is next to be
demonstrated.
Let AB, in the Plane of the Picture, be the given Height of the per-
pendicular Line, then will the Visual BS determine the Top. And a
Line drawn from the Seat a, perpendicular to the Base-Line, gives the
Axis of the Column, the Representation sought.
Tle Reprefentation is in aVisual Plane, which passes from the Line
AB, through the Column, the Face of the green Wall, and vanishes in










S the Visual Point. This Visual Plane is also a vertical Plane, because it
is in à perpendicular Direction. There is also a perpendicular Plane, which
passes through the Axes of the Yews, or Cone Trees, in which are found
their Heights.  Their Seats may be found, as FiG. 3, in, the First Plate.
The Situation of the Buildings is parallel to the Picture, which may be
observed by their parallel Parts corresponding with the Base-Line.
Fig. 9. ZY is the Base-Line, S the Point of Sight, DE the Hori-
zontal Line, SO the Distance of the Picture, GO is the Vanishing Line of
the vertical Plane, and SD is its Distance, placed perpendicular to it.
All thefe Objects are in a perpendicular Position to the Horizontal.
Plane; therefore all their Sides are in perpendicular or vertical Planes.
The Figure A is the Representation of a Cube, which has its nearest Side
in the Plane of the Picture ; the Perspective of the upper Face, in the
Horizontal Plane, is shewn by the Visuals and the Diagonals from D and
E, in the Vanishing Line of that Plane.
The Projection of the Side in the Vertical Plane, is also shewn by the
Visuals and Diagonals G4, and Of. Here l have made the double Pro-
ection to this Cube, only to fhew how exactly alike the Principles are to
both the Planes; which will appear more, if we turn the Paper, so that
the Vanishing Line GO, be in the Horizontal Position; then the Horizontal
Scheme will be changed to the Vertical, and consequently appear so.
The Pillar E, has that and its opposite Side parallel to the Plane of the
Picture. But the other Sides are in vertical Planes, which vanisn in the
Visual Point. The Plan is shewn. by the Diagonal to E. It is obvious
from this Figure, that all Objects, which are parallel to the Picture, can-
not alter nor change their Shapes; for if we suppose Lines continued from
all the Parts to the Vanishing Point, and that they were cut by a Plane in
a vertical and-paralhed Direction, to the Picture ; yet then every Section
vould retain the original Form of the Side E.
The Pillar B, placed obliquely with the Base-Line, has its nearest Angle
in the Plane of the Picture ; the Vanishing Points are produced by the





Generating Lines, which make the rig, Angle at the Eye Point, as DOE,


the Representation of which is DhE, and DLE. The Side B, is in a
vertical Plane that passes through the Line Lh, and vanishes in the Point
E. The other Side e, is in the Plane hl.D, and therefore vanishes in the
Point D. In order to project the Bottoin, bring down the Distance of the
Vanishing Point E to the Vanishing Line, as e. Make hf; equal to the
Side, and draw fe, which gives the Side h6; draw a Line from 6, paral-
lel to the Base-Line, to intersect hD, which gives the other Side: But if
the Vanishing Points were not at equal Distance from the Point of Sight,
which is here the Vanisning Point of the Diagonal, then it would be
necessary to draw Lines from 6 to D, and from E through 7 which

would give the other Side.
The triangular Pillar C, has its nearest Angle in the Plane of the Picture,
and its Plan in the Ground Plane; the Projection of which is found by
bringing the Sides to the Base-Line, as 12 and 13. Draw 2D, which
gives the Side Mthe Visual Line ; d is the Distance of D brought dovn
to the Horizontal Line; draw 3d which gives the other Side: Then raise
the Sides, and finifh the Top. The Side C is in a Vertical and Visual
Plane, the Side l vanifhies in the Point D.
The. nearest Parts of Objects will, in their Representations, be farthest
from the Vanishing Line of the Horizontal Plane; and if that Vanishing
Line was in the Middle, their Tops and Bottoms would then be exactly
similar, as may be understood by these Ohjects.
I imagine, from the Principles which I have already laid down, the
Reader will be inclined to believe, that the Representation of Objects
may be projected without the Ground Plane. For if we understand the
Original, why should we not use the same Rules at the Part of the Object
in the Picture, where the Projection is required, as if it was below the
Bottom of the Picture: Which Method would certainly shorten the
Work, and make it more easy.








PLATE V. FIG. 10.
ZY ie tlie Base Line, PI the Horizontal Line, S the Point of Sight,
SO the Distance of the Picture, and AB Part of an original
oblique Line.
All tlie Objects in this Picture are represented to the Eye obliquely;
not one Visual Line is to be found in the Work, except the principal Ray.
The Vanishing Points vary in their Distances from the Point of Sight,
the Situation of the Wall is governed by the original Line AB, the Paral-
lel of which is OV and PO is perpendicular to it. This makes the
Generating Angle POV 9o Degrees ; which determines the End of the
Wall to be square.
In order to find the Perspective of the Wall, we should first find the
Representation of the Plan, from which we raise the Elevations : The
Whole being governed by two Vanishing Points, with their Distances
brought to the Vanishing Line, makes it very easy. The Seat of the Trees
is sound as that in Figure 3. Plate I. by making their Distance or Space
from the firstTree, parallel to the Base-Line; and dividing the Line AP,
as ES, in that Figure; but reinember it shouldbe with the Distance of the
Vanishing Point P.
The Obelisk at P, being placed with the Walks, has their Vanishing
Points.
The Corner of the Building, at a, is square, though it appears an
obtuse Angle, which is owing to the little Distance of the Picture. For
had the Point Pbeen at a much greater Distance, the Obliquity of the
Line PZ, would appear more to the Satisfaction of the Eye.
Fig. 11. Here AZ is the Base-Line, PV the Horizontal Line, S the
Point of Sight, and SO the Distance of the Picture.
 








I design to begin with the Projection of the Wall, and after that, of the
Floor, then the Object RT, and so finisn with the Moulding above the
Wall.
The Generating Angle POV is a right Angle; therefore those of the
Wall will be square.
We should first make the Corner cl, then the Side E, and next that of
S. Assume the Corner XY, and draw Lines from it to P, to intersect those
of cV and IV, which will give the Side M, and make the Side Y, which
finishes the Wall.
The Line Oh, divides the Angle POV equally, and ch is its Repre-
sentation. h is the Vanishing Point of Lines that intersect the Wall, as
Diagonals do the Side of a Square. Let Ac be the Diagonal of the first
Square : DraW AV and Ap intersect them with Pe and Ve, which give
the Square Abcd, the next Diagonal is be. By this Repitition it is eafy
to see how the whole Floor is projected.
I design the Corner f of the Object RT, to be exactly over the Point g
g.
and that its Side opposite to T, should touch the Wall.
Let Ae in the Plane of the Picture, be the given Height of the Corner
f; therefore that Corner is the Intersection of eV, and a perpendicular
from g.
The Side next the Wall, and its opposite T, are in a vertical Plane,
the Vanishing Line of which is VH, because it passes through the Point
V in that Direction. And V is the Vanishing Point of the common
Intersection of the vertical and Horizontal Planes. E is the Distance of
the Vanishing Point V brought down to the Horizontal Line, the Place
where we should make the original Angle of Inclination, as VEH, which
is the Angle the Object is supposed to make with the Floor. And H is
the Vanishing Point of the Inclination.
lf from the Point E we draw a Line perpendicular to HE, to cut the
Vanishing Line HV, then will that Point be the Vanishing Point of Lines





perpendicular to the Side R. The Perpendicular at 3 gives the Length of
3f. Draw all the Sides to their Vanishing Points, which finish the Repre-
fentation.
The mosl exact and casiest Method of projecting Mouldings in Archi-
tecture, is to make the geometrical Profile at its Place in the Picture, which
I design to stiew by the Projection of these three Mouldings, that represent
a fort of Cornice.
Let IKL be the geometrical Profile of the Mouldings, placed at the
Top of the Wall, to the Line cL. Draw a Line from the Vanishing
Point of the Diagonal h, through L, cut that with a Line from P, through
K, the Intersection of which is N, the Extremity of the Projection. By
repeating this Method at every Point of the Profile, down to the Bottom
I, we shall have the exact Representation in a vertical Plane, which passes
through the Angle or Mitre Joint. When this Projection of the Mitre
Joint is found, we hane nothing more to do, but to continue the Lines
of the Sides, in their proper Direction.



PLATE VI.

THIS Picture is the Representation of a large Block of Stone,
whose Angles are square, like those. a Cube. It stands on one of
its Edges on the Horizontal Plane, and is supported by another Block. The
Line CP, is the Seat of the Edge it stands on; and CV is the Seat of
the Side R. Its Angle of Inclination with the Horizontal Plane is equal to
the Angle VEH. Therefore H is the Vanishing Point of its Inclination.
Fi6. 12. Let ZY be the Base-Line, PE the Horizontal Line, S the
Point of Sight, S0 the Distance of the Picture, and P the Vanishing
Point of the Edge the Block stands on.
First we must find V the Vanishing Point of Lines that are perpendi-
cular to the Point P; thus: Draw a Line from P to the Eye-point O,
and




and make OV perpendicular to the Line OP, which gives the Vanishing
Point V: Then will V be the Vanishing Point of the Seat of the Side R;
which Side is in a vertical Plane, whose Vanishing Line passes thro V in
that Direction : Therefore V is the Vanishing Point of the ccinnion Inter-
section of the Vertical and Horizontal Planes. Draw the Vanishing Line
GH; then will V be its Center, and Vo its Distance. Make VE per-
pendicular to the Vanishing Line GH, and equal to its Distance VO:
Then at the Point E make the geometrical Angle of Inclination, as VEH,
which gives H the Vanishing Point of the Inclination. Draw EG per-
pendicular to EH, which makes G in that Vanishing Line the Vanishing
Point of Lines perpendicular to H. Next draw the Vanishing Line PH,
and make SD parallel to it, and equal to the Distance of the Picture ;
then, from the Point of Sight, draw a Line to cut the Vanishing Line
PH at right Angles ; which gives l the Center, and ID the Distance,
of that Vanishing Line.
Here it is obvious in this Projection, that the Lines PH, GH, and PG,
are the three Vanishing Lines of the several Faces of a Figure, which con-
tain a solid right Angle.
It is also very plain, that the Line EH, according to thefe Rules, must
be the geometrical of the original inclined Plane : Therefore, if we make
Eb equal to the End or Thickness of the Block, then will a, be the
Seat of b, as on the Horizontal Plane.
To proceed with the Projection : Make AB in the Plane of the Picture
equal to ab; then will the Point B be the nearest Angle of the Block.
Next we should make IK equal to ID, and draw the Lines PK, and
HK, that generate a square Angle, which is equally divided by the Line
Ke. Make BL equal to the Length of the Block, and parallel to the
Vanishing Line PH. Draw a Line from L to h, the Distance of P;
which will give the Side Bn. Draw nH, and the Diagonal Be, and
thro’ their Intersections draw a Line from P, which gives the upper Side.
Next draw the Line BG, which gives BC, the nearest Edge; and draw
the Lines BP, CP, and BH, CH; then the Line nG, and one from the
Angle above S to G, will finisn the whole Representation, or Projection of
ghe Block.





I have endeavoured to shew, in the Progress. of all the Schemes, chat
the Principles, on which the whole Art depends, are so simple, that it is
obvious the Method is general to all Planes alike.
First, of the Horizontal Plane. The Distance of the Picture inust be
placed from the Center, or Point of Sight, perpendicular to its Vanishing
Line, before we can make the generating Angies, which give the Vanish-
ing Points : Then we may bring down their Distances to the Horizontal
Line, provided the Dimensions of the Original are brought parallel to,
them ; as I have shewn in the Course of the Work.
Secondly, of the Vertical Plane. The Distance of the Vanishing Line-
is placed perpendicular to it; and from the Eye-point proceed the gene-
rating Lines that give the Vanishing Points : The Distance of which are
used and brought to the Vanishing Line in the same manner as those of
the Horizontal Plane.
And the Inclined Plane has its Distance placed perpendicular to the
Vanisning Line; and from the Eye-point proceed the generating Lines
and Angles, which produce the Vanishing Points, and which are also
brought to the Vanishing Line, and used as those of the Horizontal.
The Method of finding the Center of a Vanishing Line, is, only to draw
a Line from the Point of Sight, to cut or intersect the Vanishing Line at
right Angles; which Intersection will be the Center of that Vanishing
Line. The general Rule for finding the Distance of a Vanishing Line, is,
always to make the Distance of the Picture from the Point of Sight parallel,
to that Vanishing Line, and to draw a Line from that, to the Center of the
Vanishing Line, which will be the Distance of that Vanishing Line, as DI.
is to the Vanishing Line PH, or OV to that of GH.
To find the perspective Representation of Circles, we are obliged to
make a Plan of the Circle, or Part of the Plan, by adding such Lines to
it, as may easily be projected, and leave a clear Idea of the required,
Circle.
Fro. 13. Let S be the Point of Sight, D and E the Points of Distance,
and KLMN the Scheme of the Plan.









The most exact and easiest Method, is, to inclose the Circle with a
Square, and then make the two Diameters and Diagonals, which give the
eight required Points. But instead of drawing Lines thro the Points of
the Diagonals parallel to the Sides of the Square, l make them parallel
to the Diagonals : This Method gives the same Points, with the Lines
nearer to the Circle than can be drawn by any other Method whatsoever.
The rest of the Figure needs no Demonstration.
Fi6. 14. Shews the Method of making the Plan of the Circles, in
order to find the perspective Representation of the Torus ; which I have
done according to my Method, juft shewn, of drawing Circles; and
which may be understood very easily, at Sight of this Figure.
The Perspective of the Torus seems to be a Circle contained in four
Lines, which are nearer or farther distant from each other, according to
the Situation of the Eye : Two of which are perpendicular to the Hori-
zontal Plane: These give the greatest Breadth of the Torus ; the other twe
are parallel to that Plane, and give the Height and Depth: The one is
the upper and farthest Part of the Circle, the other the nearest and bottom
Part of the Torus. The two perpendicular Lines proceed from the Ex-
tremity of the Circle in the Plan, which are found from the Projection of
the two eight opposite Parts : Those that give the Height and Depth are
governed by the Perspective Section of the Base, which is in the Vertical
Plane.
Fio. 15. Is the Diagonal Scale ; which is of universal Use for tranf-
ferring all Sorts of Defigns to the greatest Exactness, and so easy to under-
stand, that one Demonstration is sufficient for every Artist; who will, I
imagine, find no manner of Difficulty in applying it to Practice. Suppose
AB to represent one Foot in the Design which we are to work from, and
AC to be the intended Length of one Foot in that which we are going
to make.
The Method is, first to take the Dimensions of the Part we propose to
begin with; then to place the Compasses to the Base-Line of the Scale,










and find what it is in the Line DB; then open them to that in-the
Line DC, which will be the required Length.
Thus the Reprefentation is found by Feet and Inches ; because the
Base-Line DA contains twelve. Parts, which consequently divide the
Length AB, and AC, on the Lines DE, and DC, into that Number.
By this Method we may make the Scale to any Proportion : And as it
is the Business of every Artist to find a proper Scale for his Purpose, there--
fore Painters are not obliged to use always such-Scales as the Work was.
wrought to.
Suppose we draw the Pedestal without using the Method of Feet
and Inches : Divide the whole Height into any convenient Number
of equal Parts, and let one of those be for the Scale: Then divide
the Height we intend to make the Pedestal of, in the same manner, and
apply them to the Method of the Scale ; which will answer our Purpose
as well. It is sometimes necessary, in copying, to divide the Original into
a Number of Squares, and then divide the Cloth for the Copy the same.
lf in one of the Squares at the Corner of the Cloth we make the Scale
according to this Method, we may use them as we did the Scale of Feet
and Inches.
The Number in the Base of the Scale is at our Pleasure. Remember
to make the Squares very large; for none but Novices make them
otherwise.
Fi6. 16. Is a Method which I have often found to be of great Use,,
and very easy to practise, when we are à little used to.it.
Suppose the Line Aa, to be the Height of any Design we have to work
from; and the Line Bb,the intended Height of that which we are going
to make. Draw the Base CE, then place the Design perpendicular to it as
Aa, Bb, &c. and draw a Line from b through a, to cut the Base, which
will give the Center C.










If the Line Aa, be divided into any Number of Parts, and we draw
Lines from the Center Cthrough them, to cut the LineBb, then will they
divide the Line Bb in the same Manner exactly.
Therefore if the Line Aa, was the Axis of à Column and Entablature,
the same may be transferred to the Height we would have it, by having
a small Nail in the Center, and a fine Thread, such as the Wig-makers
weave with, and only strain the same over the Parts in Aa, to Bb, which
will give the required Dimensions.
In the same Manner we may have all the Breadths, by applying them-
to the Line Aa, and continuing them to the Line Bb; or if it is only a
few of them, as the Diameters, they may be done separately : But remem-
ber, that after the Places of the Lines Aa and Bbare fixed, they must con-
tinue so, till the Whole is finished.
The antique Figure in the sixth Plate, marked with the Letter X, is an
Object l have studied with great Application and Care, in order to project
it exactly, according to the Rules of Perspective; and as l improved in the
Knowlege of the new Principles, I flattered myself I should succeed ;
believing if Iarrived at such Perfection in the Art, I’should then be able in
time to represent all Objects whatsoever, as some of the Learned in the
Mathematicks will have it, according to the strictest Rules; who dogma-
tically asfert that every Part of the Perspective should be mathematically true:-
When we fancy this to be really the Case, it is reasonable to believe that
we should be anxious to learn an Art, which we think so absolutely neces-
sary. Now, gentle Reader, I must confess my Weakness, and tell you, that
notwithstanding all my Care, and puzzling after this mathematical Truth,
I find the Undertaking was too great for iy Capacity; and therefore, from
the Experience of my Folly, I determined to give up the Attempt, and
flatter myself no farther with such Expectations. But whenever the
Rules which I have shewn, should fail, and grow tedious, which I believe
will not happen in Matters of Consequence, ldesign immediately to settle
the Affair at Sight of the Object.





The Volutes in the Capitals of Columns, and the Twist in Stair-cases,
are Objects of this Nature, and very probably were taken from this An-
tique. It has also a great Resemblance to Mr. Hogarth’s precise Serpentine
Line; and therefore, without doubt, has some Grace, though the Twist
is a little quicker. It is an Object of well-varied Contents, whose Pro-
portions gradually lessen to its Extremities; and its Dimensions are governod
by Fitness, Variety, Uniformity, Simplicity, Intricacy, and Quantity. What
a Pity it is, this venerable Object of Antiquity should not be represented by
the strictest Rules of Perspective : l confefs this would afford Matter of
Triumph to any learned Critic, that is happy enough to succeed in the
Attempt.
In pursuance of our present Inquiry, suppose, according to a certain
chimerical new System, the Object under our Consideration be imagined
to have all its inward Contents nicely scooped out, and the Eye at once ta
view the Whole from within, and mark the opposite corresponding Parts,
and take Care to acquire a perfect Idea of the Distances and Bearings of
their several material Points and Lines in the Surfaces : Or, for the more
easy Description of the Projection, suppose we were to gauge the Contents
with Wires, in order to assist and guide us to a readier Conception of all
che intervening Parts; I leave it to the Critics to judge of what Use these
Expedients are, towards raising in the Imagination a true and perfect Idea
of the Antique in Question.
The Pamphlet intituled A critical Examination of the Paintings on the
Ceiling of the Banqueting-house at White-hall, shews that that celebrated
Ceiling has nine separate Points of Sight: And that no Painting can appear
perfectly true, unless seen from the Point intended by the Painter: And
though a Picture may be perfectly true from one certain Point of View,
it cannot from any other. Therefore the Author has taken great Care, fo
shew the Necessity of regarding a Picture, as intended by the Painter.
The Picture he fays; being alaaays confidered as a transparent Surfaae ac
Medium, through which the Visual Rays are sipposed to pass, if the Spec-
tator cbanges his Situation, those Rays (in Nature ) will intersect that Sur-
f








face in different Points , and therefore (in the Picture ) being determined to
such certain Points, tbe Station of the Spectator becomes necessarily fixed and
unalterable, and the Picture must appear false seen otberwife.
Suppose we see, through a Window or transparent Plane, a real Cube,
placed directly opposite, tho somewhat below, the Eye. In this Situation
we shall see only two Faces, one in Front, and the other at Top; and if
we move to the Right or Left, we must see one of the other Faces. This
ishis Proposition ; which is certainly teue.
In order to understand the Principles of Perspective, we are obliged to
consider the Picture as a transparent Plane, thro which the visual Rays
pafs to the Spectator’s Eye. But when the Design is really a Picture,
whose Representation is fixed upon some opaque Body, as a Board, Wall,
or painted Cloth, that cannot be transparent, but a flat smooth Surface;
and the Object represented is a-Cube that shews only two Faces, one in
Front, and the other at Top ; tho we move to the Right or Left from
the Point of Sight, we shall never see more by changing the Place ; nei-
ther is it reasonable to believe we should: For if we find the same Appear--
ance, tho moved from the Point intended by the Painter, the Case is not
aktered ; which shews there is no Necessity of having the Eye of the
Spectator exactly in that identical Point.
If the Spectator’s Eye must coincide with the Point of Sight, the Distance
should be considered accordingly; and it will then be a very difficult Mat-
ter to come at the proper Point of View to see the Picture; and the more
so, as its Horizon, when hung up, is seldom so low as the Eye.;
I own the Sight of the Pamphlet excited my Curiosity to examine the
Ceiling; and I find the Centre of the Whole to be the only Point of Sight
requisite in all that noble Design. For, from the Middle of the Room,
I saw the Intention of that great Painter, and was convinced of it from
the Order of the Whole, and by the natural Position of the Figures, which
appeared all finely foreshortened, and looked like such living Objects
viewed from the middle of the Room below, which. was, in my Opinion,
the principal Point of View that Rubens intended for the whole Ceiling.






I am also of Opinion, that all Ceilings, except those of Galleries or
 long Rooms, should have but one Point of Sight; and, that there are
some Subjects, which I believe require. no Point of Sight, as living Objects
represented in the Clouds, which have no Architecture, nor any terrestrial
Appearance; which is the Case with most of the Work in this Ceiling.
And if there is no Point of Sight required in the Work of the Picture,
then I think there is none in regard to its being truly seen ; because the
Eye cannot coincide with the Point that never was made or intended.
It was not material to take Notice of the most dry and lifeless Part of
the Performance ; lexpected Mr. Highmore would have given us some
ingenious Remarks on the Foreshortenings of the Figures, and of the
Excellence of the Colouring, which I presume would have been more
agreeable to his Readers, than telling them, that Rubens was a little
deficient in an Art which was never understood, as he might have said, till
this Century. But it is reasonable to believe, if his Leisure had permitted
him to examine the Whole, he would have found much to commend,
and very little to censure.
As it may be expected, that l should say something of the Perspective of
Shadows, I shall only observe, that the Geometrical or Perspective Know-
lege of Shadows is of very little Consequence to a Painter; it is easily
understood, when we have learned that of the Objects. But in my Opinion
Painters may spare themselves the Trouble of learning the lineal Perspec-
tive of Shadows, because their Business is to shun every thing of that
Nature in a Picture. All the Limits and Shapes of Shadows should vanisn;
cvery Part that is hard and edgy cuts and offends the Eye.
Having now given my Readers the best Insight in my Power to the
Practice of Painting and Perspective, I hope they will excuse the Size of
this Treatise, which it has been my Study, from its first Projection, to con-
fine to as narrow Limits as possible, being from Experience convinced, that
an Art (if properly) cannot be too concisely described: Therefore I am
forry l could not, from the Nature of the Subjects, reduce it to a fhorter
or lesser Work.






















