

T HE
2

A R
7
0 F
DRAWINC AND PAINTING
IN
WATER-COLOURS.
WHEREIN
The Principles of DR AwINc are laid down after
a natural and eafy Manner; and Vouth directed
in every Thing that relates to this ufeful rt,
according to the Practice of the beft Mafters.
To which are annexed,
Familiar DIRNCTIONs, whereby a Stranger in the Art
of Drawing may be readily taught to delincate any
View or Profoect with the atmoft Exactnets; of co.
louring any Print of Drawing in the moft elegant
Manner; and of taking off Miedals, Coc. inftantlys
after a Variety of different Ways never before made.
public; intermixed with curious Receipts for the Ufe,
of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, Gc.
WIt
IaTaveriONs for prepering, mixing, and managing all Sorts of
Water-Calours ufed in Painting, to as to repretent Nature
in the greateff Ferfedion.
The EICHTH EDITION, corrected; and, befides other im=
provements, illuftrated with COPPER-PLATES.
-
LONDONe
PRINTED TOR J. JONNSON, EV. PAUL'S. CNURGH VAsD.
Price 1s. or bound together with the any or waitine, en
5
TYaAT Of DaAwiNe IN MIRSIRUTiUE, Se. 6d.) . 
Stian



 3 33is



P.H E




CONT ENT
+
Of the several Articles contained in this Book.
bl o









conditi 

Pis  per t  .

D: A R.T. I

-


The ART of DRAING.




IF Drawing in General
Page S

If the proper Materials for Drawing-
6


Of Ligbt and Shade
8



General Rules for Drawing
11

Particular Directions for Drawing


Of drawing Faces
16
of the several
Of the Meafures and Proportions


Parts of the Body
18

Of drawing the Body at full Length
20


Of Drapery
25

Of Drawing mixed Figures
28
Of Drawing Landscapes, Buildings, Eoc.
29
Curious Rules for Drawing any Object in its Out-
lines as exact as Nature; with some farther
Inftructions for Sbadowing, ESc. without any
Regard to the forementioned Rules, or any

Knewledge in the Art of Drawing
3
2
Several other curious and easy Methods of taking
Views, copying Draughts,. Prints, Eoc. to the

reateff Degree of Accuracy
38
oD.3


4)
Secrets for copying of Drawings, E8c. continued;
alfe for taking off Medals, Eoc. various Ways:
with several other curious Precepts for the Use
of Painters, Statuaries, Founders, E5c. Puge 37
P A R T II.
The Doctrine of WATER Colovks, for illu-
minating Prints, 65c.
wr.


F Colours in General
49
Whites for Painting in Miniature
50
To make a White for the Ground, for Water or

Oil-colours, preper in Miniature
52


Of Fellows
53

Of Orange-colour
57
Of Minmum, the brigbleff red Lead; the Manner
of preparing it
88



Df other Reds
 
39
y

Of Purple
63



Of Blue
64
  

Of Black
70

Of Greens.
72
73

Of the Ife and Nature of dry Colours
 Directions to make Gum, Alum, or other Waters
28
i
71S
D
2

ORR

20. 6. D






1





TH E
A R T.
OF
DRAWING AND PAINTING
1N
WATERCOLOURS, Ec.

2
1
AR T I.
The Principles, ESc. of DRAWING.
C H A P. I.
Of DRAWINC in General.
RA WING is the art of reprefenting the ap¬
I
pearances of objects by imitation; or ex=
preffing, by lines and shades, the form or appear-
ance of any thing in nature, or art; the copying
of another draught, or any defign conceived in
the mind; and all this without the affiftance of
mathematical rules.
The art of drawing being an accomplifhment
not more elegant; agreeable, and ornamental, than
ufeful, is, therefore, by no means to be neglected
in the education of youth, wherein any genius or
inclination that way is difcovared. Befides its
being of all arts the moft univerfally admired
and efteemed, there are few other arts or pro-
feffions to which it is not affifting; its great ufe is
not only confined to painters, engravers, garden.
B


6
ers, embroiderers, weavers, and many others con-
cerned in defigning; but the mathematician, en-
gineer, architect, and navigator, daily practife it.
All defigns and models are executed by it; its ufe
appears in every ftation of life, and it is equally
admired by children and by adults.
To be able, on the (pot, to take the ketch of a
fine building, or a beautiful prospect of any cu=
rious production of art, or uncommon appearance
in nature, is not only a very defirable accomplifh-
ment, but a very agreeable amufement. Rocks,
mountains, fields, woods, rivers, cataracts, cities,
Towns, caftles, houfes, fortifications, ruins, of
whatever elfe may prefent itfelf to view on our
journeys or travels, in our own or in foreign
countries, may be thus brought home, and pre-
served for our future ufe, either in bufiness or
converfation. This art tranfinits to our view
things that are long fince paft, or would other-
wife perifh; reprefents to us the deeds of people
and nations for many ages dead, and preferves the
features and refemblance of anceffors, or other
valuable perfons, for many generations. It is
therefore no wonder that an aftainment to univer-
fally ufeful and admired shoulf be diftinguished as
one of the higheft embelliffiffents of human life,
and be patronized and cultivated by all the gene-
jous and ingenious part if mankind.

CHAP. II.
Of the proper Materials for DRAWINC.
HE materials required in drawing, are black-
lead-pencils’s crayons of black, white, or red
chalk; crow-quill pens; a rule and compaffes;
camel's hair pencils; and Indian ink.


7
Accuffom yourfelf to hold your pencil further
from the point than you do in writing, which
will give you a better command of it, and contri-
bute to render your strokes more free and bold.
The ufe of your pencil is to draw the firft sketches
or outlines of your piece; as any Rroke or line
that is amiss, may in this be more eafily rubbed
out than in any other thing; and when you have
made your fketch as correct as you can with the
pencil, you may then draw carefully the beft out-
line you have got; with your crow-quill pen and
ink. The ink made ufe of for this purpofe, muft
not he the common, but Indian ink; being much
fofter than the other, and not running; and, by
mixing it with water, it may be made to any de-
gree of Rrength, and may be ufed in a pen like
common ink. After ufing the ink, you may wipe
out the pencil-lines, by rubbing the piece gently
with the crumb of Htale bread. Having thus got
your outline difcharged, your next work is to
shade your piece properly, as you shall be directed
below, either by drawing fine firokes. with your
pen, where it requires to be shaded, or by wafhi-
ing it with the hair-pencil and the Indian ink.
As to the rule and compaffes, they are never, or
farely to be ufed, except in meafuring the propor-
tions of your figures after you have drawn them,
to prove whether they are right or not; or in
houfes, fortifications, and other pieces of architec-
Ture.
Red lead and red or black chalk are ufed in the
same manner as black lead. White chalk and to-
bacco-pipe clay are ufed in heightening or giving
Rrong lights, and in drawing on coloured paper.
Paftils or crayons are any colours, mined with
robacco-pipe clay, which, while foff and in the
confiffency of a pafte, is rolled up in pieces, about
B2


8
the thickness of a quill, and two or three inches
in length, and then dried; they are generally ufed
on coloured paper; and the colours are rubbed
and wrought one into another in fuch a manner
that no ftrokes appear, but the whole looks as if
it was done with a brush.
CHAP. III.
OfLICHT and SHADE.
T is the artful management of light and shade
that gives the appearance of fubltance, round-
nefs, and diftance, to whatever bodies are reprefent-
ed by drawing. Draw a circle on a piece of paper;
fill it up with any even colour, and it will appear to
be a body with a round circumference and ffat fides:
but by colouring it fronger in the middle, and
caufing it gradually to weaken towards the circum-
ference, it will receive a convex appearance like
that of a ball or globe: wherever the vivacity of
colour is frongeft, that part of the object catches
the fight firft, and appears neareft to it : whereas its
weaknels and goings off are more and more broken
and faint, and seem to fly farther off from the fight.
In rounding the parts of any object, the extre-
mities in turning muftlofe themfelves infenfibly and
confufedly, without precipitating the light all of a
fudden into the shadows, or the fhadows into the
glight, but the paffage of the one into the other muft
the common and imperceptible; that is, by degrees
of light into shadow, and (hadow into light. Ob.
jelts that are painted light muft have a fufficient
breadth of (hadow to fullain them; and dark bo-
dies mull have a fudden light behind, to detach
them from the ground, or from those objects that
are placed behind them; otherwife they will appear


confufedly, as slicking upon each other whereis
the opposition of shade to a light object, and of
light to a dark one, gives a projection, and fepa-
rates them from other bodies.
There should be a balance preferved berween the
fights and shadows: a broad light ought not to be
introduced into a draught without a large fhadow.
Thenearerany object is to the eye, it is feen to much
the ftronger and plainer; the fight is weakened by
diftances, and the more remote any object is, it
is feen in a more imperfect manner. Therefore,
thofe objects which are placed foremoft to the
view, ought to be more finifhed than thofe that are
caft behind; and they should have fuch a relative
dominion over each other, that as one object, by
its heightenings, caufes otliers to retire more back.
wards, fo the same obicet muft he chafed, and
made to appear farther from the fight than others
5
which are more flrongly illuminated.
It is not fufficient that remote objects be only
coloured in 4 more faint and languid manner; but,
according to their diftance, the parts muft appear
more or less confuled; the eye not being able to dif-
cover minutely what is far leparated from it. Pure
and unmixed white either draws an object nearer,
or carries it off to a greater diftance. If it be ac-
companied with black, the opposition of light and
dark renders the object more fenfible, and brings
if nearer to the advanced part; but pure white,
being the lighteff of colours, unless it be forced
forwards, and supported by black, will fly off to
the remoteft view. As for pure black, it is the
heavieff, moft earthy, and moft fenfible of all co-
lours, and brings the objects nearer to the fight:
it muft be placed in maffes, be infenfibly confuled,
and have its proper repofes.
The reprefentations of bodies give them always
B
3


10
such lights as are moft proper and convenient to
their fuppofed fituations. If the objects are in the
fields or open air, and the fun not vifible, or ob-
fcured byclouds, you muft then introduce almoft
an univerfal light, though not warm and frong
and your fhades muft be faint; but when the fun. 1s
confpicuous, and shines in its full luffre, then the
light muft be very flrong and bold, and the fhadows
very dark. If the objects you reprefent be fup-
poted in a room, a little, but not very much illu-
minated, and you furvey it from without, and
sland on a level with the light that ftrikes upon it,
the shadows of that figure muft be very foft,
whereby the figure itfelf will appear beauteous to
the eye; and will, notwithftanding the foftness of
the shadow, seem as imboffed, and come boldly out,
A small light illuminating a body occafions the
Ihadows on the dark fide to be large, and their ex=
tremities to be very bold. On the other hand, a
light makes the shadows on the darker fide to be
more diffined and more foft in their limitations.
Reffection is to be ufed in delineating glittering
or fhining bodies, as glats, pearls, filver, Oc. Ler
the caufe of the reflection, be it more or lefs, be
seen in the thing itfelf. Place all your lights one
way through the whole work; and if the light falls
fideways on the picture, the other fide, which is the
fartheft from the light, muft be made the darkeft.
That part of the body muft be made lighteft which
has the light moft oppofite to it; if the light be
placed above the head, then the top of the head
muft be made lighteft; the shoulder muft receive
the next greater degree of light; and thus muft
you continue to fhade, lofing the light by degrees.
By how much one part of the body projects more
than another, it muft by to much be made the
lighter : and, on the contrary, thofe parts that


11
bend inward muff be made to much the darker,
Two equal lights muft never be made in one and
the same picture; the greater is to ftrike forcibly
into the middle, and with greateft lustre on thofe
parts of the delign where the principal figures
and firength of the action feem to lie, diminifhing
it gradually as it approaches neareft the extremities
of the piece.
CHAP. IV
General Rules for DRAWINC.
DEGIN with plain geometrical figures, as lines

angles, triangles, polygons, arches, circles,
ovals, cones, cylinders, and the like, being tlre
foundations of all other proportions. The circle
is of ufe in the feveral orbicular forms, as the fun,
moon, globes, toc. The oval, in giving a juft pro-
portion to the face and mouth; and the (quare
confines a picture you are to copy, 6c. The tri-
angle is of ufe in drawing a fide or half face; angles,
and arches, in perspective; and the polygon in
ground-plats, fortifications, 6oc. The cone, in
pires, feeples, tops of towers, tsc.. The cylinder,
in columns, pillars, Coc.
Having brought your hand to be fit and ready
in general proportions, accuffom yourfelf to give
every object its due shades, according to its conca=
vity or convexity, and to elevate or deprets the
same, as the object appears either nearer of farther
off the light. before you begin to work, view your
original with clofe attention; divide it in your
mind into feveral parts; obferve the length, the
breadth, and the fimilitude of each part; confider
B4


12
their proportion to each other and the whole; the
diftances from one part to the other, and what parts
hie oppofite to each other.
After you have done your copy, view it afresh,
by comparing it with the original, for the difcover:
ing and amending of faults, as it will not only serve
to perfect you in that particular draught, but will
improve your knowledge of lines and proportions
in general, and in time enable you for the neareft
imitations. The outlines muft be drawn in agliding
manner, large and finooth, which will give them
the refemblance of life and motion. You muft
preserve in your draught a ftrong refemblance be-
tween the parts and the whole; every member
ought to be made to agree; ftrong limbs have no
relation to a confumptive body, or decayed old ages
and the eyes, legs, hands and feer, should be exact-
ly paired.
Having good copies to draw after, learn to re-
duce them to other proportions, either larger or
smaller, and this by frequent practice. In drawing
fruits, as apples, pears, cherries, t&c. with their
leaves; herbs, trees, (9r. of different kinds; as alfo
in the imitation of beafts, fowls, fifhes, Coc. it is
requifite not only to be perfect in laying down the
exact proportions, but, before you proceed to the
Shadowing and trimining your work, to be well
acquainted in the general or outward lines; and
this is sill more neceffary in imitating the body of
a man with all its lineaments, as head, note, eyes,
ears, cheeks, arms, and shoulders; as alfo in the
drapery, or imitation of the clothing, and the artis
ficial fetting off the outward coverings, habits, and
ornaments of the body, in their natural and proper
folds.


13)

CH AP. V
Particular Direclians for DRAWINC.
N drawing after a picture or print, you muft
 take care to place it in fuch a light that the glofs
of the colours may not interrupt your view, but
to that the light and your eye may fall equally
and oblipuely upon the piece. To this endyouare
to confider from what point, and in what direction
the light falls upon the objects, according to which
direction let all your lights and shades be placed
throughout the work. That part of the object
muft be the lighteft which has the light moft dis
rectly oppofite to it; if the light falls fideways on
your picture, you muft make that fide which is op-
pofite to it lighteft; and, on the contrary, that
side which is fartheft from it darkeft. Let the
piece be placed at fuch a diftance, that, upon open-
ing your eyes, you may view it all at once: and the
larger the picture is, it should be to much the
more placed off at the greater diftance; but right
before you, and a little reclined.
Draw all your outlines at firff very faint with
a coal, which may eafily be rubbed out again with
the feathers of a ducks wing, or the crumb of
bread; and thefe outlines should be drawn true,
and agreeable to the patrern, before you begin to
Thadow any part of the object, The ourlines next
the light should be drawn more faint; and when
you have drawn one feature; it should be a direc=
tion for you, in some meafure; to draw another, by
obterving with your eye the diftance from that to
the next feature, making a full mark at the place
BS


C. 24 )
with your coals then draw it and fo on to the
next, till you have drawn the whole figure.
Then obferve the middle of the picture you
would copy, and touch upon the paper with the
point of your coal; afterwards obferve the more
confpicuous and uppermoft figures, if there are more
than one, which you are to touch lightly in their
proper places. Thus running over the whole
draught, you will fee, as it were, the fKeleton of
the piece you are to draw.
Having made out thefe iKetches, view them di-
ligently, to fee if they anfwer your pattern or not;
for the geftures of the life ought to shew themfelves
eminently in the firft and rudeft draught of the
piece; correct and amend whatever you perceive
amifs; adding and diminifhing as it varies from the
pattern, by which means if will be brought nearer
and nearer to the life.
Obferve the diftance of one limb, joint, or muf=
cle, from aother, and the fame in all other acci-
dents of the figure; their length, breadth, turn-
ings, (oc. Shadow next to the light very faint-
ly : and where you fee bold and free touches, be
not timorous in expreffing the fame. In drawing
a head after the life, or otherwife, take care to
place the features exactly right upon the crofs-lines,
whether it be a full face, or three-quarter face. In
fore-fhortening, you muft make the cross-lines to
fly upwards, but where the aspect is downwards,
they muft be made downwards in a circular man-
Rer.
Having drawn the ouflines true with a coal,
you are to proceed to trace the same lines again
with a pen, Indian ink, 65g. drawing them with
more exactness; and by imitating all the hatches,
with their exact diffances ode from another, their


25
eroffings, turnings, and windings, with more bold-
hels and freedom, perfect your defign.
In drawing after a naked body, all the mufcles
are not to be to plainly exprefted as in anatomical
figures; but that fide whofe parts are moft appa-
rent, and of fignification in the performance of any
action, muft be made to appear more or lefs, ac=
cording to the force of that action.
In drawing young perfons, the mufcles muft not
appear manifeftly to hard as in elder and full-
grown perfons; the fame thing is to be obferved
as to fat and Hethy perfons, and fuch as are very
delicate and beautiful; and in women fcarce any
mufcles at all are to be expreffed, or but very little,
unless it be in fome very forcible action, and them
too they are to be reprefented very faintly: the
like is alfo to be obferved as to children. The
motion of the whole body muft be confidered in

drawing of the mufcles; as in the rifing and fall-
ing of the arms, the mulcles of the breaft appear
either more or less : the hips do the like, accord-
ng as they are bent outward or inward; and it
is the same chieffy in the shoulders, fides, and neck,
according to the feveral actions of the body.
The breadth and largenels of a picture is alfo to
be confidered; it should be larger about the legs
and garments, shewing itfelf flender above, by dif-
covering one shoulder, and hiding the other, which
is shortened by turning the body. But fometimes
the figure is to be reprefented biggeft in the upper
parts, by reprefenting either or both the shoulders,
or both the arms; shewing the one leg, and hiding
the other; or both of thein after one manner, at
difcretion. Neither ought this to be observed only
in the whole body, but even in every part, to that
in the legs when a mufcle is raifed outwards on
the one fide, that which is directly on the contrary
B 6


16
side muft be drawn in, and hid, as it appears in the

8
life.
The proportion of the figure ought to be mul
tiplied by degrees, in proportion of one to two,
three, four, Coc. for herein the chief skill confifts;
the diameter of the biggeft place between the knee
and the foot is double the leafl, and the largeft
part of the thigh triple.
CHAP. VI.
Of drawing FACES.
7N drawing a head, it is ufually divided into four
equal parts. 1. From the crown of the head to
the top of the forehead. 2. From the top of the
forehead to the eyebrows. 2. From the eyebrows
to the bottom of the nofe. 4. From thence to the
Bottom of the chin. But this proportion is not
conftant; thofe features, in different men, being
often very different as to length and fhape. In a
well-proportioned face, however, they are nearly
right.
To direct you, therefore, in forming a perfect
face, your firft bufiness is to draw a complete oval;
as you-fee in plate I. figure 1, in the middle of
which, from the top to the bottom, draw a perpen-
dicular line; and through the center, or middle of
this line, draw another, directly across from one
side to the other of your oval. On thefe two lines
all the features of the face are to he drawn, as fol-
lows. Divide your perpendicular line into four
equal: parts; the firft muft be allotted to the hair
of the head : the second is from the top of the fore-
head to the top of the nofe, between the eychrows:
the third is from thence to the bottom of the nofe;
and the fourth includes the lips and chin. The line





17
across the perpendicular one, or the hreadth of the
face, is always fuapofed to be the length of five
eyes; you muft therefore divide it into five equal
parts, and place the eyes upon it to as to leave ex-
actly the length of one eye betwixt them. This
is to be underflood only of a full front face; for if
it turns to either fide, then the diftances are to be
leffened on that fide which turns from you, lets or
more, in proportion to its furning.
The top of
the ear is to rife parallel to the eyebrows, at the
end of the diameter or crots line, and the boftom
of it muft be equal to the bottom of the nofe; the
noftrils ought not to come out farther than the cor-
ner of the eye in any face; and the middle of the
mouth muft always be placed upon the perpendi-
cular line. The mouth, when thut, is as large as
a1n eVe.
The following is an ingenious device, which per-
haps may fomewhat affitt the young practitioner,
in forming the face according to its different turn-
ings, and in placing the features properly thereon.
Procure a piece of finooth wood, turned for the pur=
pofe, in the fhape of an egg. which is nearly the
shape of the human head; draw a line length ways
quite round it, as in the laft fig. and divide this line
into two equal parts by another line drawn directly
acrofs it at right angles. The features being drawn
on thefe two lines, according to the rules delivered
above, will produce a fore right face. Turn the
oval a fmall matter from the left hand to the right,
and the perpendicular will appear bent like a bow,
as you fee in fiz. 2; upon which the particular fea-
tures are to be drawn, as in fif. 3; always obferv-
ing in what manner the nofe projects beyond the
round of the oval. The same muft be observed, if
you turn the oval from the right hand to the left,
as in fig. 4; and if you incline the oval downwards,


18
and to the right, the lines of the crofs will appear,
as in fig. 5; and the features drawn on them, as in
fig. 6. If you turn it upwards, reclining to the left,
the lines of the cross will appear, as in fig. 7, and
a face drawn on them, as in fig. 8. A great variety
of faces may be fhewn by this oval, according as
you incline, recline, or turn it more or lefs.
But thofe figures which come fideways are to be
drawn by means of a perpendicular, as in fif. 9.
upon which the forehead, nofe, mouth, and chin
are to be drawn, as you fee in fiz. 1e.
It is to be observed, that if the face be fat, the
cheeks will feem to fwell; if lean, the jaw-bones
will Rick out, and the cheeks fall in; but if it be
neither too fat nor too lean, it will be nearly round.
Touch the features lightly, where the eyes, note,
mouth and chin, should fland : then begin to draw
them more exactly, and fo proceed till you have
finished the face; after which draw the hair, beard,
and Chadows about it. You are to confider all
thofe chief touches which give life to a face, and
that difcover the difposition of the mind: thus the
mouth extended, and the corners turning a little
up, shews a fmiling countenance, (oc. Vou muff
take care that the fhadows be not made too dark
where they should be light, becaufe afterwards they
cannot be rendered more light; and remember, that
they are to be more faint and light in a fair, than
in a fwarthy complexion.
CHAP. VIl.
Of the MEASURES and PROPORTIONS of the
several Parts of the Body.
HE ancients commonly allowed eight heads to
their figures, though some of them had but
seven; however, the moderns ordinarily divide their


6. 29
figure into ten faces : that is, from the crown of
the head to the fole of the foot, in the manner fol-
lowing. From the crown of the head to the fore-
head, is the third part of the face. The face begins
at the loweft hairs which are upon the forehead, and
ends at the bottom of the chin. The face is divid-
ed into three proportional parts: the firft contains
the forehead, the second the nofe, and the third the
mouth and chin.. From the chin to the pit between
the collar-bones, are two lengths of a note. From
the pit betwixt the collar-bones to the hottom of the
breaft, one face. From the bottom of the breaftto the
navel, one face. From the navel to the genitals, one
face. From the genitals to the upper part of the knee
two faces. The Knee contains half a face. From
the lower part of the knee to the ancle, two faces.
From the ancle to the fole of the foot, half a face.
A man, when his arms are ffretched out, is from
the longeft finger of his right hand to the longeft
of his left, as broad as he is long. From one fide
of the breafts to the other, two faces. The bone
of the arm, called humerns, is the length of two
faces, from the shoulder to the elbow. From the
end of the elbow to the root of the little finger, the
bone called cabifus, with part of the hand, contain
two faces. From the box of the shoulder-blade to
the pit betwixt the collar-bones, one face.. If you
will be fatisfied in the meatures of breadth, from
the extremity of one finger to the other, to that
this breadth should be equal to the length of the
body, you muft obferve that the boxes of the el-
bows with the humerus, and of the humerus with
the shoulder-blade, bear the proportions of half a
face, when the arms are ftrerched out. The fole
of the foot is the fixth part of the figure. The
thumb contains a nofe. The infide of the arm,
from the place where the mufcle difappears, which


20
makes the breeft, called the pectoral mufcle, to the
middle of the arm, four nofes. From the middle
of the arm to the beginning of the hand, five nofes.
The longeft toe is a nofe long.
The two utmoff
parts of the teats, and the pit betwixt the collare
bones of a woman, make an equilateral triangle.
For the breadth of the limbs no precife meafures
can be given; becaufe the meafures themfelves are
changeable, according to the quality of the perfons,
and according to the movement of the mufcles.
CHAP. VIII.
Of drawing the Bovy at full Length.
IRST make your oval for the head, and having

divided it, according to the inftructions already
given, draw a perpendicular line from the top of
the head to the fole of the foot, and meafure out
eight lengths of the head.. This line is of special
ufeto direct you in placing the figure upright; and
in the action of the pofture, where it falls in, and
where it fwells our. One heads length from the
chin, you muft draw the breafls; the third mea-
fure reacheth to the navel; the fourth to the pri=
vities; the fifth to the middle of the thigh; the
fixth to the lower part of the knee; the feventh to
the lower part of the leg; and the eighth to the
heel and fole of the foot.
Obferve, in every meafure, what touches there
are of the mufcles. Draw that leg firft on which
the body flands; then draw the other; and after
that the arms and hands; but draw, at firft, all the
parts very lightly, with a coal only : becaufe th re
1s leaft trouble in altering and rubbing out the coal.
As for the hands, they are twice aslong as they are
broad, and each of their parts has itslength, breadth,


21
and thicknels. The nail upon the finger is about
half the joint it is upon. The length of the foot
is a fixth part of the height of a perfon; and the
length is five eighths more than the breadth. The
length of the face and hands ought to be exactly
equal, and makes but juft the tenth part of a per-
Jon’s height.
The rules in drawing children are as follow :
Some make a child to contain five meafures of the
head, viz. from the top of the head to the privities,
three, and in the thighs and legs two more; the
breadth between the shoulders, the length of a
head and a half; the breadth of the body above the
navel, the length of one head; and the breadth of
the upper part of the thigh, is the third part of two
lengths of the head; the breadth of the knee is juft
the meature there is berwixt the eyes and the chin;
the small of the leg, and the brawn of the arm, are
of the thickness of the neck.
In general, let it be obterved always to begin
with the right fide of the piece you are copying,
for by to doing you will always have what is done
before youreyes, and the reft will follow more na=
turally, and with greater eafe; whereas, if you
begin with the left fide, your hand and arm will
cover what you ao firff, and deprive you of the
fight of it; by which means you will not he able
to proceed with to much eafe, pleafure, or certain-
ty. As to the order and manner of your proceed-
ing, in drawing the human body, you muft firft
KKerch the head; then the fhoulders, in their exact
breadth; then draw the trunk of the body, be-
ginning with the arm-pits (leaving the arms till
afterwards), and to down to the hips on both fides;
being iure to obferve the exact breadth of the
waift. When you have done this, then draw that
leg which the body flands upon, and afterwards


22
the other, which stands loofe; then draw the arms,
and laft of all the hands.
Takenotice alfo of the bowings and bendings of
the body, making the part oppofite to that which
bends correfpond in bending with it. Forinftance,
if one fide of the body bends in, the other muft
fland out antwerable to it; if the back bends in,
the belly muft Hick out; if the knee bends out,
the ham muft fall in; and fo of any other joint
in the body. Finally, endeavour to form all the
parts of your figure with truth, and in juft pro-
portion, not one arm or one leg bigger or lets than
the other; not broad shoulders with a thin flender
waift, nor raw and bony arms, with thick and
joury legs: but let there be a kind of harmony and
agreement amongft the members, and an agree-
able fymmetry throughout the whole figure.
But as the effence of drawing confifts in making,
at firft, a good skerch, you muft in this particular
he very careful and accurate; draw no part per-
feet or exact, till you fee whether the whole
draught be good; and when you have altered
that to your mind, you may then finish one part
after another as curioully as you can. In drawing
the eyes, ears, Irgs, arms, hands, feet, C5s. great
care, ftudy, and practice are requifite: this muft
he learned by carefully imitating the beft prints or
drawings you can get of eyes, ears, Ec. for as to
the mechanical rules of drawing them by lines and
meafures, they are not only perplexed and difficult,
Dut alfo contrary to the practice of the beft mafters.
But the actions and poftures of the hand are fo
many and various, that no certain rules can be
given for drawing them that will univerfally hold
good; and as the hands and feet are difficult mem-
bers to draw, it is neceffary, and well worth while,

to beflow fome time and pains about them, care


23
fully imitating their various poftures and actions,
to as not only to avord all lamenefs and imperfec-
tion, but allo to give them life and fpirit.
in drawing a labouring man, you muft reprefent
him with frong limbs and raifed mufcles, fwelling
and slanding out; especially in bearing burdens,
drawing weights, leaping, walking, combating; or
such like violent exercites. In reprefenting per-
sons affeep, you muft carefully avoid giving any
such poftures or actions in their lying as would
not in all probability afford reft; for a great want
of judgment would appear in reprefenting their
limbs or bodies fupported by their own force, and
not by the help of fomething elfe.
With regard to the reprefentations of the paf-
Lions, Mr. De Piles obferves, that it is abfurd. as
well as impoffible, to pretend giving fuch particu-
lar demonftration of them as to fix their expreffion
to certain Itrokes which the painter should be
obliged to make ufe of, as effential and invariable
rules. This, fays he, would be depriving the art
of that excellent variery of expreffion, which has
no other principle than diverfity of imagination,
the number of which is infinite. The fame paf-
fion may be expreffed feveral ways, each yielding
more or lefs pleafure in proportion to the painters.
underftanding, and the spectator’s difcernment.
Though every part of the face contributes to-
wards expreffing the fentiments of the heart, yet
the eycbrow, according to Mr. Le Brus, is the
principal feat of expreffion, and where the paffions
make themfelves moft Known. It is certain, frys
he, that the pupil of the eye, by its fire and motion,
very well thews the agitation of the foul; but then
it does not express the kind or nature of that agis
tation, whereas the motion of the eyebrow differs
according as the paffions change their nature. To


24
exprets a fimple paffion, the motion is fimple; to
express a mixt paffion, the motion is compound.
If the paffion be gentle, the motion is geatle; if it
be violent, the motion is to too. We may farther.
obferve, fays he, that there are two kinds of ele-
vation in the eyebrows; one in which the eye-
Drows rife up in the middle; this elevation ex-
preffes agreeable fenfations; and it is to be ob-
served, that then the mouth rifes at the sorners:
another, in which the eyebrows rife up at the ends
and fall in the middle, denotes bodily pain; and
then the mouth falls at the corners. In laughter
all the parts agree, for the eyebrows, which fall
towards the middle of the forchead, make the nofe,
the mouth, and the eyes follow the fame motion.
In weeping, the motions are compound and con-
trary, for the eyebrows fall towards the note, and
over the eyes; and the mouth rifes that way. It is
to be obferved alfo, that the mouth is the part of
the face which more particularly expreffes the
emotions of the heart; for when the heart com-
plains, the mouth falls at the corners; when it is
pleated, the corners of the mouth are elevated; and
when it has an averfion, the mouth shoots forward,
and rifes in the middle.
The head, fays Mr. De Piles, contributes more
to the exprestion of the paffions, than all the other
parts of the body put together. Thofe feparately
can only fhew fome few paffions, but the head ex-
preffes them all. Some, however, are more pecu-
liarly expreffed by it than others as humility, by
hanging it down; arrogance, by lifting it up;
languishment, by inclining it on one lide; and
obitinacy with a Riff and resolute air, makes it
Rand upright, fixed and fliff between the shoulders,
he head alto beft shews our fupplications, threats,
mildness, pride. love, hatred, joy, and grief. The


25
whole face and every feature contribute fomething,
but more especially the eyes; yet though the pat-
Lions of the foul are moft vifible in the lines and
features of the face, they often require alfo the
affiftance of other parts of the body: Withour the
hands, for inftance, an action is weak and imperfeet;
their actions, which are almoft infinite, create
numberless expreffions.
It is by then that partly we defire, hope, pro-
mife, call and fend back; they are the inftruments
of threatening, praver, praife, Coc. by them we in
a great meafure ap, rove, condemn, refule, admit,
fear, alk, exprets our joy and grief, our doubts,
regrets, pain, and admiration; but to fay how thefe
parts muft be difpoted for expreffing the various
paffions, is impoffible; nor can any exact rules be
riven for it, both becaufe the talk would be in-
finite, and becaufe every one, muft be guided, in
this, by his own genius and the particular turn of
his Hudies.
CH AP. IX.
Of DRAPERY.
N the art of clothing your figures, or cafting the
drapery upon them with elegance and propriety,
many things are to be obferved; however, this
art confifts chieffy in three points, viz. The
order of the folds or plaits, the different quality
of the fuffs, and the variery of their colours. As
to the folds, they ought to be fo managed as that
you may eafily perceive what it is they cover, and
diftinguish it from any thing elfe; as for instance.
that you fee it is an arm that is under the drapery,
and not aleg, or a leg, and not anarm, &c. Again,


(26
the folds ought to be large, and a contraft should
be obterved between them; otherwife, in the firft
place, they break and divide the fight too much.
and in the next place the drapery will be too stiff.
As to the quality of the ftuffe, it should be well
confidered; fome folds being abrupt and harfh,
while others flow more foft and eafy. Again, the
furface of fome have a luftre, while others are flat
and dead; and fome are fine and tranfparent, while
others are firm and folid. The variety of colours,
when well managed, makes the greateft beauty in
painting: fome are not equally agreeable with re-
spect to each other; and fome are never to be
placed near certain others.
The drapery muft never be made to adhere or
stick too clofe to the parts of the body, but it muft
seem to flow round, and, as it were, embrace them;
yet in such a manner as that the figure may be
eafy, and have a free motion. A great lightnels
and motion of the drapery are only proper in
figures in much agitation, or expoted to the wind.
The nudities of the figure should always be defign-
ed before you proceed to draw the draperies.
Draw the outlines of the garments lightly ; then
draw the great folds firff, and ftroke thefe into
leffer; taking care that they do not cross one ano=
ther. The draperies that cover thofe parts which
are expoted to great light, muft not be fo deeply
shaded, as to feem to pierce them; nor should thote
members be croffed by folds that are too ftrong;
left, by the too great darkness of their shades, the
members look as if they were broken. Folds, in
general, should be large, and as few as poffible:
however, they muft be greater or lefs, according
to the quantity and quality of the fuffs of which
the drapery is suppofed to be made. Suit the gar-
ments to the body, and make them bend with the


(27
body, according as it flands in or out, ffrrit or
crooked, or as it bends one way or another; and
the clofer the garment fits to the body, the nar-
rower and smaller muft be the folds.
The quality of the perfon is allo to be confidered
in the drapery; for inftance, if they are magiftrates,
theirdraperies ought to be large, fine, and flowing; if
country-clowns, they ought to be coarfe and short;
and if ladies and nymphs, light and foft, 6oc. Folds
well imagined give much fpirit to any Kind of ac-
tion, becaufe their motion implies the like in the
acting member, which teems to draw them forcibly,
and make them more or lets ffirring, as the action
is more or lets violent. An artful complication of
folds in a circular manner, greatly helps the effect
of fore-fhortenings. All folds confift of two
shades and no mere, which you may turn with
the garment at pleature, fhadowing the inner fide
more deeply.
The shades in filks and fine linen are very thick
and (mall, requiring little folds and a light sha-
dow. Obferve the motion of the air or wind, in
order to draw the loofe apparel all flying one way,
and draw that part of the garment that adheres
clofeft to the body, before you draw the loofer
part that flies off from it, left by drawing the
loofe part of the garment firft, you should mif-
take the pofition of your figure, and place it awry.
Rich ornaments, when judicioutly and (paring-
ly ufed, may fometimes contribute to the beauty
of draperies. But fuch ornaments are far below
the dignity of angels or heavenly figures; the
grandeur of whofe draperies ought rather to con-
lift in the boldnets and nobleness of the folds,
than in the quality of the ftuff, or the glitter of
ornaments. Light and ffying draperies are proper
only to figures in great motion, or in the wind:


28
but when in a calm place, and free from violent
action, their draperies should be large and flow-
ing, that, by their contraff, and the fall of the
folds, they may appear with grace and dignity.
CH AP. K.
Of drawing MIKRD FICUREs.
N order to draw the form of any beaft, begin at
the forehead, with the lead or coal, drawing
downward the nofe, mouth, upper and nether
chap, ending the line at the throar. Then view-
ing it again, from the part where you formerly be-
gun, continue it over the head, ears, and neck,
till you have given the full compass of the but-
tock. Afterwards mark out the legs, and touch-
ing out the breaft with the eminency thereof,
finith the tail, paws, tongue, teeth, beard, and the
Leveral Thadows.
In drawing beafts, you muft be well acquainted
with their fhape and action, without which you
will never perform any thing excellent in this
way; and whatever beaft you draw, you muft be
fure to give a lketch of the landskip of the coun-
try natural to that beaft.
In drawing birds you are to begin alfo at the
head, continuing the breaft-line from under the
throat down to the legs; then begin at the pinion
for making the wing; this being joined to the
back-line, the figure will be prefently finifhed.
The eyes, legs, and tail are to be drawn laft; the
feathers, beginning at the head very small, muft
fall backwards one way in five ranks, sill increaf-
ing till finifhed.
Infects, as ffies, bees, waips, graishoppers,
worms, and such like, are drawn with great eafe,


29 )
provided you, for the firft time, have the original
before your eyes.
In drawing a ffower, begin from the rofe-tuft
or wart in the middle, as in a rofe or marigold
with the yellow tuft; which being made, draw
lines equally divided from thence to the greateft
compafs or extent of the fower. They may be
drawn either fully open, or in the bud; the leaves
may be firft drawn rudely, afterwards giving them
their veins, or jaggednels.
CH A P. KI.
Of drawing LANDSKIFS, BUILDINCS, COc.
LL true drawing confifts in nicely meafuring
A
the diffances of each part of your piece by
the eye. In order to facilitate this, you are to
imagine in your own mind, that the piece you
copy is divided into (quares : as for example; fup-
pofe, or imagine, a perpendicular and an horis
2ontal line croffing each other in the centre of the
picture you are to copy: then fuppofe alto two
fuch lines eroffing your own copy. Obferve in
the original what parts of the delign thofe lines
interfect, and let them fall on the fame parts of
the suppoted lines in your copy. If you. gre to
draw i landsssip from nature, take your station on
a rifing ground where you may have a large hori=
20n; and mark your tablet into three divifions
downwards, from the top to. the bottom: and
divide in your own mind, the landskip you are to
take into three divifichs alfo. Then, furn your
face directly oppofite to the middle of the horis
Zontal lines Keeping, your body fixed, and draw
what is directly before your eyes upon the mid
dle divifion of your tablet; then furn your hasf
C


1s


30
but not your body, to the left hand, and delineate
what you view there, joining it properly to what
you had done before. Laftly, do the fame by
what is to be feen on your right hand, laying
down every thing exactly, both with respect to
diftance and proportion. Make the neareft objects
in your piece the higheff, and thofe that are fur-
ther off to shoot away lower and lower, till they
come almoft level with the line of the horizon;
leffening every thing proportionably to its dif
tance, and obferving allo, to make your objects
fainter and lets diftinct, the farther they are re-
moved from your eye. Make all your lights and
shades fall one way; and let every thing have its
proper motion, as trees shaken by the wind, the
small boughs bending more and the large ones
lefs; water agitated by the wind, and dathing
againft ships or boats, or falling from a precipice
upon rocks and fiones, and fpirting up again into
the air, and (prinkling all about : clouds alfo in
the air, now gathered with the winds, now vio-
lently condented into hail, rain, and the like; al-
ways remembering that whatever motions are
caufed by the wind muft all be made the same way.
Let the work imitate the feafon it is intended
to reprefent; as, if you intend it for a winter-
piece, reprefent the felling of woods, fliding upon
the ice, fowling, hunting, oc. making the trees
Every-where naked, or laden with fnow or hodr.
froft; the earth bare; the air thick or heavy s the
Water frozen, with carts pafting over it, 68c.

Let every fite have its proper adjuneds or addi-
sional graces, as the farm-houfe, wind-mill, water-
mill, woods, flocks of fheep, herds of cartle, pil-
ims, ruins of temples, caftles and monuments,
with a thoufand fuch other things proper to par-
salar subjects.





31
CH AP. XII.
Carious RULks for drawing any Object, in its Ot-
lines, as exatt as Nature; with some farther Iw-
STRUCTIONs for Sbadowing, &c. without. any
Regard to the forementioned Rulis, or any Know-
ledge in the Art of DRAWINC.
AKE a sheet of the thinneft, or white brown
paper, and brush it over with oil of turpen-
tine, which will immediately render it tranipa-
rent: then, after drying the paper in the air,
Htrain it upon a frane, and fix it againft the object
you defign to draw: this done, place right before
it, a piece of wood with a hole in it, fit for ones
eye to look through, and as you meet any our-
lines of the object on the tranfparent paper, trace
them over with a pencil; by which means you
will obtain the juft proportion, and true reprefent-
ation of any object in its outlines.
To render this Htill more elegant, obferve the
tracings of your draught, wherever the shades
are, and mark them with your pencil; for all the
art in the world can never difpofe the fhades fo
regularly, as one may touch by this method; but
the shades muft be drawn quickly after the out-
lines are drawn, not at different times, becaufe
the fun inftantly changes them.
Here obferve, as in certain objects you will have
fainter, ftronger, and darker shades, in your rer
marks of them, to take fuch memorandums as may
direct you how to finish them with Indian inky or
other colour, when you fit down to complete
your work. To this end the beft way is, before
you trace out your object, to prepare three shells
or gallipots of Indian ink, mixed with common
C2


32
Water, viz. one of a very faint black, one of 2
middling black, and one of an intente black, num=
bering them 1, 2, 3, and as you make your obferv-
ation on the shades of your object, mark upon
your draught the same numbers as they happen to
appear, to that afterwards you may finith with
certainty.
In this regard the tranfparent paper is of great
ufe; for being laid upon any paper or print in a
loofe sheet, all the lines will be feen to perfectly
through it, that you may copy them with the
greateft eafe; and if the print or picture be done
by a good mafter, you can fee which lines are
Rrong, which foft, and how to imitate them.
There is yet another way to take views and
landlkips, which fome prefer to the tranfparent
paper; and that is, either with white or black tif-
fany or lawn frained upon a frame, and ufed in
the fame manner as the paper, excepting that, as
the black-lead pencil is ufed to the paper, on the
white tiffany and on the lawn, you muft ufe char-
coal very foft and finely powdered; but on the
black tiffany, very tender white chalk is to be
ifed,
CH A P. KIII
Siveral ether curions and eafy Methods of taking
ViEws, Copying DRAUOHTS, PRINTs, Gc. is
the greateff Degres of Accuraty.
To
DRAUGHT may be taken regularly, from a
1
drawing, on tranfparent paper, as follows.
Take a piece of paper of the same fize with that
of the draught; rub one fide of it with some
Bowder of black-lead, till it be well and equally
Blacked, to that a finger, touching it, will hardly


C33
be tinged with the blacking; then take the print;
and laying the paper underneath it with the black
fide downwards, upon another piece of white pa-
per of the fame fize, pin the three together in
two or three places: afterwards, take a pin of
needle, fomewhat blunted at the point, and trace
it over the outlines of your picture, which, with
a little preffing, will direct the black paper to im-
prefs the white, fo as to receive every Ilroke you
draw; this done, you may carefully correct what
errors you fee with your black-lead pencil, clean-
ing the new-made draughts flightly with the
crumb of ftale bread.
2. As for the draughts taken on tiffany or lawn,
they are only to be laid on paper; that 1s, fuch as
is drawn with charcoal upon white, and ia:
drawn with chalk upon black or blue paper; and
then, giving each of them a knock or two with a
hammer, the charcoal or the chalk will fall
through them upon the papers directly in the lines
they were drawn, and give you the true reprefent-
ation of the object drawn from the life, in white
lines upon the black paper, and in black lines
upon the white.
Then ftrengthen thefe fhadows of drawings
with your black-lead pencil, chalk, or red oker,
upon the pieces of paper where they made the
marks; for otherwife the lines will eafily be rub-
bed out. But it muft be observed, that this
amendment is to be made foon after the lines; be-
caufe thofe tender draughts will quickly vanith,
if care is not taken to Rrengthen them imme-
diately. You are to begin this operation at the
bottom of the drawing.
2. Another way is, by taking a thin piece of
paper, and holding it againft a glassewindow, par-
ticularly a fashed one, becaufe the interruption of
C
3


38
the lead in the smaller glazed windows will himm
der part of the prospect; then draw what you fee
from the glafs, and afterwards the black-lead pa-
per is to be ufed as directed before.
4. There is another way ftill, which may be
more eafy to the hand or arm of a perfon not ac-
cuftomed to drawing upon a paper or lawn placed
upright, which is by the ufe of a camera obfcure,
though to help the hand one may hold a baguette,
or fuch a flick in the left hand as the oil-painters
ufe to reft the right hand upon; or have fome
other reft made for the right hand, as may be
eafily fcrewed up and down at pleafure. But there
is this difference fill between drawing a piece of
perspective or view on a tranfparent paper or
lawn placed upright againft any object, and draw-
ing by the camera obfcurs, that fuch a piece will
take in more of the view or object, and from a
greater diftance than the camera obicura will:

however, the portable camera obicura will, at
firft, be very eafy to the arm of a beginner, by
reafon the objects appear on an horizontal plane,
such as a table; and the hand, having a proper
reff, will more eafily follow the line reprefented
on the plane, with great exactness.
The camera obicura is a machine or apparatus
wherein the images of external objects are repre-
sented diffinetly, and in their genuine colours,
either in an inverted or erect fituation. This ma-
chine may be made as follows: Darken a chamber,
one of whofe windows looks into a place fet with
a variety of objects; leaving only one little aper-
ture open in the window. In this aperture fit a
lens, either a plane convex one, or one convex on
both fides, to as to be the portion of a large
phere. At a due diftance, to be determined by
experience, pread a paper or white cloth on the


35
wall, unless the wall itfelf be whitened fo as to
serve the purpofe; and on this the images of the
defired objects will be delineated invertedly.
In this cafe, it is not more difficult to draw, or
rather copy the objects, though they are reverfed,
than to draw or copy feveral things which we fee
upright on the frames of tranfparent paper, lawn,
or tiffany; for to trace lines will be as eafily done
one way as the other; and though the objects
falling on the paper or cloth will, while you are
drawing them, be reverfed, it is but turning the
paper or cloth upfide down, when they are done,
and the drawing will be right to the eye. But to
obviate this difficulty, let the paper, or what is to
receive the objects, be placed againft the back of
2 chair,, and let a perfon look on the feveral ob-
jects reprefented thereon over the back of the
chair, and this will fet them right to the eye. 0,
if you would rather have the images appear erect,
it may be done either by means of a concave lens,
or by receiving the image on a plain speculum in-
clined to the horizon under an angle of 45, or
by means of two lenfes included in a draw-rube
inflead of one.
It is to be obferved, that if the aperture does not
exceed the bigness of a pea, the objects will be re-
prefented thereon, even though there be no lens
at all. To render the images clear and diftinet, it
is neceffary that the objects be illuminated by the
fun; and they will he Hill brighter if the spectator
firff Ray a quarter of an hour in the dark.
Care muft be likewife taken that no light efcape
through any chinks, and that the wall be not too
much illuminated. Farther, the greater diftance
there is between the aperture and the wall, the
larger and more diflinct will the images be; but the
rays becoming thus too much dilared, the bright-
C 4


26
33

ness of the image is weakened, till at length it be-
comes infenfible. But the portable camera obicu-
ra is more proper for beginners, as being more eaty
for their arm; befides, the objects appearing on an
horizontal plane, may, of courfe, be drawn with
grefter exaclness.
The confiruction of a portable camera obfcura
may be as follows: Provide a wooden cheft, in the
middle of which raife a little turret either round or
square, open toward the object. Behind this aper-
ture incline a little plain mirfor to an angle of 45d
which will reffect the rays upon a lens convex on.
both fides, included in a tube. At the end of the
focus of the lens, place a table covered with a white
paper to receive the image; and laffly make an ob-
long aperture to look through. By means of this
machine the images will be exhibited perfectly like
their objects, each clothed in their different colours;
whereby any perfon, unacquainted with defigning
of drawing, will be able to delineate any thing to
the greateft degree of accuracy and juftness; and
thofe even well verfed in painting, will find many
hints by it to perfect them in this art.
. Thus far we have thewn how any perfon
may copy a draught, print, or piece of painting, or
even make an exact reprefentation from the life;
but we shall yet add two other methods, both eaty
and entertaining, not hitherto mentioned, for taking
of draughts or drawings, which are as follow. Prick
with a pin the outlines of the print or drawing you
defign to copy, and then laving the same on a sheet
of paper, take a powder-puff or tuft of cotton, dip-
ping it now and then in charcoal-duft, and beat it
over the pricked lines through the picture, by which
means you shall have full directions marked on your
cloth or paper fufficient to finith a juft drawing.
6. The other way is by making luch an impref


37

hon from the print as shall give a juft copy of if.
and it is of great ufe when we want to carry every
Rroke of the engraver along with us; which method,
if you are very careful, will indeed but very little
fully the print.
For this end, take fome white or green foap,
which mix with such a quantity of water, as will
bring it to the confifience of a jelly; with this
mixture rub the print, and with a wet sponge gen-
tly wet the paper defigned for receiving the impref-
fion; then laying it on the print, cover all with
two or three other pieces of dry paper, and rub
it very hard all over with any thing that is fmooth
and poliffied; and thus the werted paper will
have upon it the reverfe of the print you rubbed
it upon, with every diftinct line in the original, if
you have been careful to rub it equally.
CHAP. KIV.
SECREYs of copying Drawings, &&c. continued; alfe
for taking off Medals, &c. various ways; with ji-
veral other curious PRECEPYs for the Use of Paint-
ers.. Statuaries, Feunders, &ic.
I. To lake a Drawing with FixsDink.

AKE a thin sheet of paper, and rub it all over
 with fresh butter, as equally as poffible, then
dry it well by the fire, and rub the buttered fide
with either carmine, lampablack, black-lead-pow-
der, or blue bice finely ground, till it is all equally
coloured; taking care in rubbing on any of thefe,
that the colours will not come off by a very flight
touch of the finger. Then lay the coloured side
of this buttered paper upon a piece of clean paper,
and lay the print you defign to copy upon the bur-
tered paper; afterwards with a fine pin, of needle
C 5



38
bltanted a little at the point, trace the outlines of
the drawing carefully, by which means you will
have a good copy of it upon your white paper;
which may be touched afterwards with crayons, or
the like colour.
II. To take the Impression of a Print with RxD Ink.
Mix fome vermilion finely ground with linfeed
oil, but not to much but what it shall still be liquid
enough to run or flow in a pen. With this trace
the lines of your print and then with a sponge dipt
in water, wet the back fide of the print, and turn
the printed fide down upon a piece of white paper,
to as to lie (mooth : then lay over that a piece of dry
paper, and prefs it hard in every part: and the lower
white paper will receive the impreffion. But if
you have a linen-prefs, it is better to put your pa-
pers between two of the leaves, and (crew the prefs
as tight as you can, by which means you will have
a fine impreffion.
11l. Ts take Draughts, Writings, &c. with red
LOOsEINK.

Take some vermilion finely ground, and mix it
with fair water in a gallipot with some cotton in
it, fo as that it may run very free in the pen: with
this mixture draw over all the ftrokes of your print,
imitating both the finer and Rronger lines; then
with a sponge dipt in gunm-water wet a piece of
clean white paper, and while it is wet turn the pring
upon it; and preffing it well, take off the print,
and you will find all the strokes remain on the clean
paper; and as foon as it is dry the vermilion will
be fixed to it.
This fort of ink has ben ufed frequently in writ-
ing any thing defigned to be engraved; for by
turning the writing fide of the paper down upon 2


39
copper-plate covered with bees-wax and white
ground, rubbing it very equally, the impreffion will
be upon the Wax.
IV. Taking Draughts with blue Loosk Iwk.
You may likewife make fuch a fort of ink with
blue bice and common water as will run very fine-

ly in a pen, and ferve for the same ufe as the for
mer ink.
V. To take off a Drawing in a standing REv
COLOUR by tracing.
Take vermilion finely ground, and mixing it
with a little freth butter, rub a clean sheet of pa-
per on one fide with this mixture, to that it may
bear a flight touch of the finger without leaving
the paper; then laving the coloured fide of this pa-
per upon a clean sheet, lay your print upon the
other fide of the coloured paper; and then trace
every line you think proper, as already directed in
tracing a draught with fixed ink: but befure to pin
the three papers together at the corners, to prevent
their flipping, which would inevitably fpoil your
work. This impreffion made by tracing will hold
without rubbing or preffing the papers. The quills
of a fwallow, after they are thoroughly dry, are

very good for tracing.
By mixing carmine with fome freth butter, and
colouring a paper with it in the same manner, you
will obtain a more beautiful colour and by co-
louring a paper in like manner with blue bice and
butter, you may have the drawing blue.
VI. To take the natural or lively Shape of any Fizas er
TREE.
Firft take the leaf you would copy, and gently
rub the veins on the back fide of it with a piece of
C 6


46
ivory, or fome fuch like matter, fo as to bruife them
a little; afterwards wet the fame fide gently with
linfeed-oil; and then press it hard upon a piece of
white paper, and you shall have the perfect figure
of the leaf, with every vein in it juftly expreffed:
this impreffion being afterwards coloured will feem
truly natural, and may be ufeful to fuch as would
remember plants.
VII. Anotber Wayef painting the LERVEs of Plants,
to that the Impreffion shall appear as black as if it
had been dene in a Printing-press, is as follows:
When the leaf is dry, take fuch a ball as the
prefimen ufe for blacking the types, and rubbing
it equally over with printers ink, ftrike it gently
four or hve times on the back of the leaf, till all
the veins are blacked with the ink; then laying
the leaf on a flat board or the like, with the back fide
upwards, clap a piece of whice paper well moiftened
on the leaf; and preffing it pretty hard, but not
to as to bruife the fibres, you shall have a fine
impreffion.
But this may ftill be done to greater advantage
by means of a piece of wood in the form of a cy-
linder, about a foot long, and an inch and a half
diameter, the middle part about fix or eight inches
long, being covered with a woollen cloth rolled
three or four times round it. With this cylinder
roll the paper over the leaf four or five times back=
wards and forwards, and you will have a curious
impreffion.
But where printers ink is not conveniently
come at, the following method may be made ufe of.
Rub the back of the leaf, as before directed, with
burnt linfeed-oil: then, flrewing some powder of
black lead, or, for want of that, some charcoal or


41
small-coal-duff, or the powder of burnt cork, upon
a fmooth board, fo as equally to cover it, ftroke
the powder gently over; and oiling the back fide
of the leaf, clap it upon the board; then laying the
white paper upon the back of the leaf, press or roll
it as before.
If none of thefe ingredients are conveniently had,
take vermilion, and mixing it with freth butter to
the confiftence of printers ink, cover your print-
ing-hall with it : daub it over the back of the leaf,
and take your impreffion as before.
Where vermilion is ufed, bice may alfo be made
ufe of, either with butter or oil, by grinding blue
bice with fome burnt linfeed-oil, and ufing it as
before: thus you may have a fine red or blue ink,
proper for impreffions of this fort, but the blue is
preferable in colouring leaves, becaufe it is an agree-
able colour for the green fort.
It may be observed, that the reafon why the

back of the leaf is the proper fide to make the im-
preffion from, is becaufe the ribs or veffels rife on
that fide above the flethy part of it; and therefore
being coloured with any of thofe inks, they are the
fitteft to give an impreffions whereas, in the forefide
of the leaf, the ffethy parts rife, and thefe fine fibres
are funk between them.
VIIl. To take of the LEAYRS of PLANTs in
Plaiffer of Paris, so as that they may afterwards
be caft in Meial.
Thofe perfons who caft in metal have frequent
occafion to ufe leaves of feveral forts, in order to
embellish their work; thefe are generally made from
models done by the hand, which take up a great
deal of time, and even at laff are imperfect; but
the following way, which is communicated by a



43 )
gentleman from frely, is greatly preferable, and
much eafier.
Soon after you have cropped the leaf you defire
to take an impreffion from, lay it between the leaves
of a book, till once it shall lie flat; then, upon a
smooth board with a ffrong gum-water, made of
gum-arabic, fix the forefide or front of the leaf to
the board; when this is done, raife round it a little
wall of coarfe pafte, half an inch high; or, if you
can conveniently, furround your piece of wood
with pafteboard, or card-paper, to clofe as that it
shall hold a liquid for some time; then oil the back
of your leaf, as directed below in the method for
cafting of medals; and pouron wates and plaifter
of Paris as there directed, which, when it is dry, will
give you an exact impreffion of every vein of the
leaf, and from which you may eafily make a.
mould to caft in as you fancy.
IX. An expeditious Wiethed of taking the Impression ef
any BUTTERELY in all its Colours.
Having taken a butterffy, kill it without spoiling
the wings, which contrive to (pread as regularly as
poffible in a flying pofitien; then, withatmall brush
or pencil, take a piece of white paper, wath part of
it with gum-water, a little thicker than ordinary;
to that it may eafily dry- afterwards laying your
butterffy on the paper, cut off the body clofe to the
wings, and throwing it away, lay the paper on a
fmooth board, with the fly upwards; and laying
another paper over that, put the whole preparation
into a fcrew-press, and ferew it down very hard, or
otherwife press it, letting it remain under that pref=
fure for the space of an hour. Afterwards take off
the wings of the butterfly, and you will find a per-
felt impreffion of them, with all their various
colours marked diftinctly, remain upon the paper.


43
When this is done, draw between the wings of your
impreffion the body o the butterffy, and colour
your draught of the body after the life.
X. To take off the Impression of MEDALS.
This may be of ufe to fuch as would preferve to
themfelves good specimens of fine draughts of cu-
rious medals, especially as it is eafily executed, and
with but a triffing expence.
One way is as follows: Take ifinglats, and break=
ing it in pieces, diffolve as much of it as is neceffary
over the fire in a quantity of water fufficient only
to cover it, taking care to keep it ftirring till the
whole is diffoived. This done, with a hair-brush,
Hroke fome of the glue over the medals whofe im-
preffions you would take, after placing them as ho-
fizontally as you can, and when you have covered
them perfectly all over, let them he till the glue is
hardened; and afterwards, with the point of a pin,
or needle, raife the edge of the glue from each
medal, and the whole impreffion of the medal in
glue will fly off as hard as a horn, with all the fine
sharpness of the medal as it was struck.
This glue may be made of whatever colour you
pleafe, by mixing the colour in the water the glue
is boiled in. The impreffion muft be dried imme-
diately, but very regularly, and not in a hot fun,
nor in any damp place.
If you ufe ifinglats without any colour mixed
with the water, you may, as foon as you take the
impreffion from the medals, breathe gently on the
concave fide of them, and then lay them upon the
thickeff fort of leaf gold, which will stick to them;
and by fhining through the ifinglats will appear
like a gold medal : but if we would imitate a cop-
per medal, we should mix carmine with the water
that we diffelve our ifinglafs in.


44
Although water may do very well for diffolving
the finglats in for this purpofe, yer, brandy or Ip:-
rits of wine will give the glue a much greater
Rrength, to as not to be subject to foften in a damp
Dir.
XI. To take the Impression of large EDALS.
Firft rub the medals gently over with a tuft of
fine cotton moiftened or greafed with fwect oil;
then having fome melted brimftone, enough to co-
ver the medal half an inch thick, put a hoop of card-
paper round the edge of it, and pour the melred
brimffone on it, but not too hot; as foon as it is
fixed and hardened, take off the hoop of paper, and
the impreffion on the brimftone will come clean
from the medal, which shall ferve for a sharp and
correct mould, wherein you may caft another with
plaifter of Paris. But brimftone should not be ufed
on filver medals, becaufe it will effectually change
their colour. Therefore, to take silver medals off,
bind them round, after oiling them, with a hoop of
some fliff paper, as before, and mixing a little plaifter
of Paris with water, fill the hoop with it; then
immediately fill the cafe in a (prinkling manner
with the same plaifter, till it hardens; and when
it turnsdry, take it off from the medals. But from
thofe moulds caft in brimftone that are concave, you
muft again caft fuch medals in plaifter of Paris, and
they will be convex, oiling the mould and uting
the plaifter of Paris as before. By this method you
may take off any medal or fine bas-relief with
great exactness, even foas to form medals from them
in any fort of metal.
XII. Another Way of taking of MRDALS is as
fellows:
Procure some thin pieces of lead, and placing
the medal horizontally on the top of a firm post


45
of any fleady place, lay a piece of harder metal fiat
ever the lead, and place a piece of a round turned
Stickover that, fuch as is ufed in the ffaff of a houfe-
bruth; faw off about five or fix inches in length,
and holding that tight with the left hand, on the
lead and flat piece of metal, ftrike the top of the
Rick a fmart blow with a large hammer, and it
will give the lead a perfect impreffion of the image
of the medal. But this muft be done by one fingls
blow, to render the impreftion perfect.
XIII. Various Ways of taking off MEDALS.
Take the fhavings of paper, and boiling them
cill they are render, pound them well in a mortar,
to as to reduce them into a pafte; then boil them
again in (pring-water with a little gum-arabic: ler
this mixture sland fome time to fettle: then pour
off the water, ftraining it through a fieve or linen-
cfoth, and the remaining part of this mixture will
be an excellent ingredient either to prefs into any
moulds, or upon any medal: for when the pafte
is dry, it will come off very fharp.
Some medals that are under-wrought cannot be
taken off this way; therefore, in fuch cafes, you
should take common glue, and melting it, fix a
hoop of pafteboard, Coc. round the edge of the
medal, and pour on the glue hot; the medal having
been firft ailed with a tuft of greafed cotton.
When the glue is dry and hard, take off the hoop,
and the glue will fly off from the edges: and it
will, as being subject to bend and give way, which
the things formerly mentioned are not, come very
eafily off. But the glue ought to be made flrong.
3
and should be poured on one third part of an inch
thick.
When an impreffion has been taken by this means,
you muft then hoop your mould of glue with either


6 46 )
Cald-paper or pafteboard, as before directed, taking
care to oil it to that no bubbles or blifters may be
feen; then you may caft your plaifter of Paris in
it, and you will obtain, by thefe means, a good
copy of the medal. When this is dry, the glae
will fy off, or may be broken off, and there will
remain a good pattern to caft from.
Alfo, a putty may be made of linfeed-oil and
fine-ground ftarch, which being well worked toge-
ther into a pafte, will take a good impreffion from
any medal. By means of thefe moulds you may
cafl good medals of bees-wax: but they will come
off much Charper if the mould be in brimftone, than
if it be in plaiffer of Paris. But then your wax
should be as well blanched or whitened as if it was
ated for wax-candles; however, it will be neceffary
to greafe the mould before the wax is poured in;
and though white wax is here recommended, yet
it will not be beft that the copy of the medal be
white, becaufe the dark colours thew the medal

much better.
If you would have your copy of a red colour,
mix vermilion with the wax, while it is melring;
and if you would have it blue, put in flone
blue well beaten, or ground, into the melted
Wax.
As foon as thefe wax medals are cold enough to
take off, you should lay some leaf-gold upon them,
preffing it down gently with a piece of cotton,
without rubbing it backwards and forwards; and
that will gold your medal. When you caft medals
in plaifter of Paris, to make them look like feel or
metal, rub them over with a tuft of cotton lightly
greated with oil : then rewing over them tome
powder of black lead, rub them well with such a
brush as is ufed for the teeth, till the whole is
equally covered, and this will give them a fine.


47
metal glofs. You may make thefe medals in
plaifter of Paris look like box, by boiling them in
linfeed-oil; and this will harden them to fuch a
degree as to bear the brush, to clean them when
they turn foul, or dirty. If you would have thefe
medals lookf of a yellow colour, boil a little pearl-
athes in a pint of water, till it makes a ftrong lixi-
vium; then put in half a quarter of a pint of French
berries: boil this till the liquor is of a ffrong yel-
low, and ufe it with your plaifter of Paris inftead of
Common Water.
If you would have the medals look green, the
fine, tranfparent gum of verdigrife, mixed with the
plaiffer of Paris, will give them that colour; and
for a filver colour, leaf-filver or tin-foil may be
ufed in the same manner as the leaf-gold for the
gold colour: for the copper colour, German leaf-
copper may be ufed.
XIV. To take off Impressions in Plaiffer of Paris from
COPPER-PLATES.
Oil the plates a little, and binding them about
either with card or other pafteboard paper, pour
on them fome of the fineft plaifter of Paris and
water; and finithing the work with plaifter till it
becomes dry and hardens, you will have a ne
impreffion or draught of the lines on the plate in
the plaifter, which you may make ufe of to draw
from as you may have occafion.
XV. Totake of the fine Engravings from Warcn-
CASES, SNUFF-BOKES, &c.
Hold them over the (moke of a candle, till they
are quite black; then wiping off the black with
the foft part of the palm of your hand, lay a piece


48
of white paper, a little wetted with a sponge, over
the engravings; and over that clap a thin piece of
fannel, or brown paper, preffed down very hard,
which being rubbed, the paper next the picture
will obtain as fine an impreftion as if it had paffed
through a rolling-prefs.



( 49
P A R T II.
The Debtrine of WATER-Colouas, for illuminating
Prints, ESc. in the bef Manner.
CH A P. I.
Of CoLOURS in general.
OL OURSare to be diffinguished as follows: the
firft is the white colour; next the yellow; next
the orange; then the red; after that, the purple;
afterwards the blue; and laftly, the black. It is
to be obferved, that white and black are the ex-
tremes of colour : yellow is the leffer point of co-
lour towards the white; the next to that is the
green; and after it the blue.
With regard to the colouring of prints, if the
paper be pure white, you are to ufe no colour on
it, unlets in the shaded parts; and then in painting
of fowers, if they tend towards a reddish colour,
you are to ufe a faint colour of carmine with gum-
water, upon the shades only ; if bluifh, ufe a little
faint indigo in gum-water flightly paffed over the
shades, eafily touching upon the lights. Where
there is a yellow tinge, either ufe a faint tincture
of gamboge, or of French berries, which will be
described among the yellows: or if the whices have
a purplifh caft, rife a thin cake on the shady fide,
Tuffering the colour only to shife a little into the
light, which will give a luftre to the whites; and
if a greenish caft should be there, ufe a very faint
colour of the fap-green; or in proportion of the
Tapagreen mixed with the verdigrife-green.
All thefe colours, mentioned for shading the
whkes, may be found in the following directions.


21
(50 )
C H A P. II.
WHITEs for painting in Minature.
1. THE beft white fold for painting in water-
colours is Hake-white: this is better than
white lead ground, and, if it be pure, far exceeds if
in beauty; becaufe the white lead is apt to turn
blackifh, especially if it be ufed in a hard water.
2. But fome recommend a white made of pearl
and oyfter-shells, reduced into an impalpable pow-
der, to foft as to feel like grounds of ftarch, or hair-
powder: this is by fome called pearl-white, and
will mix well with any colour. But if you ufe
white lead, firft rectify it with whife-wine vinegar,
which caufing a fermentation, the white will foon
settle; after which pour off the vinegar, and wath
the white with common water. The method of
wathing it is thus: Put the powder into a glass of
water; Hir it about, and prefently pour off the
water, while it is white, into some other clean glats,
or veffel; then letting it fettle, pour off the water
from it, and you shall have an excellent white, to
which, when it is fettled, you are to put as much
gum-water as is neceffary to give it a glaze.
It is obfervable that white lead will turn black
if mixed with water that comes from iron or clay;
that is, in the space of a month or two, you may
perceive thote places where it lies thickeff tinged
with black; and if it be mixed with any other co-
lour, it will foon change or alter it.
3. Some recommend the powder of egg-shells
of the brighteft colour, and well cleaned and wash-
ed, as very good to be ground with guim-water;
or you may put a twentieth part of clean white
fugar-candy to grind with it in water : it muft be



58
ground as fine as poffible; that is, to the ftate of
an impalpable powder; and then ufe it. Some
tay it is better, if rectified spirit of wine be pour-
ed on it, which will clear it from any drots that
may be in it : this, it is probable, muit be poured
off, when the spirif of wine has done its work; and
then the parts left behind muft be mixed with
gum-water again.
But it has been found by experience, that egg=
shell powder is of very great service as a white, in
water-colours, and that itfelf and the oyffer-shell
powders, well rectified and mixed with the white
of an egg well beaten, will make an extraordinary
mixture in other colours, and will correl them
from changing or altering their qualities.
4. As to a white for illuminating of prints, the
clear white of the paper is to be left uncoloured,
and if it happens that the paper is apt to fink, or
to (pread any water-colour that is laid upon it more
than is neceffary, then the way to correct it is as
follows: Fix the paper in such a ftation as that it
may only receive the colour you lay on to glaze,
juft as far as you defigned it; then take fome ftarch
boiled and prepared in water, of a middle frength,
and with a large painting-brush, stroke it over the
black of the print; and after it has been well dried
in the air, or fun, put the print in a book with
the weight upon it, to take out the crumplings
which it may receive by wetting of it; and thus
will any print he rendered fit to receive water-co-
lours, which will be prevented from running fur-
ther than one would have them.
s. A fine white for water-colours is made by
diffolving filings of fine filver or filver-feaf in aqus-
fortis; then evaporating the aqua-fortis till it looks
like cryftals in the bortom of the glats: decant
the other part of the aqua-fortis, and wath the fil.


32)
ver five or fix times in common water, till it is
freed from the aqua-fortis, which may be Known
by tafting it; then dry it for ufe. It muft be ufed
with gum-water, and a little water of fugar-
candy.
6. An incomparable fine white lead-colour is
made by grinding choice white lead well upon a
porphyry with vinegar, to that it turns blackish:
then take a pot full of water, and wathing the
white lead in it very well, let it fettle; and pour-
ing off the water, grind it again with vinegar:
repeat this once or twice more; and you will have
an excellent white both for water-colours and
and painting in oil.
7. To make a good White for the Ground, for Water
or Oit-celours, proper in Miniature:
Take a pound of glovers clippings, put them
some time to steep in water; then boiling them in
a kettle, with twelve quarts of water, till it finks
to two, ftrain it through a linen cloth into a new
earthen pan: this is called glove-glue, or fize; and
to know whether it be firong enough, it is only
neceffary to try, when it is cold, and has got its
confiftence, whether it be ftiff and firm under the
hand.
The glue being made, take white chalk, and
reducing it to powder, and melting the glue, while
it is hot, put fuch a quarktity of white in it, as to
make it to thick as pap : then leaving it to fteep
for a quarter of an hour, ffir it about with a briftle-
brush.
Then taking some of this whire, put more glue
to it, in order to make it brighter, for the firft or
sevond lav: this muft be applied by heating: with
she end of the brush. Mind tharyou ler every lay
dry wellbeforeyou put chsnother. Ifie is wood


53
you work on, you muft put on a dozen; but if it
is thick paper, fix or feven are fufficient.
This done, take water, and dipping a foft bruth
in it, and draining it with your fingers, rub the
work with it, in order to render it the fmoother.
When yourbruth is full of white, you muft wash it
again, and alfochange the water when it is too white.
Xou may likewife fomerimes make ufe of a wee
linen-rag inflead of a bruth. Your work being
very even, let it dry, and when it is fo, rub it
with fhave-grafs, r a bit of new linen-cloth, to
make it foft and free.
C H A P. III.
Of VELLOw.
T. THERE are some objects which have the ap-
pearance of gold fhining through the colours
of green, red, or blue; fuch as some fort of flies and
beetles, and the cantharides. This golden
tranfparency is very well imitated by laying
some gold-leaf on the shaded part of the drawing,
giving in a little to the light fide of the print.
The way of laying on the gold-leaf, is by washing
the part where the gold is to be with ffrong gum-
Water, and when it is fomewhat dry, by laying on
the gold as fmooth and even as poffible, preffing it
down clofe with cotton. But in doing this, care
muft be taken that, in laying on the gum-water,
you do not exceed the limits you would have the
gold appear to shine. In this cafe the gold is to
shine only through the tranfparent colour which
is to be laid on.
It muft be obferved, that the gold-leaf will not
receive the water-colours regularly, and for that
reafon it muft be firoked over with a little thin
liquor of ox-gall in a painting brufh of camels


54
hair, by which means it will receive any celour that
you have a mind to paint upon it, and will hold it.
The greens may be firft, the verdigrife green or fap
green (which colours should be defcribed in their
places); the reds may be lake or carmine; the
purples, lake and fine indigo, or carmine and in-
digo; and for the blues, indigo on the dark fide,
and on the light a little stroke of ultramarine blue,
juft to thine into the light, which will have an
admirable effect.
2. There may be found upon rofe-trees in Juns
and July, a Kind of beetle of a gold and green
colour, which may ferve for a direction in this
kind of painting. But if gold itfelf be ufed, it will
be beft to polish it, which may be done in the
following manner:
There may be feen in fome manuscripts fine
golden letters which rife above the furface of the
vellum or paper : the composition that raifes them
thus is faid to be made up of vermilion and the
white of an egg, whicked or beaten up to the con-
fiftence of an oil, and worked together like a Kind
of pafte, and with a ftamp fixed to the vellum or
paper with gum-arahic. On this figure of a letter
wath some ftronggum-water with a pencil of camels
hair, obferving that the gum does not reach more
than the outlines; then lay on the goid-leaf clofe
with some cotton, and being dried, rub it with fome
dry cotton; and then polifh it with a dog's tooth:
this will make itappear as if it werereally caft in gold.
3. There is befides this another way of working
in gold, and that is performed by shell gold, but
then it muft be pure gold and not that brought from
Germany, which turns green in a few days time.
Before you ufe this gold, cover the fhady parts
with vermition; and after your gold has been well
reclified with spirit of wine, lay it on with gum-


8
35
water, which will readily mix with it; and when
it is dry, polish it with a dog's tooth. In laying
on gold, it will be beft to leave the lights with-
out 1t, becaufe it will make a much brighter ap-
pearance than if the object was covered all over
with it. But if, by accident, or otherwife, the
whole piece happened to be covered with gold,
there is no better way to fet it off, than by tracing
over the shady parts with gall-ilone, or, what is
much preferable, the yellow made of French
berries, the compofition of which is treated of
below : but it is the deepeft that is to be ufed in
this way. A little minium heightens it very
much. How the minium is to be rectified may
be learned among the reds. Obferve to polish the
gold before you ufe the minium on it.
After this colour of the gold, the yellows shall be
treated of as they fail gradually in their flrength.
4. The firft yellow is a Kind of Straw-colour,
and is made of ffour of brimftone, which of itfelf
is fine enough to mix with guin -water.
5. A common way of illuminating prints is, by
giving the tincture of gamboge for a yellow; and
this may be of two or three forts, either fainter or
Rronger; the laft to be a shade to the firft, and
to be shaded with the preparation of French ber-
ries.
6. Mr. Boyle fays, that if the roots of barberries
are cut and put into a lixivium made Hrong with
water and pearl-afhes, there will be a fine yellow
produced from it; this having been often tried,
fucceeded very well.
7. He likewife propofes another way for making
a tranfparent yellow, which is by boiling the root
of a mulberry-free, wathed well from the earth, in
a Rrong lixivium of pearl-afhes and water; this
D2


56

will afford a yellowish juice,, from which may be
extracted a tincture much deeper than the former.
8. Fellow oker will likewife make another good
pale yellotw, but it is a colour rather of too much
body for illuminating of prints yer being well
ground with gum-water, it is of ufe after it has
been well washed.
0. The plant celandine will afford another good
yellow by infufing it in water and preffing it gently,
and then boiling the liquor with a little alum.
This yellow will incline fomewhat to green.
10. But a yellow which fome prefer to the reft,
and may be ufed in feveral capacities of lights, is
one made of French berries, and prepared as
follows: Boil two ounces of French berries in a
quart of lixivium made of pearl-athes and water,
till the liquor gives a fine tinge of yellow to a
bit of paper dipped in it; and then pour it off from
the berries; fet the liquor cool, and bottle it up for
ifc.
Then again, put a pint of the same lixivium to the
berries, and boil them till the liquor is as deepico-
loured as gall-fione, and this will be fit for the
shade of any fort of yellows you can ufc. This
may be boiled till it produces a brown colour; and
will, with a little ox-gall, ferve to shade any leaf-
gold that is laid on paper, and is much preferable to
gall-ftone in imitating any gold-colour; and it
anfwers well upon a tincture of gamboge, or any of
the former yellows.
11. Next to this may be reckoned the tincture
of faffron in common water only, which affords a
bright reddish yellow, fuch as would be required
for an orange-colour, in covering the Ihadowed
parts of a print; and when faffron is infufed in
rectified spirits of wine, there is nothing higher





" 31
but then it will fly, unless it he loaded with gum-
arabic.
12. As for a deep yellow, with a body, Dutch
pink comes the neareft of any to the forementioned
Rtrong yellow made of French berries in point of
colour: but the English pink, which is still made
of French berries, is of a lighter yellow.
13. Alfo a good yellow colour for illuminating
prints may be extracted from the rools of gingers.
and with tranfparent verdigrife it makes a fine
green.
It is to be obferved, that the English and Dutch
yellow pinks are made with French berries ground
to a fine powder and boiled.
CHAP. IV
Of ORANCE-Colour.
Norange-colour for wathing prints is made by
A
laying on a teint of gamboge; and over that
some minium or red lead wathed, and rendered fine
and fit for ufe; it not being fine enough to paint
with as it is bought at the shops; and befides,
it will change, or turn black in a few weeks, if it
be not refined; but being well prepared, it will be
very lafting and beautiful. But this you muft
take notice of, that an ounce will not produce
above twenty grains of a good colour to fland the
reft of painters. This colour may be mixed with
gamboge upon a white Dutch tile, to render it of
the teint you would have it, either fofter or ftronger
or elfe the gamboge may be glazed over, and
Rrengthened with the tincture of faffron, which
will make it glare into a ftrong orange.
D3


58
CH A P. V
Of MINIUM, the brightef RED LEAw; the Manner
of preparing it.
HE minium or red led is as heavy and ftrong a
colour as moft we have; and prepared, is
the moft beautiful one, when it is well washed and
cleanfed of its more weighty parts, which caufe
it to turn black.
Mr. Borle directs the preparing, or cleanfing it
in the following manner: Put four ounces of it in
a quart of rain-water; then ffirring it, pour off
the water immediately, and let it fettle to the
bottom of every cup or glats you pour it into;
then pouring off that water, in a day's time you
will have the colour dry, and as fine as can be de-
fired. Afterwards put a little gum-arabic into
each glats or cup, and as much water as will
moiften each of them.
Any of thefe may be afterwards ufed with gum-
water but if the gum you put in it at firft make
it Rrong enough to glaze it, then you need only
add to it common water; and according as your
colour is less or more gumined, ufe lefs or more
gum-water; for it is of ufelf a dead colour. When
you ufe this colour, touch it gently on the yellow
above mentioned that is made of the yellow herries,
into the light fide, and if it wants a shade, you
may put a littlle vermilion upon it; but ver-
milion is too heavy to paint with, when you
would illuminate your prints, becaute it hides the
shades of the engravings though tometimes they
had better he hidden than appear. Some generally
shade this minium with carmine, which gives it a
fine effect, and renders it equal to the brighteft red


59 ).
fower that is to be feen; leaving still the lights
ancoloured, only dathing a little way into the
lights with the minium.
When the carmine has shaded the minium, it
may be shaded again with lake in the flronger
Part, to bring it to a deeper red.

CH AP. VI.
Of otber REDs.
1. Scarlel-Red.

6
CARLE 1 may be reprefented on a plane with
nd
minium a little mixed with vermilion; but if
you have occafion to paint a flower of a fearlet co-
lour on a print, let your lights as well as shades
be covered thin with minium; and the shaded parts
glazed with carmine, which will produce an ad-
mirable fcarlet, fuch as is feen in the fower
fcarlet martagon.
2. Crimfon-Red.
 crimfon colour is reprefented with carmines
but it is neceffary that the bayer be informed, that
there are feveral forts of it; some darker, and some
much coarfer than others: therefore it should ne-
ver he bought by candle-light, unless of fuch as a
perfon can confide in : for between the beft and the
worft there is ten shillings an ounce difference:
nay, indeed, all the money that an ounce will coft,
becaufe had carmine will but fpoil the work.
3. Next after crimfon comes lake, which is of
ufe in shading and heightening carmine. But it
muft be obferved that in laying of carmine upon a
print, you muft touch your lights only with fuch
a thin teint of it as can fcarcely be obterved; lay-
ing it on frong juft on that part of the light
which enters upon the shade, and afterwards lay-
ing fome lake on the Rronger part of the shade.
D4


60
Lake is to be had in moft colour-fhops, ready
prepared in shells for water-colours.
To make a fine lake, take half a pound of good
brazil, and boiling it in three pints of ley made
with the afhes of vine-twigs till half the ley be eva-
porated, let it fettle, and then strain it; which
done, boil it again with fresh brazil, a quarter of
a pound; cochineal, two ounces, and terra marits
half an ounce, adding a pint of fair water. Let this
boil sill it be half evaporated as before: then fet it
by to fettle, and ftrain it. But when you take it
off the fire, remember to put in half an ounce of
calcined alum, reduced to an impalpable powder,
and diffolve is, by firring it about with a stick,
adding a quarter of a drachm of arfenic.
In order to give it a body, reduce two cuttle-
fith bones to a very fine powder, and putting in the
powder, let it dry up at leifure. Then grind it
with a good quantity of fair water, in which leave
it to Keep, and afterwards ftrain it through a cloth;
and making it up into a few tablets, or cakes, fet
it to dry on a card, or pafteboard. If you would
have this lake redder, add lemon-juice; and if you
would make it deeper, add oil of tartar.
Anotherlake may be made as follows: Boil shav-
ings or fhearings of fearlet in a ley of the afhes
of burnt tartar: this ley having the property of fe-
parating the dye from the (carlet shreds. When
It has boiled enough, take it off, and putting in
cochineal, powdered maftic and roch-alum, boil
the whole again, and while it is quite hot, strain it
wo or three times through a fine bag; the first
ime the bag muft be squeezed with two slicks from
the top to the bottom; then the gross matter re-
maining being taken out of the bag, wash it well.
After this, pass the liquor you expreffed with the
Ricks through the bag again, and you will find a


6


61
pafte sticking to the fides of the bag, which you
may either (pread upon a pafteboard, or divide into
sinall parcels upon paper, and fet it afide to dry.
To make lake-columbine, fleep half a pound of
the fineft Brazil wood of Fernambuca rafped, in
three pints of the fineft diftilled vinegar, for at leaft
a month, the longer the better. After which feethe
the whole in balneo marix, till it boils up three or
four times; letting it fettle for a day or two. Af-
ter this, prepare a fourth part of powdered alum,
and putting it in a clean earthen pan, ftrain the li-
quor upon the alum, and fo let it remain for a
day. Afterwards heat the whole again till the li-
quor firnmers, and let it fettle twenty-four hours;
then reduce two cuttle fith bones into powder, and
having warmed the liquor, pour it in upon them,
and fir it about with a stick till it be cold, and
leave it again for twenty-four hours before you
Hrain it. Remember, that it muft be firft ftrained
upon the alum, before it is poured upon the cuttle-
fith bones.
4. But a liquid colour not much inferior to Car-
mine itfelf may be made of the rafpings of Brazil-
wood: this colour is in the tranfparent crimion,
and is made as follows: Boil an ounce of the raip-
ings of Brazil-wood, fold at the dry-falters, and
at fome colour-fhops, in twelve ounces of pale
Rtale beer, and a little alum, till the colour of the
liquor is as ftrong as you pleafe, which may be dif=
covered by dipping a slip of white paper into it.
When this colour is as you would have it, pass it
when cooled into a linen cloth, and bottle it up for
Ife.
And if you would bring this colourto a body,
take ox-blood, and dry it till it can be reduced to a
powder, which being done, mix it with the liquor,
and it will communicate a colour to it little infe-
DS


62
rior to a middling carmine: fome fay, that the
blood of an ox or cow dried, will make a good body
for any colour.
s. A Crimson Colour, from Mr. Boyle.
Take the fruit of the berry-bearing fpinacl,
which being preffed, will yield a beautiful red-co¬
loured juice; boil this, adding a fourth part of
alum to it; then letting it cool, put it up for ufe.
6. The red beet -root baked with a little ftrong
vinegar produces an elegant red colour equal to a
tincture of carmine: then pour it on alum, and it is
fit forufe, where carmine should be ufed in washing
prints, for it is a fine tran(parent red.
7. Another Crimsen Colour for washing Prints, Exc.
is prepared as follows.
Put thirty or forty grains of bruifed cochineal
into a gallipot, with as many drops of tartar-ley as
will juft wet it, and make it give forth its colour;
then immediately adding to this mixture half a
fpoonful of water, or more, if the colour be Htill
too deep, you will have a delicate purple liquor or
findure. Then taking a bit of alum, (crape very
finely with a knife a small quantity of it into the
fincture, and this will take away the purple colour
and make if a delicate tincture. Strain it through
a fine cloth into a clean gallipot, and ufe it as foon
as you can, becaufe this is a colour that will al-
ways look exquifitely fine if it is foon made ufe of;
but will decay if it Rands long.
8. Indian Red.
Next to thefe is the Indian red, which though
it is a colour of a body, yet it is afeful for a back
ground for ffowers at a diftance, when ufed with

gum-water.



63
There is alfo an earth brought from the 1fle
of Wight, which has been found to mix extremely
well with gum-water, though, being of a vifcousna
ture, it requires lets gum than moft other colours;
and as it is naturally fit for ufe without grinding,
and is vifcous, fo it will no doubt mix with oil as
well as with water.
There is one thing very ex-
traordinary in this earth, which is, that if you rub
a deal board with it, it will make the board exact-
ly of the colour of mahogany-wood, and stain it fo
deep, and with to much flrength, that it is hard to
get it out with wathing.
C H AP. VII.
Of PURPIE.
FINE tranfparent purple may be made either
AA
redder, or nearer the blue, as you would have
it, by boiling four ounces of rafped Brazil-wood in a
pint of ftale beer, with haif an ounce of logwood,
or Campeachy-wood, till the liquor is heightened
to the colour you defire, which may be known by
dipping a piece of paper in it.
If you find it toored, add an ounce of logwood
to the Brazil-wood, which will make it much
nearer to the purple than the former; and by this
method you may humour it to any degree of
purple, by putting in either more or lefs logwood
to the former compofition, and fixing the colour
with alum.
This will produce fuch a clear purple as no mix-
ture of folid reds and blues will do, and the re-
ceipt has been for a long time kept secret. It is
said, that the beft purple colour that can be made,
may be compoted between the carmine and indigo,
to Rrengthen which, on the red fide, you may add
lake between the lighter and darker part; and to
D6



64
lake, when it is ufed in the fame way, on the fore-
going purple, or the liquid crimfon, produces a
very fine effect.
The colour may be varied, and made either red-
der, by putting more carmine, or bluer, by ufing
more indigo, which, being mixed on a white Dutch
rile, will shew itfelf.
A fine purple colour may be made of the grofs
part or fediment of lake-columbine, both for oit
and water-colours, as follows:
Take the fediment of lake-columbine, which
falls to the bottom of the vial in which is the bone
of the cuttle-fith, let it dry, and grind it; there
will be no lake to fine as this; and if you mix it
with lake, it will give it a better body, befides
more ftrength and vigour.
CH A P. VIII.
Of BLvE.
1. THE ultramarine blue is not only the firft, but
the heft fort of bright blue we have, as it
gives a spirit to all paintings where blues are ufed.
This colour is made from the lapis lazuli divefted
of its gold, and ground into an impalpable powder,
which is done as follows: Take half a pound of la-
pis lazuli, and putting it upon red-hot coals, let
it flay there till it is red-hot : then quenching it in
very Arong vinegar, and grinding it upon porphyry,
or any fuch hard ftone, with rectified brandy,
to an impalpable powder, make a paftil, with which
the lapis is to be incorporated: for the making of
this paftil, take bees-wax, turpentine, rofin, and
linfeed-oil, of each a quarter of a pound; and
melting the whole together over a flow fire, when
it begins to boil, pour it into a glazed pot: this

1


65
is the pafte of ultramarine. Take of this paffe a
quantity equal to that of the lapis, knead them to-
gether upon the marble, and being well incorpo-
rated, let them remain for one night; after which,
to bring out the ultramarine that is in the pafte,
pour clean water upon it, and Knead it with your
hands as pafte is kneaded, and the ultramarine will
come out; for the receiving of which, place a por-
ringer or other proper vellel under your hands,
and let it fettle in this water till you fee the ultra-
marine at the bortom of it.
If your colour feems to be clammy or pnafty,
you may correct it thus: add thereto tartar, dif-
solved in water, as much as will drown it, and let
it reft for one day at leaft; then wath it in warm
water, and you will by that means have it correct
and well purified. Ultramarine muft be choten of
a high colour and well ground, which may be
Known by putting it between the teeth; for if it
feels gritty, it is a fign that it has not been
well ground.
To know whether it be pure and unmixed, puta
little of it into a crucible, and hearing it red-hot,
if the powder does not change its colour after
trial, it is certainly pure; but, on the contrary, if
there be any change or black specks in it, then it
has been adulterated.
2. The Pruffian blue is next to ultramarine in
beauty, if it be ufed in oil, though it is not agreed
on whether it will hold fo well as the other, par-
ricularly as not having the body of the ultra
marine. The Pruffian blue does not grind well in
water, becaufe there is fuch an oily quality in it,
that it does not mix kindly with water, and at the
beft will change, as it is now prepared in the com-
mon way: Attempts have been made to make it
2 blue ink, which indeed has held the colour for a


66
month or two, but then turned to a muddy yels
low. And when you put your pencil with gum
water into a shell of this blue, you will find that
where the water preads, the blue will turn yel-
lowifh, till the body of the colour is well firred
up; and after all that can be done with this co-
lour in water, it will only ferve to thade ultrama-
rine with: but in oil it may ferve very well, for
the prefent, to fupply the place of ultramarine.
3.. Blue bice is a colour of good brightness, and
the next to the Pruffian blue. It is alfo a colour
of a good body, and will flow pretty well in the
pencil, especially if it be well wathed, as is direct-
ed to be done of the whites and minium.
4. Saunders blue is alfo of very good ufe, and
may ferve as a shade to ultramarine, or the blue
Dice, where the shades are not required to be very
deep, and is of itfelf a pleafant blue to be laid be-
tween the lights and shades of fuch a fower as is
of a mazarine blue.
5. The laemus or litmus blue, is another beau-
tiful colour, and will run in a pen as free as ink:
being made of laemus, or, as some term it, litmus,
which is fold at moff druggifts fhops. But as this
colour is never to be met with prepared for water-
colours, we therefore shall give the following me-
thod of preparing it, according to NIrs. Mariona.
Take an ounce of lacmus, and boil it in about a
pint of finall-beer-wort, till the colour is as ftrong
as you would have it; then pour off the liquor
into a gallipot, and let it cool for ufe: it will toon
become a jelly, and by degrees will grow hard.
But this colour is to be opened again and made
liquid by water, to as to be ufed in ink; and will
be either paler or darker, as it is made thicker or
thinner. This affords a bright colour, and has
extraordinary effects : for it is not only a beautis


67
ful-but a holding colour. This colour, if it be
touched with aqua-fortis, immediately changes
into a fine crimfon, little inferior to carmine, and
finks quite through the paper, fo as not to be got
out; to that when it is ufed as a blue, it is beft to
keep it from aqua-fortis, or fuch frong acids. It
is a good fhade for ultramarine or blue bice, where
the ftrongeft shades should not be extremely deep;
and for colouring of prints it is very good, as it is
a tranfparent colour, and goes a great wav.
6. Indigo biue makes the tlrongeft fhade for
blues of any other, and is a foft warm colour,
when it has been well ground and wathed with
gum-water, by means of a ftone and muller. It is
made of what lightness you pleafe, by putting more
gum-water to it; and by how much the less gum-
water is put to it, the darker it will be. Before
you afe it upon a print, it will be proper to try it
upon a Dutch tile; for it runs warmly in the pen-
cil, and to perhaps may otherwife prove too Hrong
for your defign, which is always to be taken care
of, when a flowing colour is to be laid over the
dark shade of a print; which (hade will much
heighten its blackness, and even make it appear
quite black.
7. A fine Blue, from Mr. Boyle.
Take of the blue leaves of rue, and beating them
a little in a ftone-mortar with a wooden peftle, in-
fufe them in water, juice and all, for fourteen
days or more, wathing them every day till they
are rotten; and at laft beat them and the water to-
gether till they become a pulp, and let them dry
in the fun.
This will produce as good blue as indigo, and
be much fofters but in order to keep it a long time,
when you beat it the laft time, add a little powder


68
of gam-arabic to it, of which you may put more
or.lefs, as you would have it more free or tena-
cious in the working.
This is an excellent blue
for fhading, has a good body, and runs warm in
the pencil.
3. A transparent Blue, frem Mr. Boyle, equal to
Uliramarine.
This is a beautiful blue, the chief ingredient of
which is the cyanus or blue cornbottle-ffower.
This ffower has two blues in it, one of a pale co-
lour in the larger ourward leaves, the other of a
deeper colour in the inner leaves, or middle of th
Hower. Both thefe will do, being feparated from
the buttons and cafes they grow in; but the deep
blue leaves in the middle produce by much the
beft colours; this may be obferved by rubbing the
leaves while they are fresh, to hard upon a piece
of good writing-paper, as to prefs out the juice,
which will yield an excellent colour that will not
fade for feveral years. This part of the ffower is
therefore the principal, and what may be depended
on, and should be picked from the reft of the
flower-leaves the fame day it was gathered, or as
foon afterwards as poffibly can be. A good quan-
fity of thefe middle-leaves being procured, prefs
out what juice you can from them, and adding a
little alum to it, you will have a lafting tranfpa-
rent blue of as bright a flanding colour as can be
defired, fcarce inferior in beauty to ultramarine,
and very durable.
As for the outward ffower-leaves, which are
much paler, it is not certain that they will anfwer
the end, but some trials may be made whereby
that may be known alfo. Let the flowers be ga-
thered about the beginning of June, or in July
or Auguft; but the preparation of the colour, by


69
picking out the middle deep blue flower-leaves, and
preffing out the juice, muft be done with all the ex
pedition poffible, or elfe they will lofe their per-
fection.
It is probable, that if the leaves of thefe blue
cornbottle-flowers were cured in the fame manner
as faffron is, they would produce a much greater
body of colour from which a tincture might be
drawn with more eafe, than if preffed raw or freth
from the field.
In order to do this, fuch a kiln muft be prepared
as is ufed for curing of (affron, in which may be
made a small charcoal fire that may communicate
a heat to the top of the Kiln, which is to be covered
with a hair-cloth; upon this should be laid four or
five fheets of white paper, fuch as is ufed in cu-
ring of Laffron : afterwards a parcel of the picked
fowers are to be laid on to the thickness of two
or three inches, laying them clofe and flat with a
Knife, and fprinkling them with fome gum-water.
Then the cake of flowers is to be covered with two
or three sheets of paper, and a board, with a small
weight laid on for a few minutes; after which the
board is to be taken off, and the cake of flowers to
be turned on the Kiln, taking hold of all the papers
with both hands; and when it has been rightly
placed, take off the upper papers, and (prinkle the
cake a second time with fome gum-water; then
fettling the cake again with a knite, let the papers
be laid on as before, with the board and weight for
a minute or two; after which let the papers be turn-
ed again and again, till the cake of flowers becomes
united, and of the thickness of a cake of faffron.
In this operation you will find the flowers grow
darker and darker every time they are turned, till
at length the cake will look of a deep blue tending
to black, from whence a tincture may be eafily


70
drawn. During this operation, great care should
be taken that the fire does not feorch the flowers,
but that it be as conftant and gentle as poffible,
which will be a fure way to bring the cake to a
good colour.
But it will not be improper for any perfon, who
shall undertake the curing of this cofour, to con-
fult the methods of curing fatfron, of which they
may be informed either in a treatife of the method
of curing faffron written by Mr. Dauglas, or in
another by Mr. Brodly, in his monthly treatife of
hufbandry and gardening.
CH AP. IX.
Of BLACk.
HE proper black for water-colours is ivory-
& black, which, if pure and well ground, is of
wfe in painting in miniature, but it is not proper
for colouring prints, being too heavy a colour, and
hiding the beautiful flrokes of the graver, unlets
done with great care; however, if it be neceffary
to ufe black for the darkening a print, rather choofe
a frong tincture of good India ink than the ivory.
black; but to colour pieces in miniature, ufe the
ivory-black, prepared as follows:
Grind the ivory-black well in gun-water, till
you perceive a Kind of oily liquor fettle to the bot-
tom; this liquor mix with as much of the ivory-
black as you think will be proper to make it flow
freely in the pencil, and it will bear an extraordis
nary glofs; and if the object is fhining, fuch as
the wings of Come beetles, mix with- fome of it a
little white upon a Dutch glazed tile, till you find
it light enough to receive the fhade; and then
make another lighter mixture of the same, which,
being ufed on the brighter part of the subject, will
produce the effect you defire.


< 71

CHAP. X.
Of GREENS.
T. ( REENS are allowed by all to depend upon
I the yellow and blue; and any green colour,
whatever you pleafe, may be made with them.
Gamboge is one of the firft yellows, which may
be made to produce five or fix greens with verdis
grife, according as the gamboge is in the greater
or leffer proportion; if it abounds, it will make a
tolerable oak green; and being mixed with a
greater quantity of verdigrife, it will make a fine
Grais green.
2. But the yellow, which some prefer before all
others, is made of French berries (as already de-
scribed under the yellows), which is either deeper
or fainter as the liquor they are boiled in is more
or lefs flained with them; if it be very thin, it
makes a good glaze all over the verdigrife, and;
as it approaches nearer to Dutch pink or gall-fione,
commands almoft any colour we want; being
agrecably mixed with the tranfparent verdigrife;
and is fill tranfparent.
2. in like manner, a yellow drawn from the
roots of harberries, and alfo that drawn from the
roots of the mulberry-tree, will, in a great Mmea-
fure, produce the like effect, being mixed with the
tranfparent verdigrife. As for the verdigrife itfelt,
it produces a fine bluifh green, flows eafy in the
pencil, and may even ferve as an ink to Write
with.
4. The way of preparing the tranfparent ver-
digrife is as follows: Take fix ounces of common
verdigrife (the diftilled verdigrife not antwering
this purpofe to well), break it into little pieces,


C 72)
and boil it gently in a quart of white-wine virregary
keeping it continually firring, and, when you
Berceive it to boil, add a little tartar broken; and
continuing ftill to ftir it till you find the liquor of
such a colour as you would have it, that is, till it
is of a fine tranfparent green with a bluiffi caft,
which you may know by dipping in a bit of white
paper, then pour it through a linen-cloth into an
open veffel, and fet it. to cool; and when it. is
quite cold, bottle it up for ufe. Remember to cork
the bottle clofe, for being expoted to the air it will
dry; however, it may be reduced again by com-
Irion Water.
This liquor should be touched upon part of the
lights and fhades of a print, and the fhades after-
wards coloured with fap green.
In the making of this green, remember that it
be flrong enough, becaufe it cannot be ftrength-
ened afterwards without the trouble of boiling it
afresh : but it may at any time he rendered as faint
as you pleafe by mixing common water with it.
5. Sap green is a colour like that of an oak-
leaf, if it he ufed thin with common water: for
this as well as the former wants no sum: but if if
be ufed flrong, it will produce as dark a greeen as
any. It will be proper to try the colour firft upon
a white Dutch tile; and by thinning it with wa-
ter, you may render it of what ftrength you pleafe,
and may brighten it very much by the addition of
a very little verdigrife.
There are two ways of making fup green, viz.
Firff, take the flowers of blue fiag iris, or fower-
de-luce, and press them while there is any juice to
be got from them; beil them gently in a glazed
pipkin, till it grows thick, adding a little alum to
I, and it will make a very ufeful and lafting
Breen.


6 73 ).
You muft obferve this, that in the boiling of
Any juice, Cot. of the colours before mentioned
you should always do it in an earthen pirking fior
if it be boiled in veffels of metal, they will ofien
times change it from the colour intended.
The second way to make a fap green &mp rijs
wathing and illaminating of prints, is to take the
juice of buck-thorn-berries, and though tha
quice fimply will yield only a dark purple of 
very bafe hue, yet either of thefe colours will mix
with the liquid verdigrife above mentioned, and
will make a delicate flrade for it.
6. There is befides thefe another green; which
is admired by forme perfons, that carries a good
body with it, and a degree of tranfparency too (as
it may be made), but, as it is commonly ufed, is
a colour of a full body, and fit only for painting
in miniature. This is made by mixing Dutch
bink with indigo to what degree of colour you
1
pleafe: but the high preparation of French ber-
ries with indigo is much to be preferred to Dutch
pink, especially as this anfwers all the intentions
of Dutch pink, and carries a tranfparency with it
which the Dutch pink has not.
CH A P. XI.
The Vse and Nature of dry CoLOURs.
1. DLUE BICE is the moft excellent blue next

to ultramarine, which is too good to wash
withal, wherefore we leave it out here, becaufe
blue bice may do very well inftead of it; and in-
deed both may be left out, fince small may be ufed
inflead of them : however, it will not work to
well as blue bice; which, without doubt, is too


7
A)
good to ufe upon all occafions; only when you in=
tend to beffow fome cofl and pains upon your
work: otherwife, you may ufe no other blue in
your piece than blue verditer, with which you
may make a very good thift without any other
blue, that is, in any ordinary work.
2. Indigo is a dark blue that is ufed principally
to shade with upon other blues. Indigo and yel-
low berries mixed together make a dark green, to
shade other greens in the darkeff places.
3. Blue verditer is a very bright pleafant blue,
and the eafieff to work in water : it is fomewhat
inclining to a green: and, being mixed with yel-
low berries, it makes a very good green: this is
the blue moft ufed.
4. Verdigrife is a good green, but subject to de-
cay; when it is dry upon the paper, it will be of
a lighter colour than it was when firft laid on:
therefore to preferve it from that fault, put fome
Tap green among it, to diffolve in it, which will
make it keep its colour. There is a diffilled ver-
digrife to be bought at the shops that is a far bet-
ter green than the other, but it is fomewhat dearer,
and the other may ferve instead of it.
g. Verditer green is a light colour feldom ufed
in any thing but in colouring landskips, and thofe
places that should appear afar off; and it is good
for fuch a purpofe, becaufe it is fomewhat inclining
to a blue, that you may make shift to do guy
thing well enough without it, for a little blue ver-
diter mixed with copper green, and a little white,
make juft fuch another green.
6. Sap green is a dark, dirty green, and never
afed but to shade other greens in the darkelf
places, or elfe to lay upon fome dark ground, be-
hind a picture which requires to be coloured with


75
a dark green; but you may do without this green,
for indigo and yellow berries make juft fuch
another colour..
. Copper green is an excellent tranfparent

green, of a fhining nature, if it is thickened in
the Jun, or upon a gentle fire; and it is the moft
ifed of any green in wathing, especially in colour-
ing of the grafs, ground, or trees, for it is al-
moft grass-green.
8.. Vermilion is the moft perfect fearlet colour:
you need not either grind or wath it, being fine
enough itfelf; only temper it with your finger in
a gallipor, or oyfter-fhell, with gum-water, and
it will be ready to ufe: if you put a little yellow
berries among it, it will make the brighter co-
lour: this is principally ufed for garments.
9. Lake is an excellent crimion colour, with
which you may shade vermilion, or your yellow
garments, in the darkeff places; and being mix-
ed with white, you may make a fky-colour with
it; or fleth-colour, by mixing white and a little
red lead with it; and it is an excellent colour of
itfelf for colouring garments, of the like.
Indian lake is the best lake, but it is too good
to be ufed in wathing prints with, unless you in-
rend to beftow great curiofity upon your work;
for the beft fort of ordinary lake will ferve well
enough for ordinary uses; and this alfo will be
Tomewhat too coftly : therefore, inftead thereof
you may ufe red ink thickened upon the fire,
which may ferve your purpofe very well, better
even than lake, unlets it is very good.
Obferve, that if you would make a light fky-
colour of your red ink, or if you would mix it
among your ffefh-colour, you muft not thicken
it; but shade your vermition rather with Spanish
brown than thick red ink, as it may ferve very


76
well for that purpofe; but it is not altogether fuch
a bright and clear colour.
10. Red lead is the neareft to an orange colour,
and putting a little yellow berries into fome of it,
will make a perfect orange colour: but if you de-
fire to make a ffeth-colour of it, you muft put no
yellow in it. This colour is ufed in colouring
buildings or highways in landlkips, after being.
mixed with a little white. Befides, this is the
only bright colour to fhade yellow garments
with, in order to make them look like changeable
taffety. It is good glfo to colour any light ground in
a picture, taking only the thir water of it; and fo
for feveral other ufes, as you shall fee occafion.
11. Vellow berries are moft ufed in wathing of
all other colours : they are bright and tranfparent,
fit for all ufes, and will be fufficient without the
ufe of any other yellow.
12. Saffron is a deep vellow, if you let it fland
2 good while: it is of use principally to fhade
yellow berries with inflead of red lead, and it is
Tomewhat of a brighter fhadow; but you may
make a shift well enough without this colour, for
red lead and yellow berries make juft fuch another
colour.
13. Mafficote is a light yellow just like yellow
berries and white; and therefore you may do well
enough without it, only for faving you the la-
bour to mix your yellow berries with white, when
you have occafion for a light yellow; then you
may make ufe of it to colour a light. ground in a
picture; in which cafe, shadow it with the water
of burnt umber or red lead; that is, the thin-
neft part of the colour.
14. Cerufe is the beft white, if it be good
and finely ground: of, for want of it, white lead
picked : either of thefe will ferve well enough;


77
for either of them being mingled with another
colour will make it lighter, and the more fo
in proportion to the quantity of either mixed
with it.
15. Spanifh brown is a dirty brown colour,
and of no great ufe to colour any garment with,
unless it be an old man's gown, or to fhade vere
milion, or lay upon any dark ground behind v
picture, or elfe to fhade yellow berries in the
darkeff places, when you want lake or thin red
ink.
iIt is the beft and brighteft colour, when it is
burnt in the fire till it be red-hot, though if you
would colour, a hare, horfe, dog, or the like, you
muft not burn it, but for other ufes it is beft when
burnt for inftance, to colour any wooden poft,
bodies of trees, or any thing elfe of wood, or any
dark ground in a picture. It is not to be ufed
about any garments, unless you would colour
a number of old men's gowns of caps, flanding
togethef; on account they muft not be all of one
colour therefore for diftinction and variety's
Lake! you may ufe umber unburnt for fome of

them:
16. Printer's black is moft ufed, becaufe it is
eafieft to be had, and ferves very well in wathing.
 Lou muft obferve, that yeu are not to put any
black among your colours to make them dark, be-
caufe it will make them dirty neither should
you shade any colour, with black unless it be
Spanish brown, when you would colour an old
man's gown, or the like, that requires to be done
of a fad colour.
17. lvory burnt, or, inflead of that, hurnt bone,
is the beft black, and is thus made: Take ivory
or for want of it fome white bone, and put it inro
the fire till it be thoroughly burnt; then taking it
E


 78
out, and letting it cool, fir it, and taking out the
biackeft part of it in the middle, grind it for ufe.
C H A P. XII.
Divections for making Gum, Hlum, or eiber Waters.
1. Temake GUn-WATER.

TAKE an ounce of fine white gumarabic, and
half an ounce of clear white candied fugars
diffolve thefe in a quart of fair water; then paft-
ing it through a fine fieve, or a piece of muffin,
botile it for ufe; and, as you have occation
to ufe its pour out a little at a time, remembering
to keep it clear; for if it should prove dirty or
foul, it will spoil your colours. By adding a little
coloquintida to the solution of the guin, toc. it
will prevent the flies from spoiling your work, if
it should chance to he expofed.
Or gum-water may be made thus: Pour a
quart of pure fpring-water into a jar glafs, and
hanging in it, tied up in a fine woollen rag, a
fufficient quanticy of pure white gum-arabic bruif-
eds let it hang till the gum is diffoiveds then
putting your finger into the water, if you find
them stick together, as if they were glued, your
water is too Rrong or full of the gum; and there-
fare you muft put more fair water to it; and, if
you find it too weak, you muft put in it more gum,
adding, if there is any occafion for it, the colo-
quintida as before.
With this water moft of the colours are to be
tempered; and with fo, much of it, as that being
touched when dry the colour will not come off. it
is to be obterved, that if the colour glifters, there
is too much gum in it.







(73)
5
2. To make ALUM-WATER.
Boil four ounces of alum in a pint of fair water,
sifl the alum is diffolved; or thus, to two quarts
of fpring or well-water, put haff a pound of pow-
dered roch alum; diffolving it well by boiling;
then filtering it through brown paper, keep it up
for ufe.
Wet your paper with this water before you lay
on any of your colours, and it will prevent them
from finking in, and will befides add a luftre and
beauty to the colour laid on. But you muff fake
notice, that if the paper is not good, it muft be
wathed over four or five times with a large bfush
or pencil; remember alfo, that alum raifes ftand-
ing colours, and preferves them from fading.
If you defign to varnifh your prints after they
are coloured, then wash them all over equally
with white Harch, before you colour them, and
that being dry, lax on your colours.
2. To make LIME-WATYR.
Take some unllaked time, and covering it an
inch over with fair water, and fo letting it remain
for twelve hours, pour off the clear part of the
watez,: and keep it for ufe. By wathing with
this water you may change your fap green into
biue.
4. To make PEARL-APHES WATER.
Take about half an ounce of pearl afhes, and
keeping this quantity for twelve hours in rain or
river water, pour off as much of the water as is
clear, and you will find if of excellent ufe with
Brazil-wood in giving its colours an enlivening
Jufre


1


1


  " s " " 

80 )
H
S. To MakexS12E for Water-Colours.
Take half a pound of the cuttings of white
rloves, and keeping them in water for some time,
29
boil them, with fix quarts of water, till it be con-
firmed to qne; then train it through a cloth into
an eartheir pan.

f
If, when the fize has ftood till it is cold; it
feels firm under your hand, then it is:fufficiently
Hrong.
You may prepare, any colours with: this

1 
tize, while it is warm, after diffolying it. The

principal ufe of it is to prevent colours fromifhin-
55
ingtby candle-light, as they would do if. mixed

with gum-water; on this account the fcenes of
Mlag-houfes are painted in fize.)

3


FINIS.
5




I
Lanly Publissed, Price 13.
= A. NEW EDITION OF
2
THEART OFDRAWING INPERSPECTIVE.
TO WRICH Is Duptp

The ART OF PAINTINC upon Glass; and DRAWING
in CRAKONs, with Directions for making thems after
the French and Italian Manner. Alfo the Any of
ErcHINC and JAPANNINC upon Wood, Metal &&c.
and making the hardeft and moft tranfparent Var-
nithes; with a Method of cafting Tmber in any Form
Whatever.

Also.. Pries 18.
THE ART OF WRITINC.
32.1

BY A. SERLE.
Wish Copper-plate Copies of the various Hands now in
Ofe.





at 

4
7
6






At




-

as








d11













4E

y h


 


P
tr


nlent

T


uriiy
ILII

lele



Hnay

3r 

17
5
M



t





 













5



5
6
14
8

9

10


0

F


a
ii
X

 tn





1


5

m









29



31

up
4
r
n

16



5

r





3
d


1
ae


114
n
L
5

hst Bea



 















23







3


i



 
e t



fer



II


Pl.2.


