
Of
1HC LIR 1





 
R O

I
11
4
1
RIO v G all the beauciful and entertaining Arts, that
ufed in moll farions of life, from the General who commands
of Draaving has had the largeff fhare of Admirers,
an Army, to the Rlechanicks who fugport themfelves by
4 A the number o thes: including almoff all alankind;
Laudicratc. Neither is the Etlerm of this excellent Art con-
and no wonder, nce is gives us the likeness of many
fined to Adults, for we often find Children, through a parural
objects we have no other ways of viewing, and heips us to the
Cenius, draw a great Variety of Figures. and that in Tuch a
remembrance of all the works of nature or art. It prefents
anner as to excue our admiration.
to our view things long fince paft, the deeds of People and
In order therefore to instruct Vouth, and inform them how
Nations long fince dead, and shews us the features and re-
to acquire fome degrees of Perfection, we shall ly down
temblances of our Anceffors for feveral Generarions. There
certain Rules which is abfolutely neceffary they should be
are few Arts or Profeffions to which if Draving be not the
veil acquainted with, and then prefent them with a courte
Parent, the muft at leaft be acknowledged a kind of Abiffant;
of Leffons in the Art of Drawing, delivered in the moll clear
all defigns and models being execured by Drancing; Marhe-
and concife manner poffible.
maticians, Architects, and Navigacors, daily practife it; tis
RUL Es to direct the Students Judgment and Practice in the Art of DRAWINC.
Rarving is the reprefenting by Lines or Shades the form
diligence: Tis a fam’d maxim, that laziness never pro-
1 or appearance of any thing in Nature or Art, the imi-
duced any thing that was excellent; Drawing is an Art of
tation of another Draught, or the exprefting by Lines and
some length and time, and to be perfect in it, is neceffary
Shades any defigns conceived in the Mind. And ac in
that the Hand should be improved in Practice, and the Mind
imitating Nature, or any Draught; the Riind is fril im-
in Judgment every day.
preft with the form and shape of the Figure; which, by
the operation of the hand, is afrerwards exprested by Lines,
Let no Duy pass you witheut something done;
it will appear how necetiary it is hat the Alind should be
But let the Fratice of the Hand facceed
frequently ufed in a curicas abfervance of what is propoted
The precious Sxeculanons of the Head.
to ir, by which mear, i. will be mare Rrongly impreft by the
objicrs, and conceive mmore jTs about them, and the hand
Or as Herace exprefies it;
will delineare with the grearr cfe and exactnets whar is thus
Rrongly impreft on the meimor
Nulla dres fine Linca.
In order to draw well, tis neceffary to underftand what
is good and beauriful in a Draught. In which knowledge the
Tis neceffary that some time be (pent in Praclice every
Mind will make a quick progrels, by comparing Prints and
day. The morning is recommended to the young Pupil as
Draughts together. Tis a rock on which many Fainters
the beft and mott proper part of the Day for bufinets; Em-
have tpliz, they have fa: fed themfelves with a bare imita-
ploy ir therefore in the ftudy and exercife of thofe things which
tation of bad Piece:, without improving their genius, or ac-
require the greatell pains and application.
quiring a capacity to difcover what are beaunes and what
The entrance iato Mnervo’s cahiner is no otherwife to be
defects: Our Ideas in some meafure ought to ferve us for a
gain’d than by flow gradacions; and in the Art of Drawing.
Model, and if we would improve thefe, we mull frequently
though the reprefentation of a human Figure, or many Fj.
view the performances of others; we ought to be nice and
gures in one piece, is what every one propotes that applies
critical in obferving fuch as are correct and good; we should
himself to that udy; yet this muft not to be artempted at fird;
meditate on every Print and Draught we fee, make neceliary
there are proper sleps by which the voung Practitioner is to be
reffections on them, and labour to fix in our WMlinds a remem.
brought forwards. His firft care should be employed in imi-
brance of their beauties, the freedom and boldness of the
tating dreight and curved Lines, (quare, round, regular, ir.
Our-Line, ard the Proportion of the feveral Parts. If the
regular, and inanimate Figures; alfo parts of human Figures;
Judgment be well inform’d, the young Practicioner will be
as the eyes, ears, hands, feet, 68c. of all which, in the fol-
enabled to make a much greater improvement than he can
lowing leaves, he will find feveral examples. This will be
a good Platform on which to crett the building; for by this
poffibly do if he proceeds in Practice without increafing in
labour he will artain a facility of Hand, a freedom and exact-
Judgmenc.
ness of drawing Lines, and a cullomary exercife of his pa-
More to the Gevius then the Hand avs orwe,
tience: Qualificarions without which no one can apply him-
felf with pleafure and diligence in the exact imitation of
From this the Brauties of your Art muft forw.
thafe objects which require greater length of time and more
The labour of the Hind mult fecond and fupport that of
art in copying.
the Brain; Tis imposible to become an able Arrill without
Tbus be achs undertakes a verk with pill.
making the Art habrual, an eafy and jutt expreffion is not
to be gained withou: conflant practice. In all Ares the rules
Has balf perform’d it by beginning rusil.
of them are learnee in a little time, but the perfection of
B
them is not acquire: sithour a long practice and 2 fevere
The


THe ART of DRAWING.
2
appear liff, but when they are performed in the manner
The circumferent rokes of a Figure, are called Out-Lines,
now directed, they have the refemblance of life and mo-
and the excellency of a good Our-Line confifts in freedom,
tion.
boldness, and the exact proportion of all its parts. The
bett methods of practice for attaining thefe perfections are
The firft das Poktures of each figure trace,
given in the following rules, but the Scholar is firft advifed
In swelling Out-Lires with an eafy gracc.
ever to avoid all triffing and indirect practices, fuch as tracing
Soft Rrokes, and graceful negligence command,
the originais thro' oil’d Paper, or taking advantages by means
The nice refultance of an cap tland.
of a thin Paper, or artful light: Thefe deceiving meatures
infallibly prevent all proficiency in Drawing. It is allo
You muft preferve in your Draughts a perfect relation be-
worth obferving that the Rule and Compaffes ought not to
tween the parts and the whole; that they may be entirely of
be ufed except in Archifefare, or to raife a Perpendicular,
a piece, every member ought to be made for its own head,
and thereby to form a Square or other Figure to draw in:
and to agree with it : ffrong limbs have no relation to a con-
Or when the Draught is finish’d, for the more curious
fumptive body or decay’d old age; tis a blemith when the
comparing the Original with the Copy, nicely examining their
eyes, legs, hands, and feet are not exactly paird; or when
agreement or difagreement: yer the bare eye by ufe will be
any of the Limbs are difproportionate to the others. In the
fufficient for that.
following Leffons the Learner is directed how to draw a face.
and then are given him the meatures and proportions of a
Let Sente prevail oer Reatons which are vain,
human body. The Scholar is advifed to make himself well
And render intricate the Ak T that's plain:
acquainted with thefe.
And if you would the Compats manage right.
Gaide if not with your Hlands, but by your Sight.
No look or member muff mithap’d appear;
Bold be tbe work, tur boldly regular.
Be content for fome time to practife after a good Out-Line,
without attempring at finith’d Pieces, or without harching or
The mufcles muft be inferted according to the Rules of
Thading your own draught, Kkerch your Our-Line at firtl with
Anatomy; let them no be crouded into finall Sections, but
flight touches and faint, that the amendment of it, where
kept as entire as pottible, expreffing only the principal muf-
neceffary, may be perform’d without appearing to be re-
cles; and they must be fwell’d larger in those members which
touch’d: Endeavour after the moft exact imitation in every
express any particular force, as the leg which fupports
Stroke, and when you correct the Out-Line by taking away
the body, or the arm that lifes a weight, Gc. than in other
a little of fome parts, and fwelling the others, mind that
members.
you lofe nothing of the freedom and boldness of it: Com
pare your Copy frequently with the Original, curioutly ob-
If ven the mufcles artfuily express,
ferving what is amifs, that a fault may not efcape without
Here they inferted are, and there they rise,
correction, and that in your next Draught, after the fame
Follone the rules Anatomills advite.
Original, you may avoid thofe Errors; for you are not to
In drawing limbs the Grecian forms reneav.
make new tranfitions from one Original to another, till
Express’d by mufcles, princiyal and few.
you are in fome meature Mafter of the firff. A great
number of Ketches of the fame Figure, in every one
And thote limbs and members which are expreffed by fevw
endeavouring to exceed the former, is the furell way of
and large mutcles excel in majefty and beauty. In the fame
Prattice.
manner the beauty of the Draperies contitt not in the mul-
citude of folds, but in their natural order and plain fimpli-
Like Niaro, firft with trembling Hand defign
city: The Drapery muft encompats the Parts loofely; when it
Some humble Work, and fludy Line by Linc.
fits too Hreight, it gives a Riffnets to the piece: the Plaits
muft be large, and follow the order of the parts that may
Be flow in your firft operations, haffe feldom produces any
be feen underneath, by means of due placing the Lights
thing beautiful or correct, but many times marrs an under-
and Shades: when the extremities of the Joints, fuch as
taking in the firft artempt, and ill habits once contracted are
the shoulders, elbows, Knees, 6fc. are covered, they should
vallly difficult to be amended; a conftancy of practice will
be mark’d in fuch a manner as their fhape may be diffin-
make your Hland expeditious: Learners muft overcome their
guithed.
paffions by the exercife of patience, they mult proceed flowly
and prudently in their firft attempts, and make it their care
Tis not a trifling Beauty to express
rather to perform well, and to fecure every llroke, and by that
The Various Chapes and foldings of the dress:
means make one good Draught, than in a heedless manner to
Through the clear robes the fvelling Wembers rife,
harry over a number of bad ones.
Or beaving breafts which decently furprise.
Be evry person's proper habit Known,
Painful and Row to noble Arts acs rife,
Peculiar to his aze or tex alone,
And long, long labours, vait the glorins prise
Large be the folsings, natural and firing.
Tet by Degrees your Readier Hland sall give
Let the broad Lights in spreading glories play,
A bolder grace, and bid each object live.
And here contrafled deeper Shades decay.
Before you begin to work, and whill you are at it. view
your Original with clofe attention, divide it in vour Niind
The proper materials for Drawing
into feveral parts, obferve the length, the breadsh, and the
fimilitude of each part; confider their proportion to cacu
RE. either Black Lead Pencils, or Black Leed fixed in a
other, and to the whole, the Dillances from one part to the
4X Portcrayon, Charcoal, red. black, or white Chalk,
other, and what parts lie parallel or oppofite to cach
Paftils, or Crayons, Pens, or He r Peacils, and Indian Ink.
other.
Black Lead is as proper in the beginning to practite after
After you have done your Copy, and the Exerpe and
the plain Lines, Cc. as any other material, the troke it
your Draught have been laid afide, and your Afind c.rpoy’d
makes being fmooth, will pleafe the young Learner bet-
on other Matters, you should view them afreth; for many
ver than what is effected by Charceal or Crazons.
Slope
times frules will then appear which were nor difcovered be-
your Lead with a Penknife to a fine point. that it may cafl
fore. Tis natural to conceive, that when the eyes have
a small neat troke: If it is nor made into a Pencil, then
been for fome time engaged upon the fame object, the form
fix your piece of Lead in a Porterayon: And whatever you
and shape becomes cullomary to them, and that the Under-
Kkerch wich, accultom yourfelf from the beginning to hold
slanding may form other conceptions of it on a freth re
it long in your hand, that the end of your fingers may
view; and wharever pains you beltow on frequent review-
be at a much larger diftance from the point, than they are
ing and comparing the original Draught with your own
from the nip of a Pen in writing, and form your rokes
Copy for the difcovering and amending of Faults, will not be
with light gentle touches; by thefe means you will have a
mitapplied, for it not only ferves to perfect you in that
greater command of hand, and your Our Line will be more
particular Draught, but will improve your knowledge of
Iree and bold.
Lines and Proportions, and by practifing in that method,
WEon
you will be fooner qualified for the neareit imitations.
The Our Lines mult be drawn in a gliding manner, large
and fmooth: When the Out-Lines are too Hreight they


The ART of DRAWING.
3
When vos begin to practife, after Limbs. and Figures, it
In parts to vicw, awbilff the off-goings seem
will be ufeful to draw the rough skerch with Charco.1, the
More faint and broken, as they approach th extrerme;
Rrokes made therewith being ealily ditcharged from the Pr-
In the same manner muft the Painter do,
per. Your Charcoal mult be flit in snall flender pieces, and
To round his Figures, and bring out to view:
Evr in a Porterayon, for the better conveniency of holding it;
And by his Lights and Sbades take fach a course,
ver mutt then tharpen it to a proper point, and with a light
To give them more Relicvo and more forte.
hand Exeick after your Original as correctly as you can:
hat you difapprove of in this performance, may eafily be
In rounding the parts of any object, the extremities in
turning mult lofe themfelves infenfibly and confufedly, wich-
wip’d oat by gently bruthing that part with a feather or clean
out precipitacing the Light all of a fudden into the Shadows,
rag. Your Out-Lme being fecured with your Charcont, wife
or the Shadows into the Light, but the Paffage of one into the
it in a flight manner with a feather, that it may appear
other muft be common and imperceptible, that is by degrees
faint, then go over your Lines with your Black or Red-Lead,
of Light into Shadow, and Shadow into Light.
making them yer more correct, if you can: When this is done,
if upon reviewing your draught there appears any errors
Th extremines muft turn by fow degrees,
vou would amend, discharge the paper of what part of
And lose themfelves infensibly with eaje.
the drawing you pleafe, by rubbing fuch part with the
Light muff not be teo judcenly o ereaft.
Crumb of a Hale white loaf.
Nor Shade pais into Light with too much baffe;
F: 7 Rawnaels tilf from rude Er.v. began,
A leiturely tranfition there muft be,
Reciprocal of each in due degree.
ind petped resb a Coal b.; Thapelets Man.
Objects that are painted light muft have a fufficient breadth
Ret Le.f. and Red or Bia.k Cralk are ufed in the fame
of Shadow to fuftain them; and dark bodies muft have a
Tanner as Black-L.ad.
tudden Light behind, to detach them from the ground. or
ittire-Chaik and Tobreco-Pife-Clay are uted in heighten.
from thofe objects that are placed behind them, otherwife
ings or giving ltrong lights, and in drawing on coloured
they will appear confufedly as sicking upon each other;
Paper.
whereas the oppofition of Shade to a light object, and of
Pylils or Crayns are any colours mixt with Tot acco-Pipe
Light to a dark one, gives a projection, and feparates them
Ches, which, while fofr, and in the confiffency of a pafte,
from other bodies.
is rolied up in pieces about the thicknets of a quill, and two
or three mikes in lengen, and then dry’d; they are generally
Ler Lights and Shades be so enfirely laid,
nnt on conured Paper, but never in a way of Earching, as
That bodies light may have Jufficient Shade,
Ii it too Ret-hend many times are; but the colours are
And bodies dark, by a fudden light be found,
rubled and wrought one into anorher, in fuch a manner,
Sufficiently detachked from the ground.
teat kr Rrokes afpear, but the whole looks as if it was
Jo:c Wiln a raR.
There should be a ballance preferved between the Lights
this is a very quick and expeditious Afanner of Drawing,
and Shadows, a broad Light ought not to be incroduced into
and uaon the Crayons are handled with judgment, they
a Draught without a large Shadow. The Lights mutt ferve
never ful or a delicare Sofinets and fine Exprestion; but this
for a repofe to the Dark, and the Darks to the Light; and
fiud he enneived, that the Touch of a rude Finger, unac
hence a Drapery which is coloured yellow or red in fome
quainted with the Performance, may eafily spoil the fine
places in other parts appearing more brown, has a good
Work, while only handling it to look on; therefore, it
effect.
should not be forgor, to preserve this fort of work in Books,
or under Giarles in Frames. The Grain of the Paper, on
To use such advantageous Lights take beed
which Crayons are ufed, should be a litle rough, they
That to great Light, great Shadows may succeed.
working eafier, and expresting themfelves flronger than when
the Paper is tmooth; if it is a little dark or brownith, or
The nearer any object is to the eye, it is feen to much the
near the Colour of whiced brown Paper, it yields a good
Rronger and plainer; the fight is weakened by diftances; and
Relief to the render parts of the Work, by shewing the
light Rrokes thereof.
the more remote any object is, tis feen in a more imperfect
manner; therefore thofe objects which are placed foremoff to
Pens are tometimes ufed in fhading Draughts by hatching
the view, ought to be more finith’d than thofe that are caft
them with crots Rrokes, but this is better perform’d wish
behind; and they should have fuch a relacive dominion over
Heir- Pearils and InKan-Ink, which are not only ufed in
each other, that as one object by its heightnings caufes others
harching by tlrokes, but in fhiding after a far more expedi-
to retire more backwards, to the fame object mult be chafed
rious manner, orx. by wathing, which is the fame way of
and made to appear farther from the fight than others which
working with Hair Pencils and Indian Int, as with Hair-
are more tlrongly illuminated.
Pencil and Warer-Colours: The Shades in harching are
effected by Lines, and appear like the frokes which thade
Objects the more advanc’d they are to vierw,
an engraved print; contrary to this, in wathing there does
Maft be more faillr’d, and exacily true,
not appear any Lines, but the Shades look like thote in a
And have domnion oer thofe things acbich are
Alexzorinto Print.
Confusd and trankent, and achicb scarce appear:
But here a due relation you must find,
The conduct of the tints of Lights and Shadows.
Lets things being caft by greater sliil behind.
grr 15 the artful management of Lights and Shades that
Tis not fufficient that remore objects be only colour’d in
gives the appearance of fubttance, roundness, and
1
2 more faint and languid manner, but according to their
diftance to wharever bodies we repretent. Imagine or draw
dittance the parts muff appear more or less confuted; the eys
a circle on a piece of Paper, confider this circle when tis firtt
does not minurely difcover what is far teparated from it At
form’d, or Fli it up with any even colour you pleates and it
the length of a Hreet we defery human Figures, but the
will appeer to be a body with a round circumference, and flat
features of their faces, and the folds of their garments are
tides: bn: of you let the dronget of the colour remain in the
imperceptible to us, and to the innumerable leaves that
nidele. ard gradsally weaken ir towards the circumference,
grow on diltant plantations appear to the fight but one
it will ay this means pleatingly deceive the light, and receive
nals.
I commitawcarance. Lise a Eall or Clobc.
Wherever the viraciry of colour is tlrongeff, that part of
Things at a distance in one mass combine
the object carckes the fight firtl, and appears neareif to it:
As leaves on trees, and the sea waves muft join.
whereas its weaenets and going, off are more and more broken
ard faint, and em to lly farther from the fight. Thus
Pure and anmix’d white either draws an object nearer
what a Carver pairs oir, and makes round with the edge of
or carries it off to farther diftance: If it be accompanied
his tool, the Painter performs with his Pencil: by the dimi-
wich black, the oppofition of light and dark renders the ob-
nusion and breaking of his Colours, he removes to a dislance
ject more fentible, and brings it nearer to the advanced
the objcct which should be leall vilibic.
part; but pure whice being the lighrelf of colours, unlets it
be forced forwards, and iapported by black, it will fy off
A. CanVex Murours, by colleded Ravr,
to the remorelt view: As for pure black it is the heavicit,
En.ri 1e fot Coloure, anf the Objetts raife,
moll earthy and most fenkbie of all colours, and bring: the
objects


The ART of DRAWING.
4
objects nearer to the fight; if muft be placed in maffes, be then the Lights muft be very Rrong and beid, and the Sna-
dows very dark.
infenfibly confuled, and have its proper repofes.
If the Object you reprefent be fuppofed in a Room, a little,
Pure white will near, or at a diftance shew,
but not very much illuminated, and you furvey it from withour,
With black tis near, without remote from view:
and fand on a level with the Light that Itrikes upon it, the
But black anmixt does aluays nearer bring
Shadows of that Figure muft be very foff, whereby the Figure
The object, and looks bold, and promising.
itfelf will appear beauteous to the Eye. and norwithllanding
the foftness of the Shadow, it will teem as imbofied, and
The Reprefentations of Bodies, give them always fuch
come boldly our.
Lights as are moft proper and convenient to their suppofed
A small Light illuminating a Body occafions the Shadows on
Siruations. If your Objects are in the Fields or open Air,
the dark fide to be large, and their Extremities to be very
and the Sun not vifible, being obfcured by Clouds, you
bold; on the other hand, a Light makes the Shadows
muff then incroduce almoff an univerfal Light, tho' not
on the darker fide to be more diffinel and more foft in their
warm and flrong, and your Shades muft be faint. But
Limitations.
when the Sun is confpicuous, and shines in its full lufire,
F I R S T
L E S S O N.



Lefson the Firft

X

B. C

F
X
B



5
D




C





-

t


-



5o
E


Cn



5


S the alphabet, or knowledge of letters, ferves for
right Line let fall or erected upon another, making the
an incroduction to Grammar, to Geomerry is the firft
Angles on each fide equal, or which hanging down without

Rep that conducts us to Drawing; for it is by Geo-
inclining to the right or to the left, would pass thro' the

meery and the affiftance of the Lines that we learn to
center of the earth, if it were produced infinicely. Dis an
know the length and largeness of all Bodies, whether they be
oblique or horizontal Line; that is a Line which paffes from
Rreight or curve, round, oval. square, or any other Figure
one Point to another without any deviation. C marks two
imaginable. And fince there is nothing corporeal that does not
oblique Lines, that is tuch as are neither horizontal nor per-
fall under one of thofe derominations, whoever would make a
pendicular. EE, FF. HI H, are curve Lines; that is, fuch
proficiency in the Art of Drawing ought to be well acquainted
as turn ent of their way by one or more deviations. 6 G
therein. And that he may gain a comperent knowledge in
and 1 are parallel Lines; that is, fuch as follow one another
geometrical affairs in a short cime, and with great advantage
at equal Diftances: at1 there are two Semicircles drawn from
in respect to Drawing, he is advifed to make ufe of Le
points affumed in the lower Line, and the upper Line being
Clercs Praftical Geometry.
a Tangent to both of them, prove the truth of its being drawn
In all Arts and Sciences it is of the greateft confequence to
parallel
begin with the moff fimple principles, upon which the Learner
Form an exact Idea of thefe feveral Lines, and exercife
ought to dwell sill he is perfect mafter of them. And as the
yourfelf in drawing them upon a Slate, or upon Paper with
firtt Rudiments of Defign confift in knowing how to make
a Pencil, at the fame time endeavour to do it in a bold and
different Strokes, or Lines differently turned, in this firft ex-
neat manner, which you may do by not leaning too hard on
ample the Scholar is prefented with feveral of them, aiz. 2
your Pencil, and not holding it too thore in your hand.
perpendicular Line mark’d B. A perpendicular Line is a
SECONND


The ART of DRAWING.
SICUN eI.

Lelson the Second
2




wrl
6

69


d
I
9

19


2

II
3






8
nt



4

2
2 3







horizental, which parts it equally in the middle. 6. Is an
-AHE Second Leffon we shall fer our Scholars will
cquilateral Triangle, with a perpendicular Line, which curs it
amount to much the same thing as the former, and
in two from rop to bottom, and an horizental Line which cuts
at firtl not appear to be of much greater confequence.
it tranfverfely. 7. is a Stone two foot wide, and four high,
Number 1. is a Circle or Figure perfectly round,
the fide of which is a plain furface. 8. Are convex Surfaces,
detcribed upon a Cenrer, from which the Circumference in all
and a concave Surface: 5o a hollow Globe cur afunder ex-
its parts is equally dittant. 2. Is a Square or Figure that has its
proffes both convex and concave Surfaces.
four fides equai, and four Angles right. 7. Is a Triangle or
The Imitation of this Leffon will bring the Learner forward
Figure with three fides. 4. 1s a fpiral Line or curve Line iffu-
in the drawing of Lines, and the Surface will give him fome
ing from a center, and continually going off from it at every
idea of the ufe of Light and Shades.
turn. 5. 1s a Square with one Line perpendicular, and another
a t
 B.- Letson the Thard
8r

F.1
5
2
C
D
D.
E.




2
L
L.
H.

IV
M.
I
C
0. 6
C.


E.








R.

7
1s
ECVj

5
2




11.
34

3/33
3

3


. (



-


Da bow, I a draught-board, F a trowel, 6 a barber's bu-
E shall now proceed to fer before the Learner some
fon, II an heart, 1a thovel, Ka decanter, L a rea-canifter,
figures that will be more pleating to him than the
Mabafon, or large cup, Na rea-por, O a pear, P, 6 and R
lines in the former Leffons, yet he will find the
leaves and foldages. In drawing thefe or any other objects
imitation of thefe more ealy by having perfected
begin always at the rop, and draw the right fide firtt, making
himfelf in the others, and the practice of thefe will qualify him
your flrokes near and bold.
to proceed in the copying after more difficult reprefentations.
The Letter A marks a cann or por, Ba Window, Ca glats,
FOUR T H


5


6


The ART of DRAWING.
L E S S ON.
FOUR T H
Kkerch the whole figure before you finifh any part of it: by
AHE principal thing in drawing confifts in kerching
this means you will fecure the proportions in the moft exact
well; wherefore a greatdeal of pains and attention
manner.
ought to be beftowed upon it. Some perfons in
Among the examples will be found feveral draughts of the
copying a Starue begin with the head, which they
parts of the face, as the eyes, nofe, mouth, 6Gc. feen in
thoroughly finith, and then go on with the reft of the figure.
different positions, which should feverally be practifed after,
This method generally fucceeds ill, either becaufe they make
before the Drawer artempis a whole face, for which work
the head too big or too little, and upon the whole, the parts
we shall prepare him by our inftructions concerning an oval,
are fo difproportionate, as not to agree with the original,
with its feveral changes ard variations, and of the crofs in
which arifes from their not having well obferved the di
the fame, for that will help him the better to underftand all
Rances; therefore remember, when you have any thing to
bowings and rerurnings, reclinations and inclinations, of all
draw, divide it immediately into its different parts; meafure
forts of Faces, as will prefently appear.
with your eye the diftances truly in the original, mark your
paper with a faine line how far each divition is to reach, and
Vou muft obferve
then, that the head in
general has the form
2
2
or shape of an C2s.

or oval; to this head
belongs cycs, eye-
brows, nofe and cars,
which you may learn
to place in their pro-
per fituations, by the
help of the cross thro'
the oval. Thus the
perpendolar in the

oval being divided in-
y
to four equal parts,
makes the whole head
to be four nofes in
6


1CC
hefhs. buc

onixfor chol


and the dian

fing the perpe
is divided who five
equal parts, each be-

ing the breadth or
wideness of one eye;
and this diameter is
the ocular line, or the

line whereon the eyes
2
to
are to be placed; and


therefore a Hraight

line is to be drawn

from the top of the
right ear, thro' both
1
12
10.

eyes, to the top of
the left car; and
from above through
the midit of the note,
2
mouth, and chin, is
5
drawn the whole line

which is called per-


croffing
pendicular,
the diameter or ocu-

right
lar line, 2t
lines
Angles; thefe

together are called the
crots of the oval;
upon which crots
let the face turn
which way it will)
we
7
the eyes, nofe, mouth
and ears Muft be
plac’d in their due
and proper places,
as you may obferve
in the fore right face
marked No. 4.
But fince we find by experience the Learners do not eafily
may obferve in Fig. 3. This done, you will eafily under-
apprehend the right ufe of this crots in the oval; and con-
Rand the changes and alteracions of the cross: and by that
means to draw all manner of faces, as well thofe that turn
sequently the many variations of the fame, much lefs the
declinations, reclinations, and inclinations of faces; you
afide, as those that turn backwards or forwards. We have
muft imagine or procure a piece of wood fit for the purpofe,
already explained Fig. 4. to you, which is a fore right face.
to be turned in the shape of an egg, fmooth, round, and
Turn the oval from the left hand to the right a little about,
even, like as the figure doth dircct you. Draw then a
then the raight perpendicular of the cross will change and
line from point to point long-wife, through the midft of
Hand bent like a Bow or Arch, as is to be feen in Fig. 5.
the fame egg, as may be feen in Fig. 2. Divide this line into
upon which the parricular members are to be drawn, as in
two equal parts, and draw a line a cross from the left hand
Fig. 6. but you muff obferve in what manner the nofe pro-
to the right, cutting the former ling at right Angles, as you
jects beyond the round of the oval: the fame is likewife
10


The ART of DR A WIN G.
The infide of the arm, from the place where the mufcle
to be obterved in the contrary turning, viz. from the right
to the left, as you may fee in Fig. 7. Again rurn the oval difappears, which makes the breaft, cailed the pectoral mufcle,
inclining downward, and the crots will appear as in Fig. 8. to the middle of the arm, four nofes.
From the middle of the arm to the beginning of the hand,
and the feveral parts being drawn will appear as in Fiz. 9.
five nofes.
Then fee the oval be turned backward, when the lines of
The longeff roe is a nofe long,
the cross will change again, a: in Fig. 10. and a face
The two urmoll parts of the tears, and the pir berwixt the
drawn according ro thefe lines will appear as in Fiz. ir.
collar-bones of a woman, make an equilateral triangle.
After this manner you may thew as great variety of fices
For the bredoth of the limbs no precife meafures can be
as you pleafe, with this oval; except thote which come fide-
given; becauts the meafures themfelves are changeable accord-
ward, which mry be drawn by means of a perpendicular, as
ing to the quality of the perfons, and according to the move-
in Fiz. 12. upon which perpendicular forchead, note,
ment of thhe mutcles.
mouth, and chin are to be drawn, as you may observe in
In drawing a head remember always thefe following
Fiz. 13.
rules.
This being thoroughly underfood and fixt in your mind,
Firtt, that the eyes be at fuch a diftance from one another,
you will be able in a little rime to draw out of your own
that you may place a third between.
invension and fancy, good faces wih judgment and rea-
The mouth, when thur, is as large as an eyc.
ion, and execure them in a matterly manner: Whereas thofe
The ears are upon a level with the eyes, a rop and below
who draw after a Prine, Draught, or Picture, without being
with the noe be is as thort or as long as it will.
rcguainted with the ufe of the cross lines, and the propor=
That the nottril ought to be placed exaclly againt the cor-
cion of a face wii it. pars, know not what they do, nor
ner of the eve.
what they hive to obferve in the fame, but learn much like
That in a sir face the cheeks fweil out. and in a lean one
Pirrors.
the jae bo.n i: out and the checks fail in.
Having fally informed vou of the feveral ways of drawing
Having had luen full inffrutuers concerning the draw-
3 face, we thall now teach :a the meatures and proportions
ing of a head, you may proceed to draw a man at full
of the leveral parts of the Eody.
lenoth.
The Irecents have comm only allowed eight heads to their
Firil, make your oval, and divide it according to your in-
Ligures, though tome of them have bur feven. But we or-
Hrueions, then draw a perpendicalar lins from the top of the
Qinarily divice the Fizare into ten & faces; that is to fay,
head to the tole of the foor, and meature out eight ie:gths.
from the crown of the head to the fole of the foor, in the
This line is of special ute to direcl you in placing the figure
following manner.
upright; and in the action of the potture, where it falls in,
From the crown of the head to the forchesd, is the third
and where it fwells osr. One head's length from the chin
part of the face.
you muft draw the breatts, the third meature reacheth to the
The face begins at the roor of the loweff havs which are
navel, the fourth to the privities, ne hith to the middle of
upon the forchead. and ends at the bottom of the chin.
the tuigh, the fixth to the lower part of the Knee, the feventh
The face is divided into three proportional parts; the firtt
to tee lower part of the leg, and the eight to the heel and
contains the forchead, the fecond the nofe, and the third the
fole of the foor.
mouth and chin.
Obterve in every meafure what rouckes there are of the
From the chin to the pit berwixt the collar-bones are two
mukcles.
lenrths of a nofe.
Draw that leg firff that the body fands on, then the other,
Frow the pit berwixt the collar bones to the bottom of the
and after that the arms and hands. Bar draw at firft all the
breaff, one face
parts very lightly with a Coal only, becaute there is leatt
From the botrom of the breafts to the navel, one face.
trouble in aliering and rubbing out the coul.
From the navelto the genitals, one frec.
As for the hands, they are twice as long as broad, and each
From the genitals to the upper part of the knce, two
of their parrs has its length, breadih, and thickness.
faces.
The nail upon the hnger is about half the joint it is
The knee contains half a facc.
upon.
From the lower part of the knee to the ancle, two faces.
The length of the foot is a fixth part or height of a man,
From the ancle to the fole of the foor, half a face.
and ½ more in length than breadth.
A man, when his arms are frecht our, is from the longeft
The length of the face and hands ought to be exactly equa!,
finrer of his right hand, to the longeft of his left, as broad
and makes but juft the renth part of a perfon's height.
as he is long.
Having taught you to draw a man in all his parts, we shall
From one fide of the breafts to the other, two faces.
now give you fome rules with respect to children.
The bone of the arm called Ifumerns is the length of two
Some then make a child to contain five meafures of the
faces, from the shoulder to the eibow.
head, vix. From the top of the head to the privities, three,
From the end of the elbow to the root of the little finger,
and in the thighs and legs two more: the breadth berween
the bone called Cabirns, with part of the hand, contains two
the shoulders the length of a head and an half; the breadth
faces.
of the body above the navel, the length of one head; and
From the box of the shoulder-blade to the pit betwixt the
the breadth of the upper part of the thigh is the third part
collar-bones, one face.
of two lengths of the head; the breadsh of the Ence, juit
If you will be farished in the meafures of breadsh, from
the meature there is berwixt the eyes and the chin; the small
the extremity of one finger to the other, to that this breadsh
of the leg and the brawn of the arm are of the thickness of
should be equal to the length of the body, you muft obterve
that the boxes of the elbows with the Humeras, and of the
the neck.
The proportion of a child fanding backward is of the fame
Hhemeras with the thoulder-blade, hear the proportion of half
4 tace, when the arms are Hrerched our.
meafure with the former.
If you defire to be able to draw a well proportioned piece,
The fole of the foot is the fixth part of the figure.
you muft copy with great carefulness and attention all the fe-
The hand is the length of a facc.
T he chumb contains a nofe.
veral parts fingly, as the cyes, ears, and the refl.
 I F
T H L E S S ON.
coul you muft renew them with your Rid Lead-Craion, and
t lidte hitherto been treating of Contours or Our-
then wipe off all the dirtiness of the Charceaf with 2
lines, but shall now direct how to till up the
feather. That done, you mult gearly retouch all thofe
empty figures, and to mark the harchings in fuch
2 manner as will have the bett effeel.
places which have been farnished in the rebving, as the hair,
cyes, notc, mouth, fingers, tocs, out lines, C5c. Vou muft
Obferve then that your harchings are to confift but of two
remember always to make your rokes very light in thote
drokes, which crofs one another, or of three at mott to make
Out lines which are open to the day, and ilronger in thote
the drongell Shade. In those places where the caviries require
which are darkened. By this means the Our-lines will ap-
the whole fore of the Leaf or Craion, you muft rub it upon
pear in 4 natural manner, and human figres and all other
your paper according as there shall be cecafion: For it would
objects will receive an extraordinary beauty and grace,
be an ateless trouble to employ more than three harchings one
After that you muft begin the Shades with a fingle harching,
upon anuther.
After you have drawn the Outlines with your Cbar-
but reafonably flrong, beginning at the top, and conducting
it
a This depends an the ax: and qualty of the pertons. The Spols and Venn: of Mledicis have more than ten facce.


8
The ART of DR A WING.
it infenfibly to the bottom, with as much evennets in the di- The Skeeping or Perspective will be bever preterves. i
Itances as poffible. Then you may proceed to the round-
beginning the Shadows in a light and taint manner, and
ings, which mult likewife be exprefted by fimple Rrokes,
heightening of them afterwards; 10 as to produce an syrec-
more or lets light, according to the object before vou; be
able effect.
careful not to make your Shadows too dark or hard ar firtt:
SI X T H L E S S O N.
A VIN G given you divers Leffons, wherein you
correct your sketch, and make it neater and nearer, by add-
have been taught to draw Prints and Draughts, we
ing or taking away, as you fee occafion, which is eafily
shall now direl you how to draw after a Picture, a
done with your Charceal: But take heed in doing this that
Model, or the Life, and how you are to place them.
you do not fpoil the firtt good Actions in it, which may
Having then a Picture to draw after, put the same in a place
cafily happen, if you do not well confider the movements of
of good light, fo that your eye and the light of the day
the feveral parts.
may run together to the Picture. Make choice of a reafon-
Take care that whatfoever makes nothing to your fubject,
able diftance, according as the Picture is great or fmall, at
and is improper to it, be not admitted into your work, or
leaft to far off that with the opening of your eyes you may
not poficts the chief place in it.
fee the whole Picture at once; for the greater your Picture
Always chufe, if convenience will admit of it, a North
is, the farther off you muft fit to draw after the fame. Vou
Ligbs for your conflant Situation, as tis much Headier than
mult likewife take notice, that your Print be traight or right
any orher. If your Window should open rowards the Sourh,
before you, and not laid fat down; for then yeu will pre-
it will be very proper to fix a Sath before it, made with
fently obferve the things to forefhorten: In the fame man-
white Paper oiled, and to rendered tranfparent. by means of
ner muft the Paper you draw upon he laid five or fix innes
this Medium, the Rays of the Sun which will thike upon it
double upon a pannel board, which mult be kept in your
all Day, will be more moderaic. coually diffafe themfelves.
lap, and raifed as high as poffible with your Knces, or be
and be conflant withour any vifible Variation. When you
reited on a form or defk that Roops, that what you draw
draw after the Lif:, confider how large or small the Ojeci is
may fland before you upon one end. By this means you will
you propofe for your lmilation. Remove yourtelf from it
be the becter able to judge whether your Draught be like
three times its Magnitude; feat vourfelf in tuch a Mlenner,
the Original, which you cannor difcern if it lies fist before
as to bring your kye in a Level with is. and be very ca-
you. This being obferved, firtt guets the middle of your
rious as you draw every individual Stroke, to remark what
Picture, or that which you intend to draw; then mark the
Parts of your Object hie under the perpendicular or princifal
fame with the point of your Coaf upon your Paper; after
Line.
that observe your biggeft figures (if there be more than one)
As for the Pofition of your Figure, whether it be the Lifs
and rouch it with a light hand in its proper place, and fo
or a Model, a high light equally diffuted, being neither too
all that is in the Picture, then it will prefently appear whe
Rrong nor glaring, is the beft; Objects to difpoted, thew
ther your gueffing and Kkerching be true : Befides you myft
all their beauties, and the minureil Parts appear to id;
afture yourfelf of every llroke you are to draw with good
Vantage.
reafon and obfervation, taking good heed upon the great
And particularly when you are drawing from the Life, ler
and general parts, and omit the small breakings till the
your Light come from fuch an Affirude, as that the Shadows
next ketching, by this means you will acquire a great rea-
of Bodies projected on the plane, may be equal, and in Pro-
dinets and judgment in your work. Remember likewife to
portion to their Height.
begin always on the right fide of the figure, for by that
The Light thus falling from above, does not frike upon
means the firff flrokes are always exposed to the cye, and
or enlighten all the Parts; but fome are shelered by the
the reft will follow more naturally and create less trouble.
Reliese of others; the Fye brows defend the hollow of the
On the contrary, by beginning on the left fide, the hand
Eye, the Nofe fome part of the Mouth, and the Chin ob-
hides the object from your fight. Having rudely, though
fcures the Throar. This is the Reaton that Portrair Painters
with good judgment, made your Kerch, you mutt carefully
ever darken all the Windows of their Painting Room, except-
look over it to fee whether it he good, and whether you can
ing one, and by means of a wooden Shurter, or some other
observe the Actions of the figure or figures contained in the
Blind placed at the lower Part thereof, only admit the Light
Original; for the Actions mult thew themfelves apparently
thro' the upper Part of that Window, to Irike upon the Ob-
in the firft and rudeft skerch, before you can affure yourfeif
jetts they are Painting after, both themfelves and the Object
of any good, in regard that Actions are the life of a Picture.
being beneath the Light.
and by confequence of your Drawing. After this you muit
ADVER TISEMENT.
Printed for Tho. Bowles in St. Pauls Church-yard, and John Bowles at the
Black Horfe, Cornhill.
AH E Practice of Perspective: Or, an eafy Merhod of
siver your Purpase. Woltius in Element. Mathef. Tom. 11.
reprefenting Narural Objects according to the Rules of
P. 1C48. in 470.
Art, applied and exemplified in all the Variery of
Practical Gcometry: Or, a new and cafy Method of
Cafes; as. Landskips, Gardens, Buildings of divers
grearing that Arr. Whereby the Practice of it is rendered
Kinds, their Appendages, Parts, Furniture, Cc. With Rules for
plain and familiar, and the Student is directed in the moft
the Proportions, Pofitions, Coc. of Figures, both in Draught and
caty Manner through the feveral Parts and Progreffions of
Relievo. Alfo the manner of conducting the Shadows by
it. Tranflared from the Frenct of Monficur S. Le Cfore
divers Luminaries, and practical Methods of Defigning truly,
The third Edition. Iluttrated with eighy Copper Place.
without underftanding any Rule at all. A Work highly ne-
Wherein, belides the feveral Cicomerrical Figures, are conrain:d
cuffary for Painters, Engravers, Archifects, Embrviderers,
many Examples of Landlkips, Pieces of Archirectare, Pi:
Statuaries, Jewellers, Tapeftry-Workers, and others concern-
spective, Draughts of Figures, Kuins. Cc. 12m0.
ed in Defigning. The whole Iluffrared with one hundred
A Copy Book of a new Defian, Printed in Red, being c.
and fifty Copper-Plates. Written in French by a Tefuie of
molluteful Piece ever publifhed for Beginners. Piac 1s.
Paris; fince tranflated into German, by Ct. Rembeld; and
Alfo variety of Elack Lines to lat under Paper to vc:.
into English, by Rob. Pricke: And now, a second time, into
Rraight and eren.
the Jame Language, by E. Chambers. If you rcould proceed
Aeu Cupy Beok. containing carion- Exifze- of Perz:
immediately to the Prartice of Perspestive, avitheat ingueing in
ship ft for Bubref By Moabrm Ririzc. Pin::
the Intricacies of the Therry, the Aetuns Pertyce.: un.


