















































employed in common purposes of painting, and may be used
in nicer ; but will require washiing over, and then it is little
inferior to flake white. Notwithstanding its cheapnefs, it
is frequently adulterated by the makers or wholesale dealers,
by adding chalk or powdered tale, which may be seen by
comparing a pure piece with a fuspected one; as the fraud
will appear by the difference of the weight. But to prove
it more exactly use the following means :
 Take an ounce of the white lead suspected; and mix
 it well with about half an ounce of pearl affies, or of any
 fixed alkaline salt, and about a quarter of an ounce of

charcoal dust: and having put them into a crucible, give
 them a strong heat. The lead will by this means be re-

duced to its metallic state: and being weighed, will

shew, by what it may fall short of the weight of an
 ounce, the proportion of the adulteration; about à tenth
part being allowed for the corroding acid which formed
 part of the white lead. '
CALCINED OT BURNT HARTSHORN.
 Take horn, or bones, and burn them in any common
 fire till they become a coal, or are caleined to some de¬

gree of whitenefs. Then, having freed them carefully

from any coal or filth, reduce them to a gross powder;

and put them upon a vessel made in sorm of a common
 earthen dissi, of ground crucibles and Stourbridge clay,
 and well dried ; and procure this to be placed in a to-
 baccopipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, during the time
 they keep their pipes or pots in the fire. The earth of
 the horn or bones being thus thoroughly calcined, it must
 be very well levigated with water; and it will he yet
 further improved by being carefully washed over.







This is a pure white, nor will change by eitlier air or
time : for the nicest purposes it is much used in water paint-
ing, and will not turn black in the manner flake white and
white lead sometimes will. It is therefore preserred by the
more experienced painters.
PEARL WHITE,
Is prepared by drying or caleining oyster shells at a fire,
and taking that part of the powder that is of a perfect white-
ness, levigating it well on a stone, and washiing it over. It
is serviceable in miniature painting.
TROY WHITE, or SPANISH WHITE,
May be used in water colours, from the following pre¬
paration :
 Take a pound of chalk, and soak it well in water.
 Then wasn over all the fine part; and having poured off
 the first water, add another quantity, in which two
 ounces of allum is dissolved. Let them stand for a day or
 two, stirring the chalk once in six or eight hours. Wasni
 then the chalk again over, till it be rendered perfectly
 fine; and pour off as much of the water as can be sepa¬

rated from the chalk by that means, taking off the re-

mainder of the dissolved allum, by several renewed quan-
 tities of fresn water. Aster the last water is poured off, put
 the chalk into one of the cullender filters, with a linen
 cloth over the paper; and and when the moisture has
 been sufficiently drained off from it, lay it out in lumps
 to dry on a proper board. 7
EGG SHELL WHITE
Is made of the clear shell when the inner skin is peeled
off, levigated to powder of a proper fineness, and washied
over. It is used by some in water colours, and preserred
to flake white.









CLASS VIII. Of BLACK COLOURS.
LAMP BLACK.

There is no other preparation than procuring it good,
from burning oil, in a confined place, and collecting the
soot. It mixes well either with oil or water, and is esteem-
ed as the principal black in all nicer kinds of painting.
 Take plates, chips, or shavings of ivory; and soak
 them in hot linseed oil ; or, iffilings are to be more easily

procured, they may be used moistened with the hot oil.
 Put them into à vessel which will bear the fire; covering
 them with a fort of lid made of clay and sand; which

should be dried, and the cracks repaired besore the vessel
 be put into the fire. Procure this vessel to be placed in a
 tobacco-pipe-maker’s or potter’s furnace, or any other
 fuch fire; and let it remain there during one of their

heats. When it shall be taken out, the ivory will be

burnt properly; and must be asterwards thoroughly well
 levigated on the stone with water; or it should, indeed,
 to have it perfectly good, be also washed over. 
It is not so much used as lamp black, owing perhaps, to
its drying slowly in oil, or to the frequent adulterations
with charcoal dust, which renders it of a blue cast; other-
wife it is, if genuinely prepared from the ivory, a full clear
black, and extremely serviceable.
INDIAN INK.
The true Indian ink is imported from China, and is of a
consistence, when dissolved with water, extremely well
adapted to the pencil. It is much used in miniature paint-






ing, and drawings of small kinds. There is a fort frequent-
ly sold for it made as follows :
 Take of isinglass six ounces; reduce it to a size, by
 gissolving it over the fire in double its weight of water.

Take then of Spanishi liquorice one ounce: and dissolve

it also in double its weight of water; and grind up with
it an ounce of ivory black, prepared as above directed in

p. 67. Add this mixture to the size while hot; and stir
 the whole together till all the ingredients be thoroughly
incorporated. Then evaporate away the water in a bal-
neo mariae, and cast the remaining composition into lead¬
 ed moulds greased; or make it up in any other form.
The preceding are the chief of the substances there will be
occasion to mention in drawing and painting; but crayou
and enamel colours will be treated of in their places.

Those persons who are accustomed to paint in oils,
generally purchase their colours ready prepared in bladders;
a compleat set of which, with a pallette, and requisites
for painting, may be procured at the colour-shops.
Compleat sets of water-colours are also sold in boxes,
with peneils, &c. for miniature painting, drawing, &c.
The price, from eight shillings to three guineas.
As the oil colours prepared in bladders, if they are kept
long, become useless; and as those who are not professed
artists seldom paint so much as to use them without great
waste, it became à desideratum that some method should be
found to render them more durable :-this Mr. Blackmen
has accomplished; and at the same time has made them a
portable, that they can be used with equal ease with the
common water-colour cakes. We give the method of
preparing them from Vol. XII. of the Transactions of the
Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and
Commerce.










Method of preparing BLACKMANS OIL-COLOUR
CAKES.
Take of the clearest gum mastick, reduced to fine powder,
four ounces; of spirit of turpentine, one pint; mix them
together in a bottle, stirring them frequently till the
mastick is dissolved: if it is wanted in haste, some heat may
be applied, but the solution is best when made cold. Let
the colours to be made use of, be the best that can be
procured, taking care, that by washing, &c. they are
brought to the greatest degree of finenefs possible. When
the colours are dry, grind them on a hard close stone
(porphyry is the best) in spirit of turpentine, adding a
small quantity of the mastick varnissi; let the colours so
ground become again dry ; then prepare the composition
for forming them into cakes, in the following manner :
Procure some of the purest and whitest spermaceti you can
obtain; melt it over a gentle fire, in a clean earthen vessel;
when fluid, add to it one third of its weight of pure poppy
oil, and stir the whole well together; these things being in
readiness, place the stone on which your colours were
ground on a frame or support; and, by means of a charcoal
fire under it, make the stone warin; next grind your
colour sine with a muller; then, adding à sufficient quan¬
tity of the mixture of poppy oil and spermaceti, work the
whole together with the muller to a proper consistence;
take then a piece of a fit size for the cake you intend to
make ; roll it into a ball, putit into a mould, press it, and
it will be complete.
When these cakes are to be used, they must be rubbed
down in poppy or other oil, or in a mixture of spirit of
turpentine and oil, as may best suit the convenience or
intention of the artist.









Of PAINTING.
PAINTING is the art of representing to the eyes, by
means of figures and colours, every object in nature that is
discernable by the sight, and of expressing the various
emotions of the mind. By an admirable effort of human
genius, it offers to our vision every thing which is most
valuable in the universe ; its empire extends over every
age and country : it presents to us the heroic deeds of
ancient times, as well as those with which we are more
conversant, and distant objects equally with those we daily
see. In this respect it may be considered as a supplement
to Nature, which gives us only a view of present objects.
The painter, who is distinguished for noble and profound
concentions ; who conveys to the spectators the sentiments
with which he is himself inspired; who animates them
with his genius, and makes a lasting impression on their
minds; this Artist is a poet, and worthy to share in the
glories of Homer; but if he seek only to please, or astonisn
by the illusion of colours, he must rest contented with the
secondary merit of flattering the eye with a variety of tints,
or making an industrious assemblage of a multiplicity of
objects.
The poet or the painter who excel in their profefsions,
deserve all the respect due to genius; they are of the
number of those men whom nature, sparing of her best
gifts, grants but occasionally to the inhabitants of the
earth. If they are sublime, they elevate the human race ;
if tney are agreeable only, they excite those sweet sensations
necessary to our happiness.














of the SCHOOLS.
A School in the sine arts denominates a class of artists
who have learned their art from a certain master, either by
receiving his instructions, or studying his works. All the
painters which Europe has produced since the renovation
of the arts, are classed under the following schools :The
school of Florence, of Rome, of Venice, the Lombard,
French, German, Flemisn, Dutch, and Englisn schools.
The school of Florence is remarkable for greatnefs, for
attitudes seemingly in motion; for à certain dark severity;
for an expression of strength, by which grace is perhaps
excluded; and for a character of design approaching to the
gigantic. It cannot be denied that the productions of this
school, although overcharged, possess an ideal majesty which
elevates human nature above mortality. The Tuscan
artists, satisfied with commanding admiration, seem to have
considered the art of pleasing as beneath their notice.
Cimabue, a noble Florentine, born in the year 1240,
was the first, who, after the destruction of the Roman
empire, practised the art of painting, which he learned
from some Greek workmen who were employed by the
Tuscan government. His pictures were, as may be ima¬
gined, in an ordinary stile : but they received the applause
of his countrymen. So little practised was he in his art,
that in his pictures, to prevent the possibility of a mistake
in the judgment of the spectator respecting the subject,
inscriptions were added, with sentences coming out of the
mouths of the persons represented in them. To Cimabue
succeeded Giotto, his disciple, who, when a shepherd’s boy,
was found by him drawing the figure of a shieep upon a
stone: he soon become more celebrated than his master, and is








accounted one of the founders of the Florentine school.
From this time the number of artists encreased so rapidly,
that, in 1350, they established a society under the protection
of St. Luke.
Towards the commencement of the sisteenth century,
the works of the Florentines possessed something of gran-
deur, life, and expression; and Massacio is mentioned as
the first who gave force and relief to his pictures; but
Michael Angelo, and Leonardo de Vinci were the glory
of the school of Florence; the former superior in grandeur,
in boldness of conception, and knowledge of design; the
latter in all the amiable parts of the art. Leonardo, pos¬
sessed of a fine imagination, and full of sensibility, devoted
himself in painting to express the affections of the soul :
and, if in this sublime branch of the art he was afterwards
surpassed by Raphael, he had at least the glory, not only
of surpassing all the painters who went before him, but of
pursuing a path which none of them had attempted. Mi-
chael Angelo, lefs formed to experience sweet affections
than violent pafsions, sought in nature what the strength of
man might accomplisn, not that which constitutes beauty.
Better acquainted with anatomy than any other artist, he
seems too eager to display his knowledge of it, and to have
forgotten that the muscles are less visible in children,
females, and young men, than in confirmed and vigorous
manhood. 1. You never perceive, (says Mengs) a muscle
at rest; and although he knew admirably well how to
place them, their action is very frequently inconsistent with
their situation. He never (says Sir Joshua Reynolds),
attempted the lesser elegances and graces of the art; and if
any man had a right to look down upon the lower accom-
plishiments as beneath his attention, it was certainly Michael
Angelo.






3


THE ARTIST’S ASSISTANT.
75
The Roman school has exceeded every other in beauty
of form, grandeur, stile, and just exprefsion: this is to be
attributed to the superior advantages they enjoyed, in
having access to those precious remains of ancient art, which
Rome, in its prosperity, drew from declining Greece; or
which were executed in its own bosom by Grecian artists.
This school was altogether devoted to the principal
parts of the art, to those which require genius and vast
conceptions, and was no farther occupied with colours
than was necessary to establisn a difference between painting
and sculpture; or rather between painting varied with
colours, and claro obscuro.
At the head of this school is placed Raphael Sanzio,
born at Urbino, in 1483.
In the early part of his lise he had accustomed hiinself to
copy nature with great exactness, but without being solicit-
ous about the choice, or perhaps ignorant that any choice
was necessary. When he saw the works of Leonardo de
Vinci, and Michael Angelo, they gave to his genius a new
direction ; he perceived that there was something more in
the art of painting than a simple imitation of truth; but the
works of those masters were not sufficient to enable him
to make the best choice; and he continued in uncertainty
till he saw at Rome the works of the ancients ; then he
perceived, that in imitating them, he had only to follow
the natural impulse of his genius.
His design is admirable-he excelled in representing the
character of philosophers, apostles, and other figures of that
kind. The Greeks were superior to him in ideal figures,
but if he did not succeed in embellishing nature in the same
high degree, he saw, at least, and imitated her in whatever
was expressive and beautiful. The Greeks (says Mengs),
sailed with majesty between earth and heaven; Raphael
walked with propriety on the earth.







Composition is in general (says the same authorl, of two
kinds: Raphael’s is the expressive kind; the other the-
atrical or picturesque, which consists of an agreeable dispo-
sition of the figures. Lanfranc was the inventor of the
last, and after him Pietro de Cortona. The preference is
given to Raphael, because reason presides over all his
works, or at least the greatest part of them. He never
allowed himself in common ideas, nor ever sussered his
accessary figures to turn the attention from the principal
object of the piece. The excellency of Raphael (says Sir
oshua Reynolds) lay in the propriety, beauty, and majesty
of his characters; his judicious contrivance of composition,
correctness of drawing, purity of taste, and the skilful
accommodation of other men’s conceptions to his own
purpose.
The school of Venice is the child of nature. The
Venetian painters, not having under their eyes, like the
Romans, the remains of antiquity, were destitute of the
means of forming a just idea of the beauty of forms, and
of expression. They copied without choice the forms
of nature, but were chiefly delighted with the beauties
which presented themselves in the mixture and variety of
colours. Colouring was their chief object; and they
endeavoured by the agreement and opposition of colours,
and by the contrast of light and shade, to produce à vigor-
ous effect, to demand and fix the attention. In this they
succeeded.
Dominico, who was the second Italian artist who painted
in oil, had educated, before he quitted Venice, Giacomo
Bellino, who had two sons, Gentile and Giovanni, both of
whom were painters ; the latter contributed much to the
progress of his art in painting constantly in oil and after
nature. Giorgione and Titian, his scholars, are considered
as the founders of the Venetian school.













Giorgione distinguished himself by a better taste in de-
signing than his master; but he chiessy surpassed hiin
in colouring. He died in his zad year.
Tiziano Vecelli, better known by the name of Titian,
was instructed in the school of Bellino, to copy nature in
the most servile manner; but when he had seen the works
of Giorgione, he began to study the ideal in colouring.
The truth of history is not to be expected in hipniings,
or in those of the artists of the same school. He paig little
attention to the consistance of scene, to the costume, to
expression adapted to the subject; or, finally, to the accom¬
modation of parts which characterise the works of those
who have studied the ancients.
The artists of the Florentine and Roman schools painted
most commonly in water-colours, or in fresco; and, instead
of nature, they finished their work from their sirst sketches.
Titian painted in oil, and finisned from the objects in
nature; and this practice, joined to his exquisite talents,
gave the greatest truth to his colours. His being a portrait
painter was also of advantage to him as a colourist. In this
department he was accustomed to the colours of nature in
carnations and draperies.
He was a landfkape painter; and here he also took the
colours from nature.
Titian has, in general, little expression in his pictures;
and he sometimes introduces figures which augment the
coldness of the piece; for if it be true that heads, even in
historical painting, ought to be studied from nature, it is
true also that individual nature should not be presented, but
one general and ideal. The painter fails in the effect
which he ought to produce, if, when he represents Achilles,
Hector and Cæsar, his personages are familiar to our obser-
vation.








The distinguishing characteristies of the Lombard school
are grace; an agreeable taste for design, without great cor-
rection ; a mellowness of pencil; and a beautisul mixture
of colours.
Antonio Allegri, called Corregio, was the father and
greatest ornament of this school: he began by imitating
nature alone; but as he was chiefly delighted with the
graceful, he was careful to purisy his design :-he made his
figures elegant and large: and varied his outlines by fre-
quent undulations ; but he was not always pure and correct.
Corregio painted in oil, a kind of painting susceptible of
the greatest delicacy and sweetnefs; and as his character
led him to cultivate the agreeable, he gave a pleasing cap-
tivating tone to all his pictures. He sought transparent
colours to represent shades conformable to nature, and
adopted a manner of glazing which actually rendered his
shadows more obscure. It is chiesly in this that he deserves
to be imitated; for his lights are too clear, and somewhat
heavy ; and his fleshy parts are not sufficiently transparent.
Harmony and grace are connected together; and on this
account Corregio is excellent also in harmony. As the
delicacy of his taste suffered him not to employ strong
oppositions, he naturally became a great master in this
part, which chiesly consists of easy gradations from one
extreme to another. A delicate taste in colours, a perfect
knowledge of the claro obscuro, the art of uniting light
to light, and shade to snade, together with that of de-
taching objects from the ground; inimitable, grave, and
perfect harmony, were the qualities which distinguished
Corregio from all painters, and placed him near the head of
his profefsion.
The Carracci, Lewis, Augustin, and Hannibal, formed
what is called the second Lombard school, which is fre-
quently distinguished by the name of the school of Bologna.







Lewis was the master of the other two; he had studied
the works of Titian and Paolo Veronese, of Andrea del
Sarto, of Corregio, and of Julio Romano; but he chiesly
endea voured to imitate the manner of Corregio. Hannibal
sluctuated between Corregio and Titian. Augustin, their
rival in painting, had his mind cultivated by learning,
and devoted part of his time to poetry, music, and other
many exercises.
These three painters often employed their talents upon
the same work; and their united labours seemed to be
animated with the same spirit.
They established an academy at Bologna, called l’Academia
degli Desiderosi; but it was afterwards known by the name
of the Academy of the Carracci. In this school was
taught the art of constructing models, perspective, and
anatomy ; lessons were given on the beautiful proportions of
nature, on the best manner of using colours, and on the
principles of light and snade. The academy separated on
Hannibal’s going to Rome to adorn the gallery of the
cardinal Farnese.
The works of the Carraci are often, from the resemblance
of their manner, confounded together; nevertheless, each
of them has a decided character, distinct from the other
two. Lewis had less fire, but more grace and grandeur :
Augustin had more spirit in his conception, and more
pleasantness in his execution. Hannibal is characterized
by boldness, by a design more profound, by an exprefsion
more lucky, and by an execution more solid.
Lodovico Carracci (says Sir Joshina Reynolds), appears to
me to approach nearest to perfection ; his unaffected breadth
of light and shadow, the simplicity of colouring, which,
holding its proper rank, does not draw aside the least part
of the attention from the subject; and the solemn essect of











that twilight which seems diffused over hie pictures, appears
to me to correspond with grave and dignified subjects, better
than the more artificial brilliancy of sunshine which en¬
lightens the pictures of Titian.
Hannibal is esteemed by the best judges as a model for
beauty and design. Those who blame him for becoming
less a colourist at Rome than he was at Bologna, ought
to recollect that it is his performances at Rome which
have chiefly secured his reputation. Severe critics have
maintained, that his design is too little vaired in the figures;
that he excels only in male beauty, and that in imitating
ancient statues, he excites some resemblance, but without
arriving at that sublimity of ideas and of stile which cha¬
racterise the ancients.
The success of Hannibal, and the reputation which he
acquired, have been pernicious to the art. His successors,
deluded by these considerations, have made him the object
of their imitation, without ascending to the sources from
which he derived his knowledge, and which they never
could equal. The result has been, that instead of be¬
coming equal to Hannibal, they have often copied his
imperfections.
The French school has varied so much under different
masters, that it is difficult to characterise it. Some of its
artists have been formed on the Florentine and Lombard
manner; others, on the Roman; others, on the Venetian;
and a few have distinguisned themselves by a manner which
may be called their own. In speaking in general terms
of this school, it appears to have no peculiar character;
and it can only be distinguishied by its aptitude to imitate
easily any impression; and it may be added, speaking
still in general terms, that it unites in a moderate degree
the different parts of the art, without excelling in any
one of them.








It is equally dissicult to determine the progress of painting
in France. Miniature painting, and painting on glafs,
were early cultivated in that country; and in these two
kinds, the Italians had often recourse to French artists.
Cousin, a painter on glafs, and portrait painter, was the
first who establishied any kind of reputation in France.
He was correct, but possessed very little elegance of design.
Painting, for some time encouraged by Francis the First,
fell into a state of languor, from which it was not recovered
till the reign of Louis XIII. Jaques Blanchard, formed in
the Venetian school, and called the French Titian, flourissi-
ed about this period; but as he left no pupils to perpetuate
his manner, he must be regarded as à single good artist, and
not as à founder of the French school.
In the same manner Poussin, whom they call the Raphael
of France, educated no pupils, and formed no school. His
stile and manner of painting, are described by Sir Joshua
Reynolds as simple, careful, pure, and correct. No works
of any modern have so much the air of antique painting
as those of Poussin. His best performances have a certain
dryness of manner, which seems perfectly correspondent to that
ancient simplicity which distinguisn his stile. In the latter
part of his lise he changed from this manner into one
much soster and richer, where there is a greater union
between the figures and the ground. His favorite subjects
were ancient fables; and no painter was ever better quali¬
fied to paint such subjects, as he was eminenily fkilled in
the knowledge of the ceremonies, customs, and habits of
the ancients; and well acquainted with the different cha¬
racters which those who invented them gave their allegorical
figures.
Poussin, more admired than imitated, had no manner of
insluence in forming the French school. Simon Vouet had
this honour, because his pupils, in the happy age of the arts










in France, conferred on it the greatest splendour. Vouet
was a man of distinguished abilities; but the school which
he erected would have had no continuance, if his scholars
had pursued his manner of painting. He had a kind of
grandeur and facility; but his design was false with
regard to colours, and without any idea of exprefsion.
He had the merit of destroying the insipid taste which
reigned in France, and pointing the way to a better.
If Vouet laid the foundation of the French school, Le
Brun finishied the edifice. He had a noble conception, and
a fruitful imagination ; on no occasion was he inferior to
the vast compositions he undertook. Few painters have
united a greater number of essential qualities and access-
ories of the art:—-he drew well, but his design was far
from being so elegant as that of Raphael, or so pure as
that of Domenichino; and it was less lively than that of
Hannibal Carracci, whom he had taken as a model. In
drapery he followed the Roman school; but in this part he
was not equal to the painter of Urbino. He had studied
the expression of the affections of the soul; but after
observing the general characters, and establishing the prin-
cipal traits of expression, he thought he had reached the
whole extent of this subject which is so infinitely extended.
He was delighted with great compositions; and he gave
them life, animation, and variety; but he wanted the
vigour and inspiration of Raphael. His compositions are
founded on philosophical principles; but those of Raphael
are created. Le Brun thought well; Raphael, Poussin, and
Le Sueur thought most profoundly. Le Brun had eleva-
tion, but he was not elevated, like Raphael, to the sublime.
In colouring, Le Brun did not follow the painters of the
Venetian school. The sweet attractions, and strong and
solid colours of the schools of Rome and Lombardy, seem
rather to have been the object of his imitation; and from







them also he learned an easy, agreeable, and bold manage¬
ment of the pencil.
Eustach le Sueur was the cotemporary and rival of le
Brun; and no painter approached nearer to Raphael in
the art of drapery, or in disposing the solds in the most
artful and the noblest manner. His design was in general
more slender than that of Raphael, but like his it was form-
ed on the model of the ancients. Like Raphael he re-
presented with art and precision the affections of the soul;
like him he varied the air of the head, according to the
condition, the age and the character of his personages; and,
like him, he made the different parts of every figure
contribute to the general effect. His intention in compos¬
ing was to express his subject, not to make shining con¬
trasts or beautiful groups of figures, not to astonish and
bewitch the spectator by the deceitsul pomp of a theatrical
scene, or the splendour of the great machine. His tones
are delicate, his tints harmonious, and his colours, though
not so attractive as those of the schools of Venice and
Flanders, are yet engaging. They steal peaceably on the
soul, and fix it, without distraction on the parts of the art,
superior to that of colouring.
If le Sueur had lived longer, or if like le Brun he had
been employed under a court, fond of the arts and of
learning, to execute the great works of the age, the French
school would have adopted à disserent and a better manner.
The noble heauty of his heads, the simple majesty of his
draperies, the lightness of his design, the propriety of his
expreffion and attitudes, and the simplicity of his general
disposition would have formed the character of this school.
The deceitful pomp of theatrical decoration would have
been more lately introduced, or perhaps would never have
appeared, and Paris might have been the counter part to Rome.








But as le Brun, by an accidental concurrence of favour-
able circumstances, was the faffiionable painter, to be em¬
ployed or rewarded, it was necessary to imitate his manner;
and as his imitators possessed not his genius, his faults be¬
came not only current but more deformed.
The French school not long ago changed its principles;
and, if they follow the road which they have marked out
for themselves, they have the chance of becoming the most
riged observers of the laws imposed on the Greek artists.
The Count de Caylus, pupil of Buchardon, who by his
rank and fortune had the means of encouraging the imitators
of the ancients, and of the masters of the i5th century,
first sormed the design of restoring a pure taste to the art of
painting. He was seconded by the talents of M. Vien,
an artist who had only occaston to have his lessons and his
example laid before him.
In this manner commenced a revolution, so much the
more wonderful, as it was scarcely ever known that any
nation substituted a system of simple and rigid excellence
in place of à salse and glittering taste. The history of all
nations on the contrary, discovers à gradual progrefs froin
à rude beginning to perfection, and afterwards to an ir-
remediable decay. The French have the prospect of stopping
short in this ordinary course. They have begun in a
manner which promises success, and the best consequences
may be expected from the study of those master pieces of
ancient art with which the capital the of French Republic is
ornamented, and which, to the honour of the government,
are open to the inspection of every one. It is almost need-
less to mention that these invaluable works are the most
capital productions of art, which were formerly at
Florence, Rome, Turin, Naples and the cities in the
Austrian Netherlands.







In Germany there can hardly he said to be a school, as
it is a continuation of single artists, who derived their
manner from different sources of originality and imitation.
There were some German painters of eminence, when the
art, emerging from its barbarous state, first began to be
cultivated in Europe. As they were totally unacquainted
with the ancients, and had scarcely access to the works of
their contemporaries in Italy, they copied nature alone, with
the exception of somewhat of that stisfness which forms the
gothic manner. But this is by no means the case with
their successors, part of whom were educated in Flanders,
and part in Italy. For if Mengst or Deitrich, were com-
prehended in this school, there would be nothing peculiar
to its manner discovered in their works. It is therefore
necessary to confine our observations to the more ancient
German painters in whom the gothic stile is conspicuous.
Albert Durer was the first German who corrected the
bad taste of his countrymen. He excelled in engraving as
well as painting. His genius was fertile, his compositions
varied, his thoughts ingenious, and his colours brilliant.
His works, though numerous, were finished with great exact-
ness; but as he owed every thing to his genius, and as
works of inferior merit were by the salse taste of the times
preferred to his, it was impossible for him altogether to avoid
* Antonio Raphael Mengs was born at Ausig in Bohemia. His first patron
was Augustus id King of Poland, and his last and most generous was Charles
3d King of Spain. His grand work was the Apotheosis of St. Eusebius at
Rome, andhis most beautiful picture, that of the nativity at Madrid. There
was à great rivalsnip existing between Reynolds and Mengs, who possessed
little original genius, and was a scrupuluus if not a servile copyist. He was
coldly correct and the greater plagiary. In the chamber of painters at
Florence are the portraits of Mengs and Reynolds by themselves, strongly
characterised by the dignified but sullen air of the one, and the universal in
telligence and liberality of the other.









the faults of his predecessors. He is blamed for stiffnefs, and
aridity in his outlines, sor little taste or grandeur in his
expression, for ignorance of the costume, of ærial per-
spective, and of gradation of colours; but he had studied
lineal perspective, architecture, and fortification.
John Holbein, nearly cotemporary with Albert Durer,
painted in oil and water-colours. He excelled chiesly in
history, and in portrait painting. His colours are fresni
and brilliant, and his works highly finishied; but in his
historical subjects, his draperies are not in so good a taste as
those of Albert Durer.
The Flemish school is recommended to the lovers of the
art by the discovery, or at least the first practice of oil
painting. It has been generally attributed to John Van
Eyck, who was accustomed to varnisn his distemper pictures
with a composition of oils, which was pleasing, on account
of the lustre it gave them. In the course of his practice
he came to mix his colours with oil, instead of water,
which he found rendered them brilliant without the trouble
of varnishing. From this and subsequent experiments,
arose the art of painting in oils, of which wonderful dis-
covery Van Mandes gives à very particular account; but
the truth of it is now very much questioned; and it is even
proved that this method of painting was discovered long
besore the time of Jolin Van Eyck. It is admitted that
Joln and his brother Eubert, were the sirst who brought it
into general practice, by shewing the excellence of which it
was susceptible; their own paintings having acquired, all
over Europe, great reputation for the softnefs and delicaey
of their colours. The attention of the Italian painters was
soon excited; and Antonio de Massina persormed à journey
into Flanders sor the express purpose of acquiring the con¬
sidence of John Van Eyck, and of discovering the secret.







John of Bruges was the sounder of painting as a profeffion
in Flanders. Peter Paul Rubens was the founder of
the art. This extraordinary person produced an im-
mense number of works. He excelled equally in historical,
ortrait, and landskape painting; in fruits, flowers, and in
animals. He invented, and executed with the greatest
facility. The works of Rubens were destitute of that soft
inspiration, productive of sweet and pleasant effects so con¬
spicuous in the works of Raphael; but he possessed that
prightlinefs of genius and strength of mind, which are
ever ready to burst forth in wonderful and astonishing
effects. His figures appear to be the exact counterpart of
his conceptions, and their creation nothing more than a
simple act of the will. His chief merit consists in colour-
ing; though in this branch of the art he has not equalled
Titian. He is the first among painters eminent for pomp
and majesty; the first among those who spedk to the eye ;
and the power of the art is often by him carried almost to
enchantment.
Rubens (says Sir Joshiua Reynolds) is a remarkable in¬
stance of the same mind, being seen in all the various parts
of the art. The whole is so much of a piece, that one can
fcarce be brought to believe but that if any one of them had
been more correct and perfect, his works would not be so
compleat as they appear. If we should allow a greater
urity and correctuess of drawing, his want of simplicity in
composition, colouring, and drapery, would appear more grofs.
The Flemisn school, of which Rubens is the greatest
master, is remarkable for great brilliancy of colours, and
the magie of the claro obscuro. To these may be joined a
prosound design, which is yet not founded on the most
beautiful forms; a composition possessed of grandeur, a
certain air of noblenefs in the figures, strong and natural
exprefsions; in short, a kind of national beauty, which is






neither copied from the ancients, nor from the Roman or
Lombard schools; but which deserves to please, and is
capable of pleasing.
To speak in general terms, and without regarding a great
number of exceptions, the Dutch school carries none of the
above qualities to great perfection, except that of colouring.
Far from excelling in the beauty of heads and forms, they
seem to delight in the exact imitation of the lowest and most
ignoble. Their subjects are derived from the tavern, the
smith’s shop, and from the vulgar amusements of the rudest
peasants. The exprefsions are sufficiently marked; but it
is the expression of passions which debase instead of ennobling
human nature.
It must be acknowledged, at the same time, that the
Dutch painters have succeeded in several branches of the
art. If they have chosen low objects of imitation, they
have represented them with great exactness; and truth must
always please. If they have not succeeded in the most
difficult parts of the claro obscuro, they, at least, excel in
the most striking, such as is in light confined in a narrow
space, night illuminated by the moon, or by torches, and
the light of a smith’s sorge. The Dutch understand the
gradations of colours. They have no rivals in landskape
painting, considered as the faithful representation of a
particular scene; but they are far from equalling Titian,
Poussin, Claude Lorrain, &c. who have carried to the
greatest perfection the ideal landskape; and whose pictures,
instead of being the topographical representation of certain
places, are the combined result of every thing beautiful in
their imagination or in nature. The Dutch distinguisn
In so great estimation are some of the landskapes by this master, that
two pictures, known by the name of the Altiere Claudes, (from their having
been long in the Altiere palace at Rome) were lately purchased by Mr.
Beckford, for the almost incredible sum of zooo guineas.




themselves by their perspective, by their clouds, sea scenes,
animals, fruits, slowers, and infects; and they excel in
miniature painting: in short, every thing which requires a
faithful imitation, colour, and à nice pencil, is well exe-
cuted by the Dutch painters.
Holland has also produced history painters, as Octavius
Van Been, and Vander Hilst, the rival of Vandyke; but
it is not in the works of these artists that we find the
character of the Dutch school.
Neither is the origin of their style to be derived from the
the works of Lucas of Leyden; though from the time he
flourished, viz. about the end of the fifteenth century, he
may be considered as the patriarch of the Dutch school.
Lucas painted in oil, in water-colours, and on glass; and the
kinds of his painting were history, landfkape, and portrait.
If miniature painting be considered as a character of the
Dutch school, Cornelius Polembourg may be regarded as
the father of it. He possessed the colour, delicacy of touch,
and disposition of the claro obscuro, which chiesly distin-
guish this school; and if any thing is to be added, it is
want of correctness in his design.
But, if the choice of low figures is its chief characteristic,
this is to be found in the greatest perfection in the works of
the celebrated Rembrandt Vanryn; and it is the more
offensive in this artist, as his compositions frequently re-
quired an opposite choice of figures. As his father was a
miller, near Leyden, his education must altogether have
depended on the exertion of great talents, and the study of
nature. He studied the grotesque figure of a Dutch peasant,
or the servant of an inn, with as much application as the
greatest masters of Italy would have studied the Apollo of
Belvidere, or the Venus de Medicis. This was not the
manner of elevating himself to the noble conceptions of







Raphael; but it was acquiring the imitation of truth in
vulgar painting.
Rembrandt (says Mr. Descamps) may be compared to the
great artists for colour, delicacy of touch, and claro obscuro.
He delighted in great oppositions of light and shade; and
he seems to be chiesly attentive to this branch of the art.
His workshop was occasionally made dark, and he received
the light by a hole, which fell as he chose to direct it on
the place which he desired to be enlightened. His painting
is à kind of magie: no artist knew better the effects of
different colours mingled together, nor could better distin-
guisn those which did not agree from those which did.
He placed every tone in its situation with so much exactness
and harmony, that he needed not to mix them, and so
destroy what may be called the slower and fresnness of the
colours.
Such is the power of genius, that Rembrandt, with all
his faults, and they are enormous, is placed among the
greatest artists by Mr. Descamps, who had attentively exa-
mined his works, and was himself an artist. 
John de Laer, a miniature painter, and who made
choice of his subjects from common life, deserves à distin-
guished place in the Dutch school. He painted hunting-
scenes, the attacks of robbers, public festivals, landikapes,
and sea views. He had a correct design, and employed
vigorous and lively colouring.
Van-Ostade, although born at Lubeck, Gerrard Dow,
Metzu, Miris, Wouvermans, Berghem, and the celebrated
painter of slowers Van Huysum, belong to the Dutch
school.
The greater part of the schools of which we have treated
have no longer any existence. Italy alone had four schools,
and there only remain at present à very sew Italian













artists known to foreigners. The school of Rubens is
in vain sought for in Flanders. If the Dutch school still
exists, it is not known beyond the precincts of Holland.
Mengs, a German artist, has rendered himself famous in
our days; but it was in Italy that he chiefly improved
his talents, and exercised his art. M. Dietrich, another
German, has made himself known to strangers: but two
solitary artists do not form a school.

The Englisn school has been formed in our own times.
It is connected with the Royal Academy in London, insti-
tuted in 1766: but although as a school it did not exist before
that time, yet ever since the revival of the arts, and the
consequent encouragement given to them by the fovereigns
of Europe, England has possessed portrait painters of
ability; and perhaps it has been owing only to the re-
markable partiality of the nation for this branch of the
art, that the more noble one of history painting has been
neglected.
Hans Holbein is ranked by Du Piles among the German
painters ; yet he painted his most celebrated works in
England. He was the first painter of eminence encouraged
by Henry the Eighth, who, excited by the fame which his
cotemporaries Francis 1. and Charles V. had gained as pa¬
trons of the arts, employed him, and invited Titian to Eng-
land; but merely as a portrait painter--whether the reward
offered was not thought adequate to his merit, or for
some other cause, perhaps the knowledge that his talents
for historical design would be depreciated ; he firmly re-
jected the overture. The public works of Holbein, in
England, are four only, as enumerated by Mr. Walpole,
which are rather groups of portraits than history.






Nothing could be more unsavourable to female beauty
than the dress of those times: Holbein’s men are there-
fore much more characteristic than his ladies; even his
Anna Bulleyne is deficient in loveliness, as he pourtrayed
her. In his likeness of Anne, of Cleves, he is said to
have sacrificed truth to slattery; yet the original, which is
in the possession of Mr. Barret, of Lee, in Kent, is below
mediocrity. There are, in his Majesty’s collection, a
feries of portraits of persons of quality in the reign of
Henry the Eighth, sketched upon paper, with crayons,
probably taken al a single sitting. They have lately been
engraved by Bartolozzi, with all the strength and spirit of
the originals.
Holbein was as celebrated in miniature as in oil colours.
He made a great number of designs for engravers, sculp-
tors, and jewellers. He died at his residence at White-
hall, in those lodgings which were afterwards the paper-
offices.
The fame of lsaac Oliver, who flourished about the latter
end of the reign of Elizabeth, as a miniature painter, is
well known:he received some instructions from Fre-
derico Zucchero, who was in England at that time, where,
among other portraits, he painted that of the unfortunate
Mary, Queen of Scots. Oliver drew well, and made some
admirable copies from the Italian masters. Greatly as lsaac
was celebrated, he was afterwards exceeded by his son
Peter, who drew portraits of King James the First, Prince
Henry, Prince Charles, and most of the court.
About this period, Cornelius Janson, a fkilful portrait
painter, came to England from Amsterdam, and painted
the king and many of the nobility ; but his merits being
eclipsed by Vandyke, of whom he was jealous, and the
civil war breaking out, he fled from England. Cornelius
Janson was remarkable for high finisning in his draperies;










many of which are black, which seems to. add roundness,
relief, and spirit, to his figures and carnations. He is said
to have used ultra marine in the black colours, as well as
in the carnations, to which may be attributed their lustre
even at this day. The Duke of Beaufort has a capital
portrait of Janson by himself; but one of his best perform-
ances is the Rushiout family, at Northwick, in Worcester-
shire.
Daniel Mytens was a popular painter in the reign of
James, and Charles l—He had studied under Rubens, and
was for some time principal painter to Chadles, but was
deprived of his place when Vandyke arrived in England.
Charles, however, continued his pension during lise.
Vandyke had his first instructions from Vaubalen,
of Antwerp; but he soon found in Rubens a master
every way more suited to direct his genius, and to ma¬
ture that consummate taste which he very early showed
marks of possessing. Under the instructions of Rubens, he
acquired such sxill in his art, that the portrait of his master’s
wife, which he painted whilst he was yet his disciple, is
esteemed one of the best pictures in the Low Countries.
He painted for his master two admirable pieces, one repre-
senting Christ seized in the garden, and the other the
crowning him with thorns. When he left Rubens, he
travelled into Italy ; and on his return, having established
his reputation as one of the first painters of the age, he
was invited to England, where he was knighted by
Charles 1. and married one of the handsomest ladies of
the court, the daughter of Lord Ruthven, Earl of Gowry.
Towards the latter end of his lise he went to France, in
hopes of being employed in the great gallery of the Louvre ;
but not succeeding, he returned to England, and proposed
to the king to make cartoons for the banqueting-house at
Whitehall; but his demand of Z. So,ooo being judged







unreasonable, whilst the king was treating with him for a
less sum, the gout, and other distempers, put an end to his
lise.
Dobson had merited from Charles I. the title of the
English Tintoret, besore his premature death, in 1646, at
the age of only thirty-six years. He was the father of the
English school of portrait painting; and though sometimes
unequal, had much the manner of his master Vandyke.
He resided much at Oxford, and left there the portraits of
himself and wife, and of Sir Tradescant and his friend
Zythepsa the Quaker, in the staircase of the Ashmolean
Museum. Dobson sometimes painted history. His decolla-
tion of St. John, at Wilton, and the astronomer and his
family at Blenheim, are amongst those which are most
known and admired.
Lely was in the former part of his life à landskape
painter, but was induced to practice portrait painting,
perhaps from the reputation and emolument which its pro¬
fessors obtained in England. Lely was chiefly celebrated
for painting females; and it is sometimes objected to him,
that his faces have too great à fimilarity of expreffion.
The languishing air, the drowsy sweetness peculiar to him-
self, and
e The sleepy eye that spoke the melting soul 
is found in nearly all the pictures of females by this painter.
His crayon drawings are admirable. He drew the por-
trait of Charles 1. when a prisoner at Hampton-Court.
Charles I1. Knighted him, and made him his principal
Kneller was the fafhiionable artist in the reigns of James II.
and William :among an infinity of portraits, there are
some which bear the marks of excellence. Dr. Wallis,
the mathematician, and Lord Crew, both for colouring and
exprefsion, are in a great style. The latter was admired






by Sir Joshiua Reynolds sor the air of nobility it possesses.
Kneller is said to have drawn ten crowned heads, viz. four
kings of England, and three queens; the Czar of Muscovy,
the Emperor Charles, and Louis XIV. Notwithstanding
the negligence which is manisest in most of his works,
which arose from the desire of gain, his genius is very
apparent. In his lise-time he received the praise of his
contemporaries ; but the connoisseurs of the prefent age by
no means allow that the praises of Pope were merited ;
speaking of Kneller he says-
ee Whose art was nature, and whose pictures thought. 
But hoiv sew of them deserve the compliment !
Thornhill painted several great works : his fresco paint-
ings in the dome of St. Paul’s, and the painted hall at
Greenwich, are too well known to need deseribing. His
copies of the cartoons of Raphael, which were purchased
in 1800, for 450 guineas, have been presented to the Royal
Academy by the Duke of Bedford. Richardson was a
portrait painter of eminence : to his Treatise on Painting,
we are indebted for the greatest ornament to the art; Sir
Joshua Reynolds sixed the destination of his mind on the
prosession, occasioned by the accidental reading of that work.
Pope praised Jervais, but without discernment. Those
beauties which were to ee bloom in his colours for a thousand
years,’ are now faded and unnoticed. Hudson was the
best pupil of Richardson. The merit of Sir Joshiua Rey-
nolds, as a portrait painter, cannot be attributed to Hudson’s
instructions, since his manner seems entirely his own. Sir
Joshiua was born at Plimpton, in Devonshire, in the year
1723: his relations still preserve some frontispieces to the
lives of Plutarch, as specimens of his early predilection for
his art, and tlie promise he gave of becoming eminent
in it. He became pupil to Hudson about 1742; who, amonstg








other advice he gave him, recommended him to copy
Guerchino’s drawings, which he did, with such still, that
many of them are preserved in the cabinets of collectors,
as the original of that master. About the year 1750, he
went to Rome to prosecute his studies, where he remained
nearly two years, and employed himself rather in making
studies from, than copying the works of the great painters :
he amused himself with painting caricatures, particularly
one of all the Englisn then at Rome, in the disserent
attitudes of Raphael’s celebrated school of Athens. On his
return he resided in Newport-street, but shortly after re-
moved to Leicester-fields, where he continued till the time
of his death.
An ingenious critic thus delineates Sir Joshua’s
professional character: e Sir Joshua Reynolds was, most
assuredly, the best portrait painter that this age has pro-
duced: he possessed something original in his manner,
which distinguished him from those painters who preceded
him. His colouring was excellent; and his distribution of
light and shadow so generally judicious and varied, that it
most clearly shewed that it was not a mere trick of practice,
but the result of principle. In history painting, his abilities
were very respectable; and his invention and judgment
were sufficient to have enabled him to have made à very
distinguished figure in that very arduous branch of his
profession, if the exclusive taste of his country for portraits
had not discouraged him from cultivating à talent so very
unproductive and neglected. His drawing, though incor-
rect, had always something of grandeur in it.1'
To his own pictures might well be applied what he used
to say respecting those of Rubens: ee They resemble,
said he, et a well-chosen nosegay, in which, though the
coloure are splendid and vivid, they are never glaring or







oppressive to. the eye. Sir Joshua was a great experiment-
alist with respect to the composition of his colours: at first
he used preparations from vegetables, which he relin-
quissied for minerals: he is known to have purchased
pictures by Titian, or his scholars, and to have scraped off
the several layers of colouring in order to ascertain it, and
discover his secret.
The Englisn school of painting must acknowledge Sir
Joshiua Reynolds as its great founder, under Royal auspices,
in the establishment of the Academy. The pure precepts
which he laid down in his annual orations, were exempli¬
fied in his own works: his most favourite paintings are :
I. Garrick between Tragedy and Comedy, 2. The
Ugolino in prison, in which he has imitated Michael
Angelo in his te terribil via,  as it is called by Augustino
Caracei, in his fonnet on painting. It is Sir Joshua’s
triumph in the art. 3. The Nativity. 4. The Infant
Hercules. 5. The Death of Cardinal Beaufort, in which
are united the local colouring of Titian, with the chiaro
feuro of Rembrandt. 6. Mrs. Siddons. 7. Mrs. Billington.
8. Robin Goodfellow. 9. Cimon and Iphigene. 10. Holy
Family, which displays a norel and beautiful manner of
treating that very frequent sulject.
To speak generally of the Englisn school, their colouring
is less glaring than that of the Flemisn or Venetian masters.
Their talents are more admirable in portrait than history,
particularly in those of females. Examine (says a French
writer) a picture of a French woman, painted by an artist
of that nation, and you will generally find, in place of ex-
pression, a foreed grin, in which the eyes and forehead do
not partake, and which indicates no affection of the soul. Ex-
amine the picture of an English woman done by one of their
painters, and you observe an elegant and simple expression,








which makes you at once acquainted with the person re-
presented.
Perhaps it might be difficult to assign to the English
school, as exhibited in the Royal Academy, any perfect
discrimination ; as each painter, either implicitly follows
his own genius, or attaches himself to that particular
manner of the foreign schools which approaches nearest to
his own ideas of excellence: but there are other exhibitions
in which the best painters of the age have exerted a fuccess-
ful competition. Alderman Boydell’s Shakespeare Gallery;
Macklin’s Gallery of Subjects, taken from the English
poets ; Boyer’s Gallery of those illustrative of Englisn
History; and Fuseli’s, from Milton, all by his own pencil,
are very honourable testimonies of the spirit of private
individuals in the cause of the arts.
Mr. Fuseli’s boundless imagination has attempted, with
surprising effect, to embody several metaphysical ideas
which occur in the Paradise Lost. He has gained a free
and uncontrouled admission into the richest regions of
fancy ; but appears not to be solicitous about how sew of his
spectators can partially follow him there, or how many are
totally excluded. The excellence of the present president
of the Royal Academy (Mr. West), in historical and scrip-
tural subjects, is universally allowed. The institution of
the Order of the Garter is his grand work, both for com¬
position, correctness, and finishing. His Death of the
Stag; the Battles of La Hogue and the Boyne; and his
Death of General Wolse, are all in an excellent style of
composition : the latter is esteemed by an eminent critic, a
perfect model of historical composition; as the pictures by
Barry, late professor of painting in the Royal Academy,
(in the rooms of the society for the Encouragement of the
Arts), are of the poetic style.














In the course of the last twenty years, some of the most
able artists this country ever produced, have flourished and
died. The great landskape painters of Italy have scarcely
exceeded the Smiths of Chichester, Gainsborough, and
Wilson, in truth and nature, and the accuracy of their
native scenery. It would be injustice not to mention
Wilson’s pictures of Niobe, Phaeton, and Cicero at his
Villa; which last rivals even Claude himself.
Mortimer, who died prematurely, in the freedom of his
pencil, and the savage air of his banditti, his favourite
subject, approached nearly to the boldest efforts of Salvator
Rosa.
We rarely have met with an artist who was not admirer
of some particular school, or attached to some favourite
manner. The difficulties they find in the practice of their
art tie them down to the mechanic, whilst self-love and va-
nity lead them into an admiratien of those strokes of the
pencil, which come nearest to their own.
Of living artists we decline speaking, with the exception
of those whose eminence, as men of genius, has placed
them beyond competition. In the works of Northcote,
Opie and Lawrencer we hail the continuance of an Englisn
school, and the happy application of those classical precepts
which its founder, Sir Joshiua Reynolds, delivered with so
much dignity and effect. The principles of the art are
exemplified in their works; and genius, so directed, will
reach a degree of perfection of which the modern schools
painting in Europe will aspire to with unsuccessful emu¬
lation.
Lawrence’s colossal figure of Satan and Beelzebub, from Milton, noW
the Duke of Norsolk’s :- Mr. Kemble in Coriolanus, Sir Richard Worsley’s :
and as Rolla in Pizarro, have gained him unanimous admiration.








DESIGN.
IN painting, a good taste, and correctness of design, are
so necessary, that a painter who wants them must not hope
to attract esteem. Design being the foundation of all the
other parts, its elegance and correctness are no less neces-
sary in painting, than purity of language is in eloquence.
We are told by Pliny, that all the statues before the
time of Daedalus, were represented stiff and motionless,
with the feet closed, and arms hanging in right lines to
their sides; or they had only the head finished; the body,
arms, and legs not being expressed. These were the rude
essays of design.
In the progrefs of the art, and in abler hands, motion
was fashiioned into grace, and life was heightened into
character: beauty of form was no longer confined to mere
imitation, which always falls short of the object imitated ;
to make the copy equal in its effect, it was necessary to give
it an advantage over its model: the artists, therefore,
observing that nature was sparing of her perfections, and
that her efforts were limited to parts, availed themselves of
her inequalities, and drawing those scattered beauties inte
a more happy and compleat union, rose from an im¬
perfect imitation, to a perfect ideal beauty. We are in-
formed, that the painters of Greece, pressed in crowds to
design the bosom and breast of Thais; nor were the elegant
proportions of Phryne less the object of their study: by
this constant contemplation of the beautisul, they enriched
their imagination, and confirmed their taste; from this fund
they drew their systems of beauty; and though we should
consider them but as imitators of the parts, we must allow
them to have been the inventors in the compositions.







Should we doubt the justice of the preference given to
invented beauty, over the real, we need only contemplate
the fine proportions, and the style of drawing in the
Laocoon and Gladiator, and mark the expressive energy of
Apollo, and the elegant beauties of the Venus de Medicis.
These are the utmost efforts of design ; it can reach no
farther than a full exertion of grace, beauty, and character.
The design of the ancients is distinguishied by an union
of proportions, a fimplicity of contour, and excellence of
character.
There is no one excellence of design from which we
derive such immediate pleasure, as from gracefulness of
action: if we observe the attitudes and movements of the
Greek statues, we shall mark that careless decency, and
unassected grace, which ever attend the motions of men
unconscious of observation.
Raphael has been wonderfully happy in imitating this
simple elegance of the antique; the most courtly imagin-
ation cannot represent to itself an image of more winning
grace than is to be seen in his Sancta Cæcilia. Indeed, an
elegant simplicity is the characteristie of his design; we no
where meet in him the affected contrasts of Michael
Angelo, or the studied attitudes of Guido.
The design of Raphael was, in its beginning, dry, but
correct ; he enlarged it much on seeing the drawings of
Michael Angelo : of too just an eye to give intirely into
the excesses of his model, he struck out a middle style,
which, however, was not so happily blended as quite
to throw off the inssuence of the extremes: hence, in the
great he is apt to swell into the charged ; in the delicate
to drop into the little : his design, notwithstanding, is
beautisul; but never arrived to that persection which we
discover in the Greek statues.







He is excellent in the characters of philosopliers, apostles,
and the like; but the figures of his women have not that
elegance which is distinguisned in the Venus di Medicis,
of the daughter of Niobe; in these, his convex contours
have à certain heaviness, by which, in seeking to avoid,
he falls into a dryness still less pardonable. His proportions
are esteemed excellent, yet not having formed his manner
on the most beautiful antique, we do not see in him that
elegant symmetry, that freedom in the joints which lend all
their motion to the Laocoon and Gladiatorl instead of
these, the figures of Michael Angelo were his models in
the great style ; whence, having quitted the lines of nature,
and not having substituted ideal beauty, he became too like
his original, as may be seen in his Incendio di Borgo.
Would we therefore place Raphael in his true point of
view, we must observe him in the middle age; in old men,
or in the nervous nature : in his Madonna’s, he knew how
to choose, as likewise how to vary the most beautiful parts
of nature; but he knew not how to express a beauty
superior to the natural.
Thus in his Galatea, where he has attempted a cha-
racter of perfect beauty, he has fallen short of the beauty of
his Madonna’s: the cause of this seems to be, that he
drew the former after his own ideas, which were im
perfect: in the latter he copied beautiful nature, which
was almost perfect : à second observation will confirm this
opinion ; of all the objects of painting, Angels call moft
for ideal beauty; and those of Raphael are by no meant
distinguished in this particular.
One of the greatest excellences of design is grace. Cor-
regio in this is inimitable. His constant aim was grace,
and a happy effect of light and shade. A waving and
varied contour was necessary to this end: hence he studi






oussy avoided right lines, and acute angles as too simple in
their effects. Thus the habit and necessity of continually
varying his outline, threw him into little errors in draw-
ing, which spring not from an ignorance of this branch
of his art, but from a predilection for another; and there
are few who would wishi those inadvertences away, accom-
panied with the charms which gave occasion to them.
We may affirm of hiis design where it is not sacrificed to
his more favorite aims, that it is often masterly, and always
pleasing ; a quality rarely to be met with in those servile
painters, who think they have attained every persection,
if they keep within the rules of drawing (such painters,
says Quintilian) while they think it sufficient to be free
from faults, fall into that capital fault, the want of beauties.
We shall close this article with an account of the Apollo
Belvidere, and the celebrated Groupe of Laocoon, so long
the pride of Rome, but removed to Paris during its ravages
by the French republicans, as described by the late Abbe
Winckleman :
THE APOLLO BELVIDERE.
et Of all the productions of art, which have escaped the
ravages of time, the Statue of Apollo Belvedere is unques-
tionably the most sublime. The artist founded this work
upon imagination, and has only employed substance for the
purpose of realizing his ideas. As much as the descriptions
which Homer has given of Apollo are superior to those
given of him by other Poets, in the same degree is this
statue superior to any other statues of that deity. Its stature
is above that of man, and its attitude breathes majesty. An
eternal spring, such as reigns in the delightful fields of
Elysium, clothes with youth the manly charms of his body,









and gives a brilliancy to the animated structure of his
limbs.
 Endeavour to penetrate into the regions of incorporeal
beauty ; try to become the creator of a celestial nature, in
order to elevate your soul to the contemplation of super-
natural beauties; for here there is nothing mortal: neither
thie veins nor sinews are too conspicuous ; a kind of celestiai
spirit animates the whole figure. The God has pursued
Python, against whom he has, for the first time, bent his
dreadful bow: in his rapid course he has overtaken him,
and given him a mortal blow. In the height of his joy,
his august features denote more than victory. Disdain is
seated on his lips, and the indignation which he breathes
distends his nostrils, and affects his eye-brows; but still
his forehead expresses serenity, and he is all full of sweet-
ness as if he were surrounded by the Muses, eager to caress
him.
Among all the figures of Jupiter which we possess, you
will not see one in which the Father of the Gods displays
so much of that majesty described by the poets, as does this
statue of his son. The peculiar beauties of all the other
gods are united in this figure, in the same manner as in
the divine Pandora. The forehead is the forehead of
Jupiter, impregnated with the Goddess of Wisdom; his
eye-brows, by their movement, declare their wishies; his
eyes in their celestial orbits, are the eyes of the Queen of
the Goddesses; and the mouth is that which inspired the
beautiful Bacchus with voluptuousness. Like the tender
branches of the vine, his sine hairs play about as if they
were slightly ruffled by the breath of zephyrs; they seemed
erfumed with celestial essence, and negligently tied by the
hands of the Graces.
 On seeing this prodogy of art, l forgot the whole uni¬
verse; I placed myself in a more noble attitude to contem














plate it with dignity. From admiration I passed to extacy;
silled with respect, I felt my breast agitated like those who
are inspired with the spirit of prophecy.
et I felt myself transported to Delas and the sacred woods
of Lycia, places which Apollo honoured with his presence ;
for the beauty which was before my eyes appeared to be
animated, as was formerly the beautiful statue produced by
the chizel of Pygmalion. How can l describe you, oh,
inimitable chef d’auvrel Art itself must inspire me and guide
my pen.
ee The outlines which I have traced I lay at your seet ;
so those who cannot reach to the head of the deity they
adore, place at his feet the garlands with which they wishi
to crown him. 
THE GROUPE OF LAOCOON.
ee Laocoon prefents to us a picture of the deepest distrefs,
under the representation of a man, contending with all his
powers in his own defence, while his muscles and sinews are
dilated and contracted by agony; vou may still perceive the
vigour of his mind expressed on his wrinkled forehead. His
breast oppressed with restrained respiration, seems to contend
against the pain with which it is agitated.
ee The groans which he restrains, and his breath which
he holds in, seei to exhaust the lower part of his body, and
the loins, by being drawn in, seem to discover his very
entrails. Nevertheless, his own sufferings seem to affect
him less than those of his children, who look up to him as
if imploring his succour. Compassion, like a dark vapour,
overshadows his eyes. His physiognomy denotes complaint,
his eyes are directed towards heaven, imploring assistance.
His mouth bespeaks languor, and his lower lip is fallen.
Agony, mixed with indignation at his unjust punishment,
is displayed in all his features.







 The contest between pain and resistance is displayed
with the greatest sxill ; for while the former draws up the
eye-brows, the latter compresses the flesn over the eyes,
and makes it descend over the upper eye-lids. The subject
not allowing the artist to embellisn nature, he has exerted
himself to display contention and vigour. In those places
where there is the greatest agony, there is also great beauty.
The left side, on which the furious serpent makes its
attack, seems to be in the greatest pain from its proximity
to the heart. This part of the body may be called a
prodigy of art. Laocoon wishies to raise his legs in order to
escape. No part of the figure is in repose. The very
flesn, by the skill of the artist, has the appearance of being
benumbed.

Of COLOURING.
COLOURING, though a subject greatly inferior to many
others which the painter must study, is yet of sufficient
importance to employ a considerable share of his attention;
and to excel in it, he must be well acquainted with that
part of optics which has the nature of light and colours for
its object. Light, however simple and uncompounded it may
appéar, is nevertheless made up, as it were, of several
distinct substances; and the number, and even dose, of
these ingredients, has been happily discovered by the
moderns. Every undivided ray, let it be ever so fine, is a
little bundle of red, orange, yellow, green, azure, indigo,
and violet rays, which, while combined, are not to be
distinguished one from another, and form that kind of










light, called white; so that white is not a colour perse, as
the learned De Vinci (so far, it feems, the precursor of
Newton) expressly affirms, but an assemblage of colours.
Now, these colours, which compose light, although immu¬
table in themselves, and endued with various qualities, are
continually, however, separating from each other in their
reflection from, and passage through other substances, and
thus become manifest to the eye. Grafs, for example,
reflects only green rays, or rather reflects green rays in
greater number than it does those of any other colour; one
kind of wine transmits red rays, and another yellowish
rays; and from this kind of separation arises that variety of
colours with which nature has diversified her various pro-
ductions.. Man, too, has contrived to separate the rays of
light by making a portion of the sun’s beams pafs through
a glass prism; for after passing through it, they appear
divided into seven pure and primitive colours, placed in
succession one by the other, like so many colours on a
painter’s pallet.
Now, though Titian, Corregio, and Vandyke, have
been excellent colourists, without knowing any thing of
tliese phyfical subtleties, that is no reason why others should
neglect them. For it cannot but be of great service to a
painter to be well acquainted with the nature of what he
is to imitate, and of those colours with which he is to give
life and perfection to his designs; not to speak of the plea¬
sure there is in being able to account truly and solidly for
the various effects and appearances of light. From a due
tempering, for example, and graduating, of the tints in a
picture ; from making colours partake of each other, ac-
cording to the reflection of light from one object to ano¬
ther ; there arises, in some measure, that sublime harmony
which may be considered as the true music of the eye :
and this harmony has its foundation in the genuine prin-










ciples of opties. Now this could not happen in the system
os those philosophers, who held, that colours did not ori-
ginally exist in light, but were, on the contrary, nothing
else than so many modifications which it underwent in
being reflected from other substances, or in passing through
them; thus subject to alterations without end, and every
moment liable to perish. Were that the case, bodies
could no more receive any hues one from another, nor
this body partake of the colour of that, than scarlet, for
example ; because it has the power of changing into red
all the rays of the sun or sky which immediately sall
upon it, has the power of changing into red all the other
rays reflected to it from a blue or any other colour in
its neighbourhood ; whereas, allowing that colours are in
their own nature imiutable one into another, and that
every body reflects, more or less, every sort of coloured
rays, though those rays in the greatest number which
are of the colour it exhibits, there must necessarily arise, in
colours placed near one another, certain particular hues or
temperaments of colour: nay, this influence of one colour
upon another may be so far traced, that three or you bodies
of different colours, and likewise the intenseness of the light
falling upon each, being assigned, we may easily determine
in what situations, and how much they would tinge each
other. We may thus, too, by the same principle of optics,
account for several other things practised by painters, inso-
much that a person, who has carefully observed natural
effects with an eye directed by solid learning, shall be able
to form general rules, where another can only distinguish
particular cases.
But after all, the pictures of the best colourists are, it is
universally allowed, the books in which a young painter
must chiefly look for the rules of colouring; that is, of that
branch of painting which contributes so much to express











the beauty of objects, and is so requisite to represent them
as what they really are. Giorgio and Titian seem to have
discovered circumstances in nature which others have
entirely overlooked; and the last in particular has been
happy enough to express them with a pencil as delicate as
his eye was quick and piercing. In his works we behold
that sweetnefs of colouring which is produced by union ;
that beauty which is consistent with truth; and all the in-
sensible transmutations, all the soft transitions, in a word,
all the pleasing modulations of tints and colours. When a
young painter has, by close application, acquired from
Titian, whom he can never sufficiently dwell upon, that
art which, of all painters, he has best contrived to hide,
he would do well to turn to Bassano and Paolo, on account
of the beauty, boldnefs, and elegance of their touches.
That richnefs, softness, and freshness of colouring, for
which the Lombard school is so justly cried up, may like-
wise be of great service to him; nor will he reap less
benefit by studying the principles and practice of the Fle-
missi school, which, chiesly by means of her varnishes, has
contrived to give a most enchanting lustre and transparency
to her colours.
But whatever pictures a young painter may choose to
study the art of colouring upon, he must take great care
that they are well preserved. There are very sew pieces
which have not suffered more or less by the length, not to
say the injuries, of time; and perhaps that precious patina,
which years alone can impart to paintings, is in some mea-
fure akin to that other kind which ages alone impart to
medals; inasmuch as, by giving testimony to their anti¬
quity, it renders them proportionably beautisul in the super-
stitious eyes of the learned. It must, indeed, be allowed,
that if on the one band, this patina bestows, as it really
does, an extraordinary degree of harmony upon the colours












of a picture, and destroys, or at least greatly lessens, their
original rawness, it, on the other hand, equally impairs the
freshiness and lise of them. A piece seen many years aster
it has been painted, appears much as it would do, imme¬
diately after painting, behind a dull glass. It is no idle
opinion, that Paolo Veronese, attentive above all things to
the beauty of his colours, and what is called strepiro, left
entirely to time the care of harmonizing them perfectly,
and, (as we may say) mellowing them. But most of the old
masters took that task upon themselves; and never exposed
their works to the eyes of the public, until they had ripened
and finished them with their own hands. And who can
say whether the Christ of Moneta, or the Nativity of Bassano,
have been more improved or injured (if we may so speak)
by the touchings and re-touchings of time, in the course of
more than two centuries ? It is indeed impossible to be
determined: but the studious pupil may make himself
ample amends for any injuries which his originals may
have received from the hands of time, by turning to truth,
and to Nature which never grows old, but constantly retains
its primitive slower of youth, and was itself the model of the
models before him. As soon, therefore, as a young painter
has laid a proper foundation for good colouring, by study-
ing the best masters, he should turn all his thoughts to truth
and nature. And it would perhaps be well worth while to
have, in the academies of painting, models for colouring as
well as designing ; that as from the one the pupils learn to
give their due proportion to the several members and mus¬
cles, they may learn from the other to make their carnations
rich and warm, and faithfully copy the different local hues
which appear quite distinct in the different parts of a fine
bodv. To illustrate still farther the use of such a model,
let us suppose it placed in different lights; now in that of
the sun, now in that of the sky, and now again in that of a






lamp or candle; one time placed in the shade, and another
in a reflected light: hence the pupil may learn all the disserent
efsects of the complection in different circumstances, whe-
ther the livid, the lucid, or transparent; and, above all,
that variety of tints and half tints, occasioned in the colour
of the skin by the epidermis having the bones immediately
under it in some places, and in others a greater or less
number of blood-vessels or quantity of fat. An artist who
had long studied such a model, would run no risk of de¬
grading the beauties of nature by any particularity of stile,
or of giving into that preposterous fulness and floridness of
colour which is at present so much the taste. He would
not feed his figures with roses, as an ancient painter of
Greece shrewdly expressed it, but with good beef; a differ-
ence which the learned eye of a modern writer could per-
ceive between the colouring of Barocci and that of Titian.
To practise in that manner, is, according to a great master,
no better than inuring one’s self to the commission of
blunders. What statues are in design, nature is in colour
ing; the fountain head of that perfection to which every
artist, ambitious to excel, should constantly aspire : an,
accordingly, the Flemish painters, in consequence of their
aiming solely to copy nature, are in colouring as excellent
as they are wont to be aukward in designing. The best
model for the tone of colours, and the degradation of shades,
is furnishied by means of the cumera-obscura.
We may form a general idea of the various effects of
reflections from the following examples; If a blue be reflected
on a yellow, the latter becomes greenish ; if on a red, the
red becomes purple ; and so on through a variety of combi-
nations. And as the white is of a nature to receive all the
colours, and to be tinged with that of each reflection, the
painter must he caresul how his carnations may be affected
by the several reflections.







Of COMPOSITION.
COMPOSITION, which may be considered as a branch
of invention, consists in the proper stationing of what the
inventive faculty has imagined, so as to exprefs the subject
in the most lively manner. The chief merit of compo¬
sition may be said to consist in that disorder, which, wear-
ing the appearance of mere chance, is, in fact, the most
studied effect of art. A painter, therefore, is equally to
avoid the drynefs of those ancients who always planted
their figures like so many couples in a procefsion, and the
affectation of those moderns who jumble them together as if
they were met merely to fight and squabble. In this branch
Raphael was happy enough to choose the just medium, and
attain perfection. The disposition of his figures is always
exactly such as the subject requires. In the Battle of Con-
stantine, they are confusedly clustered with as much art,
as they are regularly marshalled in Christ’s commitment
of the keys to St. Peter, and constituting him prince of the
apostles.
Let the inferior figures of a piece be placed as they will,
the principal figure should strike the eye most, and stand
out, as it were, from among the rest: this may be effected
various ways, as by placing it on the foremost lines, or in
some other-conspicuous part of the piece ; by exhibiting it,
in a manner, by itself; by making the principal light fall
upon it; by giving it the most resplendent drapery, or, in-
deed, by several of these methods; nay, by all of them toge¬
ther; for beins the hero of the picturesque fable, it is hut
just thatit should draw the eye to itself, and lord it, as it
were, over al the other objects.











According to Leon Batista Alberti, painters should follow
the example of comic writers, who compose their fable of
as few persons as possible : for, in fact, a crowded picture
is apt to give as much pain to the spectator, as a crowded
road to the traveller.
Some subjects, it must be granted, require à number ;
nay, a nation, as it were, of figures. On these occasions,
it depends entirely on the skill of the painter to dispose
of them in such a manner, that the principal ones may
always make the principal appearance, and contrive mat-
ters so, that the piece be not over-crowded, or want conve-
nient rests and pauses : he must, in a word, take care that
his piece be full, but not charged. In this respect, the
Battles of Alexander, by Le Brun, are master-pieces which
can never be sufficiently studied ; whereas nothing, on the
other hand, can be more unhappy than the famous Paradise of
Tintoret, which covers one entire side of the great council¬
chamber at Venice. It appears no bêtter than a confused
heap of figures, a swarm, a cloud, a chaos, which pains
and fatigues the eye. What a pity it is that he did not
dispose this subject aster à model of his own, now in the
gallery of Bevilacqua at Verona l In this last, the several
choirs of martyrs, virgins, bishops, and other saints, are
judicioussy thrown into so many clusters, parted here and
there by à fine sleece of clouds, so as to exhibit the innu¬
merable host of heaven, drawn up in a way that makes a
most agreeable and glorious appearance. There goes a
story, to our purpose, of a celebrated master, who, in a
drawing of the Universal Deluge, the better to express the
immensity of the waters that covered the earth, left a corner
of his paper without figures. Being afked, if he did
not intend to sill it up: No, said he ; do not you see that
my leaving it empty is what precisely constitutes the picture?







The reason for breaking a composition into several groups
is, that the eye passing freely from one object to another,
may the better comprehend the whole. But the painter is
not to stop here ; for these groups are, besides, to be so
artsully put together, as to form rich clusters, give the
whole composition a singular air of grandeur, and afford
the spectator an opportunity of discerning the piece at a
distance, and taking the whole in, as it were, at a single
glance. These effects are greatly promoted by a due regard
to the nature of colours, so as not to place together those
which are apt to pain by their opposition, or distract by
their variety. They should be so judicioussy disposed as
to temper and qualify each other.
A proper use of the chiaro-scuro is likewise of great ser-
vice on this occasion. The groups are easily parted, and
the whole picture acquires a grand effect, by introducing
some strong falls of snade; and, above all, one principal
beam of light. This method has been followed with great
success by Rembrandt in a famous picture of his, represent-
ing the Virgin at the Foot of the Crofs on Mount Calvary;
the principal light darting upon her through a break of the
clouds, while the rest of the figures about her stand more
or less in the shade. Tintoret, too, acquired great repu¬
tation, as well by that brifkness with which he enlivened
bis figures, as by his masterly manner of shading them;
and Polidoro de Caravaggio, though he scarce painted any
thing but basso-relievos, was particularly famous for intro-
ducing with great skill the effects of the chiaro-scuro, a
thing first attempted by Mantegna in his Triumph of Julius
Cæsar. It is by this means that his compositions appear so
strikingly divided into different groups; and, among their
other perfections, afford so much delight through the beau-
tiful disposition that reigns in them.














In like manner, a painter, by the help of perspective,
especially that called ærial, the opposition of local colours,
and other contrivances which he may expect to hit upon by
studying nature, and those who have best studied her before
him, will be able not only to part his groups, hut make
them appear at disserent distances, so as to leave sufficient
passages between them.
But the greatest caution is to be used in the purfuit of
the methods here laid down; especially in the management
of the chiaro-scuro, that the effects attributed to light and
shade, and to their various concomitants, may not run
counter to truth and experience. This is a capital point.
For this purpose, a painter would do well to make, in little
figures, as Tintoret and Poussin used to do, a model of the
subject that he intends to represent, and then illuminate it
by lamp er candle-light. By this means he may come to
know with certainty, if the chiaro-scuro, which he has
formed in his mind, does not clasti with the reason of
things. By varying the height and direction of his light,
he may easily discover such accidental effects as are most
likely to recommend his performance, and so establisn a
proper system for the illuminating it: nor will he after-
wards find it a difficult matter to modisy the quality of his
shades, by softening or strengthening them, according to
the situation of his scene, and the quality of the light
falling upon it. Ifit should happen to be a candle or lamp¬
light scene, he would then have nothing to do but consider
his model well, and faithfully copy it.
In the next place, to turn a groupe elegantly, the best
pattern is that of a bunch of grapes, adopted by Titian; as,
of the many grains that compose a bunch of grapes, someare
struck directly by the light, and those opposite to them are
in the shade, whilst the intermediate ones partake of botli
ight and shade in a greater or less degree ; so, according to






Titian, the figures of a groupe should be so disposed, that,
by the union of the chiaro-scuro, several things may appear
as it were but one thing: and, in fact, it is only from his
having pursued this method, that we can account for the
very grand effect of his pieces this way, in which it is
impossible to study him too much.
The mannerists, who do not follow nature in the track
of the masters just mentioned, are apt to commit many
faults. The reason of their figures casting their snades
in this or that manner, seldom appears in the picture, or at
least does not appear sufficiently probable. They are,
besides, wont to trespass all bounds in splafhiing their pieces
with light, that is, enlivening those parts which we usually
term the deafs of a picture. This method, no doubt, has
sometimes a very sine effect; but it is, however, to be used
with no small discretion, as otherwise the whole loses that
union, that pause, that majestic silence, as Caracci used to
call it, which affords so much pleasure. The eye is not less
hurt by many lights scattered here and there over a picture,
than the ear is by the confused noise of different persons
speaking all together in an asfembly.
Guido Reni, who has imparted to his paintings that
gaiety and splendour in which he lived, seems enamoured
with a bright and open light; whereas Michael Angelo de
Caravagio, who was of a sullen and savage disposition,
appears sondest of a gloomy and clouded sky ; so that neither
of them were qualified to handle indifferently all objects.
The chiaro-scuro may likewise prove of great service to a
painter in giving his composition a grand effect; but, never-
thelefs, the light he chooses must be adapted to the situation
of the scene where the action is laid : nor would he be less
faulty, who, in a grottoor cavern, where the light entered by a
chink, snould make his shades soft and tender, than he wlio
should represent them strong and bold in an open sky-light.









But this is by no means the only fault which mannerists
are apt to be guilty of in historical pieces, and particularly
in the disposition of their figures. To say nothing of their
favourite groupe of a woman lying on the ground with one
child at her breast, and another playing about her, and the
like, which they generally place on the first lines of their
pieces ; nor of those half-figures in the back ground peep¬
ing out from the hollows contrived for them : they make à
common practice of mixing naked with clothed figures;
old men with young; placing one figure with its face
towards you, and another with its back; they contrast
violent motions with languid attitudes, and seem to aim at
opposition in every thing; whereas oppositions never please ;
but when they arise naturally from the sulject, like Anti¬
theses in a discourse.
As to foreshortened sigures, too mucl assectation in using
or avoiding them is equally blamable. The attitudes had
better be composed than otherwise. It very seldom happens
that there is any occasion for making them so impetuous as
to be in danger of losing their equilibrium, a thing too much
practised by some painters.
In regard to drapery, equal care should be taken to avoid
that poverty which makes some masters look as if, through
mere penury, they grudged clothes to their figures; and
that profusion which Albani imputed to Guido, saying, that
he was rather à tailor than a painter. The ornaments of
dress should be used with great sobriety; and it will not be
amiss to remember what was once said to an ancient painter:
e I pity you greatly; unable to make Helen handsome,
you liave taken care to make her sine.'
Let the whole, in a word, and all the different parts of
the composition, possess probability, grace, costume, and
the particular character of what is to be represented. Let
nothing look like unisormity of manner which does not








appear less in the composition than it does in colouring,
drapery, and design; and is, as it were, that kind of accent,
by which painters may be as readily distinguished
as
foreigners are, by pronouneing in the same manner all the
different languages they happen to be acquainted with.

CRAYON PAINTING.
WHETHER the painter works with oil colours, water
colours, or crayons, the grand olject of his purfuit is still
the same : à just imitation of nature. But each species has
its peculiar rules and methods. Painting with crayons re-
quires, in many respects, a treatment different from painting
in oil colours ; because all colours used dry are, in their
nature, of a much warmer complexion than when wet with
oils, or any other binding fluid. Let this be proved by
matter of fact :-Mr. Cotes painted a portrait of Sir William
Chambers, which is in Lord Besborough’s collection. An
ingenious foreigner had discovered a method of fixing crayon
pictures, so that iliey would not rub or receive an injury if
auy accident happened to the glass. The Society for the
encouragement of Arts had before offered a premium to any
one who should discover so valuable a secret, for which
premium he made application. Mr. Cotes being eminent
in his prosession, was desired to lend a picture for the trial,
and give his judgment, which was made on this portrait of
Sir William Chambers. Tlie crayons he indeed so persect-
ly fixed as so resist any ruh or brush without the leust injury,
which before would have entirely defaced or spoiled it: but










the picture, which before had a particularly warm, brilliant,
and agreeable effect, in comparison became cold and purple ;
and though in one sense the attempt succeeded to the de-
signed intention of sixing the colours, yet the binding quali¬
ty of whatever sluid was made use of in the process, chang-
ed the complexion of the colours, rendering the cold teints
too predominant. For this reason, in order to produce a
rich picture, a much greater portion of what painters term
cooling tints must be applied in crayon painting, than
would be judicious to use in oils. Without any danger of a
mistake, it is to be supposed, the not being acquainted with
this observation is one great cause why so many oil painters
have no better success when they attempt crayon painting.
On the contrary, crayon painters, being so much used to
those tints which are of a cold nature when used wet, are
apt to introduce them too much when they paint with oils,
which is seldom productive of a good effect.
Another observation l would make, which requires par-
ticular notice from the student who has been conversant
with oil painting, prior to his attempts with crayons; oil
painters begin their pictures much lighter and fainter than
they intend to finish them, which presents the future co¬
louring clear and brilliant, the light underneath greatly
assisting the transparent glazing and scumbling colours,
which, if they were laid over any part already too dark,
would but increase its heavy effect. On the contrary, cray-
ons being made of dry colours, are difficult to procure fuffi-
ciently dark, the crayon painter therefore will find an ab-
solute necessity to begin his picture in dark and rich as pos¬
sible, except in the strongest lights; for if once the grey
and light tints become predominant, it will be next to im¬
ossible for him (in the deep shadows especially) to restore
depth and brilliancy, having no opportunity of glazing or
scumbling to give the effect, as the grey tints being mix-








tures with whiting underneath, will continually work up
and render the attempt abortive.
I shall now endeavour to give the student some directions
towards the attainment of excellence in this art.
The student must provide himself with some strong blue
paper, the thicker the better, if the grain is not too coarse
and knotty, though it is almost impossible to get any intire-
y free from knots. The knots should be levelled with a
penknise or razor, otherwise they will prove exceedingly
troublesome. After this is done, the paper must be pasted
very smooth on a linen cloth, ' previoussy strained on a
deal frame, the size according to the artist’s pleafure; on
this the picture is to be executed; but it is most eligible not
to paste the paper on till the whole subject is first dead-co¬
loured. The method of doing this is very easy, by laying
the paper with the dead-colour on its face, upon a fmooth
board or table, when, by means of a brush, the backside of
the paper must be covered with paste; the frame, with the
strained cloth, must then be laid on the pasted side of the
paper; after which turn the painted side uppermost, and
lay a piece of clean paper upon it, to prevent fmearing;
this being done, it may be stroked gently over with the
hand, by which means all the air between the cloth and the
paper will be forced out.
When the paste is persectly dry, the student may proceed
with the painting. The advantages arising from pasting
the paper 4 in the frame, according to this method, after
That side of the paper should be pasted which has the strokes from the
wires most evident, that the painting may be on the smoothest side, otherwise
the lines, which these wires have left in the paper will prove troublesome
and look unpleasant.
f Some crayon pictures are painted on vellum; but the animal salts in the
skin very often cause them to mildew. It must be confessed the vellum gives
tne picture à foft effect: but its use cannot be recommended in our unsavour-
able climate. Others make use of smalt grounds; Le Tour, lately a painter













the picture is begun, are very great, as the crayons will
adhere much better than any other way, which will enable
the student to finish the picture with a firmer body of co¬
lour, and greater lustre. The late Mr. Cotes discovered
this method by accident, and esteemed it a valuable acquisi¬
tion; and, I remember, on a particular occasion, he re-
moved a sine crayon picture of Rozalba’s and placed it on
another strained cloth, without the least injury, by soak ing
the canvas with a wet sponge, till the pafte between the
cloth and paper was sufficiently wet to admit of separation.
When painters want to make a very correct copy of a
picture they generally make use of a tiffany, or black
gauze, strained tight on a frame, which they lay flat on the
subject to be imitated, and with a piece of sketching chalk,
trace all the outlines on the tiffany. They then lay the
canvas to be painted on, flat upon the sloor, placing the
tiffany with the chalked lines upon it, and with an hand¬
kerchief brush the whole over: this prefents the exact out¬
lines of the pictureon the canvas. The crayon painter may
also make use of this method, when the subject of his imi¬
tation is in oils, but in copying a crayon picture, he must
have recourse to the following method, on account of the
glass :
The picture being placed upon the esel, let the outlines
be drawn on the glass with a small camel’s hair peneil dip¬
ped in lake, ground thin with oils, which must be done
with great exactness; after this is accomplishied, take à sheet
of paper of the same size, and place it on the glass, stroking
of note in Paris, often used them with great fuccess. The method to prepare
them is to brush over the paper with gum water, which directmy strew with
smalt moderately fine, the superfluous part of which should be swept off, with
a painter’s brussi, when the gum water is perfectly dry. On this the picture
is to be painted; but we have paper now in England to be procured of so ex-
cellent a texture, as to render this preparation perhaps unnecessary.







over all the lines with the hand, by which means the co¬
lours will adhere to the paper, which must be pierced with
pin holes pretty close to each other. The paper intended
to be used for the painting must next be laid upon a table
and the pierced paper placed upon it; then with some fine
pounded charcoal, tied up in a piece of lawn, rub over the
perforated strokes, which will give an exact outline. Great
care must be taken not to brushi this off till the whole is
drawn over with sketching chalk, which is a composition
made of whiting and tobaccopipe clay, rolled like crayons,
and pointed at each end.
When the student paints immediately from the life, it
will be most prudent to make a correct drawing of the out-
lines on another paper, the size of the picture he is going to
paint, which he may trace by the preceding method, be¬
cause erroneous strokes of the sketching chalk (which are
not to be avoided without great expertness) will prevent the
crayons from adhering to the paper, owing to a certain greasy
quality in the composition.
The student will find the sitting posture, with the box of
crayons on his lap, the most convenient method for him to
paint. The part of the picture he is immediately painting
should be rather below his face, for, if it is placed too high,
the arm will be fatigued. Let the windows of the room
where he paints he darkened at least to the height of six feet
from the ground, and the subject to be painted should be
situated in such a manner, that the light may fall with
every advantage on the face; avoiding too much shadow,
which seldom has a good effect in portrait painting, especi-
ally if the face he paints has any degree of delicacy. Before
he begins to paint, let him be attentive to his subject, and
appropriate the action or attitude proper to the age of the
subject: if a child, let it be childishi; if a young lady, ex-
press more vivacity than in the majestie beauty of a middle








aged woman, who also should not be expressed with the same
gravity as a person far advanced in years. Let the embel¬
lishments of the picture, and introduction of birds, animals,
&c. be regulated by the rules of propriety and consistency.
The features of the face being carefully drawn with chalk,
let the student take a crayon of pure carmine, and carefully
draw the nostril and edge of the nose, next the shadow ; then,
with the faintest carmine tint, lay in the strongest light upon
the nose and forehead, which must be executed broad. He is
then to proceed gradually with the second tint, and the suc-
ceeding ones, till he arrives at the shadows, which must be
covered brilliant, enriched with much lake, carmine, a little
broken, with brilliant green. This method will, at first,
offensively strike the eye, from its crude appearance; but,
in finishing, it will be a good foundation to produce a plea-
sing effect, colours being much more easily sullied when
too bright, than when the first colouring is dull, to raise the
picture into a brilliant state. The several pearly tints,
discernable in sine complexions, must be imitated with blue
verditer and white, which answers to the ultramarine tints
used in oils. But if the parts of the face where these tints
appear are in shadow, the crayons composed of black and
white must be substituted in their place.
Though all the face, when first coloured, should be laid
in as brilliant as possible, yet each part should be kept in
its proper tone, by which means the rotundity of the face
will be preserved.
Let the student be caresul when he begins the eyes to
draw them with a crayon inelined to the carmine tint,
of whatever colour the iris are of; he must lay them in
brilliant, and, at first, not loaded with colour, but executed
lightly : no notice is to be taken of the pupil yet. The stu-
dent must let the light of the eye incline very much to
the blue cast, cautioussy avoiding à staring, white appear-










ance, (which, when once introduced, is seldom overcome)
preserving a broad shadow thrown on its upper part, by
the eye-lashi. A black and heavy tint is also to be avoid-
ed in the eye-brows ; it is therefore, best to execute them
like a broad, glowing shadow at first, on which, in the
finishing, the hairs of the brow are to be painted, by which
method of proceeding, the former tints will shew themselves
through, and produce the most pleasing effect.
The student should begin the lips with pure carmine and
lake, and in the shadow use some carmine and black; the
strong vermillion tints should be laid on afterwards. He
must beware of executing them with stiff, harsh lines, gently
intermixing each with the neigbouring colours, making the
shadow beneath broad, and enriched with brilliant crayons.
He must form the corner of the mouth with carmine, brown
oker, and greens, varioussy intermixed. If the hair is dark,
he should preserve much of the lake and deep carmine tints
therein; this may be easily overpowered by the warmer
hair tints, which, as observed in painting the eye-brows,
will produce a richer effect when the picture it finished;
on the contrary, if this method is unknown or neglected, a
poverty of colouring will be discernable.
After the student has covered over, or as artists term it,
has dead-coloured the head, he is to sweeten the whole to-
gether by rubbing it over with his finger, beginning at the
strongest light upon the forehead, passing his singervery light-
ly, and uniting it with the next tint, which he must continue
till the whole is sweetened together, often wiping his finger
on a towel to prevent the colours being sullied. He must
be cautious not to smooth or sweeten his picture too often,
because it will give rise to a thin and scanty effect, and
have more the appearance of a drawing than a solid painting,
as nothing but a body of rich colours can constitute à rich
effect. To avoid this, (as the student finds it necessary to







sweeten with the singer) he must continually replenisn the
picture with more crayon.
When the head is brought to some degree of forwardnefs,
let the back ground be laid in, which must be treated in a
different, covering it as thin as possible, and rubbing it into
the paper with a leather stump. Near the face the paper
should be almost free from colour, for this will do great
service to the head, and, by its thinnefs, give both a soft and
solid appearance. In the back ground also, crayons which
have whiting in their composition should be used, but
seldom or never without caution; but chiessy such as are
the most brilliant and the least adulterated. The ground
being painted thin next the hair, will give the student an
opportunity of painting the edges of the hair over in a light
and free manner, when he gives the finishing touches.
The student having proceeded thus far, the face, hair,
and back ground being entirely covered, he must carefully
view the whole at some distance, remarking in what respect
it is out of keeping, that is, what parts are too light, and
what too dark, being particularly attentive to the white or
chalky appearances, which must be subdued with lake and
carmine. The above method being properly put into
execution will produce the appearance of a painting prin¬
cipally composed of three colours, viz. carmine, black, and
white, which is the best preparation a painter can make for
producing a sine crayon picture.
The next step is to compleat the back ground and the
hair, as the dust, in painting these, will sall on the face,
and would much injure it, if that was compleated first.
From thence proceed to the forehead, finishing downward
till the whole picture is compleated.
Back grounds may be of various colours; but it requires
great taste and judgment to fuit them properly to different
complexions: in general, a strong coloured head should








have a weak and tender tinted ground, and, on the contrary,
à delicate complexion should be opposed with strong and
powersul tints; by which proper contrast between the
sigure and the back ground, the picture will receive great
force, and strike the spectator much more than it could
possibly do was this circumstance of contrast not attend¬
ed to.
Young painters often treat the back grounds of pictures
as à matter of very little or no consequence, when it is most
certain great part of the beauty and brilliancy of the picture,
especially the face, depends upon the tints being well suited,
the darks kept in their proper places, and the whole being
perfectly in subordination to the face. Thus à simple back
ground requires attention, but the difficulty is still greater
when a variety of objects are introduced, such as hills,
trees, buildings, &c. in these cases one rule must be strictly
attended to, that each grand object be disposed so as to
contrast each other; this is not meant merely respecting
their forms, but their colour, their light, shade, &c. For
instance, we will suppose the figure receiving the strongest
light; behind the figure, and very near at hand, are the
stems of some large trees; these must have shade thrown
over them, either from a driving cloud or some other inter-
posing circumstance; behind these stems of trees, and at a
distance, are seen trees on à rising ground; these should re-
ceive the light as a contrast to the former, &c. lf an ar-
chitectural back ground be chosen, the same rule must be
applied; suppose a building at a moderate distance is placed
behind the figure receiving the light, a column, or some
other object in shadow should intervene, to preserve proper
decorum in the piece, or what will have the same effect, a
shadow must be thrown over the lower part of the building,
which will give equal fatisfaction or repose to the eye. It
must be remembered, the light must be always placed against








the dark, and the weak against the strong, in order to pro-
duce force and essect, and vice versa.
In painting over the forehead the last time, begin the
highest light with the most faint vermillion tint, in the
same place where the faint carmine was first laid, keeping
it broad in the same manner. In the next shade succeeding
the lightest, the student must work in some light blue tints,
composed of verditer and white, intermixing with them
some of the deeper vermillion tints, sweetening them to-
gether with great caution, : insensibly melting them into
one another, increasing the proportion of each colour as his
ugdment shall direct. Some brilliant yellows may also be
used, but sparingly; and towards the roots of the hair,
strong verditer tints, intermixed with greens, will be of
singular service. Cooling crayons, composed of black and
white, should succeed these, and melt into the hair. Be¬
neath the eyes, the pleasing pearly tints are to be preserved,
composed of verditer and white, and under the nose, and
on the temples, the same may be used; beneath the lips
tints of this kind also are proper, mixing them with the
light greens and some vermillion.
The introduction of greens and blues into the face, in
painting, has often given surprize to those who are unac-
quainted with the art, but there is reason sufficient for their
introduction (though it may appear strange at first) in order
to break and correct the other colours.
The carmine predominating in the dead colour, is, as
has been observed, the best preparation for the succeeding
tints ; the crudeness of this preparation must be corrected
hy varioussy intermixing greens, blues, and yellows; which
of these are to be used is to be determined by the degree

* This direction is sor the finest complexions, but the student must vary
nis colouring accordin to his subject.








of carmine in the dead colour, and the complexion intended.
The blue and yellow are of a nature diametrically opposite,
and serve to correct the reds, and oppose one another; the
greens being compounded of both these colours, is of pecu-
liar use in many cases were the transition is not to be so
violent.
The student, attentively considering nature, will discover
a pleasing variety of colours on the furface, and discernible
through a clear and transparent skin; this variety will be
still increased by the effect of light and shade; he will per¬
ceive one part inclining to the vermillion red, another to
the carmine or lake, one to the blue, this to the green, and
that to the yellow, &c. In order to produce these different
effects he will apply those colours to which the tints are
most inclined; yet in crayon painting it is often best to
compound the mixed colours upon the picture, such as blue
and yellow instead of green; blue and carmine instead of
purple ; red and yellow instead of orange; in other circum-
stances the compounds already mixed should be used: but
in this case there can be no absolute rule given, it must be
left to the experience and discretion of the painter, though
the student may be greatly assisted in the commencement
of his studies, by an able master to direct and point out the
best method to treat circumstances of this nature, as they
occur in practice, which may at first appear obscure and
mysterious, but will soon, to a good capacity, become de-
monstrably clear upon certain and sure principles; the cir-
cumstances that require different treatment are so various
and so many, as to render it impossible here to descend to
every particular.
In finishing the cheeks, let the pure lake clear them froin
any dust contracted from the other crayons; then, with the
lake, may be intermixed the bright vermillion; and last of
all (if the subject should requre it) a few touches of the











orange coloured crayon, but with extreme caution; after
this sweeten that part with the finger as little as possible,
for sear of producing a hieavy, disagreeable essect on the
cheeks: as the beauty of a crayon picture consists in one
colour shiewing itself throughi, or rather between another;
this the student cannot too often remark, it being the only
method of imitating beautiful complexions.
The eye is the most difficult fcature to execute in crayons,
as every part must be expressed with the utmost nicety, to
appear finishied; at the same time that the painter must pre-
serve its breadth and solidity, while he is particularizing the
parts. To accomplishi this, it will be a good general rule
sfor the student to use his crayon, in sweetening, as much,
and his singer as liitle as possible. When he wants a point
to touch a small part with, he may break off a little of his
crayon against the box, which will produce a corner fit to
work with in the minutest parts. If the eye-lashies are
dark, he must use some of the carmine and brown oker,
and the crayon of carmine and black; and with these he
may also touch the iris of the eye (if brown or hazel)
making a broad shadow, caused by the eye-lasni. Red tints
of vermillion, carmine and lake, will execute the corners
of the eye properly; but if the eye-lids are too red, they
will have a disagrecable sore appearance. The pupil of the
eye must be made of pure lamp-black ; between this and the
lower part of the iris, the light will catch very strong, but
it must not be made too sudden, but be gently diffused
round the pupil tiil it is lost in shade. When the eye-balls
are sufficiently prepared, the shining speck must be made
with a pure white erayon, which should be first broken to a
point, and then laid on firm; but as it is possible they may
be desective in neatness, they should be corrected with a
pin, taking off the redundant parts, by which means they
may be formed as neat as can be required.







The difficulty, with respect to the nose, is to preserve
the lines properly determined, and at the same time so
artfully blended into the check as to express its projection,
and yet no real line to be perceptible upon a close examin-
ation; in some circumstances it should be quite blendid
with the check which appears behind it, and determined
entirely with a slight touch of red chalk. The shadow
caused by the nose is generally the darkest in the whole
face, partaking of no reflection from its furrounding parts.
Carmine and brown oker, carmine and black, and such
brilliant crayons will compose it best.
The student having before prepared the lips with the
strongest lake and carmine, &c. must, with these colours,
make them compleatly correct; and, when finishing, intro¬
duce the strong vermillions, but with great caution, as they
are extremely predominant. This, if properly touched,
will give the lips an appearance equal, if not superior to
those executed in oils, notwithstanding the seeming supe¬
riority the latter has, by means of glazing,t of which the
former is entirely destitute.
When the student paints the neck, he should avoid ex-
pressing the muscles too strong in the stem, nor should the
bones appear too evident on the chest, as both have an un¬
pleasing effect, denoting a violent agitation of the body, a
circumstance seldom necessary to express in portrait painting.
The most necessary part to be expressed, and which should
ever be observed (even in the most delicate subjects) is a
strong marking just above the place where the collar bones
unite, and if the head is much thrown over the shoulders,
some notice should be taken of the large muscle that rises
e The method with which painters in oil express transparency in the lips
is, by painting them first with light vermillion tints, and, when dry, touchint
them over with pure lake.








from behind the ear, and is inserted into the pit between
the collar bones. All inferior muscles should be, in general,
quite avoided. The student will sind this caution neces-
sary, as most subjects, especially thin persons, have the
muscles of the neck much more evident than would be
judicious to imitate. As sew necks are too long, it may be
necessary to give some addition to the stem, a fault on the
other side being quite unpardonable, nothing being more
ungraceful than a short neck. In colouring the neck, let
the student preserve the stem of a pearly hue, and the light
not so strong as on the chest. If any part of the breast
appears, its transparency must also be expressed by pearly
tints, but the upper part of the chest should be cosoured
with heautiful vermillions, delicately blendid with the
other.
t
Of the MATERIALS.
HHE perfection of the crayons consists, in a great meafure,
in their softnefs, for it is impossible to execute a brilliant
picture with them if they are otherwise, on which account
great care should be observed in the preparing them, fo pre-
vent their being hard-In all compositions, slake white,
and white lead should be wholly rejected, because the
slightest touch with either of these will unavoidably turn
black.
The usual objection to crayon paintings is, that they are
subject to change, but whenever this happens it is entirely
owing to an injudicious use of the above-mentioned whites,
which will stand only in oils. To obviate the bad effects









arising from the use of such crayons, let the student make
use of common whiting prepared in the following manner:
Take a large vessel of water, put the whiting into it, and
mix them well together; let this stand about half a minute,
then pour off the top into another vessel, and throw the
gritty sediment away; let what is prepared rest about a
minute, and then pour it off as before, which will purisy
the whiting and render it free from all dirt and grittiness.
When this is done, let the whiting settle, and then pour
the water from it; after which, lay it on the chalk to dry,
and keep it for use, either for white crayons, or the purpose
of preparing tints with other colours, for with this, all
other tints may be safely prepared.
The student must be provided with a large, slexible pallet-
knife, a large stone and muller to levigate the colours, two
or three large pieces of chalk to absorb the moisture from
the colours aster they are levigated, a piece of flat glafs to
prevent the moisture from being absorbed too much till the
colours are rolled into form, and vessels for water, spirits,
&c. as necessity and convenience snall direct.
REDS.
CARMINE and LAKE.
It is rather difficult to. procure either good carmine or
good lake. Good cermine is inclined to the vermillion
tint, and should be an impalpable powder, and good lake
to the carmine tint. The carmine crayons are prepared in
the sollowing manner:
As their texture is inclinable to hardness instead of
grinding and rolling them, take à sufficient quantity of
carmine, lay it upon the grinding-stone, mix it with a







levigating knife with spirits of wine, till it becomes smooth
and even ; yet the less friction produced by the knife the
better. The chalk-stone being ready, lay the colour upon
it to absorb the spirit, but be careful that it is laid on in a
proper shape for painting.
The simple colour being prepared, the next step is to
compose the disserent tints by a mixture with whiting; the
proportion to be observed consisting of twenty gradations
to one, which may be clearly understood by the following
directions: Take some of the simple colour, and levigate
it with spirits of wine, adding about one part of wasnied
whiting to three parts of carmine, of which, when properly
incorporated, make two parcels. The next gradation
should be composed of equal quantities of carmine and
whiting, of which sour crayons may be made. The third
composition should have one fourth carmine, and three
fourths whiting; of this make six crayons, which will be a
good proportion with the rest. The last tint should be
made of whiting, very faintly tinged with carmine, of
which make about eight crayons, which will compleat the
abovementioned proportion.
N. B. Though these tints made with whiting may be
rolled, yet the pure carmine will not bear it, but must he
lest on the chalk-stone till persectly dry.
LAKE
ls a colour very apt to be hard ; to prevent which the
student must observe the following particulars :
Take about half the quantity of lake intended for the
crayons, and grind it very sine with spirits of wine; let it
dry, and then pulverize it, which is easily done if the lake
is good; then take the other half and grind it with spirits;








after which mix it with the pulverized lake, and lay it out
directly in crayons on the chalk. The colour will not bear
rolling. The simple colour being thus prepared, proceed
with the compound crayons as directed before, and in the
same degrees of gradation as the carmine tints.
VERMILLION, or NATIVE CINNABAR.
The best is inclined to the carmine tint. To prepare
this colour, mix it on the stone with soft water, or spirits,
aster which it may be rolled into crayons.
BLUES.
PRUSSIAN BLUE
Is a colour very apt to bind, and is rendered soft with
more difficulty than carmine and lake. The same method
of preparation is to be followed with this as directed with
respect to lake, only it is necessary to grind à larger quan¬
tity of the pure colour, as it is chiefly used for painting
draperies.
BLUE VERDITER
Is a colour naturally gritty, and therefore it is necessary
to wasni it well. Its particles are so coarse as to require
some binding matter to unite them, otherwise the crayons
will never adhere together. To accomplish this, take a
quantity sufficient to form two or three crayons, to which
add a piece of slacked plaister of Paris about the size of a
pea; mix these well together, and form the crayons upon
the chalk. This blue is extremely brilliant, and will be
of great use in heightening draperies, &c.







Brilliant greens are produced with great difficulty, which
may be procured of those who make it their business to
prepare them; yet the following compositions will be
found useful: Take yellow oker, and after grinding it
with spirits, mix it with the powder of Prussian blue; then
temper it with a knife, and lay the crayons on the chalk
without rolling them: besides this, use king’s yellow,
mixed with Prussian blue, brown oker, and Prussian blue.t
The crayons made of these last may be rolled.
YELLOWS.
KING’S YELLOW
Is the most useful and the most brilliant, levigated with
spirits of wine, and compose the different tints as before
directed. Yellow oker, and Naples yellow, ground with
spirits, will make useful crayons.
ORANGE
Is produced with king’s yellow and vermillion, ground
together with spirits, and the tints formed as in other cases ;
but no great quantity of them is required.
BROWNS.
CULLENS EARTH.
Is a sine dark brown. After six or eight of the simple
crayons are prepared, several rich compound tints may be
Roman oker and Prussian blue mixed in difserent proportions will be
useful.









produced from it, by a mixture with carmine in various
degrees : black, carmine, and this colour, mixed toget ier,
make useful tints for painting hair; several gradations
may be produced from each of these by a mixture with
whiting.
UMBER
May be treated in just the same manner, only it is
necessary to levigate it with spirits of wine.
PURPLES.
Prussian blue ground with spirits, and mixed with pulve¬
rized lake, will produce a good purple. Carmine thus
mixed with Prussian blue will produce a purple something
different from the former. Various tints may be made
from either of these compounds by a mixture with whiting.
BLACK.
LAMP-BLACK
Is the only full black that can be used with safety, as all
others are subject to mildew.
Cinnabar mixed with carmine-This is a composition of
great use, and tints made from this with whiting will be
found very serviceable.
Carmine and black is another good compound, of which
five or six gradations should be made, some partaking more
of the black, and others having the carmine most predomi¬
nant, besides several tints by a mixture with whiting.
Cinnabar and black is also a very useful compound, from
which several different tints should be made.










Prussian blue and black is another good compound, and
will be sound of singular service in painting draperies.
It is impossible to lay down rules for forming every tint
necessary composition a set of crayons, there being many
accidental compositions entirely dependent on fancy and
opinion. The student should make it à rule to save the
leavings of his colours, for of these he may form various
tints which will occasionally be useful.

O ROLLING the CRAYONS and DISPOSING
them for PAINTING.
The different compositions of colours must be cut into
a proper magnitude after they are prepared, in order to be
rolled into pastils, for the convenience of using them. Each
crayon should be formed in the left hand with the ball of
the right, first formed cylindrically, and then tapered at
each end. If the composition is too dry, dip the finger in
water; if too wet the composition must be laid upon the
chalk again to absorb more of the moisture. The crayons
should be rolled as quick as possible; and when finished,
must be laid upon the chalk again, to absorb all remaining
moisture. After the gradation of tints from one colour is
formed, the chalk and the grinding-stone should be well
scraped and cleansed with water before it is used sor another
colour.
When the set of crayons is compleated according to the
rules prescribed, they should be arranged in classes for the
convenience of painting with them. Some thin drawers,
divided into a number of partitions, is the most convenient








method of disposing them properly. The crayons should
be deposited according to the several gradations of light.
The bottom of the partitions must be covered with bran
as a bed for the colours, because it not only preserves them
clean, but prevents their breaking.
The box made use of when the student paints, should be
about a foot square, with nine partitions. In the upper
corner, on the left hand, (supposing the box to be in the
lap when he paints) let him place the black and grey
crayons, (those being the most seldom used); in the second
partition, the blues; in the third, the greens and browns :
in the first partition on the left hand of the second row, the
carmines, lakes, vermillions, and all deep reds ; the yellows
and orange in the middle; and the pearly tints next; and
as these last are of a very delicate nature, they must be
kept very clean, that the gradations of colour may be eafily
distinguished: in the lowest row, let the first partition con¬
tain a piece of fine linen rag to wipe the crayons with while
they are using; the second, all the pure lake and vermillion
tints; and the other partitions may contain those tints,
which, from their complex nature, cannot be classed with
any of the former.

ENCAUSTIC PAINTING.
Tiis method of painting has been little practised
in
England. For the information of the curious we give the
following directions, which will enable them to produce
with ease a picture in this very curious manner.
The first method is described in a letter from Mr. Febroni,
the inventor, published in Maty's Review for 1785.














 Mr. Lewis, of Gottenbrun, has lately executed a picture
according to my manner: it is done upon wood prepared
with wax; and is remarkable for the vivacity and splendour
of its colours. I believe I have already mentioned to you,
in what this new manner consists : you melt, or rather
dissolve, some good white wax in naptha petrolei, ' without
colour, till such time as the mixture has acquired, by cool¬
ing, the appearance of an oil beginning to freeze. Mix
your colours in this, and then keep them in small tin boxes;
ou dilute them more or less, with the same naptha, ac-
cording as they dry, or as you wisn to use them. This
painting allows time enough to give all the finishing you
desire; and if you wisfi to work in haste, you may dry as
fast as you please by exposing it to the heat. When the
picture is finished, it is of that fine tone which is preferable
to any varnish; but if you choose a varnisn only, warm the
picture, and the naptha will evaporate. When this is done,
you must wait till the picture cools, when you must polishi
it by rubbing it over neatly with a cloth. If vou wishi to
have it still brighter, you must melt white wax on the fire,
without suffering it to boil; mix a little naptha with this,
and draw a layer of it over the picture already heated, by
means of a brazier, which you hold under, if the picture is
small, or before it if it is large : the colours at first appear
spoiled, but you restore them to their first beauty, if, when
the layer of wax is cooled, you polisn it by rubbing with a
cloth; it is then that the colours take the high tone of oil.
lf vou fear the effect of fire for your picture, you are to
make a soap of wax, which is to be done by boiling white
wax in water, in which you have dissolved a twentieth part
e Naptha petrolei is a bituminous kind of oil, issuing out of certain
rocks in the territory of Modena. There are three forts, more or less, pure
and colourless.







of the weight of the wax of marine alkali, or sel de sourde,
very pure. Rub your picture with this soap; and when it
is dry, polish it as before-mentioned : if you do not choose
either of these methods, give your painting its usual var-
nisn of sandarac and spirit of turpentinc. This method has
been found preferable to all those that have been tried, and
superior to oil for the beauty of their colours. There are
many fine colours which cannot be used in oil, which
may be made use of with great success in this method.
As the naptha entirely evaporates, one may be asfured
that this is the true method or painting in wax. There is
likewise much to hope for the duration of the pictures
painted in this manner, as wax is much less liable to altera¬
tion than oil, and does not so easily part with its phlogiston.

The ANCIENT GRECIAN METHOD of
PAINTING,
By EMMA JANE GREENLAND. .
TAKE an ounce of white wax, and the same weight of
gum mastick in lachrymae, that is, as it comes from the
tree, which must be reduced to a coarse powder. Put the
wax in a glazed earthen vessel, over a very slow fire, and
when it is quite dissolved, strew in the mastick, a little at a
time, stirring the wax continually, until the whole quantity
A Gold Pallet was, on this occasion, voted to Emma Jane Greenland,
November 14. 1786, by the Society at London for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce.










of gum is persectly melted and incorporated; then throw
the paste into cold water, and when it is hard, take it out
of the water, wipe it dry, and beat it in one of Mr.
Wedgwood’s mortars, observing to pound it at first in a
linen cloth to absorb some drops of water that will remain
in the paste, and would prevent the possibility of reducing
it to a powder, which must be so sine as to pafs through a
thick gauze. It should be pounded in a cold place, and
a little while at à time, as, after long beating, the friction
will in a degree soften the wax and gum; and instead of
their becoming a powder, they will return to a paste.
Make some strong gum arabick water, and when you
paint, take a little of the powder, some colour, and mix
them together with the gui-water. Light colours require
but à small quantity of the powder, but more of it must be
put in proportion to the body and darkness of the colours ;
and to black, there should be almost as much of the powder
as colour.
Having mixed the colours, and no more than can be used
before they grow dry, paint with fair water, as is practised
in painting with water colours, a ground on the wood being
first painted of some proper colour prepared in the same
manner as is described for the picture; walnut-tree and
oak are the forts of wood commonly made use of in Italy
for this purpose. The painting should be very highly
finished, otherwise, when varnisned, the tints will not
appear united.
When the painting is quite dry, with rather a hard
brush, passing it one way, varnisn it with white wax, which
is put into an earthen vessel, and kept melted over a very
slow fire till the picture is varnissied, taking great care
the wax does not boil. Afterwards hold the picture before
a fire, near enough to melt the wax, but not make it run ;
and when the varnissi is entirely cold and hard, rub it gently







with a linen cloth. Should the varnisn blister, warin the
picture again very slowly, and the bubbles will subside.
When the picture is dirty, it need only be washied with
cold water.

The VENETIAN METHOD Of COLOURING;
By TIMOTHY SHELDRAKE, Efa.
THE method of Painting practised in the Venetian
School :
ee The cloth was primed with colours in distember, of a
brownisn hue, such as would properly enter into the darkest
parts of the picture. The most transparent colours are the
properest. I believe umber was most generally used, broken
with red, vellow, or blue, according to the tint intended
to be produced, and diluted with chalk or whiting to the
proper degree of strength. Upon the ground so prepared,
the subject was correcty drawn with umber, pure, or mixed
with lake, blue, or black; and, with the same colours,
those shadows that were darker than the ground were then
painted in.
The artist then painted the lights with pure white, in a
solid body, where the light was brightest, or where the
full effect of colour was to be produced; and, where the
demi-tints were afterwards to be, scumbling it thinner by
degrees, till it united with the shadows.
In this manner the chiaro-oscuro was finished as much
as possible, and the local colour of every object in the picture
The Greater Silver Pallet was voted to Mr. Sheldrake, sor this Disser-
tation on Painting in Oil, in 1798, by tne Society instituted at London, for
the Encouragement of Arts, Manusactures and Commerce.












glazed over it. All the colours used in this part of the
work were ground in oil, which was absorbed into the
ground, the picture remaining flat, something like a picture
in water-colours or crayons; it was then varnissied, till
saturated with varniss, and the full of every colour brought
out : the picture was then complete.
Upon the most superficial view of this process, it will be
evident that a picture painted by it is, as to all visible pro¬
perties, a varnish picture ; for the small quantity of oil that
had been used, sunk into the ground, and never could rise
again to be hurtsul; while the varnisn, being laid on after
the colours, gave them all the brilliancy and durability
they could derive from that vehicle, without being
liable to the objections that are made to painting in
varnissi, supposing it to be used in the same manner as oil is
in painting with oil. It is true that this mode of painting
is itself liable to some objections ; these l have endeavoured
to obviate, and shall therefore mention hereafter. Here it
may be observed, that, as any varnisn may be used, it is to
this circuistance we must attribute the different degrees of
durability in pictures of the Venetian School. I have seen
some that would resist the most powerful solvents, while
others were destroyed by the weakest; though all possessed
the apparent properties that distinguish the Venetian
pictures from all others.
As l do not pretend to degrade painting to the rank of a
mechanical art, that may be infallibly practised by a receipt,
 shall be permitted to observe, that this was the general
system of the Venetian school, wlich I have seen variously
modified in the works of different artists of that, as well as
of the Flemissi, which is derived froi it. It is susceptible
of an almost infinite number of modifications, in proportion
to the talents, the judgment of, and the objects to be painted
by the artists who may adopt it. This being the case, if it is






proved by experiment that effects similar to those of the
Venetian pictures may be produced by this method; and
that the system has a strong tendency to produce that bril-
liancy and harmony of colouring as is so much admired,
with more certainty and facility than those qualities can be
obtained by any other mode of painting.
l once afked Sir Joshua Reynolds, by what circumstances
in the management of a picture he thought the harmony of
colouring was to be producedP He replied, an unity of light
and an unity of shadow should pervade the whole. He
explained to me the difficulty of reducing the various colours
of all the objects that may be included in a picture, and the
various modifications of those colours to the simple, harmo-
nious state he described, and illustrated what he had said by
this simile. :e A picture, to possess harmony of colouring,
should look as if it was painted with one colour (suppose
umber and white), and, when the chiaro-oscuro was com¬
plete, the colour of each object should be glazed over it. 1
This observation, from such authority, was impressed
with peculiar force on my mind; and if l can retrace its
perations on a fubject which has so long engaged my atten¬
tion, I should say Sir Joshua’s observation was the clue that
guided me through all my experiments; and, I hope, will
enable me to prove, that the beautiful and simple practice
which he suggested as à simile, was literally the practice of
that school upon whose works his ideas of colouring were
founded. At the same time l may observe, that the fact
seems to have eluded his observation, or he would not have
used it as a comparison to simplisy his description of a
practice which he thought both difficult and complex.
In the Newfonian doctrine of Light and Colours, it is
believed that all colours are inherent in light, and are ren-
dered visible by the action of various bodies, which reflect








particular rays, and absorb the rest. Without disputing
the truth of this doctrine, it is to be obserred, that a
painter must consider the objects he represents as being
analogous to the materials he uses to represent them; and,
in this view of the subject, colour is to be considered as a
property inherent in bodies, which is rendered visible by
the contact of light, a colourless, or at least a mono-
coloured substance, and shadow the mere privation
light.
A picture may reprefent either a groupe of figures, or
other objects, in a room, or any objects in the open air:
whatever the situation may be, it reprefents certain objects
in a given space, possessing individually their peculiar
colours, and generally exposed to the operations of light.
The quantity of light each can receive, must depend upon
its form, and its position respecting that part whence the
light comes; for, in proportion as other parts recede fromn
the light, the shadow becomes visible : but shadow is no¬
thing but privation of light, and privation of colour, in pro-
portion as the light is diminished. Some attention to these
circumstances will, perhaps, enable us to demonstrate the
truth of Sir Joshiua’s position.
If a globe of one colour be exposed in a painter’s room,
properly darkened, that part which is nearest the light will
partake of its colour; the next part will shew the true
colour of the object; that which first recedes from the light
will be à little obscured, the next a little more, and so on
progressively, till that part which is farthest from the light
will lose its colour, and appear equally dark with the
shadiest part of the room. Now we know this globe is of
one unifori colour; the variations we see in disserent
parts of it are only deceptions, occasioned by the accession
of light in some parts, and the privation of it in others.









What is true of this one object and its parts, would be
equally true of any number of objects, whatever their
colours or relative situations might be: if they were placed
together in the same room, each would possess its own
indvidual colour, each would partake of the general light,
in proportion to its situation, and of the general darkness in
proportion as it recedes from the light. All this may be
easily conceived; but the difficulty, and, in the ordinary
modes of painting a ferious one it is, is to represent such
objects with the appearance of trutà, and preserve the har-
mony necessary to constitute a whole. The Venetian
painters, however, by whatever means they obtained their
knowledge, discovered a method so simple, that perhaps no
other can produce such brilliant effects, and undoubtedly
not with facility and certainty at all comparable with
their’s.
The artist will remark that, in describing the whole of
the Venetian method of painting, I have said nothing of
the manner of producing those demi-tints which conduce so
much to the brilliancy of a picture, which are so difficult to
execute, and in which he most frequently fails. Those
tints are, in the ordinary modes of painting, produced by
the mixture of black, grey, blue, or brown (according to
the judgment of the artist), with the local colours of the
objects. It is these tints which, from their being made
with such colours, it is difficult to get clear, and which
never are so clear in any other as in the Venetian, and in
some of the Flemisn pictures, which are painted upon ana-
logous principles. The fact is, that those painters pro-
duced all such tints without the admixture of any colour to
represent them, and by a method so like that by which
they are produced in nature, that this circumstance alone
ensures a degree of brightness to their colours, and of













harmony to their shadows, that it is perhaps impossible
to produce, in an equal degree, by any other mode of
painting.
It is à singular fact, which l have not skill in physies to
be able to account for, though by numerous experiments I
have ascertained, beyond contradiction, that if upon any
degree of brown, between the deepest and the lightest
brown yellow, we paint pure white, in gradations, from
the solid body to the lightest tint that can be laid on, all the
tints between the solid white and the ground will appear to
be grey, intense in proportion to the depth of the ground,
and the thinnefs of the white laid upon it. But in every
case all the tints laid upon one ground will harmonize with
each other, and form one connected chain (if I may use
the expression), which will persectly unite the highest
light with the darkest shade.
If then we examine the component substances of a
Venetian picture, we shall sind the lighter parts consist only
of white, to represent the light; and of the local colours
of the objects it represenis, the demi-tints are imitated by
an appearance almost as deceptive as the similar appearances
in nature: but in every other method of painting, these
demi-tints are produced by mixing some dusky colour with
the local colours and the light. The comparison of these
inethods will afford a demonstrative reason why the Vene-
tian must be brighter than any other mode of painting.
Having shewn, as near to à demonstration as the nature
of the subject will perhaps admit, why those parts of a
Venetian picture that are connected with light and colours
are brighter than the corresponding parts of any other
pictures, it remains to explain the cause of similar superi-
ority in the darker parts of the same pictures.








It has been said, with much confidence, that as wlite
represents light, so black is the representative of darkness.
But though this may be true in physies, it certainly is not
so in painting : for the painter’s art is to represent objects
as they appear, in point of colour, to be, not as they really
are. Thus, if l know an object is perfectly black, and am
to reprefent it as it appears to be at the distance of fisty
feet, black from the pallet will not produce a good imitation
of it, because the interposition of sisty feet of the atmosphere
will cause it to appear of a colour disserent froi what it
really is; and vice versa, if we go into a cavern, a cellar,
or a room, so darkened that the colour of no object can be
distinctly seen, and if we there hold any solid black sub-
stance near to the eye, the disference will be visible at once ;
the black object will be immdiately distinguished, by its
solidity and colour, from the surrounding space, and such
remote objects as may be obscurely visible through it.
These objects actually possess their individual colours,
and only appear indistinctly from the absence of light.
The black object may appear solid, and of that colour,
from its proximity to the eye; but the circumjacent ones
will appear of a colour perfectly distinct from it, more
or less transparent, in proportion to their distance from
the eye, and shewing a portion of their individual colours,
according to the quantity of ill-defined light that may
be admitted. Thus we see (if l may venture to mention
so notorious à truism), that shadows are nothing real; they
only seem to exist in the absence of light, and give to
objects an ill-defined appearance, distinct from, though in
some instances mixed with, light and colours in disserent
degrees : but as the painter must represent this appearance
by something real, he chooses the colours most analogous,







viz. browns, and the most transparent of their class, to
represent this transparent, but imperfectly defined appear-
ance in nature. 
It has been supposed that the Venetian painters had some
peculiarly rich and transparent brown colour, which is seen
to pervade all the works of that school; the effect of
which no modern artist has been able to imitate, and which
therefore is supposed to have been lost. Is it not very
probable that a colour so common as to pervade the works
of the worst as well as of the best artists of that school,
should be so unaccountably lost; and, as the effect attributed
to it may be easily produced by the mode of painting I
have described, it is not unreasonable to conclude that this
much-lamented colour has never existed.
It is well known that chalk, and other earths of the
same kind, lose, when wetter, much of their whitenefs,
and become semi-transparent ; it is equally certain, that if
umber or other earths are mixed with chalk, and saturated
with varnisn after they are laid on the cloth, they, in like
manner, become diaphanous, and are infinisely more bril-
liant than the same colours can be when mixed with white
lead and oil. This seems, on good grounds, to have been
the basis of the Venetian method of painting, and all its
peculiar efsects; at least, if l may draw any conclusion srom
the numerous experiments l have made. But if artists,
whose talents will enable them to repeat those experiments
to the hest advantage, should be induced to do so, the fact
will be determined in the most satisfactory manner.
I may now be permitted to say, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to conceive à theory more simple, more beauti-
ful, or more true, than that of Sir Joshua Reynolds. It is
certainly impossible to form a practice more simple, or more









conformable to that theory, than the one l have described,
as will be evident on recapitulating the particulars.
The artist, having determined what hue should pervade
his picture, formed his ground with that colour prepared in
distemper; upon this the subject was drawn, and the
darker shades painted in with transparent colours, which
sunk into the ground : with pure white he then painted in
all the lights and demi-tints; and, lastly, glazed in the
colours, each in its place. Upon applying the varnisn, the
darker shades were, as to body, incorporated with the
ground ; and thus, though different in colour, appeared
thinner and more transparent than any colours could be
when laid upon any ground: the sull effect of every colour
was brought out, and the picture was complete.
Whoever has been accustomed to paint, or to mark the
progrefs of painting in the common way, and will reslect
on the practice of the method I have described, by artisis
who had been brought up to it, must see that such artists
would paint with a degree of facility, expedition, and
certainty, as to effect, that could never be equalled in the
ordinary way of painting in oil ; besides, it will be evident
that an artist would not onsy paint a picture himself with
more facility; but, if he had occasion, could employ a
number of subordinate artists upon large works, and put
those works out of hand with more uniformity, as to
merit and effect, than if he were to employ such affistants
in similar works if they were to be painted in the common
way.
I am sensible how litile attention will, and perhaps ought
to be paid to observations on painting, if made by those
who are not professionally artists: for practical men acquire
a kind of knowledge that can never be obtained in any













other way; but at the same time they contract preju-
dices that often prevent them from sully investigating
any novelty in practice that may be offered to their notice.
The speculative man, on the contrary, who investigates
the properties of matter, unshackled by practical preju
dices, and with ideas purely chemical or philosophical,
will be more likely to ascertain all the facts relative to
any theory that may become the object of enquiry. In this
way l hope I have proceeded in this investigation. I have
endeavoured to consider pictures as masses of matter, pos¬
sessing the properties, but differing from each other in
degree of brilliancy, transparency, and duration.
I ought, perhaps, here to take leave of the subject; but
it may be expected that l should give an account of the
manner in which the pictures were painted.
I have already mentioned that there are some difficulties
in the method of painting I have described, as being that
of the old artists, and which would form objections of
considerable force to the practice of it by artists who are
well acquainted with the usual modes of painting: these
difficulties are first, the ground absorbs the oil from the
colours so fast, that they are not so manageable as in oil-
painting ; secondly, the effect of the picture is not seen
till the finishing varnish is laid on; and thirdly, as the
effect is not seen till the picture is finished, it will some¬
times disappoint the artist, and in that case it will be dif-
ficult, if at all practicable, to alter it.
As l believe the process I have described in the beginning
of this paper is similar to that of Miss Provis, the artists
who are acquainted with her recipe, can afcertain whether
my conjectures on this subject are right or not. I am
certain at least that these difficulties occurred in my












attempts to paint, and to obviate them l adopted the sol¬
lowing process:
I prepared the ground in distemper, and painted the
dark parts in the way I have described ; l then varnisned
the ground with the copal oil-varnissi, till it was fully
saturated; and by this means the full effect of that part of
the picture was seen : upon this l painted the lighter parts
with white, using much of the vehicle where the colour
was thin, and little in the folid parts, leaving the white in
them dead: by this means l understood the effect of my
chiaro oscuro, as l saw the effect of the demi-tints nearly
as well as when the picture was finished.
Upon this l glazed the colours in the way I have
described in the beginning of this, and finished the
picture. 1 often found (probably from want of practice)
that the effect was different from what l intended, as the
effect of the colours, added to that of the chiaro ofcuro,
produced an essential alteration in the whole ; as l took
care in general that the defect did not arise from too much
white, I added more where it was deficient, and glazed
freshn colours over it, which united perfectly with what had
been done before, and did not give the appearance of a
mended picture. If the defect was from too much white,
I glazed on it a colour similar to that of the ground,
painted with fresn white upon that, and glazed the proper
colours over it. In this way I sound I could alter the
picture, but not so well as in the former case.
I found l could, when necessary, increase the effect of
the picture, by painting on the principal mass or maffes of
light with the local colours, only mixed with white; as
this practice brought those parts more forward by making
them appear solid, and thus contrasting them with the










transparency of the rest of the picture. In this way I
could use the colours tempered with copal varnissi without
difficulty; and, I believe, that if I had been accustomed
to paint large pictures, l could have painted one as large as
lise with the same ease.
 
METHOD and PROCESS or TRANSFERRING
PAINTINGS.
By Mr. ROBERT SALMON.,
THE first thing to be attended to, either for paintings on
plaster walls or ceilings, or from boards, is, that the place
in which they are, be secure from wet or damp. If the
paintings are on old walls, in large buildings, and places
where this cannot be aftained by art, then the summer
season should be taken for the purpose, as the picture
would rarely escape damage if the wet or damp gets at it,
while under the process; at the same time caution should
be taken that the room or place be not over-heated, which
would also produce equally bad effects: these precautions
taken, the next thing is to examine the face of the paint-
ing. If there are any holes in the same, they must be
carefully filled up with paste, or putty of glue and whiting:
this, if the holes are large, should be twice or thrice done,
so as to entirely fill up and leave the face even and smooth;
but if there are any bruised places, with paint still remaining
The Great Silver Pallet was voted to Mr. Robert Salmon sor this
Discovery, by the Society sor the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and
Commerce, Dec. 5. 1796.








on the face of the bruised parts, then this stopping must not
be applied, but the securing canvass, hereaster described, be
pressed down into these places. In the places that are
stopped, there will, of course, appear blemishies, when the
picture is transferred; but the process is rendered much
more certain and sure by being so done. Attention must
next be paid, to lay down any blisters, or places where the
paint is leaving the ground: this is done by introdueing,
between the paint and the ground, some very strong paste
of slour and water; and the face of the blistered paint
being damped with a wet sponge or pencil, it may then be
pressed with the hand home to the ground, to which it will
then adhere ; all the unsound places being thus secured, care
must be taken to clear the face of any grease or dirt; as
also of any particles of the paste that may happen to be
left on the surface. The next thing is, to determine the
size of the painting meant to be taken off; and if on a plain
surface, a board of the size of the picture must be procured,
of not less than an inch in thickness, and framed together
with well-seasoned wood, in small pannels, smooth, and
flushi on one side: this done, a piece of fine open canvass
must be provided, such as the finest sort used for hanging
paper on : this canvass to be made somewhat larger than
the picture, and so sewed together, and the seam pressed,
that it be persectly smooth and even. This is what l call
the securing-canvass, which, being so prepared, is then
stuck on the face of the picture with a paste made of strong
beer, boiled till it is half reduced, and then mixed with a
sufficient quantity of flour to give it a very strong consist-
ence. To large pictures on walls or ceilings, the canvass
must for some time be pressed, and rubbed with the hand as
smooth as possible, working it from the middle to the out-
side, so as to make it tolerably tight; and observing, as it








dries, to press it with the hand or cloth into any hollow
or bruised places, so that it may adhere to every part of the
painting: this done, it is left to dry, which it will mostly
do in a day or two, when dry, a second canvass, of a
stronger and closer sort, and of the same size as the other,
is in like manner to be attached on the top of the first.
This last will want very little attention, as it will readily
adhere to the first; and, being dry, attention must be paid
to the face thereof, to take off any small knots, or uneven¬
nefs thereon; which done, the whole should be again
covered with a thin paste of size and whiting; when dry,
to be pumiced over, so as to make the whole perfectly
smooth and even. The painting being thus secured, the
board, already prepared to the size of the picture, is to be
put with the smooth side against the face thereof , so as
exactly to cover as much as is-intended to be transferred.
The edges of the canvass, which, as before directed, are
left larger than the painting, are then to be pulled tight
over, and closely nailed to the edge of the board. If the
painting be large, either on ceiling or walls, the board
must, by proper supports, be firmly fixed against the
picture, so that it can readily be lowered down when the
plaster and painting is detached.
The canvass and board being fixed, the paintings from
walls or ceilings are to be freed, together with a certain
portion of the plastering: this, with proper care and atten¬
tion, may be readily done. If on a ceiling, the first thing
is to make some holes through the plastering round the
outside of the board and painting; and, with a small saw,
to saw the plastering from one hole to another, till the whole
is disunited from the other parts of the ceiling: this done,
the workman must get at the upper side of the ceiling,
where he must free the plastering from the laths, by break-











ing off the keys thereof: and, with a chissel, cut out the
laths, whereby the plastering, together with the picture,
will be left resting on the board and supports: if there be
apartments over the ceiling, the readiest way will be to
take up a sew of the floor boards above; if next the roof,
means may always be found to get into the fame; and,
although at first this operation may appear difficult, vet
it is presumed no difficulty will be found by any ingenious workman.
If the painting is on a brick or stone wall, the same must
be cut away at top, and down the sides of the painting :
and then, by means of chissels or saws in wood handles, of
different lengths, the wall must be cut away quite behind
the painting, leaving the same, together with the plaf¬
tering, resting on the board ; this operation may sometimes
be done with a saw; or, if the wall be not thick, nor the
other side of much consequence, the bricks or stones may
be taken out from that side, leaving the plastering and
painting as before: this last method I have not practised ;
the other, of cutting away some part of the wall, I have,
and see no difficulty, or very great labour in the operation ;
but that of course must be various, according to the texture
of the wall and mortar.
If paintings are on curved furfaces, such as the coves of
ceilings, then the only difference of operation is, that some
ribs of wood must be cut out and boarded smooth to the
eurve of the surface of the painting, and then fixed up
thereto in place of the before described bearing board; the
painting is then to be freed, and left with the plastering,
resting on the bearers.
For paintings painted on wainscot or boards, the same
securing and process is exactly followed, only that, as the
wainscot or board can always be cut to the size wanted,











or laid horizontal, the securing canvass is stretched thereon,
and turned over the edges of the same, till it is dry; after
which the edges are again turned up, and nailed to the
board, in the same manner as those from walls.
Having, as before described in any of the aforementioned
cuses, freed the paintings from their original places, you
have then got them secured to two thicknesses of canvass,
with their faces next and on to the board prepared for that
purpose ; which being the case, they can readily be re-
moved to any room or shop, to be finishied as sollows :
having got the painting into the shop or room, which
should be moderately warm and dry, but by no means over¬
heated, laying the board on a bench or tressels, the back of
the picture will be uppermost, and the plastering or wood,
as may happen, is then to be cleared away, leaving nothing
but the body of paint, which will be firmly attached to the
securing canvass ; to perform this, a large rasp, a narrow
plane and chissels will he requisite : this operation is dif-
ficult to describe, but would soon be learnt by any one who
makes the attempt; nor is it very tedious; and, being per-
formed, the picture is ready to be attached to its new can¬
vass, as follows :
The painting being cleared, and laying on the board,
the back thereof is to be painted successively, three or four
times over, with any good strong-bodied paint, leaving
each coat to dry before the other comes on; a day or two
between each will generally be found sufficient; each of
these coats, and particularly the first, should be laid on
with great care, taking but a small quantity in the brushi at
a time, and laying it very thin: this precaution is necessary
to prevent any of the oil or paint from searching through
any small cracks or holes that may happen to be in the
face of the picture, which would run into the paste, and so











attach the securing canvass to the picture as to prevent its
being afterwards got off. If any of these holes or cracks
are observed, they should be stopped up with the glue and
whiting paste, and the painting then repeated till a com¬
plete coat is formed on the back of the picture; and it is
then ready for attaching to its canvass, which is done by
spreading all over the picture à paste made of copal varnissi,
mixed with stiff white lead, and a small quantity of any
other old fat paint; all which being spread equally over
with a pallet knife, such a canvass as the first securing-
canvass is laid thereon, and strained and nailed round the
edges of the board, in which state it is left till it becomes
tolerably dry ; and then a second canvass, of a stronger
fort, must be in like manner attached on the first, and left
till it is perfectly dry and hard. This mostly takes about
two months; and the louger it is left, the more secure the
painting will be attached to its canvass, and less liable to
crack or sly therefrom. When sufficiently dry, all the
four canvasses are to be unnailed from the board, and the
edges turned up the reverse way, and nailed to a proper
stretching frame; this is done by unnailing from the board
a part on each side at à time, and immediately nailing it to
the stretching frame, so as never to leave the canvass to
rack or partially stretch, which would damage the picture ;
in this manner, by degrees, the cloths are entirely detached
from the board, and firmly fixed on the stretching frame;
the superfluous left larger than the frame, may then be cut
off, and the wedges put in the frame, and moderately
tightened up. There remains then only to clear the face
of the painting from the securing canvass, which is done by
repeatedly washing the face with a sponge, and moderately
warm water; in doing this, no force or violence must be
used ; with frequent and gentle wasnings the paste will all







worked out with the sponge: the edges of the outer canvass
is then to be cut round, and stripped off, and the other
next the face of the picture is to be done in like manner;
which done, there only remains to clear the paste clean off,
and repair any desects; and the picture will be as strong as
if painted on the canvass.
For taking pictures off walls, without taking the walls
down, or cutting away more thereof than the plastering,
the following process is proposed: the face of the picture
to be first secured, in every respect, in the manner before
described: instead of the plain board, a bearer should be
prepared, with a convex surface, composed of ribs, hoarded
over, so as to form part of a cylinder, of not less than five
seet radius, and as long as the height of the picture. This
bearer being prepared, in order to apply it, a floor or
platform should be erected, and placed horizontally, with
its surface level, and its edge immediately in contact with
thie bottoin of the picture meant to be transferred. The
use of this platformn is for the above-described bearer to rest
and move upon; which bearer should be set on its end, with
one edge in contact with the wall, at one side of the
picture ; consequently the other edge will be at some
distance from the wall, according to the size of the picture
and convexity of the bearer. Being thus placed, the super-
fluous edge of the securing-canvass should be turned over,
and nailed to that edge of the bearer that is next the wall :
this done, the operation of cutting away the plastering
should be begun, which may be done with the corner and
end of a fhort saw, by sawing between the brick-work and
plastering, leaving the thick ness, or part of the thicknefs of
the plastering, on to the painting, fastened to the bearer; and
when this edge of the picture is fieed, the whole height,
for nine or ten inches under, the edge of the bearer that is










furthest from the wall must then be gently forced nearer:
consequently the other edge, together with the painting
and plaster that is freed, will leave the wall, and give an
opportunity of introdueing the saw behind, and cutting
away the same to a certain distance further under; and, by
repeating this, the whole of the picture will at last be freed,
and left on the bearer: each time the bearer is removed,
and, as it is were, rolled on the vertical surface of the
wall, care must be taken to turn and nail the securing-
canvass on the top and bottom edges of the bearer, so as to
secure the freed plastering and picture from moving about;
and, lastly, before the bearer and painting be moved, to
nail the other edge of the picture in the same way, which
will secure the whole to the bearer: this done, the picture
and bearer are at liberty to be moved to a proper place, in
order to be freed from the remaining plaster; the edges
may then be unnailed, and the painting and canvass slipped
from this bearer on to a plain board, and the new canvass
then put on, and remain till dry, as in other cases.
It may appear that the bending of the canvass and plaster-
ing to the convex bearer will crack the plaster, and damage
the painting; but from experience I have observed, that,
to a curve of such, or even less radius, plastering will bend,
without any visible crack, even on the exterior part thereof;
and that part next the bearer, not having occasion in bend¬
ing to extend its parts, will confequently be much less liable
to be disturbed by such bending.






