TH E



PRINCIPLES
OF
DRAWING:





OR, 


An Easy and Familiar Method for the Improvement of Youth-
in the Practice of that useful ARt.
BEING


A COMPLEAT DRAWING BOOK
CONTAINING
A curious Collection of Examples in all the Variety of Cases;
As the several Parts of the Human Body, whole Figures, Landskips,
Cattle, &c. curioussy Engraved on Copper-Plates, after the Designs of
ALBErt DURER, ABRAH. BLOEMART, CARLO MORAC, LE CLERC, HOLLAR,
and other Great Masters.
To which is prefix'd,

AN INTRODUCTION TO DRAWING

CONTAINING
An Account of the Instruments and Materials used in DRAWING, and the Method of
managing them; with Easy and Proper LEssons for a YoUNG BEGINNER, tending
to form his Judgment and direct his Practice.
Translated from the French of

Monsieur GERARD DE LAIRESSE
And improved with Abstracts from C. A. DU FRESNOY.

 
The SIXTH EDITION.



LONDONS:
Printed for John Bowles, at the Black Horse in Cornbills
and CARINGTON BOWLES, in St. Paul's Church Tard.
MDCCLXIV.







DRAWING is the art of representing by lines and
shades, the figure of any object we see, or of any form
we conceive an idea of in the mind.
It is a most ingenious, useful and elegant art; and the study
of it ought to be encouraged in every youth, that discovers an
inclination or genius towards the practice thereof, whatever
station of life he may be placed in. Its utility is so very ex-
tensive, there are few arts, and few professions in which it is
not serviceable. All designs and models are executed by it.
Mathematicians. cngineers, architects, mariners, gardiners,
embroiderers, weavers, and a multitude of other professions,
have frequent occasion to practise it. In most stations it is use-
ful, from the general who commands an army, to the me-
chanic who supports himself by handicraft.
A person who has knowledge in drawing, and a capacity of
performing it, usually sees and remembers the form, shape,
and other circumstances of objects, more minutely and perfect
than one unacquainted with the art; and posiesses an accom-
plishment, exceedingly desirable both for amusement and use :
he is qualified to take on the spot the sxetch of a fine build-
ing, of a beautiful prospect, of any curious production of art,
or of uncommon and striking appearances in nature, and to
bring home for future inspection and service, the forms of ob-
jects which yield entertainment in journies and distant placcs.

Whether you draw after nature, or the performances of
others, the hand can only express by lines and shades,
those forms and ideas which have imprest the mind. Hence
the utility appears of accustoming the mind to a curious and
attentive observation of objects, especially of those intended for
imitation : its impressions will hereby be strengthened ; its con-
ceptions will be more exact and just ; and the hand will deli-
neate with greater ease and correctness, those forms which are
clearly and strongly retained in the memory.
Inform yaur judgment of the properties and excellencies of a
drawing well executed. In this knowledge the mind will make
quick improvement, by a frequent aftentive inspection, of the
performances of those who have excelled. In viewing them,
contemplate the srecdom and boldness of the outline; the cor-
rectness or justness of the proportion of the several parts ; the
character which is peculiar and distinguishing in every figure,
and expressive of the circumstances it is supposed to be in ; the
elegance, or that which gives a kind of delicacy, or certain
agreeablenefs which pleases every one; the perspective, or re-
presentation of thie parts according to their situation with re-
spect to the point of sight. If the judgment be well informed
in these particulars, the young practitioner will make much
greater improvement, than can possibly be attained, if he pro-
ceeds in practice without a due regard to increasing knowledge
and judgment.
Mere to the genius than the hand eve owe,
From this the beauties of your art must flow.
The labour of the hand must second and support that of the
brain. To become an able artill, tnc art must be made habi-
tual. An easy and just expression is only to be gained by con-
stant practice. In all arts, the rules are lcarred in a little time,
but the practice requires a long and severe diligence. The
hand should be improved in practice, and the mind in judg-
ment every day.



This ingenious art not only affords à very pleasing entertain-
ment to men of leisure and fortune, in a variety of instances,
but enables them to judge the propriety of designs, for such
works as they intend to have executed : to lay down and ex-
hibit their construction, and vary and improve the plan most
to their own liking.
Of all others, this art has the greatest number of admirers,
and no wonder, since in a kind of universal language, under-
stood by all men ; it represents to our view, the forms of innu-
merable objects we have no other ways of beholding : and
helps us to the knowledge of many of the works in nature or
art, which any other method of describing would be insufficient
to give an idea of. It transmits to our view things long fince
past, and preserves the forms of others, that will soon perisn.
It represents the deeds of people and actions for many ages
dead ; and hands down to us the features and resemblances of
our ancestors, and of other valuable and renowned persons of
former generations. The esteem of this excellent art is not
confined to adults ; children admire it, and often by the power
of a natural genius, draw a varicty of objects in such a man-
ner as to excite commendation.
For the instruction of youth in this useful art, the following
rules are laid down, and a course of proper leffons exhibited
for their practice.

Let your first practice be employed in imitating the most plain
and simple objects: in accustoming your hand to draw strait
lines, perpendicular and horizontal ones ; circular and irregu-
larly curved lines. This method will be useful in bringing the 
hand to a facility of operation. Moreover, these lines are the
rudiments of all objects that can be expressed ; they bound and
circumscribe every figure: all its parts or members are com-
posed of them. A little time may be advantageously employed
in drawing after plain inanimate sigures, which require strokes
of various curvings. After this draw the particular features of
the face, beginning with the eye, the nose, tlie mouth, the ears.
Draw them in their different positions. Persevere in copying
several times after the same example, before you make the tran-
sition to a new one. You cannot expect to draw an entire head
or face, till you are capable of performing the parts separately :
nor of copying with pleasure and improvement those objects
which require more art and time, till you have acquired a cus-
tomary exercise of patience, and a freedom and exactnefs in
copying those that are casier.
Sketch your outline at first very faint, that the amendment
of if may be performed without its appearing to be re-touched :
endeavour at a graceful freedom, boldness, and just proportion
of all its parts; in these the excellency of a good outline con-
sists. It should be drawn with flowing and gliding strokes, not
swelling suddenly, but with gradual risings, such as might just
be felt in statues. Be careful that it loses nothing or in gee
and boldness, when you correct it by reducing some parts, and
swelling others. The outline on that side nearest the light,
must be fainter than the other. The surest and most improving
method of practice, is to fketch outlines for a considerable time,
without attempting to shade any of them ; and to make num-
bers of sketches srom the same pattern, imitating as nearly a
you can every stroke, and carefully to compare each of you
copies with the original, that you may observe wherein it is
faulty, and avoid those errors in your next sketch. A good
outline is of the greatest importance and extent in the art of




drawing; an ability to make it can only be acquired by appli-
cation and practice.
Proceed slowly in your first attempts, making it your care to
secure every stroke, and rather to produce one good sketch than
in a heedless manner to hurry over a number of bad ones. View
your original with close attention ; ponder upon the length, the
breadth, and the form of each paït; their proportions to one
another, and to the whole ; the distance from one part to the
other; which of them lie parallel, and which underneath the
other. In confidering what parts are opposite to each other,
you may conceive, or occafionally draw, a perpendicular line
from the top to the bottoin, and a strait line frem side to side,
and notice what parts are marked by these lincs, and in what
manner others deviate from them. This obsei vation may be
made by laying your ruler across the work, and observing tlie
parts interfected thereby.
Sketch out the general appcarance of the whole in very faint
strokes, without regarding the minute particulars and little turns,
these may be aaded afterwards. Review your sketch after it
has been laid aside for some time, comparing it again with the
original : faults may then appear which were undifcovered be-
fere. This method of practice, tends to make you more per-
fect in any particular sketch, and by improving your know-
ledge of outlines aad proportions, to enable you for nearer imi¬
tations after other patterns.
Proportion, or the just magnitude of the several members of a
figure, with regard to one another aed the whole figure, makes
one essential article in every good draught. A scheme of the
proportions of a graceful huiman iigure is given in the fifth
lesion, taken from the meafûres of antique stlatues, esteenied for
the highest degrees of proportion. A knowledge of thefe will
be of great service to the young sludent, yet it must not be fup-
posed, that this scheme is the standard of measurement for all
figures. For
Different attitudes make a sensible difference in the limbs of
the fame body : the muscles shist their appearances, swelling
one way and narrowing another, in different movements. Thus
the arin, the soot, the knee, &c. are enlarged by bending them,
and the limbs are also foreshortened.
Moreover, different human bodies of agreeable appearances,
have not the same meafures and exact proportions in their
features and limbs, therefore the eye must judge of gracefulness
and proportion.
Fitness to peculiar characters should always be joined to the
idea of proportion. Brawny muscular limbs are expressive of
strength, and more slender forms of agility for motion. The
legs of chairmen, and the shoulders of watermen, are enlarged
by their different occupations. Aukward as such a figure ap-
pcars, yet a thoughtless country clown is fitly expressed by a
large head, short neck, high shoulders, flat stomach, thick knees
and thighs, and large feet. Proportion, in these and other in-
stances, are regulated by fitnefs to peculiar characters, and no
exact dimensions can be given of them.
The proper materials for Drawing.
THE materials for drawing, are black lead pencils, char-
coal, crayons of black, white or red chalk, or other dry

colours made up into crayons ; a poitcrayon, Indian ink, hair
pencils, crow-quill pens, a ruler and pair of compasses.
A black lead pencil is most convenient at the beginning of
practice. Slope your pencil to a fine point : accustom yourself
to hold it further from the point than the nib of a pen in writ-
ing ; this is necessary to an eafy command of hand, and to the
making your strokes with freedom and boldnefs.
Charcoal of a fine fmooth grain, slit into slender pieces for
the portcrayon, is very proper sor skctching, as any strokes
made with it are eafily brushed out with a feather or clean soft
rag, if you think them wrong. Having fecured your outline
with charcoal, wipe it slightly over with a feather, to make the
lines faint, then go over them with black or red lead, endea-
vouring to make them more correct. T'hefe new strokes, whea
wrong, may be discharged with the crumbs of stale white bread.
In sketching after plaister, or academy figures, charcoal is much
used, because it is cafily discharged.
Chalk, the best sort of it, is free from grittiness and sand, is
pretty soft, and has a kind of fatness in it. Black chalk is often
ufed on biue or grey paper, the colour of which serves for good
part of the shading, and the lights are put in with white chalk.
Red chalk is used on white paper: the shades made in hatching



with it receive à softness, by rubbing them in gently in the
broad strong parts with a stump made of wasn-lezther, and then
hatching upon them again. Chalk is proper for drawing large
figures; but a littie experience will teach you, to Le careful
not to make falfe strokes with it, for they are very difficult to
be discharged from the paper.
Crayons are any colours mixt with tobacco-pipe clay, which,
while soft, and in tie consistency of paste, is rolled up in pieces
about the thicknefs of a quill, and two or three inches in lengta,
and then being dried, are properly called dry colours. Tliey
work eafiest and express theniselves strongest on paper of a rough
grain, and are used on coloured paper. If dark, or brownilh,
or near the colour of whited-broivn paper, it yields a good
relief to the tender parts of the work. In using these colours
they arc rubb’d and wroughit one into another, in such a man-
ner that no slrokes appear, but the colours are mixt as if they
were laid in with a brussi. Many pictures after the life are
painted in crayons.
Drawing with these dry colours is quick and expeditious,
and when the crayons are handled with judgment they give a
delicate softness; but the touch of a rude finger may spoil the
sine work, or a damp place mildew it-
Indian ink docs not spread and run like common ink, and the
work performed with it appears much softer. It is bought in
small cakes, and by mixing it with water may be made to any
degree of strength, and used either wilh a hair pencil. or in a pen
like common iuk. When the young student has made some pro-
grefs in drawing with his black lead pencil, and begins to use
this ink, let him secure his outline as correct as he can with the
black lead, then he may trace it over with a pen or hair pencil
and Indian ink, and afterwards with the crumb of white brcad
rub out any remaining marks of his black lead pencil.
Shading with this ink is sometimes done by hatching with
the pen, or making strokes crosfing one another; but this is as
well, or better performed with the hair pencil. . A more expe-
ditious and customary manner is washing or working the shades
with the ink and hair pencils, in the same way as water colours
are used. The shades made by hatching, resemble the strokes
of engraved prints. In wassiing the snades, they appear like
those in metzitinto prints, in which there is not any lines.
The ruler and compasses are useful in making geometrical
figures and in architecture ; excepting in thefe instances the
ruler is never to be used, and the compasses but seldom : occa-
sionally they may be applied in nicely examining tlie agreement
of the copy with the original, but it is best to judge in most
cases by the eye only.
And if you would the compais manage right,
Guide it not witb your hands, but by your sight.
The conduct of the tints of lights and shadows.
IT is the proper distribution of light and shade, which gives
the appearance of substance, round or siat shapes, distance,
and relievo or projection, to whatever bodies you represent.
Draw a circle, and according to the manner in which you
shade it, it will either receive a flat, a globular, or a concave
appearance. Fill it up with an even colour, or with a number
of lines of the same strength, and it will resemble a body with
a round circumference and flat sides. By colouring it strongest
in the middle, the edges are made to retire by the gradating
shades, and it receives a convex appearance like a globe. By
gradually weakening the shades from the edge towards the cen-
ter, the middle part will be made to retire, and a concave ap-
pearance like a bafon be given to it.
Those parts of an object which have the greatest vivacity of
colour, catch the sight sirst and aprear nearest to it. By gradu-
ally weakening the coloer, the other parts are made to iccede
from the eye, and appear farther off.
Pure and unmixed white, either brings an object nearer, or
makes it to retire further. If the white be gradually weakened,
and supported by a fhade, it then advances; but unless it be
thus forced forward, it flies off to the remotest view.
In rounding the parts of any object, the light and shade must
be gradually foftened into one another, and lose themselves by
slow and almost imperceptible degrees.
The outline must be saint in those parts which receive the
light, and strong aad boid where the stiades fall.




Begin your shading at the top, proceed downward, and go

through the whole of it with a faint shade before you give the
finishing to any particular part.
A balance should be preserved between the lights and shades,
they serve for a repose to one another ; a broad light must there-
fore be accompanied with a broad shade; a fainter light with a
fainter shade.
Light objects must have a sufficient strength of shadow to sus-
tain them, and dark bodies must be relieved by a mass of light
behind. Without this opposition, objects will adhere to the
ground, or stick to one another; but by distributng lights and
shadows to advantage, they are loosened and set free, and re-
ceive a strong relievo.
Those objects or parts of objects which come forwardest to
view, must have strong and smart oppofitions, and the highest
finisning: those that are designed to be thrown further off, must
be made still weaker, and less distinct. In nature, objects ap-
pear distinct er confused, according to their nearneis or dis-
tance : the features of a face, or folds of a garment, are not
diilinguishable the length of a street; and the innumerable
leaves of a distant plantation, look like one confused mafs. A
more accurate, or slighter finishing, gives to objects a relative
dominion over each other as to their distances : the heightening
of one, chaïes another further from the sight which is not so
minutely and strongly pencilled.
Give to eyery object such lights as are most proper to its sup-
pofed fituation. In the open air, when the sun shines full upon
objects, the lights must be strong aad bold, and the shadows
dark: if the sun is obscured by clouds, the light is more equal
and universal, but not so strong and warm. and the shades must
be fainter and more siveet. Artificial light tinges the object
with its own colour, and occasions large shadows with bold
extremities. Elcmentaiy light is pure, and more generally
diffased, and, the shadows it produces are softer. The pro-
jecting parts of objects are nearest to the light, catch it first, are
brightest, and produce shades upon the lower parts. Confider
from what point, and in what direction the light falls upon the


IN all arts and sciences, the learner begins with the most
simple principles. The knowledge of the alphabet is an
introduction to the grammar; and an ability to imitate the
forins of different lines, ’tis no matter of what shape, so that
they are exactly imitated, is the foundation of drawing after
every kind of object.
In this first lesson the scholar is presented with many lines of
differeat kinds for his imitation. 7iz. Perpendicular lines
marked A ; that is, a line falling directly on another, so as to



object, and place all your lights and shades according to that
direction : if it falls perpendicular upon a man, the top of the
head is then lightest, the shoulders in the next degree so, and
the lower part gradually darker: the cavities and parts that
bend inwards, not receiving any direct rays, are darkest of all;
and the colours are lost in them. The fuil force of the princi-
pal light is to be only in one part, and ought not to be crossed
or interrupted with little shadows. A sudden brightness is
seen, and many reflections and demy tints are produced when
the sorce of light strikes upon silks, fattins, vessels of silver,
copper, or upon other glittering objects.
The very extremity of the shadowed side of objects is seldom
the darkest of all, because it almost always receives a reflection
of light from adjacent bodies. Reflexes are scarce sensible, ex-
cept in the shadowed parts. All reflccted light is supposed to
carry with it part of the colour of the body which reflects it,
so that those places which receive this light have their own
colour mixed or tinged with the other. Much szill and accu-
racy is often required in manacement of the refiexes, as the
sanie place many times receives them from different objects dif-
ferently coloured. Every circumstance of the colour, light,
and pofition of cach figure, and what effect each has toon the
other, is to be considered, and nature pursued in all the variety
of mixtures.
Nature gives a vast variety of appearances in light and shade,
a curious observer of them is rewarded with high delight; and
the artist with much improvement. The sky always gradates
one way or another: the rifing and setting fun exhibit it with
astonishiing beauty and perfection. The variety of forms and
colours reflected in water, from the sky and clouds, from trees,
houses, and other objects, are exceeding beautiful to behold:
Accustom yourself to consider the different effects of light fall-
ing upon objects, its various and delightful softnings and mo-
dulations in the shades, or parts which are more or less deprived
of the rays ; your judgment will this way be best informed by
your senfes, how to represent these pleafing appearances : the
proper management of which; makes one of the great divisions
or branches of painting

make equal angles on each side. C, horizontal lines which
pafs from one point to another without any deviation. D, ob-
lique lines, converging or approximating one way, and diverg-
ing or continually increasing their distance the other way.
E, parallel lines which are every where equidistant from each
other., at F, two semicircles are drawn from points asfumed
in the lower line, and the upper line being a tangent to both
of them, proves the truth of its being drawn parallel. En-
amples are also given of various forts of curved and twining
lines, &c.

















THIS second lesson consists partly of geometrical figures,
some of them with plain lines, others with their furfaces
formed by light and shade.
Number 1. is a circle. 2. The circle appearing with a flat
fide, being filled with an equal shade. 3. A convex appear-
ance given to the circle by light and shade. 4. A concave ap-
pearance given to it. 5. Other convex and concave surfaces.
6. A square of four equal sides. 7. An cquilateral triangle.

 



THIS lesson will be more pleasing to the learner than the
qualisy him to copy more difficult representations.



THE following leaves exhibit many examples of the fea-
turcs of the human face, as the eyes, nose, mouth, cars,
&e. The pupil should practise after the different fcatures in
their various positions, till he able to draw them well : unless
he can perform the parts separately, it will be fruitless to at-
tempt the whole together.




8. A spiral, or curve line issuing from a center, and continu-


ally going off from it at every tur. 9. A cone. These, with
other figures shewn in this lesson, are useful in different parts
of practice.
By consulting a fmall treatise of Practical Geometry, by Le
Clerk, the student, in a fhort time, will gain a knowledge of
the construction of geometrical figures, very advantageous in
drawing multitudes of objects.


former ones, and practising after the instances here given, will



Several easy examples are also given, of entire faces and
heads, in various attitudes. When the student has made a
progress in sketching after those in outline, there are others
which are sinisned ior him to shade after. By considering the
plate annexed, he will improve his ideas of a face, and the
method of drawing it, in all the changes and variations which
are occasioned therein, by different turnings of the head




The divisions and proportions of the head and face.
N drawing a head and face, four equal parts, the length of
the nofe. are usually allotted from the top to the bottom.
1. From the crown of the head to the top of the sorchead.
2. From thence to the top of the nofe. 3. To the bottom of
the nose. 4. From thence to tlie bottom of the chin.
The breadth of the faoe is divided into five cqual parts; one
of which parts is the length of the eye : the distance between
the eyes is the measure of one part, and from the corner of the
eye to the side of the face is one part. The width of the
mouth is a little moic than one of these parts; the width of the
nose across the nostrils, a little less. The eye is divided into three
parts, one of which is the meafure of the pupil or fight, with
the iris round it. The ear is usually the length of the nofe.
These are approved proportiens of a good face viewed in
front, but in different beautiful subjecis, the fame featutes often
vary both in lengeh and shape.
The head in general has nearly the shape of an egg or oval
as in figure of the annexed plate. In the middle of the
oval, draw from the top to the bottom perpendicular line
as in fig 2. Through the center of the line, draw another
directly zeross, as in fig 3. On these two lines the features
of the face are to be drawn in their due proportions.
That the learner may
apprehend more per-
fectly the ufe of these
two lines, their varia-
tions in the different
turnings of the head,
and how the features

on them appear when
the face is inclining to
either fide, turning up-
wards or downwards :
let him either conceive
of, or procure a piece
of fmooth wood turned
in the form. of an egg.
Draw a line lengthways
quite round the egg, as
in fig. 1. and a perpen¬
dicular from top to bot-
tom, as in fig. 2. Di-

vide this line into two

equal parts, by another

which reaches from side

to side, as in fig. 3.
The features, being
drawn on these crofs
lines, produce a front
right face, as in fig. 4.

By turning the egg a
fmall matter to the left,



or to the right, the cross
lincs appear more cur-


ved, as in fig. 5 and 7.

and the features inust
be drawn on them, a3

stiewn in fig 6 and 8.
The nose always pro-
jects beyond the per-
pendicular line, in pro-
portion as the face is
more or less turueil
aside, and moie of the
car and nearest side of
tlie face Eecomes vifi-
bie. The firstlinc which
was , drawn round the
egg is no longer its
boundary, but it gains

a new circumferent line,
by being turnied into a
new position. By ju-
clining the egg down-
wards, and a little to
the left, the cross will
appear, as in fig 9; if
raiied upwards, and re-
clining to the right, the
lines appear. as ili fig.
11. and the features in
these instaazes are shewn
in fig. 10 2nd 12. A
vast varietv of faces dif-
fetently inclined, may
be stewn by this oval
or egg.




Divide the perpendicular line into four equal parts. The
first must be allotted to the hair of the head. Tne second is
from the top of the forehead to the top of the nose. The
third reaches to the bottoen of the nose. Fhe fouith divinon
includes the lips and chin. This peipendicular line divides
the face breadth-ways into two equal parts : it lies exactly in
the middle betwixt the eyes, runs down the midst of the nose
and the gutter underneath. The middle of the mouth must
always be placed on it, and the bottom of it terminates on
the point of the chin.
Divide the cross line, which is the breadth of the face, into
five equal parts, and place the eyes upou it. so as to leave ex-
actly the length of one eye between them. This is t9 be un-
derstood of a front face, as in fig. 4. for if it turns to either
side, the distance appears lessened on that side which is sarthest
from you. The cross line is the boundary fer the top of the
cars ; the bottom of them is parallel with the boctom of the
nose. The noitrils should not swell beyond the inner corner
of the eye.
The features of a front face, when drawn upon the cross
lines, according to these directions, will aprear in their proper
places, whatever way the oval or egg is tal-aed, as is shewn in
fig. 6, 7, 10 and 12.






Profils or side faces, are to be drawn by means of a perpen¬
dicular, as in ngure 13, on which the forehead, nofe, mouth,
and chin are to be placed as in fig. 14. In these figures, the
line froin top to bottom is strictly perpendicular; it would be
so in an oval drawn on paper, or any flat surface ; but the cur-
vizy of an egg tuins it out of that sorm, tho’ for dislinction
sake, it is described by that name in the foregoing account.
When you mark the featutes in their proper places, touch
thein very lightly at first, and afterwards proceed on them with
greater exactness. Then draw the hair, beard, and shadows
about it. In all faces there are some principal toucles which

WHEN the pupil can draw a face and head tolerably
well, he miy proceed upon the hands and feet. The
hands are very important articles, and to perform them with
ease and freedom, is not à littie difficult; much labour should
be bestowed in practising aster the examples given of them in
theit various actions and soreshortnings. The hand, from the
tip of the fore-singer t’ the wrist, is the length of a face,
that is three quarters of a head ; and this length is equally di¬
vided into two paits, one of which is for the palm of the
hand. The thumb is the length of the nose; the breadth of
the plam is the same as its length, equal to the length of the
fore singer. The nail of the finger is about half the joint it
stands upon. The foot viewed sideways, is in length the sixth
part of the sigure, and may be divided into four equal parts ;
one of which is for the heel, two others for the sole, and the
other for the toes. The great toe is commonly the length of
the thumb These proportions usually obtain, and it will he
useful for the pupil to fix an idea of them in his niind, thol
there be few opportunities of applying them directly, because
of the foreshortnings in which these parts appear in almost
every graceful action.
The ancients commonly allowed eight heads to their figures.
The moderns ordinarily divide the figure into ten faces, the
face beginning at the root of the lowest hairs on the forehead,
and ending at the bottom of the chin.
An human figure, divided according to this method into
ten cqual parts, of the length of a face, each division will reach
as follows :
The first, from the crown of the head to the nostrils.
The fecond, to the hole in the neck between the collar-bones.
The third, to the pit of the stomach.
The fourth, to the navel.
The fifth, to the lower part of the belly.
Ihe sixth and feventh, to the upper part of the knee, the
thigh being the length of two faces.
he knee contains half a face.
From the lewer part of the knee to the ankle. two faces.
From the ankle to the sole of the foot, half a face.
A man with bis arnis extended, from the extremity of the
longest singer of his right hand, to the longest of his lest,
nicasures as broad as he is long. viz.
From the tip of the long finger to the joint of the wrist,
one facc.
Thence to the elbow, one sace and one third.


BEGIN with making the oval for the head, and divide it
 according to the instructions al:eady given. Agreeable
to that universal rule in all. just designs of comparing and pro-
portionisg every part to the first, the rest of your figure must
now be proportioned to the head ; therefore draw a perpendi-
cular from the top of the oval, and mark on it eight divifions
er lengths of the head for the heighth of the figure and ad-
justment of its parts. This line is also of ufe in placing the
figure uptight; and wbether it be measured by eight heads or
ten faccs, the former lesson directs what parts of the body are
to be placed on the feveral divifions.
ketch the head first, then the shoulders ; then draiv the
trunk of the body, beginning with the arm-pits (leaving the
arnis till afterwards) and so down to the hips on both fides,



give spirit, and are the characteristic tkereof; thesé should Sa
well confidered, and earafully exprest, If the face be fat,
the ehecks will seem to fwell; if lean, the jaw bones will stick
out, and checks fall in. The corters of the mouth, and iniddle
of the eye-brows, will be elevated in agreeable fensations.
The eye brows will rise up at the ends, and fall in the middle,
and the eorner of the mouth will fink in pain or uneasinefs.
The mouth by shooting forwards, and riling in the middle,
expresses averfion. Every passion of the soul is vifible in the
features of the face ; the lines and lights which are expressive-
of them, claim a particular attention.


Thence to the juncture of the shoulder, one face and one
third.
Thence to the hole in the neck, one sace and one third.
In all five faces, which with the five along the other arm to
the tip of the middle finger, gives ten.
In measuring a figure by eight parts, each part the length of
the head, the divifions allotted to them- are, viz. from the
erown of the head to the point of the chin, one : thence to the
bottom of the breasts, one: thence to the navel, one-: thence
to the lower part of the belly, one : thence to the middle of the
thigh, one : thence to the lower part of the knee, one : thence
to the small of the leg, one : thence to the bottoin of the foot,
one.
The figure with his arms stretched out, meafured breadth-
ways by eight parts or heads, is divided as follows, ariz.
From the end of the long finger to the wrist, one : thence
to the bend of the arni. one: thence to the bottom of the
shoulder, one: thence over to the other shoulder, two: thence
to the end of the other loug finger, three.
The proportions of a man differ in some respects from those
of a woman ; particularly the head of a woman is lefs than that
of a man, and her neck longer: tlie breasts and belly are
lower : the fpace from the bottom of the breast to the navel,
is half the length of the nose less than in men, and the thigh
a third part of the nofe shorter. As to the breadth, a woman
has her breasts and shoulders narrower, and her haunches
larger; her thighs at the place of articulation are larger: the
tops of their arms and legs are larger than a man’s, but down-
wards more slender, and their hands and feet are less.
A new born insant is not at most above four heads long,
and feldom so much. At four or five years old it is about five
heads long, and the length of the body increases with its age,
till it arrives to the state of manhood, and attains its full pro-
portions.
The thickness of the limbs must be adjusted agreeable to the
quality and eharacter of the figure. In general it iay be
noticed, that the breadth of the thigh at the thickest, is double
that of the thickest part of the leg, and treble that of the
fmallest: but therc is a diffcrence in the contours of parts when
put in different postures. Thus when the arm is bent, it is
arger than when straight: the same is true of the foot and
knee, and other limbs and joints.


being careful to observe the breadth of the waiit. Then draw
that leg which the body rests npen, and afterwards the other
which stands loose. Next draw the arms, and last of all the
hands. It is sometimes recommended to begin the sketch on
the right fide of the figure, that in the procefs of the work,
the performer’s hand may neither hide or shade any part of it,
as it may happen in some draughts when begun on the left side.
To enforce a direction already given in the general rules,
carefully view the original you draw after; the distance of one
feature, limb, joint, muscle, &c. from another; thieir length,
breadth, and turnings; their proportion to each other, and to
the whole figure : which of them are directly under the other,
which of them are parallel, and how they stand fituated with
regard to any part of the figure.




Preserve a just symmetry and harmonious correspondence in
all the parts of the figure, by forming them in due proportions
to one anotlier ; not one arm bigger or longer than the other,
or of a size ill adapted to any of the other parts. Not plump
and strong limbs, with a shrivelled face or decayed body, or
broad Herculeati shoulders with the wasted limbs of a fribble.
Take notice of the bowings and bendings of the body, and
contrast the opposite parts answerable thereto. If the belly
bends in, the body must stick out: if the knee bends out, the


In drawing a naked body, whatever muscles appear, must
be exprest agreeable to the rules of anatomy. They must not
be subdivided into small sections, but kept as entire as possiblé :
only the principal muscles, and those which are of significa-
tion to express that action which is represented, should be
made appcar. The motion or action of the figure, must al-
ways be considered in drawing the muscles; for they rise and
sink, and are cither less or morc apparent according to the
different motions of the body. The muscles of the leg which
supports the body, or of an arm that lists a weight, are fuller
or more swelled than in the leg or arm which are not so em-



IN cloathing your figures, or casting the drapery over them
 with elegance and propriety, it should be considered, that
the beauty of draperies consist not in the multitude of folds,
but in their natural order and plain simplicity. 1. The dra-
pery miust encompass the parts loosely ; when it sits too strait
or close, it gives a stissness to the figure, and seems obstructive
to its motions. 2. Draw the plaits large, and following the
form of the limbs underneath, that they may be distinguissied
from others by a due management of the light and shades.
The extremiities of the joints, as the shoulders, elbows, knees,
&c. should be so niarked as to be apparent, as sar as art and
probability will permit, notwithstanding they are covered.
This is so material a consideration, that many artists first sketch
the naked iigure, and afterwards put the drapery on it. 3. The
grcat folds must be drawn sirst, and afterwards broke and di-
vided into lesser ones ; and great care be taken that they do
nat cross one another improperly. 4. Tho’ in general the
solds should be laege, and as few as possible, yet they must be
gicater or less, according to the quality of the stuff' of which
the drarery is suoposed to consist; some, as coarse woollens
make their folds abrupt and harsh, and others, as silks and fine
innens more soft and easy : the surïace of some has a lustre,
others are dull; some are pliable and transparent, others strong
and tolid. The quality of the person is likewise to be con-
sidered in the drapery. If they are magistrates or dignified
perforages, theit robes or dtaperies should be large and ample ;
if ladies and nymphs, thin, soft. and piable ; if country
clowns, ordinary people er slaves, they ought to be stout and



ham must fall in: and so of every other joint in the body.
Sketch your outline at first very faint, marking the general ap-
pearance and proportion of the most conspicuous and remark-
able particulars with slight touches, and afterwards introduce
the minute parts by tracing it over again, correcting the first
sketch by little and little, untii the whole contour be finisned
with admirable exactness. A steady even light is always to be
chosen, that no glare may come on the original, or on your
own work.

ployed. Those of the breast become more or less visible, by
listing up or holding down the arm.
In drawing young persons, the muscles must not appear so
manifestly as in those who are elder and full grown. The same
is to be observed in fat and fleshy people, and in such as are
very delicate and beautiful. In women and children, scarce
any muscles at all are to be exprest, and but faintly when
swelled by a forcible action. In persons of an hardy and ro-
bust make, they are most apparent.


coarse. 5. Suit the garment and folds to the postare of the
body, and the sway or action of the limbs, crooked or strait,
or bending one way or another, according to their various po-
sitions, in such manner as will best express their attitude and
motion. Different postures and niotions vary the folds, and
bring them into new forms; and whatever posture the body is
supposed to be in, should be exprest by an artsul complication
of them ; when they are well imagined, they give much spirit
to every action. 6. A grcat lightness and motion of the dra-
pery, are only proper sor figures in great agitation, or exposed
to the wind. The loose apparel in this case must all fly one
way, and that part of the garment which adheres closest to the
body, should be drawn besore the loose part which flies from it,
in order to secure the true position of the figure. 7. The
closer the garment sits to the body, the narrower aud smaller
must be the folds. 8. The draperies which cover those parts
that are exposed to great light, niust not be so deeply shaded
as to seem to pierce them ; nor should thc limbs in that situa-
tion of light be crossed by solds that are too strong, lest the
great darkness of the shade give them the appearance os be-
ing broke. 9. Whenever the drapery is adorned with rich
ornaments, they should be introduced with judgment and ,
priety, suitable to the character of the figure, and in ge-
used sparingly. It is altogether improper and debasing to
use them in the imaginary representation of angels, the
dignity and


grandeur of whose draperies, oight rather to consist in a noble flow of the folds
slow of the solds, than in rich stuff and the glitter of ornaments.









ALWAYS chuse a north light if possible, because it is
 steady and mofi equally diffused. Darken with the shut-
ters all the windows of the room but one, and darken the lower
part of that window. The light contracted in this maniier,
aed only admitied at an altitude above the position of the figure,
will make the sliadows distinct, and shew every part of it to ad-
vantage. If you are constrained to a window which has a
south aspect, a transparent fasn of oil’d paper will moderate the
light, and take off the glare.
Sit at a distance from the model, in proportion to its size ; so
far that you may see the whole of it at once, which may be
effected at a distance about twice or three times its magnitude.
Seat yoursels in such a manner, as to bring your eye upon a
ievel with tlee figure.

Directions for copy
PLACE your picture in a good light, by which is meant,
not only an even steady light, as directed in the former ar-
ticle, but also the proper light for the picture, that it may fall
thercon either on the right or left side, agreeable to the lights
and shadows in the painting. Seat yourself at a proper dis-
tance from it, to see the whole picture at once. 1. Observe
nicely what object is placed in the middle of the picture; mark
slightly the middle of your paper, and give it the same situa-
tion. 2. Observe the principal ohjects on the lest and on the
right side, how they are placed and ranged ; sketch their rough
form very slightly in the same disposition and proportion, till
all the principal parts are marked on your paper in their pro-
per places. 3. The expression or supposed character and cir-
cumistances of every object in the picture, must be well studied
and imprinted on your mind ; its attitude, postuie and gesture
preserved in your copy ; and thofe parts be particularly no-
ticed, by which the action and fentiment are represented in a
strong and lively manner. 4. As the whole composition should
be slightly sketch’d before you begin to finisn any part, so in
the snading you should go on with the whole together with
a faint shade, before you finisn any part. Many directions are
given in the preceding essay for the lights and snades.
A common method of adjusting the distances, the situation
and proportion of every object agreeable to the picture. is to
divide it into little squares, and then to divide the paper for
the copy into the same number of squares, and to draw in them


For drawing landskips or
HAVING fixt your station, and determined what extent
HA of view to delineate, draw the horizontal line faintly,
and mark it into three divisions, then divide in your mind the
landskip iuto three divisions likewise. Sketch the niddle divi¬
fion first, then that on the left hand, afterwards that on the
right. Observe, 1. What objects fall under one another, and
mark them on your paper accordingly. 2. What objects raage
on a level with each other between the two sides, and place
them parallel in your draught. 3. Remark what objects are







The observations heretofore laid doin, are applicable 10
this branch of drawing, to urge the most material of them.
1. Copy after good originals. 2. Mark out all the parts be-
fore you begin to shadow. 3. Make tlie contours in great
pieces, without taking notice of the litile mufcies and other
breaks. 4. Observe every stroke as to its perpendicular, pa¬
rallel, and distance ; and particuiariy so to compare, anc op pvse
the parts that meet upon, and traverse the perpendicular, as to
form a kind oi square in the mind, which is the great and al-
most the only rule sor producing à just and exact copy.
5.
Carefully regard not only the model you are copying after,
but also the parts you have already drawn ; there being no
possibility of preserving strict justnes, in your performance, but
by comparing and proportioning every part to the first.


what is correspondent to each square. This is a sure method
to enlarge or reduce a draught with exactness; but is the stu-
dent accustom himself to practise by the help of these fquare:,
he will certainly stint and confine his judgment; let him ratiier
help it by imaginary lines, than cramp it by real ones. Let
him conceive in his miind a perpendicular and an horizontal
line intersecting each other in tlie middle of the picture, and
observe what objects are crossed by them; and tuen suppose
two such lines crossing his paper, in order to give those objects
a similar situation. In the like manner the situs-tion and pro-
portion of all the chief parts throughout the gicture may be
considered, by imagining other lines traversing them, and di.
viding as it were the several paits of the painting into imall
squares. The primary qualification in the art of drawing, is
a readiness of comparing and meafuring by the eye all tte parts
of a composition, and an ability to expreis them with boldneis
and justness. This essential accomplishment is to be acquired
by habit and application.

The proportion, form, and magnitude of objects, their dimi-
nution in size and lustre, are governed by the rules of perspec-
tive. A knowledge in the practical part of that science, will
greatly advance the pupil’s judgment and facilitate his prac-
tice ; and this knowledge may be attained with surprizing ease,
by consulting that plain and familiar treatise, the Jesuit s Per-
spective, translated by Ephraim Chambers.


seen through the intervals of other particular objects, and give
them the same apparent situation. 4. Enceavour to sxetch all
the olijects in taeir propcrtional magnitudes and distances ;
they gradually diminisn as they are sarther removed from the
eye, and it is this diminution with gradual softenings and in-
distinctness, which gives distant objects their remote appearance.
Theze are certain infallible rules in perspective for the manage-
ment of this important article. 5. Make all yeur lights and
shades sall one way.



